{"id": "74844", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74844", "title": "Glasses", "text": "Form of vision aid\nGlasses, also known as eyeglasses, spectacles, or colloquially as specs, are vision eyewear with clear or tinted lenses mounted in a frame that holds them in front of a person's eyes, typically utilizing a bridge over the nose and hinged arms, known as temples or temple pieces, that rest over the ears for support.\nGlasses are typically used for vision correction, such as with reading glasses and glasses used for nearsightedness; however, without the specialized lenses, they are also at times used for cosmetic purposes. \nSafety glasses are eye protection, a form of personal protective equipment (PPE) that are worn by workers around their eyes for protection. Safety glasses act as a shield to protect the eyes from any type of foreign debris that may cause irritation or injury; these glasses may have protection on the sides of the eyes as well as in the lenses. Some types of safety glasses are used to protect against visible and near-visible light or radiation. Glasses are worn for eye protection in some sports, such as squash.\nGlasses wearers may use a strap to prevent the glasses from falling off. Wearers of glasses that are used only part of the time may have the glasses attached to a cord that goes around their neck to prevent the loss and breaking of the glasses.\nSunglasses allow for better vision in bright daylight and are used to protect one's eyes against damage from excessive levels of ultraviolet light. Typical sunglasses lenses are tinted for protection against bright light or polarized to remove glare; photochromic glasses are clear or lightly tinted in dark or indoor conditions, but turn into sunglasses when they come into contact with ultraviolet light. Most over-the-counter sunglasses do not have corrective power in the lenses; however, special prescription sunglasses can be made. People with conditions that have photophobia as a primary symptom (like certain migraine disorders) often wear sunglasses or precision tinted glasses, even indoors and at night.\nSpecialized glasses may be used for viewing specific visual information, for example, 3D glasses for 3D films (stereoscopy). Sometimes glasses are worn purely for fashion or aesthetic purposes. Even with glasses used for vision correction, a wide range of fashions are available, using plastic, metal, wire, and other materials for frames. Most glasses lenses are made of plastic, polyethylene, and glass.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTypes.\nGlasses can be marked or found by their primary function, but also appear in combinations such as prescription sunglasses or safety glasses with enhanced magnification.\nCorrective.\nCorrective lenses are used to correct refractive errors by bending the light entering the eye in order to alleviate the effects of conditions such as nearsightedness (myopia), farsightedness (hypermetropia) or astigmatism. The ability of one's eyes to accommodate their focus to near and distant focus alters over time. A common condition in people over forty years old is presbyopia, which is caused by the eye's crystalline lens losing elasticity, progressively reducing the ability of the lens to accommodate (i.e. to focus on objects close to the eye). Few people have a pair of eyes that show exactly equal refractive characteristics; one eye may need a \"stronger\" (i.e. more refracting) lens than the other.\nCorrective lenses bring the image back into focus on the retina. They are made to conform to the prescription of an ophthalmologist or optometrist. A lensmeter can be used to verify the specifications of an existing pair of glasses. Corrective eyeglasses can significantly improve the life quality of the wearer. Not only do they enhance the wearer's visual experience, but can also reduce problems that result from eye strain, such as headaches or squinting.\nThe most common type of corrective lens is \"single vision\", which has a uniform refractive index. For people with presbyopia and hyperopia, bifocal and trifocal glasses provide two or three different refractive indices, respectively, and progressive lenses have a continuous gradient. For children, near-sighted (myopia) control lenses involve use of special lenses that assist to slow down the progression of myopia from growing further. Lenses can also be manufactured with high refractive indices, which allow them to be more lightweight, flatter and thinner than their counterparts with \"low\" refractive indices. High-Refractive Index lenses are aesthetically more appealing too. \nReading glasses provide a separate set of glasses for focusing on close by objects. They are available without prescription from drugstores, and offer a cheap, practical solution, though these have a pair of simple lenses of equal power, and so will not correct refraction problems like astigmatism or refractive or prismatic variations between the left and right eye. For the total correction of the individual's sight, glasses complying to a recent ophthalmic prescription are required.\nPeople who need glasses to see often have corrective lens restrictions on their driver's licenses that require them to wear their glasses every time they drive or risk fines or jail time.\nSome militaries issue prescription glasses to servicemen and women. These are typically GI glasses. Many state prisons in the United States issue glasses to inmates, often in the form of clear plastic aviators.\nAdjustable-focus eyeglasses might be used to replace bifocals or trifocals, or might be used to produce cheaper single-vision glasses (since they do not have to be custom-manufactured for every person).\nPinhole glasses are a type of corrective glasses that do not use a lens. Pinhole glasses do not actually refract the light or change focal length. Instead, they create a diffraction limited system, which has an increased depth of field, similar to using a small aperture in photography. This form of correction has many limitations that prevent it from gaining popularity in everyday use. Pinhole glasses can be made in a DIY fashion by making small holes in a piece of card which is then held in front of the eyes with a strap or cardboard arms.\nGlasses may also house other corrective or assistive devices. After the development of the transistor in the 1940s, combined eyeglass-hearing aids became popular. With thick-rimmed glasses the fashion at the time, a hearing aid could be concealed in the temple part of the frame. These fell out of fashion after the 1970s, but there are still occasions when combined eyeglass-hearing aids may be useful.\nSafety.\nSafety glasses are worn to protect the eyes in various situations. They are made with break-proof plastic lenses to protect the eye from flying debris or other matter. Construction workers, factory workers, machinists and lab technicians are often required to wear safety glasses to shield the eyes from flying debris or hazardous splatters such as blood or chemicals. As of 2017, dentists and surgeons in Canada and other countries are required to wear safety glasses to protect against infection from patients' blood or other body fluids. There are also safety glasses for welding, which are styled like wraparound sunglasses, but with much darker lenses, for use in welding where a full-sized welding helmet is inconvenient or uncomfortable. These are often called \"flash goggles\" because they provide protection from welding flash. Nylon frames are usually used for protective eyewear for sports because of their lightweight and flexible properties. Unlike most regular glasses, safety glasses often include protection beside the eyes as well as in front of the eyes.\nSunglasses.\nSunglasses provide more comfort and protection against bright light and often against ultraviolet (UV) light. To properly protect the eyes from the dangers of UV light, sunglasses should have UV-400 blocker to provide good coverage against the entire light spectrum that poses a danger.\nLight polarization is an added feature that can be applied to sunglass lenses. Polarization filters are positioned to remove horizontally polarized rays of light, which eliminates glare from horizontal surfaces (allowing wearers to see into water when reflected light would otherwise overwhelm the scene). Polarized sunglasses may present some difficulties for pilots since reflections from water and other structures often used to gauge altitude may be removed. Liquid-crystal displays emit polarized light, making them sometimes difficult to view with polarized sunglasses. Sunglasses may be worn for aesthetic purposes, or simply to hide the eyes. Examples of sunglasses that were popular for these reasons include tea shades and mirrored lenses. Many blind people wear nearly opaque glasses to hide their eyes for cosmetic reasons. Many people with light sensitivity conditions wear sunglasses or other tinted glasses to make the light more tolerable.\nSunglasses may also have corrective lenses, which requires a prescription. Clip-on sunglasses or sunglass clips can be attached to another pair of glasses. Some wrap-around sunglasses are large enough to be worn over another pair of glasses. Otherwise, many people opt to wear contact lenses to correct their vision so that standard sunglasses can be used.\nMixed double-frame (Flip glasses).\nThe double frame uplifting glasses have one moving frame with one pair of lenses and the basic fixed frame with another pair of lenses (optional), that are connected by four-bar linkage. For example, sun lenses could be easily lifted up and down while mixed with myopia lenses that always stay on. Presbyopia lenses could be also combined and easily removed from the field of view if needed without taking off glasses. These glasses are often used for drivers going through tunnels, with the upper frame serving as sunglasses and the second frame as transparent lenses.\n3D glasses.\nThe illusion of three dimensions on a two-dimensional surface can be created by providing each eye with different visual information. 3D glasses create the illusion of three dimensions by filtering a signal containing information for both eyes. The signal, often light reflected off a movie screen or emitted from an electronic display, is filtered so that each eye receives a slightly different image. The filters only work for the type of signal they were designed for.\nAnaglyph 3D glasses have a different colored filter for each eye, typically red and blue or red and green. A polarized 3D system on the other hand uses polarized filters. Polarized 3D glasses allow for color 3D, while the red-blue lenses produce an image with distorted coloration. An active shutter 3D system uses electronic shutters. Head-mounted displays can filter the signal electronically and then transmit light directly into the viewer's eyes.\nAnaglyph and polarized glasses are distributed to audiences at 3D movies. Polarized and active shutter glasses are used with many home theaters. Head-mounted displays are used by a single person, but the input signal can be shared between multiple units.\nMagnification (bioptics).\nGlasses can also provide magnification that is useful for people with vision impairments or specific occupational demands. An example would be \"bioptics\" or \"bioptic telescopes\" which have small telescopes mounted on, in, or behind their regular lenses. Newer designs use smaller lightweight telescopes, which can be embedded into the corrective glass and improve aesthetic appearance (mini telescopic spectacles). They may take the form of self-contained glasses that resemble goggles or binoculars, or may be attached to existing glasses.\nRecumbent glasses.\nRecumbent or prism glasses are glasses that use a prism with a 90\u00b0 refraction to allow the wearer to read or view a screen while lying on their back. Developed by Liverpudlian ophthalmologist Andrew McKie Reid in the 1930s to assist people bedbound by chronic illness or spinal injury, recumbent glasses have more recently been marketed not simply as an assistive device but also as 'lazy glasses'. They do not assist with vision, although they can be worn over regular corrective glasses.\nYellow-tinted computer/gaming glasses.\nYellow-tinted glasses are a type of glasses with a minor yellow tint. They perform a slight color correction, on top of reducing eyestrain from lack of blinking. They may also be considered minor corrective non-prescription glasses. Depending on the company, these computer or gaming glasses can also filter out high energy blue and ultra-violet light from LCD screens, fluorescent lighting, and other sources of light. This allows for reduced eye-strain. These glasses can be ordered as standard or prescription lenses that fit into standard optical frames.\nBlue-light blocking glasses.\nBy the end of the 2010s, eyeglasses that filter out blue light from computers, smartphones and tablets are becoming increasingly popular in response to concerns about problems caused by blue light overexposure.\nThe problems claimed range from dry eyes to eye strain, sleep cycle disruption, up to macular degeneration which can cause partial blindness. They may also block out ultraviolet (UV) radiation. However, there is no measurable UV light from computer monitors. The problem of computer vision syndrome (CVS) a.k.a. Digital Eye Strain can result from focusing the eyes on a screen for long, continuous periods. Many times the glasses do not appear to have much of a tint, or, if any, a slight yellow tint, but they may be more heavily tinted.\nLong hours of computer use (not blue light) may cause eye strain.\nMany eye symptoms caused by computer use will lessen after the usage of the computer is stopped.\nDecreasing evening screen time and setting devices to night mode will improve sleep.\nSeveral studies have shown that blue light from computers does not lead to eye diseases, including macular degeneration. The total amount of light entering the eyes can be adjusted without glasses using the screen brightness settings. Similarly, the blue light can often specifically be adjusted using the \"night mode\" of different operating systems, which can usually be activated outside of nighttime hours.\nThe American Academy of Ophthalmology (AAO) does not recommend special eyewear for computer use,\nalthough it recommends using prescription glasses measured specifically for computer screen distance (depending on individuals, but possibly 20\u201326 inches from the face), which are not the same as \"blue-light blocking\" glasses.\nThe position of the College of Optometrists (UK) is that \"the best scientific evidence currently available does not support the use of blue-blocking spectacle lenses in the general population to improve visual performance, alleviate the symptoms of eye fatigue or visual discomfort, improve sleep quality or conserve macula health.\"\nFrames.\nThe ophthalmic frame is the part of a pair of glasses that is designed to hold the lenses in the proper position.\nOphthalmic frames come in a variety of styles, sizes, materials, shapes, and colors.\nMaterials.\nMetal.\nVarious metals and alloys may be used to make glasses, such as gold, silver, aluminum, beryllium, stainless steel, titanium, Monel, and nickel titanium.\nNatural material.\nNatural materials such as wood, bone, ivory, leather and semi-precious or precious stones may also be used.\nCorrective lens shape.\nCorrective lenses can be produced in many different shapes from a circular lens called a lens blank. Lens blanks are cut to fit the shape of the frame that will hold them. Frame styles vary and fashion trends change over time, resulting in a multitude of lens shapes. For lower power lenses, there are few restrictions, allowing for many trendy and fashionable shapes. Higher power lenses can distort peripheral vision and may become thick and heavy if a large lens shape is used. However, if the lens is too small, it can drastically reduce the field of view.\nBifocal, trifocal, and progressive lenses generally require a taller lens shape to leave room for the different segments while preserving an adequate field of view through each segment. Frames with rounded edges are the most efficient for correcting myopic prescriptions, with perfectly round frames being the most efficient. Before the advent of eyeglasses as a fashion item, when frames were constructed with only functionality in mind, virtually all eyeglasses were either round, oval, panto, rectangular, octagonal, or square. It was not until glasses began to be seen as an accessory that different shapes were introduced to be more aesthetically pleasing than functional.\nHistory.\nPrecursors.\nScattered evidence exists for use of visual aid devices in the Greek and Roman era, most prominently the use of an emerald by Emperor Nero as mentioned by Pliny the Elder.\nThe use of a convex lens to form an enlarged/magnified image was most likely described in Ptolemy's \"Optics\" (which survives only in a poor Arabic translation). Ptolemy's description of lenses was commented upon and improved by Ibn Sahl (10th century) and most notably by Alhazen (\"Book of Optics\", c.\u20091021). Latin translations of Ptolemy's \"Optics\" and of Alhazen became available in Europe in the 12th century, coinciding with the development of \"reading stones\".\nRobert Grosseteste's treatise \"De iride\" (\"On the Rainbow\"), written between 1220 and 1235, mentions using optics to \"read the smallest letters at incredible distances\". A few years later in 1262, Roger Bacon is also known to have written on the magnifying properties of lenses. The development of the first eyeglasses took place in northern Italy in the second half of the 13th century.\nIndependently of the development of optical lenses, some cultures developed \"sunglasses\" for eye protection, without any corrective properties. For example, flat panes of smoky quartz were used in 12th-century China, and the Inuit have used snow goggles for eye protection.\nInvention.\nThe earliest recorded comment on the use of lenses for optical purposes was made in 1268 by Roger Bacon.\nThe first eyeglasses were estimated to have been made in Central Italy, most likely in Pisa or Florence, by about 1290: In a sermon delivered on 23 February 1306, the Dominican friar Giordano da Pisa (c.\u20091255\u20131311) wrote \"It is not yet twenty years since there was found the art of making eyeglasses, which make for good vision[...] And it is so short a time that this new art, never before extant, was discovered.[...] I saw the one who first discovered and practiced it, and I talked to him.\"\nGiordano's colleague Friar Alessandro della Spina of Pisa (d. 1313) was soon making eyeglasses. The \"Ancient Chronicle of the Dominican Monastery of St. Catherine in Pisa\" records: \"Eyeglasses, having first been made by someone else, who was unwilling to share them, he [Spina] made them and shared them with everyone with a cheerful and willing heart.\" Venice quickly became an important center of manufacture, especially due to using the high-quality glass made at Murano. By 1301, there were guild regulations in Venice governing the sale of eyeglasses and a separate guild of Venetian spectacle makers was formed in 1320. In the fourteenth century, they were very common objects: Francesco Petrarca says in one of his letters that, until he was 60, he did not need glasses, and Franco Sacchetti mentions them often in his .\nThe earliest pictorial evidence for the use of eyeglasses is Tommaso da Modena's 1352 portrait of the cardinal Hugh de Saint-Cher reading in a scriptorium. Another early example would be a depiction of eyeglasses found north of the Alps in an altarpiece of the church of Bad Wildungen (now in Germany) in 1403. These early glasses had convex lenses that could correct both hyperopia (farsightedness), and the presbyopia that commonly develops as a symptom of aging. Although concave lenses for myopia (near-sightedness) had made their first appearance in the mid-15th century, it was not until 1604 that Johannes Kepler published the first correct explanation as to why convex and concave lenses could correct presbyopia and myopia.\nEarly frames for glasses consisted of two magnifying glasses riveted together by the handles so that they could grip the nose. These are referred to as \"rivet spectacles\". The earliest surviving examples were found under the floorboards at Kloster Wienhausen, a convent near Celle in Germany; they have been dated to circa 1400.\nThe world's first specialist shop for spectacles\u2014what might be regarded today as an optician\u2014opened in Strasbourg (then Holy Roman Empire, now France) in 1466.\nOther claims.\nThe 17th-century claim by Francesco Redi that Salvino degli Armati of Florence invented eyeglasses in the 13th century has been exposed as erroneous.\nMarco Polo is mistakenly claimed to have encountered eyeglasses during his travels in China in the 13th century. However, no such evidence appears in his accounts. The earliest mentions of eyeglasses in China occur in the 15th century and those Chinese sources state that eyeglasses were imported.\nIn 1907, Professor Berthold Laufer speculated, in his history of glasses, that for glasses to be mentioned in the literature of China and Europe at approximately the same time it was probable that they were not invented independently, and after ruling out the Turks, proposed India as a location.\nHowever, Joseph Needham stated that the mention of glasses in the Chinese manuscript Laufer used \"in part\" to credit the prior invention of them in Asia did not exist in older versions of that manuscript, and the reference to them in later versions was added during the Ming dynasty.\nIn 1971, Rishi Agarwal, in an article in the \"British Journal of Ophthalmology\", states that Vyasatirtha was observed in possession of a pair of glasses in the 1520s, he argues that it \"is, therefore, most likely that the use of lenses reached Europe via the Arabs, as did Hindu mathematics and the ophthalmological works of the ancient Hindu surgeon Sushruta\", but all dates are given well after the existence of eyeglasses in Italy was established, including significant shipments of eyeglasses from Italy to the Middle East, with one shipment as large as 24,000 glasses, as well as a spectacles dispensary in Strasbourg in 1466.\nLater developments.\nThe American scientist Benjamin Franklin, who had both myopia and presbyopia, invented bifocals. Historians have from time to time produced evidence to suggest that others may have preceded him in the invention; however, a correspondence between George Whatley and John Fenno, editor of \"The Gazette of the United States\", suggested that Franklin had indeed invented bifocals, and perhaps 50 years earlier than had been originally thought. The first lenses for correcting astigmatism were designed by the British astronomer George Airy in 1825.\nOver time, the construction of frames for glasses also evolved. Early eyepieces were designed to be either held in place by hand or by exerting pressure on the nose (\"pince-nez\"). Girolamo Savonarola suggested that eyepieces could be held in place by a ribbon passed over the wearer's head, this in turn secured by the weight of a hat. The modern style of glasses, held by temples passing over the ears, was developed sometime before 1727, possibly by the British optician Edward Scarlett. These designs were not immediately successful, however, and various styles with attached handles such as \"scissors-glasses\" and lorgnettes were also fashionable from the second half of the 18th century and into the early 19th century.\nIn the early 20th century, Moritz von Rohr and Zeiss (with the assistance of H. Boegehold and A. Sonnefeld) developed the Zeiss Punktal spherical point-focus lenses that dominated the eyeglass lens field for many years. In 2008, Joshua Silver designed eyewear with adjustable corrective glasses. They work by using a built-in syringe to pump a silicone solution into a flexible lens.\nDespite the popularity of contact lenses and laser corrective eye surgery, glasses remain very common, as their technology has improved. For instance, it is now possible to purchase frames made of special memory metal alloys that return to their correct shape after being bent. Other frames have spring-loaded hinges. Either of these designs offer dramatically better ability to withstand the stresses of daily wear and the occasional accident. Modern frames are also often made from strong, lightweight materials such as titanium alloys, which were not available in earlier times.\nIn fashion.\nIn the 1930s, \"spectacles\" were described as \"medical appliances\". Wearing spectacles was sometimes considered socially humiliating. In the 1970s, fashionable glasses started to become available through manufacturers, and governments also recognized the demand for stylized eyewear.\nGraham Pullin describes how devices for disability, like glasses, have traditionally been designed to camouflage against the skin and restore ability without being visible. In the past, design for disability has \"been less about projecting a positive image as about trying not to project an image at all\". Pullin uses the example of spectacles, traditionally categorized as a medical device for \"patients\", and outlines how they are now described as eyewear: a fashionable accessory. Much like other fashion designs and accessories, eyewear is created by designers, has reputable labels, and comes in collections, by season and designer. In recent years, it has become more common for consumers to purchase eyewear with non-prescription lenses as a fashion accessory.\nWidespread availability.\nThe availability of eyeglasses to ordinary people is still an ongoing problem, with between 1 and 2.5 billion people worldwide lacking access to vision correction.\nSociety and culture.\nMarket.\nUnited States.\nThe market for spectacles has been characterized as having highly inelastic demand. Advertising restrictions in the United States, for example, have correlated with higher prices, suggesting that adverts make the spectacles market more price-competitive. It has also been claimed to be monopolistically competitive, as in the case of Luxottica.\nThere are claims that insufficiently free market competition inflates the prices of frames, which cost an average of $25\u2013$50 U.S. to make, to an average retail price of $300 in the United States. This claim is disputed by some in the industry.\nThe United States also prohibits the sale of glasses unless the user has a recent prescription from an optometrist or ophthalmologist, whereas in most of the world, glasses and contact lenses can be bought without needing to get a new eye exam first. This means that Americans who lose or break their glasses may be unable to see well until they can get, and pay for, an appointment with an optometrist. In most of the world, someone who has lost their glasses merely goes to the nearest store selling glasses and buys a replacement over the counter.\nRedistribution.\nSome organizations like Lions Clubs International, Unite For Sight, ReSpectacle, and New Eyes for the Needy provide a way to donate glasses and sunglasses to people on low incomes or no income. Unite For Sight has redistributed more than 200,000 pairs.\nFashion.\nMany people require glasses for the reasons listed above. There are many shapes, colors, and materials that can be used when designing frames and lenses that can be utilized in various combinations. Oftentimes, the selection of a frame is made based on how it will affect the appearance of the wearer. Some people with good natural eyesight like to wear eyeglasses as a style accessory. In Japan, some companies ban women from wearing glasses.\nPersonal image.\nFor most of their history, eyeglasses were seen as unfashionable, and carried several potentially negative connotations: wearing glasses caused individuals to be stigmatized and stereotyped as pious clergymen \u2014 as those in religious vocation were the most likely to be literate and therefore the most likely to need reading glasses \u2014 elderly, or physically weak and passive. The stigma began to fall away in the U.S. in the early 1900s when the popular Theodore Roosevelt was regularly photographed wearing eyeglasses, and in the 1910s when popular comedian Harold Lloyd wore a pair of horn-rimmed glasses as the \"Glasses\" character in his films.\nIn the United Kingdom, wearing glasses was characterized in the nineteenth century as \"a sure sign of the weakling and the mollycoddle\", according to Neville Cardus, writing in 1928. \"Tim\" Killick was the first professional cricketer to play while wearing glasses \"continuously\", after his vision deteriorated in 1897. \"With their aid he placed himself in the forefront among English professionals of all-round abilities.\" The American tenor Jan Peerce, plagued with poor eyesight, credited comedian Steve Allen for normalizing and even popularizing the wearing of eyeglasses in front of live television and stage audiences; prior to this, performers who read on early television were expected to squint or use contact lenses.\nSince then, eyeglasses have become an acceptable fashion item and often act as a key component in individuals' personal image. Musicians Buddy Holly and John Lennon became synonymous with the styles of eye-glasses they wore to the point that thick, black horn-rimmed glasses are often called \"Buddy Holly glasses\" and perfectly round metal eyeglass frames called \"John Lennon glasses\" (or, more recently, \"Harry Potter glasses\"). British comedic actor Eric Sykes was known in the United Kingdom for wearing thick, square, horn-rimmed glasses, which were in fact a sophisticated hearing aid that alleviated his deafness by allowing him to \"hear\" vibrations. Some celebrities have become so associated with their eyeglasses that they continued to wear them even after taking other measures against vision problems: U.S. Senator Barry Goldwater and comedian Drew Carey continued to wear non-prescription glasses after being fitted for contacts and getting laser eye surgery, respectively.\nOther celebrities have used glasses to differentiate themselves from the characters they play, such as Anne Kirkbride, who wore oversized 1980s-style round horn-rimmed glasses as Deirdre Barlow in the soap opera \"Coronation Street\"; and Masaharu Morimoto, who wears glasses to separate his professional persona as a chef from his stage persona as Iron Chef Japanese. In 2012, some NBA players wore lensless glasses with thick plastic frames like horn-rimmed glasses during post-game interviews, geek chic that draws comparisons to actor Jaleel White's infamous styling as TV character Steve Urkel.\nIn superhero fiction, eyeglasses have become a standard component of various heroes' disguises as masks, allowing them to adopt a nondescript demeanor when they are not in their superhero personae: Superman is well known for wearing 1950s-style horn-rimmed glasses as Clark Kent, while Wonder Woman wears either round, Harold Lloyd-style glasses or 1970s-style bug-eye glasses as Diana Prince. Sailor Mercury is also known for her glasses and her visor. An example of the halo effect is seen in the stereotype that those who wear glasses are intelligent. This belief can have positive consequences for people who wear glasses, for example in elections. Studies show that wearing glasses increases politicians' electoral success, at least in Western cultures.\nStyles.\nIn the 20th century, eyeglasses came to be considered a component of fashion; as such, various different styles have come in and out of popularity. Most are still in regular use, albeit with varying degrees of frequency.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74845", "revid": "50925032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74845", "title": "Contact lens", "text": "Lenses placed on the eye's surface\nContact lenses, or simply contacts, are thin lenses placed directly on the surface of the eyes. Contact lenses are ocular prosthetic devices used by over 150 million people worldwide, and they can be worn to correct vision or for cosmetic or therapeutic reasons. In 2023, the worldwide market for contact lenses was estimated at $18.6 billion, with North America accounting for the largest share, over 38.18%. Multiple analysts estimated that the global market for contact lenses would reach $33.8 billion by 2030. As of 2010,[ [update]] the average age of contact lens wearers globally was 31 years old, and two-thirds of wearers were female.\nPeople choose to wear contact lenses for many reasons. Aesthetics and cosmetics are main motivating factors for people who want to avoid wearing glasses or to change the appearance or color of their eyes. Others wear contact lenses for functional or optical reasons. Contact lens use is generally more costly than wearing glasses, with annual expenses typically ranging from about US$200 to US$1,000 depending on lens type and replacement schedule. When compared with glasses, contact lenses typically provide better peripheral vision, and do not collect moisture (from rain, snow, condensation, etc.) or perspiration. This can make them preferable for sports and other outdoor activities. Contact lens wearers can also wear sunglasses, goggles, or other eye wear of their choice without having to fit them with prescription lenses or worry about compatibility with glasses. Additionally, there are conditions such as keratoconus and aniseikonia that are typically corrected better with contact lenses than with glasses.\nHistory.\nOrigins and first functional prototypes.\nLeonardo da Vinci is frequently credited with introducing the idea of contact lenses in his 1508 \"Codex of the eye, Manual D\", wherein he described a method of directly altering corneal power by either submerging the head in a bowl of water or wearing a water-filled glass hemisphere over the eye. Neither idea was practically implementable in da Vinci's time. He did not suggest his idea be used for correcting vision; he was more interested in exploring mechanisms of accommodation.\nDescartes proposed a device for correcting vision consisting of a liquid-filled glass tube capped with a lens. However, the idea was impracticable, since the device was to be placed in direct contact with the cornea and thus would have made blinking impossible.\nIn 1801, Thomas Young fashioned a pair of basic contact lenses based on Descartes' model. He used wax to affix water-filled lenses to his eyes, neutralizing their refractive power, which he corrected with another pair of lenses.\nJohn Herschel, in a footnote to the 1845 edition of the \"Encyclopedia Metropolitana\", posed two ideas for the visual correction: the first \"a spherical capsule of glass filled with animal jelly\", the second \"a mould of the cornea\" that could be impressed on \"some sort of transparent medium\". Though Herschel reportedly never tested these ideas, they were later advanced by independent inventors, including Hungarian physician Joseph Dallos, who perfected a method of making molds from living eyes. This enabled the manufacture of lenses that, for the first time, conformed to the actual shape of the eye.\nAlthough Louis J. Girard invented a scleral contact lens in 1887, it was German ophthalmologist Adolf Gaston Eugen Fick who in 1888 fabricated the first successful afocal scleral contact lens. Approximately in diameter, the heavy blown-glass shells rested on the less sensitive rim of tissue surrounding the cornea and floated on a dextrose solution. He experimented with fitting the lenses initially on rabbits, then on himself, and lastly on a small group of volunteers, publishing his work, \"Contactbrille\", in the March 1888 edition of \"Archiv f\u00fcr Augenheilkunde\". Large and unwieldy, Fick's lens could be worn only for a couple of hours at a time. August M\u00fcller of Kiel, Germany, corrected his own severe myopia with a more convenient blown-glass scleral contact lens of his own manufacture in 1888.\nThe development of polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) in the 1930s paved the way for the manufacture of plastic scleral lenses. In 1936, optometrist William Feinbloom introduced a hybrid lens composed of glass and plastic, and in 1937 it was reported that some 3,000 Americans were already wearing contact lenses. In 1939, Hungarian ophthalmologist Dr. Istv\u00e1n Gy\u00f6rffy produced the first fully plastic contact lens. The following year, German optometrist Heinrich W\u00f6hlk produced his own version of plastic lenses based on experiments performed during the 1930s.\nCorneal and rigid lenses (1949\u20131960s).\nIn postwar America, the option of contacts began entering the general public consciousness; yet concerns over the effect of foreign materials directly touching the ocular surface remained. In 1949, the first \"corneal\" lenses were developed. These were much smaller than the original scleral lenses, as they sat only on the cornea rather than across all of the visible ocular surface and could be worn up to 16 hours a day. PMMA corneal lenses became the first contact lenses to have mass appeal through the 1960s, as lens designs became more sophisticated with improving manufacturing technology. On October 18, 1964, in a television studio in Washington, D.C., Lyndon Baines Johnson became the first President in the history of the United States to appear in public wearing contact lenses, under the supervision of Dr. Alan Isen, who developed the first commercially viable soft-contact lenses in the United States.\nEarly corneal lenses of the 1950s and 1960s were relatively expensive and fragile, resulting in the development of a market for contact lens insurance. Replacement Lens Insurance, Inc. (now known as RLI Corp.) phased out its original flagship product in 1994 after contact lenses became more affordable and easier to replace.\nGas permeable and soft lenses (1959\u2013present).\nOne of the major disadvantages of PMMA lenses is that they allow no oxygen to get through to the conjunctiva and cornea, causing a number of adverse and potentially serious clinical effects. By the end of the 1970s and through the 1980s and 1990s, a range of oxygen-permeable but rigid materials were developed to overcome this problem. Chemist Norman Gaylord played a prominent role in the development of these new oxygen-permeable contact lenses. Collectively, these polymers are referred to as \"rigid gas permeable\" or RGP materials or lenses. Though all the above contact lens types\u2014sclerals, PMMAs and RGPs\u2014could be correctly referred to as \"rigid\" or \"hard\", the latter term is now used for the original PMMAs, which are still occasionally fitted and worn, whereas \"rigid\" is a generic term for all these lens types; thus, hard lenses (PMMAs) are a subset of rigid contact lenses. Occasionally, the term \"gas permeable\" is used to describe RGPs, which is somewhat misleading as soft contact lenses are also gas permeable in that they allow oxygen to get through to the ocular surface.\nThe principal breakthrough in soft lenses was made by Czech chemists Otto Wichterle and Drahoslav L\u00edm, who published their work \"Hydrophilic gels for biological use\" in the journal \"Nature\" in 1959. In 1965, National Patent Development Corporation (NPDC) bought the American rights to produce the lenses and then sublicensed the rights to Bausch &amp; Lomb, which started to manufacture them in the United States. The Czech scientists' work led to the launch of the first hydrogel contact lenses in some countries in the 1960s and the first approval of the Soflens material by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1971. These soft lenses were soon prescribed more often than rigid ones, due to the immediate and much greater comfort (rigid lenses require a period of adaptation before full comfort is achieved). Polymers from which soft lenses are manufactured improved over the next 25 years, primarily in terms of increasing oxygen permeability, by varying the ingredients. In 1972, British optometrist Rishi Agarwal was the first to suggest disposable soft contact lenses.\nIn 1998, the first silicone hydrogel contact lenses were released by Ciba Vision in Mexico. These new materials encapsulated the benefits of silicone which has extremely high oxygen permeability\u2014with the comfort and clinical performance of the conventional hydrogels that had been used for the previous 30 years. These contact lenses were initially advocated primarily for extended (overnight) wear, although more recently, daily (no overnight) wear silicone hydrogels have been launched.\nIn a slightly modified molecule, a polar group is added without changing the structure of the silicone hydrogel. This is referred to as the Tanaka monomer because it was invented and patented by Kyoichi Tanaka of Menicon Co. of Japan in 1979. Second-generation silicone hydrogels, such as galyfilcon A (Acuvue Advance, Vistakon) and senofilcon A (Acuvue Oasys, Vistakon), use the Tanaka monomer. Vistakon improved the Tanaka monomer even further and added other molecules, which serve as an internal wetting agent.\nComfilcon A (Biofinity, CooperVision) was the first third-generation polymer. Its patent claims that the material uses two siloxy macromers of diverse sizes that, when used in combination, produce very high oxygen permeability for a given water content. Enfilcon A (Avaira, CooperVision) is another third-generation material that is naturally wet; its water content is 46%.\nTypes.\nContact lenses are classified in diverse ways, namely, by their primary function, material, wear schedule (how long a lens can be worn), and replacement schedule (how long before a lens needs to be discarded).\nFunctions.\nCorrection of refractive error.\nCorrective contact lenses are designed to improve vision, most commonly by correcting refractive error. This is done by directly focusing light so it enters the eye with the proper power for clear vision.\nA spherical contact lens bends light evenly in every direction (horizontally, vertically, etc.). They are typically used to correct myopia and hypermetropia.\nThere are two ways that contact lenses can correct astigmatism. One way is with toric soft lenses that work essentially the same way as eyeglasses with cylindrical correction; a toric lens has a different focusing power horizontally than vertically, and as a result can correct for astigmatism. Another way is by using a rigid gas permeable lens; since most astigmatism is caused by the shape of the cornea, rigid lenses can improve vision because the front surface of the optical system is the perfectly spherical lens. Both approaches have advantages and drawbacks. Toric lenses must have the proper orientation to correct for astigmatism, so such lenses must have additional design characteristics to prevent them from rotating out of alignment. This can be done by weighting the bottom of the lens or by using other physical characteristics to rotate the lens back into position, but these mechanisms rarely work perfectly, so some misalignment is common and results in somewhat imperfect correction, and blurring of sight after blinking rotates the lens. Toric soft lenses have all the advantages of soft lenses in general, which are low initial cost, ease of fitting, and minimal adjustment period. Rigid gas permeable lenses usually provide superior optical correction but have become less popular relative to soft lenses due to higher initial costs, longer initial adjustment period, and more involved fitting.\nCorrection of presbyopia.\nCorrection of presbyopia (a need for a reading prescription different from the prescription needed for distance) presents an additional challenge in the fitting of contact lenses. Two main strategies exist: multifocal lenses and monovision.\nMultifocal contact lenses (e.g. bifocals or progressives) are comparable to spectacles with bifocals or progressive lenses because they have multiple focal points. Multifocal contact lenses are typically designed for constant viewing through the center of the lens, but some designs do incorporate a shift in lens position to view through the reading power (similar to bifocal glasses).\nMonovision is the use of single-vision lenses (one focal point per lens) to focus an eye (typically the dominant one) for distance vision and the other for near work. The brain then learns to use this setup to see clearly at all distances. A technique called modified monovision uses multifocal lenses and also specializes one eye for distance and the other for near, thus gaining the benefits of both systems. Care is advised for persons with a previous history of strabismus and those with significant phorias, who are at risk of eye misalignment under monovision. Studies have shown no adverse effect to driving performance in adapted monovision contact lens wearers.\nAlternatively, a person may simply wear reading glasses over their distance contact lenses.\nOther types of vision correction.\nFor those with certain color deficiencies, a red-tinted \"X-Chrom\" contact lens may be used. Although such a lens does not restore normal color vision, it allows some color-blind people to distinguish colors better. Red-filtering contact lenses can also be an option for extreme light sensitivity in some visual deficiencies such as achromatopsia.\nChromaGen contact lenses have been used and shown to have some limitations with vision at night although otherwise producing significant improvements in color vision. An earlier study showed very significant improvements in color vision and patient satisfaction.\nLater work that used these ChromaGen lenses with people with dyslexia in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial showed highly significant improvements in reading ability over reading without the lenses. This system has been granted FDA approval for use in the United States.\nMagnification is another area being researched for future contact lens applications. Embedding of telescopic lenses and electronic components suggests that future uses of contact lenses may become extremely diverse.\nCosmetic contact lenses.\nA cosmetic contact lens is designed to change the appearance of the eye. These lenses may also correct refractive error. Although many brands of contact lenses are lightly tinted to make them easier to handle, cosmetic lenses worn to change eye color are far less common, accounting for only 3% of contact lens fits in 2004.\nIn the United States, the FDA labels non-corrective cosmetic contact lenses as \"decorative contact lenses\". Like any contact lens, cosmetic lenses carry risks of mild to serious complications, including ocular redness, irritation and infection.\nDue to their medical nature, colored contact lenses, similar to regular ones, are illegal to purchase in the United States without a valid prescription. Those with perfect vision can buy color contacts for cosmetic reasons, but they still need their eyes to be measured for a \"plano\" prescription, meaning one with zero vision correction. This is for safety reasons so the lenses will fit the eye without causing irritation or redness.\nSome colored contact lenses completely cover the iris, thus dramatically changing eye color. Other colored contact lenses merely tint the iris, highlighting its natural color. A new trend in Japan, South Korea and China is the circle contact lens, which extend the appearance of the iris onto the sclera by having a dark tinted area all around. The result is an appearance of a bigger, wider iris, a look reminiscent of dolls' eyes.\nCosmetic lenses can have more direct medical applications. For example, some contact lenses can restore the appearance and, to some extent the function, of a damaged or missing iris.\nTherapeutic scleral lenses.\nA scleral lens is a large, firm, transparent, oxygen-permeable contact lens that rests on the sclera and creates a tear-filled vault over the cornea. The cause of this unique positioning is usually relevant to a specific patient whose cornea is too sensitive to support the lens directly. Scleral lenses may be used to improve vision and reduce pain and light sensitivity for people with disorders or injuries to the eye, such as severe dry eye syndrome (keratoconjunctivitis sicca), microphthalmia, keratoconus, corneal ectasia, Stevens\u2013Johnson syndrome, Sj\u00f6gren's syndrome, aniridia, neurotrophic keratitis (anesthetic corneas), complications post-LASIK, high order aberrations of the eye, complications post-corneal transplant and pellucid degeneration. Injuries to the eye such as surgical complications, distorted corneal implants, as well as chemical and burn injuries also may be treated with scleral lenses.\nTherapeutic soft lenses.\nSoft lenses are often used in the treatment and management of non-refractive disorders of the eye. A bandage contact lens allows the patient to see while protecting an injured or diseased cornea from the constant rubbing of blinking eyelids, thereby allowing it to heal. They are used in the treatment of conditions including bullous keratopathy, dry eyes, corneal abrasions and erosion, keratitis, corneal edema, descemetocele, corneal ectasia, Mooren's ulcer, anterior corneal dystrophy, and neurotrophic keratoconjunctivitis. Contact lenses that deliver drugs to the eye have also been developed.\nMaterials.\nRigid lenses.\nGlass lenses were never comfortable enough to gain widespread popularity. The first lenses to do so were those made from polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA or Perspex/Plexiglas), now commonly referred to as \"hard\" lenses. Their main disadvantage is they do not allow oxygen to pass through to the cornea, which can cause a number of adverse, and often serious, clinical events. Starting in the late 1970s, improved rigid materials which were oxygen-permeable were developed. Contact lenses made from these materials are called rigid gas permeable lenses (RGPs).\nA rigid lens is able to cover the natural shape of the cornea with a new refracting surface. This means that a spherical rigid contact lens can correct corneal astigmatism. Rigid lenses can also be made as a front-toric, back-toric, or bitoric. Rigid lenses can also correct corneas with irregular geometries, such as those with keratoconus or post surgical ectasias. In most cases, patients with keratoconus see better through rigid lenses than through glasses. Rigid lenses are more chemically inert, allowing them to be worn in more challenging environments where chemical inertia is important compared to soft lenses.\nSoft lenses.\nSoft lenses are more flexible than rigid lenses and can be gently rolled or folded without damaging the lens. While rigid lenses require a period of adaptation before comfort is achieved, new soft lens wearers typically report lens awareness rather than pain or discomfort.\nHydrogel lenses rely on their water content to transmit oxygen through the lens to the cornea. As a result, higher water content lenses allowed more oxygen to the cornea. In 1998, silicone hydrogel, or Si-hy lenses became available. These materials have both the extremely high oxygen permeability of silicone and the comfort and clinical performance of the conventional hydrogels. Because silicone allows more oxygen permeability than water, oxygen permeability of silicone hydrogels is not tied to the lenses' water content. Lenses have now been developed with so much oxygen permeability that they are approved for overnight wear (extended wear). Lenses approved for daily wear are also available in silicone hydrogel materials.\nCurrent brands of soft lenses are either traditional hydrogel or silicone hydrogel. Because of drastic differences in oxygen permeability, replacement schedule, and other design characteristics, it is very important to follow the instructions of the eye care professional prescribing the lenses. When comparing traditional hydrogel soft lens contacts with silicone hydrogel versions, there is no clear evidence to recommend a superior lens.\nDisadvantages of silicone hydrogels are that they are slightly stiffer and the lens surface can be hydrophobic, thus less \"wettable\" \u2013 factors that can influence comfort of lens use. New manufacturing techniques and changes to multipurpose solutions have minimized these effects. Those new techniques are often broken down into 3 generations:\nHybrid.\nA small number of hybrid lenses exist. Typically, these contact lenses consist of a rigid center and a soft \"skirt\". A similar technique is the \"piggybacking\" of a smaller, rigid lens on the surface of a larger, soft lens. These techniques are often chosen to give the vision correction benefits of a rigid lens and the comfort of a soft lens.\nWear schedule.\nA \"daily wear\" (DW) contact lens is designed to be worn for one day and removed before sleeping. An \"extended wear\" (EW) contact lens is designed for continuous overnight wear, typically for up to 6 consecutive nights. Newer materials, such as silicone hydrogels, allow for even longer wear periods of up to 30 consecutive nights; these longer-wear lenses are often referred to as \"continuous wear\" (CW). EW and CW contact lenses can be worn overnight because of their high oxygen permeability. While awake, the eyes are mostly open, allowing oxygen from the air to dissolve into the tears and pass through the lens to the cornea. While asleep, oxygen is supplied from the blood vessels in the back of the eyelid. A lens hindering passage of oxygen to the cornea causes corneal hypoxia which can result in serious complications, such as corneal ulcer that, if left untreated, can permanently decrease vision. EW and CW contact lenses typically allow for a transfer of 5\u20136 times more oxygen than conventional softs, allowing the cornea to remain healthy, even with closed eyelids.\nWearing lenses designed for daily wear overnight has an increased risk for corneal infections, corneal ulcers and corneal neovascularization\u2014this latter condition, once it sets in, cannot be reversed and will eventually spoil vision acuity through diminishing corneal transparency. The most common complication of extended wear is giant papillary conjunctivitis (GPC), sometimes associated with a poorly fitting contact lens.\nReplacement schedule.\nContact lenses are often categorized by their replacement schedule. Single use lenses (called 1-day or daily disposables) are discarded after one use. Because they do not have to stand up to the wear and tear of repeated uses, these lenses can be made thinner and lighter, greatly improving their comfort. Lenses replaced frequently gather fewer deposits of allergens and germs, making these lenses preferable for patients with ocular allergies or for those who are prone to infection. Single-use lenses are also useful for people who wear contact lenses infrequently, or when losing a lens is likely or not easily replaced (such as when on vacation). They are also considered useful for children because cleaning or disinfecting is not needed, leading to improved compliance.\nOther disposable contact lenses are designed for replacement every two or four weeks. Quarterly or annual lenses, which used to be very common, are now much less so. Rigid gas permeable lenses are very durable and may last for several years without the need for replacement. PMMA hards were very durable and were commonly worn for 5 to 10 years but had several drawbacks.\nLenses with different replacement schedules can be made of the same material. Although the materials are alike, differences in the manufacturing processes determine if the resulting lens will be a \"daily disposable\" or one recommended for two- or four-week replacement. However, sometimes manufacturers use absolutely identical lenses and just repackage them with different labels.\nManufacturing.\nTypically, soft contact lenses are mass-produced, while rigids are custom-made to exact specifications for the individual patient.\nPrescriptions.\nThe parameters specified in a contact lens prescription may include:\nPrescriptions for contact lenses and glasses may be similar but are not interchangeable. Prescribing of contact lenses is usually restricted to various combinations of ophthalmologists, optometrists and opticians. An eye examination is needed to determine an individual's suitability for contact lens wear. This typically includes a refraction to determine the proper power of the lens and an assessment of the health of the eye's anterior segment. Many eye diseases inhibit contact lens wear, such as active infections, allergies, and dry eye. Keratometry is especially important in the fitting of rigid lenses.\nUnited States.\nContact lenses are prescribed by ophthalmologists, optometrists, or specially licensed opticians under the supervision of an eye doctor. They are typically ordered at the same office that conducts the eye exam and fitting. The Fairness to Contact Lens Consumers Act guarantees consumers a copy of their contact lens prescription, allowing them to obtain lenses at the provider of their choice.\nUsage.\nBefore touching the contact lens or the eye, it is important to wash hands thoroughly with soap and rinse well. Soaps containing moisturizers or allergens should be avoided as these can cause eye irritation. Drying of hands using towels or tissues before handling contact lenses can transfer lint (fluff) to the hands and, subsequently, to the lenses, causing irritation upon insertion. Towels, unless freshly laundered on high temperature wash, are frequently contaminated with large quantities of bacteria and, as such, should be avoided when handling lenses. Dust, lint and other debris may collect on the outside of contact lenses. Again, hand contact with this material, before handling contact lenses, may transfer it to the lenses themselves. Rinsing the case under a source of clean running water, before opening it, can help alleviate this problem. Next the lens should be removed from its case and inspected for defects (e.g. splits, folds, lint). A 'gritty' or rough appearance to the lens surface may indicate that a considerable quantity of proteins, lipids and debris has built up on it and that additional cleaning is required; this is often accompanied and felt by unusually high irritation upon insertion.\nCare should be taken to ensure the soft lens is not inserted inside-out. The edge of a lens turned inside out has a different appearance, especially when the lens is slightly folded. Insertion of an inside-out lens for a brief time (less than one minute) should not cause any damage to the eye. Some brands of lenses have markings on the rim that make it easier to tell the front of the lens apart from the back.\nInsertion.\nContact lenses are typically inserted into the eye by placing them on the pad of the index or middle finger with the concave side upward and then using that finger to place the lens on the eye. Rigid lenses should be placed directly on the cornea. Soft lenses may be placed on the sclera (white of the eye) and then slid into place. Another finger of the same hand, or a finger of the other hand, is used to keep the eye wide open. Alternatively, the user may close their eyes and then look towards their nose, sliding the lens into place over the cornea. Problems may arise if the lens folds, turns inside-out, slides off the finger prematurely, or adheres more tightly to the finger than the eye surface. A drop of solution may help the lens adhere to the eye.\nWhen the lens first contacts the eye, it should be comfortable. A brief period of irritation may occur, caused by a difference in pH and/or salinity between that of the lens solution and the tear. This discomfort fades quickly as the solution drains away and is replaced by the natural tears. However, if irritation persists, the cause could be a dirty, damaged, or inside-out lens. Removing and inspecting it for damage and proper orientation, and re-cleaning if necessary, should correct the problem. If discomfort continues, the lens should not be worn. In some cases, taking a break from lens wear for a day may correct the problem. In case of severe discomfort, or if it does not resolve by the next day, the person should be seen as soon as possible by an eye doctor to rule out potentially serious complications.\nRemoval.\nRemoving contact lenses incorrectly can result in damage to the lens and injury to the eye, so certain precautions must be taken. Rigid contact lenses can best be removed by pulling the eyelid tight and then blinking, whereupon the lens drops out. With one finger on the outer corner of the eyelids, or lateral canthus, the person stretches the eyelids towards the ear; the increased tension of the eyelid margins against the edge of lens allows the blink to break the capillary action that adheres the lens to the eye. The other hand is typically cupped underneath the eye to catch the lens as it drops out. For soft lenses, which have a stronger adherence to the eye surface, this technique is less suitable.\nA soft contact lens may be removed by pinching the edge between the thumb and index finger. Moving the lens off the cornea first can improve comfort during removal and reduce risk of scratching the cornea with a fingernail. It is also possible to push or pull a soft lens far enough to the side or bottom of the eyeball to get it to fold then fall out, without pinching and thereby damaging it. If these techniques are used with a rigid lens, it may scratch the cornea.\nThere are also small tools specifically for removing lenses. Usually made of flexible plastic, they resemble small tweezers, or plungers that suction onto the front of the lens. Typically, these tools are used only with rigid lenses. Extreme care must be exercised when using mechanical tools or fingernails to insert or remove contact lenses.\nCare.\nLens care varies depending on material and wear schedule. Daily disposables are discarded after a single use and thus require no cleaning. Other lenses need regular cleaning and disinfecting to prevent surface coating and infections.\nThere are many ways to clean and care for contact lenses, typically called care systems or lens solutions:\nThe main attraction of multipurpose solutions is that the same solution can clean, rinse, disinfect and store lenses. Some multipurpose solutions also contain ingredients that improve the surface wettability and comfort of silicone hydrogel lenses. Studies showed that multipurpose solutions are ineffective against \"Acanthamoebae\". There is preliminary research on creating a new multipurpose solution that kills amoeba.\nHydrogen peroxide can be used to disinfect contact lenses. Care should be taken not to get hydrogen peroxide in the eye because it is very painful and irritating. With \"two-step\" products, the hydrogen peroxide must be rinsed away with saline before the lenses may be worn. \"One-step\" systems allow the hydrogen peroxide to react completely, becoming pure water. Thus \"one-step\" hydrogen peroxide systems do not require the lenses to be rinsed before insertion, provided the solution has been given enough time to react.\nAn exposure time of 2-3 hours to 3% H2O2 (non neutralized solution) is sufficient to kill bacteria, HIV, fungi, and \"Acanthamoeba\". This can be achieved by using a \"two-step\" product or a \"one-step\" tablet system if the catalytic tablet is not added before 2-3 hours. However, the \"one-step\" catalytic disk systems are not effective against \"Acanthamoeba\" due to insufficient exposure time.\nUsed for cleaning protein deposits off lenses, usually weekly, if the daily cleaner is not sufficient. Typically, this cleaner is in tablet form.\nThese devices intend to disinfect and clean contact lenses. The lenses are inserted inside the portable device (running on batteries and/or plug-in) for 2 to 6 minutes during which both the microorganisms and protein build-up are supposed to be cleaned. However these devices can not be used to replace the manual rub and rinse method because vibration and ultrasound can not create relative motion between contact lens and solution, which is required for proper cleaning of the lens. These devices are not usually available in optic retailers but are in other stores.\nRub and rinse method.\nContact lenses can be mechanically cleaned of more substantial protein, lipid and debris build up by rubbing them between the clean pad of a finger and the palm of a hand, using a small amount of cleaning fluid as a lubricant; and by rinsing thereafter. This \"rub and rinse\" method is thought to be the most effective method for multipurpose solutions, and is the method indicated by the American Academy of Ophthalmology regardless of cleaning solution used. In 2010, the FDA recommended that manufacturers removed the \"no rub\" from product labeling, \"because 'rub-and-rinse' regimens help prevent microbial adhesion to the contact lens, help prevent formation of biofilms, and generally reduce the microbial load on the lens and the lens case.\"\nPhysical rubbing devices.\nThis type of devices mimic digital rubbing. The lenses are sandwiched by silicone parts inside the portable device. The device applies a gentle yet high speed rubbing action on the lens surface and remove debris.\nSterile saline is used for rinsing the lens after cleaning and preparing it for insertion. Saline solutions do not disinfect, so it must be used in conjunction with some type of disinfection system. One advantage to saline is that it cannot cause an allergic response, so it is well suited for individuals with sensitive eyes or strong allergies.\nUsed to clean lenses on a daily basis. A few drops of cleaner are applied to the lens while it rests in the palm of the hand; the lens is rubbed for about 20 seconds with a clean fingertip (depending on the product) on each side. Lens must then be rinsed. This system is commonly used to care for rigid lenses.\nWater is not recommended for cleaning contact lenses. Insufficiently chlorinated tap water can lead to lens contamination, particularly by \"Acanthamoeba\". On the other hand, sterile water will not kill any contaminants that get in from the environment.\nAside from cleaning the contact lenses, contact lens case should also be kept clean and be replaced at minimum every 3 months.\nContact lens solutions often contain preservatives such as benzalkonium chloride and benzyl alcohol. Preservative-free products usually have shorter shelf lives, but are better suited for individuals with an allergy or sensitivity to a preservative. In the past, thiomersal was used as a preservative. In 1989, thiomersal was responsible for about 10% of problems related to contact lenses. As a result, most products no longer contain thiomersal.\nComplications.\nContact lenses are generally safe as long as they are used correctly. Complications from contact lens wear affect roughly 5% of wearers yearly. Factors leading to eye damage varies, and improper use of a contact lens may affect the eyelid, the conjunctiva, and, most of all, the whole structure of the cornea. Poor lens care may lead to infections by various microorganisms including bacteria, fungi, and the amoeba \"Acanthamoeba\" (\"Acanthamoeba\" keratitis).\nMany complications arise when contact lenses are worn not as prescribed (improper wear schedule or lens replacement). Sleeping in lenses not designed or approved for extended wear is a common cause of complications. Many people go too long before replacing their contacts, wearing lenses designed for 1, 14, or 30 days of wear for multiple months or years. While this does save on the cost of lenses, it risks permanent damage to the eye and even loss of sight.\nFor non silicone-hydrogel lenses, one of the major factors that causes complications is that the contact lens is an oxygen barrier. The cornea needs a constant supply of oxygen to remain completely transparent and function as it should; it normally gets that oxygen from the surrounding air while awake, and from the blood vessels in the back of the eyelid while asleep. The most prominent risks associated with long-term, chronic low oxygen to the cornea include corneal neovascularization, increased epithelial permeability, bacterial adherence, microcysts, corneal edema, endothelial polymegethism, dry eye and potential increase in myopia. Much of the research into soft and rigid contact lens materials has centered on improving oxygen transmission through the lens.\nSilicone-hydrogel lenses available today have effectively eliminated hypoxia for most patients.\nMishandling of contact lenses can also cause problems. Corneal abrasions can increase the chances of infection. When combined with improper cleaning and disinfection of the lens, a risk of infection further increases. Decreased corneal sensitivity after extended contact lens wear may cause a patient to miss some of the earliest symptoms of such complications.\nThe way contact lenses interact with the natural tear layer is a major factor in determining lens comfort and visual clarity. People with dry eyes are particularly vulnerable to discomfort and episodes of brief blurry vision. Proper lens selection can minimize these effects.\nLong-term wear (over five years) of contact lenses may \"decrease the entire corneal thickness and increase the corneal curvature and surface irregularity.\" Long-term wear of rigid contacts is associated with decreased corneal keratocyte density and increased number of epithelial Langerhans cells.\nAll contact lenses sold in the United States are studied and approved as safe by the FDA when specific handling and care procedures, wear schedules, and replacement schedules are followed.\nCurrent research.\nContact lens sensors to monitor the ocular temperature have been demonstrated. Monitoring intraocular pressure with contact lens sensors is another area of contact lens research.\nA large segment of current contact lens research is directed towards the treatment and prevention of conditions resulting from contact lens contamination and colonization by foreign organisms. Clinicians tend to agree that the most significant complication of contact lens wear is microbial keratitis and that the most predominant microbial pathogen is \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\". Other organisms are also major causative factors in bacterial keratitis associated with contact lens wear, although their prevalence varies across different locations. These include both the \"Staphylococcus\" species (\"aureus\" and \"epidermidis\") and the \"Streptococcus\" species, among others. Microbial keratitis is a serious focal point of current research due to its potentially devastating effect on the eye, including severe vision loss.\nOne specific research topic of interest is how microbes such as \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\" invade the eye and cause infection. Although the pathogenesis of microbial keratitis is not well understood, many different factors have been investigated. One group of researchers showed that corneal hypoxia exacerbated \"Pseudomonas\" binding to the corneal epithelium, internalization of the microbes, and induction of the inflammatory response. One way to alleviate hypoxia is to increase the amount of oxygen transmitted to the cornea. Although silicone-hydrogel lenses almost eliminate hypoxia in patients due to their very high levels of oxygen transmissibility, they also seem to provide a more efficient platform for bacterial contamination and corneal infiltration than other conventional hydrogel soft contact lenses. One study showed that \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\" and \"Staphylococcus epidermidis\" adhere much more strongly to unworn silicone hydrogel contact lenses than conventional hydrogel lenses and that adhesion of \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\" was 20 times stronger than that of \"Staphylococcus epidermidis\". This might partly explain why \"Pseudomonas\" infections are the most predominant. However, another study conducted with worn and unworn silicone and conventional hydrogel contact lenses showed that worn silicone contact lenses were less prone to \"Staphylococcus epidermidis\" colonization than conventional hydrogel lenses.\nBesides bacterial adhesion and cleaning, micro and nano pollutants (biological and manmade) is an area of contact lens research that is growing. Small physical pollutants ranging from nanoplastics to fungi spores to plant pollen adhere to contact lens surfaces in high concentrations. It has been found that multipurpose solution and rubbing with fingers does not significantly clean the lenses. A group of researchers have suggested an alternative cleaning solution, PoPPR (polymer on polymer pollution removal). This cleaning technique takes advantage of a soft and porous polymer to physically peel pollutants off of contact lenses.\nAnother important area of contact lens research deals with patient compliance. Compliance is a major issue pertaining to the use of contact lenses because patient noncompliance often leads to contamination of the lens, storage case, or both. However, careful users can extend the wear of lenses through proper handling: there is, unfortunately, no disinterested research on the issue of \"compliance\" or the length of time a user can safely wear a lens beyond its stated use. The introduction of multipurpose solutions and daily disposable lenses have helped to alleviate some of the problems observed from inadequate cleaning but new methods of combating microbial contamination are currently being developed. A silver-impregnated lens case has been developed which helps to eradicate any potentially contaminating microbes that come in contact with the lens case. Additionally, a number of antimicrobial agents are being developed that have been embedded into contact lenses themselves. Lenses with covalently attached selenium molecules have been shown to reduce bacterial colonization without adversely affecting the cornea of a rabbit eye and octyl glucoside used as a lens surfactant significantly decreases bacterial adhesion. These compounds are of particular interest to contact lens manufacturers and prescribing optometrists because they do not require any patient compliance to effectively attenuate the effects of bacterial colonization.\nOne area of research is in the field of bionic lenses. These are visual displays that include built-in electric circuits and light-emitting diodes and can harvest radio waves for their electric power. Bionic lenses can display information beamed from a mobile device overcoming the small display size problem. The technology involves embedding nano and microscale electronic devices in lenses. These lenses will also need to have an array of microlenses to focus the image so that it appears suspended in front of the wearer's eyes. The lens could also serve as a head-up display for pilots or gamers.\nDrug administration through contact lenses is also becoming an area of research. One application is a lens that releases anesthesia to the eye for post-surgery pain relief, especially after PRK (photorefractive keratectomy) in which the healing process takes several days. One experiment shows that silicone contact lenses that contain vitamin E deliver pain medication for up to seven days compared with less than two hours in usual lenses.\nAnother study of the usage of contact lens is aimed to address the issue of macular degeneration (AMD or age-related macular degeneration). An international collaboration of researchers was able to develop a contact lens that can shift between magnified and normal vision. Previous solutions to AMD included bulky glasses or surgical implants. But the development of this new contact lens, which is made of polymethyl methacrylate, could offer an unobtrusive solution.\nIn popular culture.\nFilms.\nOne of the earliest known motion pictures to introduce the use of contact lenses as a make-up artist's device for enhancing the eyes was by the innovative actor Lon Chaney in the 1926 film \"The Road to Mandalay\" to create the effect of a character who had a blind eye. Dr. Rueben Greenspoon applied them to Orson Welles for the film \"Citizen Kane\" in 1940. In the 1950s, contact lenses were starting to be used in British color horror films. An early example of this is the British actor Christopher Lee as the Dracula character in the 1958 color horror film \"Dracula\", which helped to emphasize his horrific looking black pupils and red bloodshot eyes. Tony Curtis wore them in the 1968 film \"The Boston Strangler\". Contact lenses were also used to better emphasize the sinister gaze of the demonic characters in 1968's \"Rosemary's Baby\" and 1973's \"The Exorcist\". Colored custom-made contact lenses are now standard makeup for a number of special effects-based movies.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74847", "revid": "50464812", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74847", "title": "Geographer", "text": "Scholar whose area of study is geography\nA geographer is a physical scientist, social scientist or humanist whose area of study is geography, the study of Earth's natural environment and human society, including how society and nature interact. The Greek prefix \"geo\" means \"earth\" and the Greek suffix, \"graphy\", meaning \"description\", so a geographer is someone who studies the earth. The word \"geography\" is a Middle French word that is believed to have been first used in 1540.\nAlthough geographers are historically known as people who make maps, map making is actually the field of study of cartography, a subset of geography. Geographers do not study only the details of the natural environment or human society, but they also study the reciprocal relationship between these two. For example, they study how the natural environment contributes to human society and how human society affects the natural environment.\nIn particular, physical geographers study the natural environment while human geographers study human society and culture. Some geographers are practitioners of GIS (geographic information system) and are often employed by local, state, and federal government agencies as well as in the private sector by environmental and engineering firms.\nThe paintings by Johannes Vermeer titled \"The Geographer\" and \"The Astronomer\" are both thought to represent the growing influence and rise in prominence of scientific enquiry in Europe at the time of their painting in 1668\u201369.\nAreas of study in geography.\nSubdividing geography is challenging, as the discipline is broad, interdisciplinary, ancient, and has been approached differently by different cultures. Attempts have gone back centuries, and include the \"Four traditions of geography\" and applied \"branches.\" \nFour traditions of geography.\nThe four traditions of geography were proposed in 1964 by William D. Pattison in a paper titled \"The Four Traditions of Geography\" appearing in the Journal of Geography. These traditions are:\nBranches of geography.\nThe UNESCO Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems subdivides geography into three major fields of study, which are then further subdivided. These are:\nFive themes of geography.\nThe National Geographic Society identifies five broad key themes for geographers:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74848", "revid": "6014161", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74848", "title": "Killer of Sheep", "text": "Killer of Sheep is a 1978 American drama film edited, filmed, written, produced, and directed by Charles Burnett. Shot primarily in 1972 and 1973, it was originally submitted by Burnett to the UCLA School of Film in 1977 as his Master of Fine Arts thesis. It features Henry G. Sanders, Kaycee Moore, and Charles Bracy, among others, in acting roles.\nThe film depicts the culture of urban African-Americans in Los Angeles' Watts district in a style often likened to Italian neorealism. Critic Dana Stevens described its plot as \"a collection of brief vignettes which are so loosely connected that it feels at times like you're watching a non-narrative film.\" There are no acts, plot arcs or character development, as conventionally defined.\n\"Killer of Sheep\" premiered at the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York on November 14, 1978. It did not receive a general release because Burnett had not secured rights to the music used in its production. The music rights were licensed in 2007 (and again in 2024) by Milestone Film &amp; Video for US $150,000 after the film was restored by UCLA and transferred from a 16 mm to a 35 mm print. \"Killer of Sheep\" received a 200+ city release 30 years after it was first premiered, with a DVD release in late 2007. The film was restored by the UCLA preservationist Ross Lipman, presented on DVD by Steven Soderbergh and distributed by Milestone Films. In 1990, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nStan works long hours at a slaughterhouse in Watts, Los Angeles. The monotonous nature of his work begins to affect his home life with his unnamed wife and their two children, Stan Jr. and Angela. Through a series of episodic events\u2014such as acquaintances attempting to involve Stan in a criminal scheme, a white woman propositioning him to work at her store, and Stan and his friend Bracy trying to purchase a car engine\u2014a mosaic of a harsh working-class life emerges. Within this life, Stan feels powerless to change the course of his circumstances. Intercut between these events are scenes of children in Watts, playing and roughhousing together among the abandoned houses and dilapidated surroundings.\nProduction.\nBurnett used grant money from the UCLA School of Film to help finance the film, but delayed production because his first choice of actor was in prison and he wanted to wait until he was paroled. Meanwhile, he made the short film \"The Horse\". When the university insisted he make his thesis film with or without his first-choice actor, Burnett cast Henry Sanders.\n\"Killer of Sheep\" was shot in Watts on a budget of less than US$10,000 ($38,000 in 2016 dollars) over roughly a year's worth of weekends in 1972 and 1973, with additional shooting in 1975. In 1977, Burnett submitted the film as his Master of Fine Arts thesis at the School of Film at the University of California, Los Angeles. Burnett said he also intended to make the film a history of African-American music and filled it with music from a variety of genres and different eras. Burnett also kept a stable job while \"Killer of Sheep\" was being shot, spending his time working at an agency reading scripts and synopses.\nRoof jumping scene.\nOne scene contains a low-angle shot of children leaping from rooftop to rooftop. Juliet Clark, a journalist writing for the Berkeley Art Museum and Pacific Film Archive, said the scene shows how children in the film \"seem to achieve a mobility that eludes their elders\".\nIn 2009, a still from the scene, showing one of the boys mid-jump, was reproduced in red tint and used as the cover of rapper Mos Def's album \"The Ecstatic\". According to \"Complex\" magazine's Dale Eisinger, the \"subtle and still-moving\" cover has a \"hazy, dream-like movement, appearing as a non-narrative, loose collection of vignettes that are tangentially fascinating and incredibly powerful\", while reflecting the ideas of cultural justice and global inequality present throughout Mos Def's work.\nCritical reception.\nThough the film won the Critics' Award at the Berlin International Film Festival and was acclaimed at the Toronto International Film Festival, it never saw wide release due to complications in securing the music rights for the 22 songs on the soundtrack, which included such big names as Dinah Washington, Paul Robeson, Louis Armstrong, and Earth, Wind and Fire. It remained in obscurity for nearly 30 years, garnering much critical and academic praise and earning a reputation as a lost classic. The film did not win an award until four years after it came out, after having to wait four years to be released.\n\"Killer of Sheep\" holds a 97% \"fresh\" rating on Rotten Tomatoes; the consensus states: \"By turns funny, sad, and profound, \"Killer of Sheep\" offers a sympathetic and humane glimpse into inner-city life.\" Critics and scholars have likened the film to the work of Italian neorealist directors, particularly Vittorio De Sica and Roberto Rossellini, for its documentary aesthetic and use of mostly non-professional, on-location actors. Burnett has also been compared to Yasujir\u014d Ozu for his strong sense of composition, Stanley Kubrick for his sharp ear for juxtaposing popular music with images, John Cassavetes for his knack for coaxing natural performances from amateur actors, and Robert Altman for his interest in the minutiae of human interaction. Burnett's self-professed influences are Jean Renoir, Basil Wright, and Federico Fellini, all of whom exemplify the tender, humane and compassionate qualities for which Burnett has been praised, qualities intensely present in \"Killer of Sheep\". Critic Andrew O'Hehir, noting the strong influences of Jean Renoir, Roberto Rossellini, and Satyajit Ray, said, \"It's hard to overemphasize how strange and ambitious and completely out of context it was for a black urban filmmaker with no money and no reputation to make that kind of movie in 1977.\"\nIn 1990, the Library of Congress selected it as part of the National Film Registry for being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\"\nIn 2008, \"Empire\" magazine ranked the film No. 398 of \"The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time\".\nThe National Society of Film Critics chose \"Killer of Sheep\" as one of its 100 Essential Films.\nIn 2015, the BBC named the film the 26th greatest American movie ever made.\nLists.\nThe film appeared on several critics' top ten lists of the best films released in 2007.\nDistribution.\nHaving previously only existed on 16mm prints, the film was restored and enlarged to 35mm by the UCLA Film and Television Archive, then digitized by Milestone Films. The soundtrack, which had not been licensed, was also paid for at a cost of over US$150\u00a0000, thanks in part to a donation from filmmaker Steven Soderbergh.\nOn March 30, 2007, it opened in select theaters in the United States and Canada and on November 13, 2007, it was released on DVD as part of a deluxe box set with a director's cut of Burnett's sophomore feature \"My Brother's Wedding\" and three Burnett shorts: \"Several Friends\" (a 1969 aesthetic precursor to \"Killer of Sheep\"), \"https://\" (an \"allegory of the South\", in Burnett's words), and \"When It Rains\" (praised as one of the greatest short films of all time by critic Jonathan Rosenbaum).\nOn Martin Luther King Jr. Day, January 21, 2008, Turner Classic Movies presented the world broadcast premiere of the film as part of a night-long marathon of Burnett's work. Burnett was interviewed before and after the film by TCM's primetime host Robert Osborne.\nThe film was released on Blu-ray and 4K through The Criterion Collection in May of 2025.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74854", "revid": "41625025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74854", "title": "The Kiss", "text": "The Kiss may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "74856", "revid": "1717800", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74856", "title": "Knute Rockne, All American", "text": "1940 film by William K. Howard, Lloyd Bacon\nKnute Rockne, All American is a 1940 American biographical film that tells the story of Knute Rockne, Notre Dame's legendary football coach. It stars Pat O'Brien as Rockne and Ronald Reagan as player George Gipp, as well as Gale Page, Donald Crisp, Albert Bassermann, Owen Davis Jr., Nick Lukats, Kane Richmond, William Marshall, and William Byrne. The film also includes cameos by football coaches \"Pop\" Warner, Amos Alonzo Stagg, William H. Spaulding, and Howard Jones, playing themselves. It also has a cameo by Olympic star Jim Thorpe.\nReagan's presidential campaign revived interest in the film, and as a result, some reporters called him the Gipper.\nThe movie was written by Robert Buckner and directed by Lloyd Bacon, who replaced William K. Howard after filming had begun. In 1997, the film was deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry.\nPlot.\nLars Knutson Rockne, a carriage builder, moves his family from Norway in 1892, settling in Chicago. His son, Knute, saves up his money and enrolls in college at the Notre Dame campus in South Bend, Indiana, where he plays football.\nRockne and teammate Gus Dorais star in Notre Dame's historic 35\u201313 upset over Army at West Point in 1913. The game is historically significant as Notre Dame employed the seldom-used forward pass to great effect. The publicity from the Fighting Irish's surprise win creates Notre Dame football fans around the country.\nAfter graduation, Rockne marries his sweetheart Bonnie Skiles and stays on at Notre Dame to teach chemistry, work on synthetic rubber in the chemistry lab (under Father Julius Nieuwland), and, in his spare time, serve as an assistant coach of the Fighting Irish football team under head coach Jesse Harper.\nOutstanding freshman halfback George Gipp leads the Irish to greater gridiron glory. Gipp is stricken with a fatal illness after the final game of the 1920 season. On his death bed, he encourages Rockne to someday tell the team to \"win one for the Gipper.\"\nNotre Dame continues its football success with a backfield of stars dubbed the Four Horsemen. Rockne is killed in a 1931 plane crash on a trip to California, but his legend makes him a campus immortal.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReception.\nBosley Crowther of \"The New York Times\" called the film \"one of the best pictures for boys in years\" and wrote that O'Brien conveyed \"a valid impression of an iron-willed, dynamic and cryptic fellow who could very well be 'Rock.' As a memorial to a fine and inspiring molder of character in young men, this picture ranks high. But, like the Carnegie Foundation has done on previous occasions, we are inclined to question its overemphasis of the pigskin sport.\"\n\"Variety\" called the film \"one of the best biographical picturizations ever turned out ... Pat O'Brien delivers a fine characterization of the immortal Rockne, catching the spirit of the role with an understanding of the human qualities of the man.\"\n\"Film Daily\" wrote: \"Pat O'Brien's life-like Rockne is brilliantly delineated; it's as though Rockne himself were striding across the field once more.\"\n\"Harrison's Reports\" wrote: \"Very good! It is the first football picture produced without any 'hokum'; it shows how teams are developed and what the game means to both players and coach ... The football scenes should prove thrilling to all.\"\nJohn Mosher of \"The New Yorker\" wrote that the story had been \"suitably handled for its public of energetic young people and South Bend alumni.\"\nThe film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:\n\"Win just one for the Gipper\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The last thing George said to me, 'Rock,' he said, 'sometime when the team is up against it and the breaks are beating the boys, ask them to go out there with all they've got and win just one for the Gipper.'\nThis quote ranked No. 89 on the American Film Institute's \"100 Years...100 Movie Quotes\" list. However, for many years during which United Artists held the rights, the Gipper sequence was cut for television showings. For the film's initial release to home video, MGM/UA restored the sequence as part of the original uncut version, and this is the version that has been used for all home video, television and theatrical reissues since.\nThe phrase \"win one for the Gipper\" was later used as a political slogan by Ronald Reagan, who was often referred to as the Gipper because he had played the role of George Gipp in \"Knute Rockne, All American\". At the 1988 Republican National Convention, Reagan told his vice president George H. W. Bush, \"George, go out there and win one for the Gipper.\" Bob Dole used the phrase at the 1996 Republican National Convention, as did President George W. Bush at the 2004 Republican National Convention in his acceptance speech when he stated \"We can now truly win one for the Gipper\" shortly after Reagan's death.\nThe line is spoken by the dying pilot Al Ross in the 1964 film \"Flight to Fury\".\nThe speech is parodied in the film \"Airplane!\", which was released when Reagan was running for the presidency in 1980.\nHistorical accuracy.\nNeither Notre Dame nor the NCAA recognizes Knute Rockne as a (first team) All-American.\nKnute Rockne gives the famous \"win one for the Gipper,\" speech at halftime of the 1930 game during his final championship season, but the speech was actually given at halftime of the 1928 game during a season in which Notre Dame finished with a 5\u20134 record.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74857", "revid": "46628330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74857", "title": "Aristarchus of Samos", "text": "Greek astronomer and mathematician (c. 310 \u2013 230 BC)\nAristarchus of Samos (; , ; c.\u2009310\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009230 BC) was an ancient Greek astronomer and mathematician who presented the first known heliocentric model that placed the Sun at the center of the universe, with the Earth revolving around the Sun once a year and rotating about its axis once a day. He also supported the theory of Anaxagoras that the Sun was just another star.\nHe likely moved to Alexandria, and he was a student of Strato of Lampsacus, who later became the head of the Peripatetic school in Greece. According to Ptolemy, Aristarchus observed the summer solstice of 280\u00a0BC. Vitruvius writes that Aristarchus built two different sundials: one a flat disc; and one hemispherical. Aristarchus estimated the sizes of the Sun and Moon as compared to Earth, and the distances from the Earth to the Sun and to the Moon. His estimate that the Sun was 7 times larger than Earth (actually 109 times) brought about the further insight that the Sun's greater size made it the most natural central point of the universe, as opposed to Earth.\nAristarchus was influenced by the concept presented by Philolaus of Croton (\u00a0\u2013 385\u00a0BC) of a fire at the center of the universe (i.e. by contemporary understanding, at the center of the Earth). Aristarchus recast this \"central fire\" as the Sun, and he arranged the other planets in their correct order of distance around the Sun.\nLike Anaxagoras before him, Aristarchus suspected that the stars were just other bodies like the Sun, albeit farther away from Earth. His astronomical ideas were often rejected in favor of the geocentric theories of Aristotle and Ptolemy. Nicolaus Copernicus knew that Aristarchus had a 'moving Earth' theory, although it is unlikely that Copernicus was aware that it was a heliocentric theory.\nHeliocentrism.\nThe original text has been lost, but a reference in a book by Archimedes, entitled \"The Sand Reckoner\" (\"Archimedis Syracusani Arenarius &amp; Dimensio Circuli\"), describes a work in which Aristarchus advanced the heliocentric model as an alternative hypothesis to geocentrism:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You are now aware ['you' being King Gelon] that the \"universe\" is the name given by most astronomers to the sphere the centre of which is the centre of the earth, while its radius is equal to the straight line between the centre of the sun and the centre of the earth. This is the common account (\u03c4\u1f70 \u03b3\u03c1\u03b1\u03c6\u03cc\u03bc\u03b5\u03bd\u03b1) as you have heard from astronomers. But Aristarchus has brought out a \"book consisting of certain hypotheses\", wherein it appears, as a consequence of the assumptions made, that the universe is many times greater than the \"universe\" just mentioned. His hypotheses are that \"the fixed stars and the sun remain unmoved, that the earth revolves about the sun on the circumference of a circle, the sun lying in the middle of the orbit\", and that the sphere of the fixed stars, situated about the same centre as the sun, is so great that the circle in which he supposes the earth to revolve bears such a proportion to the distance of the fixed stars as the centre of the sphere bears to its surface.\nAristarchus knew that a moving-earth model would imply that the stars should exhibit parallax (that is, a movement of the stars relative to each other as the Earth moves around the Sun). However, since stellar parallax is only detectable with telescopes, it was not observed at the time. Aristarchus reconciled this issue by postulating that the stars were other suns that are very far away, far enough that the parallax was not observable. This implied a universe much larger than had been believed. \nIt is a common misconception that the heliocentric view was considered sacrilegious by the contemporaries of Aristarchus. Lucio Russo traces this to Gilles M\u00e9nage's printing of a passage from Plutarch's \"On the Apparent Face in the Orb of the Moon\", in which Aristarchus jokes with Cleanthes, who is head of the Stoics, a sun worshipper, and opposed to heliocentrism. In the manuscript of Plutarch's text, Aristarchus says Cleanthes should be charged with impiety. M\u00e9nage's version, published shortly after the trials of Galileo and Giordano Bruno, transposes an accusative and nominative so that it is Aristarchus who is purported to be impious. The resulting misconception of an isolated and persecuted Aristarchus is still promulgated.\nAccording to Plutarch, while Aristarchus postulated heliocentrism only as a hypothesis, Seleucus of Seleucia, a Hellenistic astronomer who lived a century after Aristarchus, maintained it as a definite opinion and gave a demonstration of it, but no full record of the demonstration has been found. In his \"Naturalis Historia\", Pliny the Elder later wondered whether errors in the predictions about the heavens could be attributed to a displacement of the Earth from its central position. Pliny and Seneca referred to the retrograde motion of some planets as an apparent (unreal) phenomenon, which is an implication of heliocentrism rather than geocentrism. Still, no stellar parallax was observed, and Plato, Aristotle, and Ptolemy preferred the geocentric model that was believed throughout the Middle Ages.\nThe heliocentric theory was revived by Copernicus, after which Johannes Kepler described planetary motions with greater accuracy with his three laws. Isaac Newton later gave a theoretical explanation based on laws of gravitational attraction and dynamics.\nAfter realizing that the Sun was much larger than the Earth and the other planets, Aristarchus concluded that planets revolved around the Sun.\nDistance to the Sun.\nThe only known work attributed to Aristarchus, \"On the Sizes and Distances of the Sun and Moon\", is based on a geocentric worldview. Historically, it has been read as stating that the angle subtended by the Sun's diameter is two degrees, but Archimedes states in \"The Sand Reckoner\" that Aristarchus had a value of half a degree, which is much closer to the average value of 32' or 0.53 degrees. The discrepancy may come from a misinterpretation of which unit of measure was meant by a Greek term in the text of Aristarchus.\nAristarchus claimed that at half moon (first or last quarter moon), the angle between the Sun and Moon was 87\u00b0. Using correct geometry, but the insufficiently accurate 87\u00b0 datum, Aristarchus concluded that the Sun was between 18 and 20 times farther away from the Earth than the Moon. (The correct value of this angle is close to 89\u00b0\u00a050', and the Sun's distance is approximately 400 times that of the Moon.) The implicit inaccurate solar parallax of slightly under three degrees was used by astronomers up to and including Tycho Brahe, c.\u00a0AD\u00a01600. Aristarchus pointed out that the Moon and Sun have nearly equal apparent angular sizes, and therefore their diameters must be in proportion to their distances from Earth.\nSize of the Moon and Sun.\nIn \"On the Sizes and Distances of the Sun and Moon\", Aristarchus discusses the size of the Moon and Sun in relation to the Earth. In order to achieve these measurements and subsequent calculations, he used several key notes made while observing a lunar eclipse. The first of these consisted of the time that it took for the Earth's shadow to fully encompass the Moon, along with how long the Moon remained within the shadow. This was used to estimate the angular radius of the shadow. From there, using the width of the cone that was created by the shadow in relation to the Moon, he determined that it was twice the diameter of the Moon at the full, non-central eclipse. In addition to this, Aristarchus estimated that the length of the shadow extended around 2.4 times the distance of the Moon from the Earth.\nUsing these calculations, along with his estimated distances of the Sun from the Earth and Moon from the Earth, he created a triangle. Employing geometry similar to that he had already used for the distances, he was able to determine that the diameter of the Moon is roughly one-third of the Earth's diameter. In order to estimate the size of the Sun, Aristarchus considered the proportion of the Sun's distance to Earth in comparison to the Moon's distance from Earth, which was found to be roughly 18 to 20 times the length. Therefore, the size of the Sun is around 19 times wider than the Moon, making it approximately six times wider than the Earth's diameter.\nLegacy.\nThe lunar crater Aristarchus, the minor planet , and the telescope Aristarchos are named after him.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74858", "revid": "1313854053", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74858", "title": "The Lady Eve", "text": "1941 film by Preston Sturges\nThe Lady Eve is a 1941 American screwball comedy film written and directed by Preston Sturges and starring Barbara Stanwyck and Henry Fonda. The film is based on a story by Monckton Hoffe about a mismatched couple who meet on board an ocean liner. Regarded amongst the greatest films of all time, \"The Lady Eve\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry in 1994 by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nJean Harrington is a beautiful con artist. Along with her equally larcenous father, \"Colonel\" Harrington, and his partner Gerald, she is sailing on an ocean liner with the intention to fleece rich, naive Charles Pike, the heir to the Pike's Pale (\"The Ale That Won for Yale\") fortune. Charles is a woman-shy snake expert just returning from a year-long expedition up the Amazon. The young women aboard the ship compete for his attention, but Charles is more concerned with reading about snakes.\nJean meets Charles by tripping him as he passes, and he is soon smitten with her. After Jean runs off, terrified by a real snake that Charles brought on board and has gotten loose in his cabin, the two share a steamy scene in her cabin.\nCharles's minder Muggsy suspects that Jean is a trickster looking to steal from Charles, but Charles refuses to believe him. Then, despite the planned con, Jean falls in love with Charles and shields him from her card sharp father. Muggsy discovers the truth and presents proof to Charlie, who dumps Jean.\nFurious at being spurned, Jean soon re-enters Charles's life masquerading as the posh Lady Eve Sidwich, niece of Sir Alfred McGlennan Keith, another con man who has been swindling the rich of Connecticut. Jean takes on an English accent, determined to torment Charles mercilessly; as she puts it, \"I've got some unfinished business with him \u2014 I need him like the axe needs the turkey.\"\nWhen Charles meets \"Lady Eve\", he is so bewildered at her resemblance to Jean that he constantly trips and falls over himself. Although Muggsy tries to convince him that \"she's the same dame\", Charles reasons that Jean would not come close to his home without at least disguising herself more thoroughly. Then, after Sir Alfred feeds him a story that the Lady Eve is Jean's long-lost sister, Charles accepts the resemblance. After a brief courtship, they marry, right on Jean's schedule. And just as she had planned, on the train to their honeymoon, \"Eve\" begins to confess her past, continuously dropping names of many old boyfriends and lovers. A disgusted Charles jumps off the train.\nJean's con team urges her to close the deal by pursuing a huge divorce settlement, but she tells Charles's father on the phone that she wants no money, but only wants Charles to tell her that their marriage is over in person. Charles refuses. Jean is then told by Charles's father that Charles is departing on another ocean voyage. She arranges passage for herself and her father, and meets Charles again by tripping him as he passes, just as they had met before. Charles is overjoyed to see Jean again. He kisses her and takes her hand, and they run to her cabin, where they mutually affirm their love for each other. As the cabin door closes, Charles confesses that he has no right to be in her cabin because he is married. Jean replies, \"So am I, darling, so am I.\"\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Barbara Stanwyck as Jean Harrington, aka Lady Eve Sidwich\nProduction.\n\"The Lady Eve\" is loosely based on a 19-page story by Monckton Hoffe called \"Two Bad Hats\", which was also the working title of the film. Sturges was assigned in 1938 to write a script based on Hoffe's story, with Claudette Colbert expected to be the star. Sturges and Paramount producer Albert Lewin had some written disagreement in 1939 about the development of the script. Lewin wrote to Sturges, \"[T]he first two-thirds of the script, in spite of the high quality of your jokes, will require an almost one hundred percent rewrite.\" Sturges objected, and eventually Lewin acceded, writing, \"Follow your witty nose, my boy; it will lead you and me and Paramount to the Elysian pastures of popular entertainment.\"\nThe Hays Office initially rejected the script because of \"the definite suggestion of a sex affair between your two leads\" that lacked \"compensating moral values\", and a revised script was submitted and approved.\nAt some point, the studio wanted Brian Aherne for the male lead, and Joel McCrea, Madeleine Carroll and Paulette Goddard were under consideration as of July 1940. But in August 1940, Fred MacMurray and Madeleine Carroll were announced as the film's co-stars. In September, Darryl Zanuck lent Henry Fonda to co-star with Goddard, who was then replaced by Barbara Stanwyck.\nProduction took place from October 21 to December 5, 1940. According to Donald Spoto in \"Madcap: The Life of Preston Sturges\", Sturges \"... invariably paraded on [the] set with a colorful beret or a felt cap with a feather protruding, a white cashmere scarf blowing gaily round his neck and a print shirt in loud hues ... the reason for the peculiar outfits, he told visitors, was that they facilitated crew members finding him amid the crowds of actors, technicians, and the public.\" Stanwyck compared Sturges' set to \"a carnival\". In his biography of Stanwyck, author Axel Madsen wrote, \"The set was so ebullient that instead of going to their trailers between setups, the players relaxed in canvas chairs with their sparkling director, listening to his fascinating stories or going over their lines with him. To get into mood for Barbara's bedroom scene, Sturges wore a bathrobe.\"\nLocation shooting for the opening jungle scene took place at Lake Baldwin of the Los Angeles County Arboretum and Botanic Garden in Arcadia, California. In that scene, Fonda's character refers to Professor Marsdit, whose last name is an anagram of Raymond L. Ditmars of the American Museum of Natural History, a well-known reptile expert and popular science writer of the time.\nProduction credits.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRelease.\nTheatrical release.\nThe film premiered in New York City on February 25, 1941, and went into general release on March 21. It was marketed with a number of taglines, including: \"When you deal a fast shuffle ... love is in the cards.\" The film ranked among the top-grossing films of the year.\nHome video.\n\"The Lady Eve\" was released on home video in the United States on July 12, 1990, and was rereleased on June 30, 1993. Despite issues with the condition of the surviving original film elements, the film was scanned in 4K and issued on Blu-ray disc by Criterion on July 14, 2020.\nReception and themes.\nAfter \"The Lady Eve\" premiered at the Rialto Theatre, \"The New York Times\" reviewer Bosley Crowther characterized the film as \"a sparkling romantic comedy\". He further described the director's work: \"It isn't often that this corner has good reason to bang a gong and holler 'Hurry, hurry, hurry!' As a matter of fact, it is all too rare indeed that we have even moderate provocation to mark a wonder of the cinematic world. Too many of the films on which we comment boil down to woeful mediocrity, and too many of the people who make them betray a depressing weariness.\"\nMore than 50 years later, Roger Ebert gave the film high praise: \"If I were asked to name the single scene in all of romantic comedy that was sexiest and funniest at the same time, I would advise beginning at six seconds past the 20-minute mark in Preston Sturges's \"The Lady Eve\".\" British critic Leslie Halliwell gave it three of four stars, stating: \"... the film itself was an unexpected delight: smouldering along in an inconsequential way, like an indoor firework to whose blue touch paper someone has just applied a light. It even has an explosive finish; but along the way it dazzles with bouts of romance, character comedy, witty dialogue and outrageous farce... \" Pauline Kael commented, \"A frivolous masterpiece... a mixture of visual and verbal slapstick, and of high artifice and pratfalls... it represents the dizzy high point of Sturges's comedy writing.\" Leonard Maltin gave it three and a half of four stars: \"Sometimes silly and strident, this film grows funnier with each viewing\u2014thanks to Sturges' script, breathless pace, and two incomparable stars.\"\nSome have identified a theme of gender inversion, with Jean Harrington clearly in control for the majority of the film until her feelings get in the way of her original intentions. Until she realizes that she loves Charles, there is little sense of the struggle between equals that typifies most romantic comedies. The film has been lauded for a unique blend of slapstick and satire. Film scholars have observed the theme of the fall of man implied by the film's title; in the literal sense, the fall is evidenced in Pike's frequent pratfalls, and figuratively, he falls from innocence as he is lured into Jean's deceptive plots.\nFilm critic Andrew Sarris identifies the theme of deceptiveness throughout the film, with things as small as the distinction, or lack thereof, between beer and ale, as well as the various disguises of Jean Harrington, adding depth to the plot line. Most of the characters have two names (Charles is Hopsie, Jean is Eve Sidwich); this lack of recognition sets the stage for the storyline. Sturges repeatedly suggests that the \"lowliest boob could rise to the top with the right degree of luck, bluff and fraud\".\nOn the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, of 104 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.9/10. The website's consensus reads: \"A career highlight for Preston Sturges, \"The Lady Eve\" benefits from Barbara Stanwyck and Henry Fonda's sparkling chemistry -- and a script that inspired countless battle-of-the-sexes comedies.\" Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the a score of 96 out of 100, based on 17 critics, indicating .\nAwards and honors.\nAt the 14th Academy Awards, the film was nominated for Best Original Story for Monckton Hoffe, but \"Here Comes Mr. Jordan\" (Harry Segall) proved victorious. The National Board of Review nominated the film for Best Picture, and \"The New York Times\" named it as the best film of 1941.\nIn 1994, \"The Lady Eve\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". In 2008, \"The Lady Eve\" was selected by \"Empire\" magazine as among the 500 greatest movies of all time, and one of the best 1,000 by \"The New York Times\". In 2012, the film ranked #110 on \"Sight and Sound\"'s critics' poll, and #174 on the directors' poll as selected by the British Film Institute.\n\"The Lady Eve\" was listed by \"Time\" magazine as one of its \"All-TIME 100 Movies\". The film ranked 59th on \"Entertainment Weekly\"'s list of the 100 greatest films of all time. FilmSite.org, a subsidiary of American Movie Classics, placed \"The Lady Eve\" on their list of the 100 greatest films. Films101.com ranked \"The Lady Eve\" as the 92nd best of all time.\nIn 2006, the Writers Guild of America ranked \"The Lady Eve\" as the 52nd best written film of all time.\n\"The Lady Eve\" appears on two of the American Film Institute's lists and was nominated for several others:\nInfluence.\nIn 1956, the plot of \"The Lady Eve\" was recycled for the film \"The Birds and the Bees\" starring George Gobel, Mitzi Gaynor and David Niven. Preston Sturges received a co-writer credit for the film, although he did not actually participate in the project.\nThe plot was employed as the model for \"Corrupting Dr. Nice\", a 1997 science fiction novel by John Kessel involving time travel.\nBarbara Stanwyck's Jean Harrington was one of the key reference points that James Mangold came up with for Phoebe Waller-Bridge to employ in her performance as Helena Shaw in the 2023 film \"Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny\", the fifth and last \"Indiana Jones\" movie.\nRadio adaptation.\n\"The Lady Eve\" was presented on \"Hollywood Star Time\" on September 21, 1946, with Joan Blondell and John Lund in the starring roles.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74859", "revid": "14054348", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74859", "title": "Lambchops (film)", "text": "1929 film\nLambchops is an 8-minute American comedy Vitaphone short subject released in October 1929, which depicts a vaudeville performance by Burns and Allen of the comedy routine \"Lambchops\" written by Al Boasberg. The work's copyright was renewed in 1957, and it entered the American public domain on January 1, 2025.\nProduction.\nThe night that they arrived in New York after their first tour of England with their vaudeville routines, George Burns and Gracie Allen attended a party where they were approached by their agent Arthur Lyons, who asked if they would be interested in filming a short for Warner Brothers the following morning. Comedian Fred Allen was slated to film one of his comedy routines but had come down with the flu, leaving the studio in the lurch. Burns was told that the job paid $1,700, so he said yes on the spot. \"I'd never heard of $1,700 in my life, especially for nine minutes' work,\" Burns quipped.\nWhen they arrived on the set of the Vitaphone studio in Brooklyn the next morning, Burns was shocked to see his childhood buddy Murray Roth, who was directing. Burns did not believe Roth was in showbiz, let alone a film director, so Roth shouted \"Lights!\" and the set lights come on. \"Off!\" he shouted, and the stage went black. This glimpse of the living room set that they'd be shooting on perplexed Burns due to his familiarity with theatre and street performance. His toup\u00e9e was still in his luggage, which he had not had time to pick up from the loading dock following their trip. To explain why he was wearing a hat, he quickly rewrote the comedy duo's \"Lambchops\" routine to begin with himself and Gracie coming into the room and looking for the audience.\nReception.\nAccording to George Burns, Warner Bros. was not impressed with the short, which he himself described as, \"not the greatest\", so they were not asked to shoot any more for the studio. Burns, however was so enamored by the paycheck that he actively sought out more film work and was quickly embraced by Paramount Pictures, with whom Burns and Allen subsequently released a whole series of short subjects.\nIn 1999 \"Lambchops\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\"\nHome media.\n\"Lambchops\" was released on DVD in October 2007, on disc three of a three-disc 80th anniversary edition of \"The Jazz Singer\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74860", "revid": "50896449", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74860", "title": "A Hard Day's Night (album)", "text": "1964 studio album by the Beatles\nA Hard Day's Night is the third studio album by the English rock band the Beatles, released on 10 July 1964 by Parlophone, with side one containing songs from the soundtrack to their film of the same name. \"A Hard Day's Night\" is the band's first album to contain all-original material, penned by John Lennon and Paul McCartney. The American version of the album was released two weeks earlier, on 26 June 1964 by United Artists Records, with a different track listing including some from George Martin's film score.\nThe album includes the song \"A Hard Day's Night\", with its distinctive opening chord, and \"Can't Buy Me Love\", both transatlantic number-one singles for the band. Several songs feature George Harrison playing a Rickenbacker 12-string electric guitar, with its sound influencing the Byrds and other groups in the emerging folk rock and jangle pop genres.\nRecording.\nShortly after the release of \"With the Beatles\" (1963), the Beatles were at EMI Path\u00e9 Marconi Studios in Paris on 29 January 1964 for their first recording session outside of London. Here, they recorded German-language versions of their two most recent singles, \"I Want to Hold Your Hand\" and \"She Loves You\", titled \"Komm, gib mir deine Hand\" and \"Sie liebt dich\", respectively. According to their producer, George Martin, this was done as \"they couldn't sell large quantities of records [in Germany] unless they were sung in German\". Also recorded\u2014in English\u2014was Paul McCartney's \"Can't Buy Me Love\", which was completed in only four takes. Shortly afterward, the band gave their first live performance in the United States on \"The Ed Sullivan Show\" on 9 February. They gave more US performances before returning to the United Kingdom on 22 February.\nThe Beatles were set to begin filming their first major feature film on 2 March 1964. According to historian Mark Lewisohn, the band were set to record songs for both the film and a tie-in LP, of which the songs from the film were completed first. On 25 February\u2014lead guitarist George Harrison's 21st birthday\u2014the band were back at London's EMI Studios, recording John Lennon's \"You Can't Do That\" for release as the B-side of \"Can't Buy Me Love\". The band also attempted \"And I Love Her\" and \"I Should Have Known Better\" on this day and again the following day, with the former finalised on 27 February. Two more songs from the film, \"Tell Me Why\" and \"If I Fell\", were recorded on this day.\nOn 1 March 1964, the Beatles recorded three songs in three hours: \"I'm Happy Just to Dance with You\" for the film, featuring Harrison on lead vocal; a cover of Little Richard's \"Long Tall Sally\"; and Lennon's \"I Call Your Name\", which was originally given to Billy J. Kramer and the Dakotas the previous year. Mono and stereo mixing was carried out over the following two weeks. The \"Can't Buy Me Love\" / \"You Can't Do That\" single was released on 16 March and topped charts worldwide. Taking a break for filming, drummer Ringo Starr coined the phrase \"a hard day's night\", providing the film with its title. Lennon and McCartney wrote a song based on the title, which was recorded at EMI on 16 April and mixed four days later.\nOn 1 June, with the film completed and the band returning from holidays, the Beatles returned to EMI, recording the remaining songs for the tie-in LP, with outtakes appearing on the \"Long Tall Sally\" EP. Covers of Carl Perkins' \"Matchbox\", with Starr on lead vocals, and Larry Williams' \"Slow Down\", appeared on the EP, while Lennon's \"I'll Cry Instead\" and \"I'll Be Back\" appeared on the LP. The following day on 2 June, the band completed Lennon's \"Any Time at All\" and \"When I Get Home\", and McCartney's \"Things We Said Today\". The band spent the remainder of June and July touring internationally.\nContent.\nMusically, \"A Hard Day's Night\" eschews the rock and roll cover songs of the band's previous albums for a predominantly pop sound. Sputnikmusic's Dave Donnelly observes \"short, peppy\" pop songs characterised by layered vocals, immediate choruses, and understated instrumentation. According to \"Pitchfork\"'s Tom Ewing, the lack of rock and roll covers allows listeners to \"take the group's new sound purely on its own modernist terms\", with audacious \"chord choices\", powerful harmonies, \"gleaming\" guitar, and \"Northern\" harmonica. Music journalist Robert Christgau writes that Lennon\u2013McCartney's songs were \"more sophisticated musically\" than before. It also features Harrison playing a Rickenbacker 12-string electric guitar, a sound that was influential on the Byrds and other bands in the folk rock explosion of 1965.\nSide one of the LP contains the songs from the film soundtrack. Side two contains songs written for, but not included in, the film, although a 1980s re-release of the film includes a prologue before the opening credits with \"I'll Cry Instead\" on the soundtrack. The title of the album and film was the accidental creation of Starr. According to Lennon in a 1980 interview with \"Playboy\" magazine: \"I was going home in the car and [film director] Dick Lester suggested the title, 'Hard Day's Night' from something Ringo had said. I had used it in \"In His Own Write\", but it was an off-the-cuff remark by Ringo. You know, one of those malapropisms. A Ringo-ism, where he said it not to be funny\u00a0... just said it. So Dick Lester said, 'We are going to use that title.'\"\n\"A Hard Day's Night\" is the first Beatles album to feature entirely original compositions, and the only one where all the songs were written by Lennon\u2013McCartney. Lennon is the primary author of nine of the thirteen tracks on the album, as well as being the lead singer on these same nine tracks (although Paul McCartney sings lead on the title track's middle-eight). Lennon and McCartney co-wrote \"I'm Happy Just to Dance with You\", sung by Harrison, while McCartney wrote \"And I Love Her\", \"Can't Buy Me Love\" and \"Things We Said Today\". It is one of three Beatles albums, along with \"Let It Be\" and \"Magical Mystery Tour\", in which Starr does not sing lead vocal on any songs. (Starr sang the lead vocal on \"Matchbox\" during the sessions; it appeared instead on the \"Long Tall Sally\" EP.) It is also one of three Beatles albums, along with \"Please Please Me\" and \"Beatles for Sale\", in which Harrison does not contribute to the songwriting.\nCritical reception and legacy.\nAccording to music critic Richie Unterberger, writing for AllMusic:\nGeorge Harrison's resonant 12-string electric guitar leads [on \"A Hard's Day's Night\"] were hugely influential; the movie helped persuade the Byrds, then folksingers, to plunge all out into rock &amp; roll, and the Beatles would be hugely influential on the folk-rock explosion of 1965. The Beatles' success, too, had begun to open the US market for fellow English bands like the Rolling Stones, the Animals, and the Kinks, and inspired young American groups like the Beau Brummels, Lovin' Spoonful, and others to mount a challenge of their own with self-penned material that owed a great debt to Lennon\u2013McCartney.\nIn his book \"Yeah! Yeah! Yeah!: The Story of Pop Music from Bill Haley to Beyonc\u00e9\", Bob Stanley identifies \"A Hard Day's Night\" as the album that best captures the band's early-career appeal. He writes:\nIf you had to explain the Beatles' impact to a stranger, you'd play them the soundtrack to \"A Hard Day's Night\". The songs, conceived in a hotel room in a spare couple of weeks between up-ending the British class system and conquering America, were full of bite and speed. There was adventure, knowingness, love, and abundant charm.\n\"A Hard Day's Night\" was included in the list of \"100 Essential Rock Albums\" compiled by musicologists Charlie Gillett and Simon Frith for \"ZigZag\" magazine in 1975, and is one of the \"Treasure Island albums\" featured in Greil Marcus's 1979 book \"Stranded\". In 2000, \"Q\" magazine placed \"A Hard Day's Night\" at number 5 on its list \"The 100 Greatest British Albums Ever\". That same year, it appeared at number 22 in Colin Larkin's book \"All Time Top 1000 Albums\". In 2012, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked it 307th on the magazine's list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time. In the 2020 revision, it rose to number 263. In 2000, the album was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame.\n\"A Hard Day's Night\" has also appeared in critics' lists of the best albums of all time published by the \"NME\", in 1974 (at number 33), 1985 (number 73) and 2013 (number 195); \"Mojo\", in 1995 (number 81); and \"Uncut\", in 2016 (number 149). It was a featured album in \"The Mojo Collection: The Greatest Albums of All Time\", Tom Moon's book \"1,000 Recordings to Hear Before You Die\" and Robert Dimery's \"1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die\", and was selected as one of the \"Most Significant Rock Albums\" in the \"Greenwood Encyclopedia of Rock History\".\nReissues.\nOn 26 February 1987, \"A Hard Day's Night\" was officially released on compact disc in mono, along with \"Please Please Me\", \"With the Beatles\", and \"Beatles for Sale.\" Having been available only as an import in the US in the past, the 13 track UK version of the album was also issued in the US on LP and cassette on 21 July 1987. Stereo mixes of \"A Hard Day's Night\", \"Can't Buy Me Love\", and \"And I Love Her\" had been made available on the first compact disc issue of \"1962\u20131966\" in 1993. Most of the rest of the tracks appeared in stereo on compact disc for the first time with the release of the box set \"The Capitol Albums, Volume 1\" in 2004.\nOn 9 September 2009, a remastered version of this album was released and was the first time the album appeared in stereo on compact disc in its entirety. This album is also included in \"The Beatles: Stereo Box Set\". A remastered mono version of the original UK album was part of \"The Beatles in Mono\" box set. A 60th anniversary reissue of the album was released on 19 October 2024 to celebrate National Album Day.\nNorth American release.\n\"A Hard Day's Night - Original Motion Picture Sound Track\", the American version of the album, was released on 26 June 1964 by United Artists Records in both mono and stereo, the fourth Beatles album in the United States. The album went to number one on the \"Billboard\" album chart, spending 14 weeks there, the longest run of any album that year. United Artists rushed the album into stores over a month before the film's US premiere; as a result, the Beatles had both the number-one album and number-one single in the country when \"A Hard Day's Night\" opened on 11 August 1964.\nAll seven songs from the film, the first side of the UK album, were featured along with \"I'll Cry Instead\", which, although written for the film, was cut at the last minute. The omitted tracks from side two were spread across the Capitol Records LPs \"The Beatles' Second Album\", \"Beatles '65\" and \"Something New\" although this last album, using a misleading name, contained five tracks already issued in the US soundtrack album. \nThis album also included four orchestral instrumental versions of Lennon and McCartney songs arranged by George Martin conducting an orchestra of studio musicians: \"I Should Have Known Better\", \"And I Love Her\", \"Ringo's Theme\" (featuring Vic Flick on lead guitar), and \"A Hard Day's Night\". After EMI acquired United Artists Records, this album was reissued in August 1980 on the Capitol label, catalogue SW-11921.\nWhile the stereo version of the album included the instrumental tracks in true stereo, the Beatles' own recordings appeared as electronically rechannelled stereo recordings made from the mono releases. The 1980 Capitol Records reissue used the same master tape as the original United Artists LP release in fake stereo, despite the availability of several tracks with official true stereo remixes. True stereo versions of most of the songs had been issued on the Capitol album \"Something New\", released in July 1964. \"Can't Buy Me Love\" and \"I Should Have Known Better\" finally appeared in stereo on the 1970 Apple Records compilation \"Hey Jude\". The song \"A Hard Day's Night\" did not appear in true stereo in the US until the 1982 Capitol compilation album \"Reel Music\". In 2014, the American version of the \"A Hard Day's Night\" album was released on CD individually and in a boxed set of all the other US Beatles albums to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the Beatles first US visit. This CD reissue features all of the songs in both true stereo and mono mixes. In 2024, the album was reissued on vinyl as part of \"\", using the original master tapes.\nIn 2000, the 1964 North American release of \"A Hard Day's Night\" by The Beatles on the United Artists label was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame.\nPersonnel.\nSources:\nThe Beatles\nAdditional personnel\nCharts and certifications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74861", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74861", "title": "The Land Beyond the Sunset", "text": "The Land Beyond the Sunset is a 1912 short, silent drama film which tells the story of a young boy, oppressed by his grandmother, who goes on an outing in the country with a social welfare group. It stars Martin Fuller, Mrs. William Bechtel, Walter Edwin, and Bigelow Cooper. Produced by Edison Studios in collaboration with the Fresh Air Fund, the screenplay was written by Dorothy G. Shore and directed by Harold M. Shaw.\nIn 2000, \"The Land Beyond the Sunset\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". It is included on the DVD \"Treasures from American Film Archives\" (2000).\nPlot.\nJoe is an impoverished New York newsboy who lives with his abusive grandmother. While selling papers, he is given a ticket for a children's excursion sponsored by the Fresh Air Fund. The next morning, Joe sneaks out of his tenement home to join the excursion, where he sees the countryside and the ocean for the first time. After a picnic, an adult volunteer reads to the children a fanciful tale from a story book, a tale about a young prince who is beaten by an old witch. A group of fairies rescues the boy, take him to a boat, and sail off for \"the Land Beyond the Sunset, where he lived happily ever after.\" Joe imagines himself as the boy in the story. When the other children and adults begin their return to the city, Joe manages to get the book, linger, and then hide, afraid that his grandmother will be mad at him and dreading the prospect of returning to his wretched life in the city's slums. Next he wanders to the beach, where he finds a rowboat and decides to embark alone on a voyage to the wonderful, far-off land. He pushes the oarless boat into the water and climbs aboard. The film ends with a distant view of Joe, holding the storybook against his chest, slowly drifting out to sea toward the horizon and most likely to his death.\nProduction.\nThe film was shot in studio at the Edison Company's plant at Decatur Avenue and Oliver Place in New York City, in the Bronx, as well as on location in a Bronx-area park that afforded a view of Long Island Sound.\nReferences and notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74862", "revid": "1319311257", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74862", "title": "Lassie Come Home", "text": "1943 film by Fred M. Wilcox\nLassie Come Home is a 1943 Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Technicolor feature film starring Roddy McDowall and canine actor Pal, in a story about the profound bond between Yorkshire boy Joe Carraclough and his rough collie, Lassie. The film was directed by Fred M. Wilcox from a screenplay by Hugo Butler based upon the 1940 novel \"Lassie Come-Home\" by Eric Knight. The film was the first in a series of seven MGM films starring \"Lassie.\"\nIn 1993, \"Lassie Come Home\" was included in the annual selection of 25 motion pictures added to the National Film Registry of the Library of Congress being deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" and recommended for preservation.\nThe original film saw a sequel, \"Son of Lassie\" in 1945 with five other films following at intervals through the 1940s. A British remake of the 1943 movie was released in 2005 as \"Lassie\" to moderate success. The film has been released to VHS and DVD.\nPlot.\nSet in Depression-era Yorkshire, England, Mr and Mrs Carraclough are hit by hard times and forced to sell their collie, Lassie, to the rich Duke of Rudling, who has always admired her. Young Joe Carraclough grows despondent at the loss of his companion.\nHowever, Lassie will have nothing to do with the Duke, and finds ways to escape her kennels and return to Joe. The Duke finally carries Lassie to his home hundreds of miles distant in Scotland. There, his granddaughter Priscilla senses the dog's unhappiness and arranges her escape.\nLassie then sets off for a long trek to her Yorkshire home. She faces many perils along the way, dog catchers and a violent storm, but also meets kind people who offer her aid and comfort. At the end, when Joe has given up hope of ever seeing his dog again, the weary Lassie returns to her favorite resting place in the schoolyard at home. There, Lassie is joyfully reunited with the boy she loves.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Roddy McDowall as Joe Carraclough, a Yorkshire schoolboy\nProduction.\nThe film was shot in Washington state and Monterey, California, while the rapids scene was shot on the San Joaquin River. It also features scenes from the former Janss Conejo Ranch in Wildwood Regional Park in Thousand Oaks, California. Additional photography occurred in Big Bear Lake and Cape Mendocino.\nDuring the film's production, MGM executives previewing the dailies were said to be so moved that they ordered more scenes to be added to \"this wonderful motion picture.\"\nSome sources say that, initially, a female collie was selected for the title role, but was replaced when the dog began to shed excessively during shooting of the film in the summer. The trainer, Rudd Weatherwax, then substituted the male collie, Pal, in the role of \"Lassie\". Pal had been hired to perform the rapids stunt and, being male, looked more impressive in the part. Still other accounts, such as a 1943 \"New York Times\" article written while the film was in production, say that Pal was cast by director Fred Wilcox after first being rejected, because no other dog performed satisfactorily with the \"near human attributes\" he sought for the canine title role. Weatherwax would later receive all rights to the Lassie name and trademark in lieu of back pay owed him by MGM.\nMusic.\nIn 2010, Film Score Monthly released the complete scores of the seven Lassie feature films released by MGM between 1943 and 1955 as well as Elmer Bernstein\u2019s score for \"It's a Dog's Life\" (1955) in the CD collection \"Lassie Come Home: The Canine Cinema Collection\", limited to 1000 copies. \nDue to the era when these scores were recorded, nearly half of the music masters have been lost so the scores had to be reconstructed and restored from the best available sources, mainly the Music and Effects tracks as well as monaural \u00bc\u2033 tapes.\nThe score for \"Lassie Come Home\" was composed by Daniele Amfitheatrof.\nTrack listing for \"Lassie Come Home\" (Disc 1)\nBonus tracks\nBonus track for \"Lassie Come Home\" (Disc 4)\n\u2020Contains Dialogue\nTotal Time: 81:19\nReception.\nThe movie was a big hit. According to MGM records it earned $2,613,000 in the US and Canada and $1,904,000 overseas, resulting in a profit of $2,249,000.\nThe film was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Cinematography, Color and later the character of Lassie received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6368 Hollywood Blvd. In 1993, \"Lassie Come Home\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nBosley Crowther in \"The New York Times\" of October 8, 1943 uniformly praised the performers and production, noting that the film \"tells the story of a boy and a dog, tells it with such poignance and simple beauty that only the hardest heart can fail to be moved.\" In \"The Nation\" in 1943, critic James Agee wrote, \"\"Lassie Come Home\" is a dog story which I had hardly expected to enjoy... I did, though. Those who made it seem to have had a pretty fair sense of the square naivete which most good stories for children have, or affect; they also manipulate some surprisingly acute emotions out of the head dog. Whether from private remembrance or from the show, I got several reverberations of that strangely pure, half-magical tone which certain books... have for many children.\"\nAlmost 50 years after the film's release, \"Parade\" discussed its lasting cultural impact, quoting the \"Saturday Evening Post\" which said the film launched Pal on \"the most spectacular canine career in film history\". \"Lassie Come Home\" was also cited as a cultural icon in Jane and Michael Stern's 1992 book, \"Encyclopedia of Pop Culture\".\nThe film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:\nHome media.\nThe film was released on VHS by MGM Home Entertainment in 1990.\nThe film was released on DVD by Warner Home Video and Warner Archive Collection from 2004 onwards.\nRemake.\nA German remake was released in 2020\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "74864", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74864", "title": "The Last of the Mohicans (1920 American film)", "text": "1920 film by Maurice Tourneur, Clarence Brown\nThe Last of the Mohicans is a 1920 American silent adventure drama film written by Robert A. Dillon, adapted from James Fenimore Cooper's 1826 novel of the same name. Clarence Brown and Maurice Tourneur co-directed the film. (Brown took over the direction of the film after Tourneur injured himself in a fall.) It is a story of two English sisters meeting danger on the frontier of the American colonies, in and around the fort commanded by their father. The adventure film stars Wallace Beery, Barbara Bedford, Lillian Hall, Alan Roscoe and Boris Karloff in one of his earliest silent film roles (playing an Indian brave). Barbara Bedford later married her co-star in the film, Alan Roscoe in real life. The production was shot near Big Bear Lake and in Yosemite Valley.\nThe film was well received at the time of its release. Film historian William K. Everson considers \"The Last of the Mohicans\" to be a masterpiece. In 1995, the film was deemed \"culturally significant\" by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry.\nPlot.\nIn 1757, in the midst of the French and Indian War, three French divisions and their Huron Indian allies are advancing on Fort William Henry, a British stronghold south of Lake George in the colony of New York. Chingachgook sends his son Uncas, the last living warrior of the Mohican tribe, to warn the fort's commander, Colonel Munro, of the imminent danger. Uncas is admired by Munro's daughter Cora, much to the displeasure of her suitor, Captain Randolph.\nUpon receiving Munro's plea for assistance, General Webb dispatches a relief force of 3000 men to Fort William Henry with the Munro sisters, but with the aid of an Indian runner named Magua, the sisters and Major Heyward take a shortcut through the wilderness. Magua, who is a Huron sympathizer, then pretends to lose his way. In the forest they encounter Uncas, Chingachgook and the hunter and scout Hawkeye, accompanied by an eccentric preacher named David Gamut. When Heyward asks for directions to Fort Edward, the men become suspicious of Magua who, like all Indians in the area, should have an intimate knowledge of the terrain. Their fears of treachery are confirmed when they discover that Magua has disappeared.\nUncas and Hawkeye conceal Heyward and the women in a cave, but Magua and his men find the hiding place, and after a fierce firefight the women are captured. Magua offers to spare \"Golden Hair\" (Alice) if Cora will become his squaw; but Uncas, Chingachgook and Hawkeye counterattack and rescue the hostages. Although they leave Magua for dead, he is actually uninjured.\nThe hostages and their rescuers arrive at Fort William Henry at the same time as the column of troops, but the situation is still dire. The only thing keeping the besiegers at bay is a formidable gun emplacement on the left rampart. The cowardly Captain Randolph informs Montcalm, the French commander, that the rampart guns are nonfunctional, leaving Munro no choice but to surrender the fort. Though promised safe passage for the women and children, the Hurons, under the influence of French-supplied whiskey, slaughter the civilians and torch the fort.\nMagua kidnaps the Munro sisters for a second time and flees. Uncas and Hawkeye pursue him, but Magua reaches a neutral Delaware village. The dispute is taken before a Delaware council of three; their judgment is that Cora be released to Uncas, and that Alice remain with Magua. To save her sister, Cora offers to take her place. Uncas vows that Magua will not leave with his true love, but by Delaware law, Magua is protected until sundown.\nThat night, Cora escapes and is pursued by Magua to the edge of a precipice. She threatens to jump if he approaches, so Magua waits patiently for her to fall asleep. When she does, he grabs her arm. She flings herself off the cliff, but Magua still has hold of her arms. When Uncas appears, the situation is reversed: Cora tries to save herself, but Magua uses his knife to pry her fingers loose, and she falls to her death. In the ensuing fight, Magua stabs Uncas, whose body rolls down the embankment to rest near Cora's. Before dying, Uncas reaches forth and takes Cora's hand in his. Magua flees when Chingachgook and Hawkeye arrive, but Hawkeye shoots him dead.\nAt Cora and Uncas's burial ceremony, Munro laments the passing of his daughter and Chingachgook mourns for his son, the last of the Mohicans.\nCritical assessment.\nThe Maurice Tourneur and Clarence Brown adaptation of James Fenimore Cooper's 1826 historical novel retains its high stature among film historians and \"still considered to be the best film adaption of Cooper\u2019s novel.\u201d\nFilm historian and biographer Charles Higham offered high praise for the directorial \u201csophistication\u201d and \u201cdaring\u201d in the development of the Cora Munro (Barbara Bedford) character:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; \u201cThe Last of the Mohicans mood is darker, stranger than anything suggested by James Fenimore Cooper\u2019s robust boy\u2019s book. The darkness wells from the character of the older girl, Cora Munro, played by Barbara Bedford. Prim and proper in her demeanor, she is actually seized by virginal longings, consumed with sexual desire for her Indian guide-protector Uncas (Alan Roscoe). At a time when women in movies were supposed to be mere wilting violets, this explicit sexual frankness must have been an astonishment, and was in truth quite revolutionary. Looking into Miss Bedford\u2019s sly animal eyes, looking at the movement of her mouth, we are already aware of the director\u2019s sophisticated understanding of the medium\u2019s potential for sexual expression. In 1920, this understanding, and the equivalent daring of the actress, whose performance is a triumph of subtle technique, were nothing short of miraculous.\u201d \nAcknowledging the \u201cstrengths and weaknesses\u201d evident in every cinematic treatment of the famous novel\u2014adaptations of the novel appeared as early as 1911\u2014 including the George B. Seitz version in 1936 and the 1992 production by Michael Mann\u2014film critic David Sterritt reports \u201cthat for pure visual storytelling and a memorably filmed climax, the silent movie by Tourneur and Brown has proven hard to beat.\u201d\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74868", "revid": "50676393", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74868", "title": "The Last Picture Show", "text": "1971 film by Peter Bogdanovich\nThe Last Picture Show is a 1971 American coming-of-age drama film directed by Peter Bogdanovich and co-written by Bogdanovich and Larry McMurtry, adapted from the 1966 semi-autobiographical novel by McMurtry. The film's ensemble cast includes Timothy Bottoms, Jeff Bridges, Ellen Burstyn, Ben Johnson, Cloris Leachman, Cybill Shepherd, Eileen Brennan, and Randy Quaid. Set in a small town in northern Texas from November 1951 to October 1952, it is a story of two high school seniors and longtime best friends, Sonny Crawford (Bottoms) and Duane Jackson (Bridges).\n\"The Last Picture Show\" was theatrically released on October 22, 1971, by Columbia Pictures. It was a critical and commercial success, grossing $29 million on a $1.3 million budget, and was nominated for eight Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Director, Best Supporting Actor for Johnson and Bridges, and Best Supporting Actress for Burstyn and Leachman, with Johnson and Leachman winning.\nBogdanovich directed a 1990 sequel, \"Texasville\", based on McMurtry's 1987 novel of the same name and featuring much of the original film's cast reprising their roles; \"Texasville\" failed to match the critical or commercial success of its predecessor. In 1998, the Library of Congress selected \"The Last Picture Show\" for preservation in the United States National Film Registry for being \"culturally, historically or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nIn 1951, Sonny Crawford and Duane Jackson are high school seniors and best friends in the small oil town of Anarene, Texas. Duane is dating Jacy Farrow, the prettiest girl in town, with the richest parents. Sonny breaks up with his girlfriend due to his secret crush on Jacy.\nAt a Christmas dance, Jacy is invited by Lester Marlow to a skinny-dipping pool party at Bobby Sheen's, a wealthy young man and seemingly better prospect than Duane. At the dance, Sonny kisses Ruth Popper, the depressed middle-aged wife of his high school coach.\nDuane, Sonny and others take their young, mentally disabled friend, Billy, to a prostitute to lose his virginity. Returning him home, local businessman Sam \"The Lion\" is angered by their treatment of Billy, who habitually sweeps Anarene's main street. He forbids the group from entering any of his businesses, the only entertainment in town: the pool hall, movie theater, and caf\u00e9. Later, when Sam catches Sonny visiting Billy and Genevieve the waitress at the caf\u00e9, Sonny apologizes and Sam lifts the ban on him.\nBobby makes an advance on Jacy, but refuses to have sex with her because she is a virgin. On New Year's Eve weekend, Duane and Sonny impulsively drive to Mexico. Before leaving, the nostalgic Sam gives them some extra money to enjoy themselves. When the boys return hungover and tired on Monday morning, they learn that Sam died suddenly of a stroke the day before. Sam leaves Sonny the pool hall in his will.\nJacy invites Duane to a motel room for sex, as she wants to be accepted into Bobby's libertine circle. He is unable to get an erection, so she scolds him. Later, they try again and Duane performs briefly, just enough for Jacy to lose her virginity. She breaks up with him by phone, hoping to become involved with Bobby.\nHowever, Jacy learns that Bobby has already married another girl. Out of boredom and feeling rejected, she has sex with Abilene, her father Gene's roughneck foreman and her mother's lover. When he drops Jacy off he is brutally cold. Upon entering the house, Jacy's mother Lois catches her and Jacy begins to cry. They discuss the double bind they are trapped in\u2014reduced to objects of sexuality, but punished if they express or enjoy their sexuality.\nUpset over the breakup, Duane enlists in the Army and is scheduled to serve in the Korean War after basic training. In his absence, Jacy goes for Sonny, who abruptly drops Ruth and dreams of marrying her. Duane returns home on leave, driving a new Mercury. He fights with Sonny over Jacy, smashing a beer bottle into Sonny's eye, sending him to the hospital. During his recovery, he refuses to see Ruth when she visits.\nJacy and Sonny elope to Oklahoma. While driving to their honeymoon, Jacy reveals she left a letter to her parents, telling them of their entire plan. Jacy and Sonny are stopped by a state trooper who takes them to the Farrows\u2019. Gene angrily berates Sonny and drives Jacy home. Sonny rides back with Lois, who reveals Sam was her first true love. She suggests Sonny would be much better off with Ruth than with Jacy. The marriage is annulled and a short time passes.\nOn Duane's last night of leave, Sonny makes amends with him and reveals that Jacy has left for college in Dallas. They go to the theater on its final night. The last picture show is \"Red River\".\nThe next morning, when Sonny sees Duane off, Duane asks Sonny to take care of his Mercury after Sonny admits that he and Jacy \"never made it to the motel.\" As Sonny opens the pool hall, he hears brakes squealing outside. Billy was struck and killed by a truck when he was sweeping the road. The local townsmen surround Billy's body and coldly blame the dead boy for being stupid and careless. Grief-stricken, Sonny yells at them for their behavior and carefully carries Billy's body away, covering his face with his letterman jacket.\nAngry and depressed with his life, Sonny drives to the city limits. He slowly changes his mind and returns, parking near Ruth's. He shyly asks to come in for a cup of coffee. Depressed, she has shuttered herself inside.\nRuth lets him in, then explodes in hurt and anger. She notices that Sonny is completely devastated. Demanding he look at her, he does and gently touches her hand. Ruth's anger melts away and she comforts him. Her last words are \u201cNever you mind, honey. Never you mind\u201d as the film ends.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Timothy Bottoms as Sonny Crawford\nProduction.\nGoing into \"The Last Picture Show\" Peter Bogdanovich was a 31-year-old stage actor, film essayist, and critic. Bogdanovich had directed one film, \"Targets\" (also known as \"Before I Die\"), working with his wife and collaborator, Polly Platt. As Bogdanovich later explained to \"The Hollywood Reporter\", while waiting in a cashier's line in a drugstore, he happened to look at the rack of paperbacks and his eye fell on an interesting title, \"The Last Picture Show\". The back of the book said it was about \"kids growing up in Texas\" and Bogdanovich decided that it did not interest him and put it back. A few weeks later, actor Sal Mineo handed Platt a copy of the book. \"I always wanted to be in this\", he said, \"but I'm a little too old now\", said Mineo, who recommended that Platt and Bogdanovich make it into a film. According to Bogdanovich, Platt said, \"I don't know how you make it into a picture, but it's a good book.\" According to Platt, at a dinner with her and Bogdanovich, producer Bert Schneider \"asked Peter what he wanted to direct next, and Peter didn't really have an answer, but I piped up about this great book, The Last Picture Show, and Bert showed some interest.\" Platt contended that after Schneider agreed to fund the picture through BBS Productions, she convinced Bogdanovich to overcome his hesitations about the source material and commit to the project. Bogdanovich, McMurtry, and Platt adapted the novel into the film of the same name.\nStephen Friedman was a lawyer with Columbia Pictures but keen to break into film production as he had bought the film rights to the book, so Bogdanovich hired him as producer.\nAfter discussing the proposed film with Orson Welles, his houseguest at the time, Bogdanovich agreed with him that shooting the film in black and white would work aesthetically, which by then was an unusual choice.\nThe film was shot in Larry McMurtry's small hometown of Archer City located in north-central Texas near the Oklahoma state line. McMurtry had renamed the town \"Thalia\" in his book; Bogdanovich dubbed it Anarene (for a ghost town south of Archer City). The similarity to famed cowtown Abilene, Kansas, in Howard Hawks' \"Red River\" (1948) was intentional. \"Red River\" again is tied in as \"the last picture show\", which Sonny and Duane watch at the end of the film.\nAfter shooting wrapped, Bogdanovich went back to Los Angeles to edit the film footage on a Moviola. Bogdanovich has said that he edited the entire film himself, but refused to credit himself as editor, reasoning that director and co-writer were enough. When informed that the Motion Picture Editors Guild required an editor credit, he suggested Donn Cambern, who had been editing another film, \"Drive, He Said\" (1971), in the next office and had helped Bogdanovich with some purchasing paperwork concerning the film's opticals. Cambern disputes this, stating that Bogdanovich did do an edit of the film, which he screened for a selection of guests, including Jack Nicholson, Bob Rafelson and himself. The consensus was the film was going to be great, but needed further editing to achieve its full potential. Cambern claims Bogdanovich invited him to do so, during which he made significant contributions to the film's final form.\nBogdanovich obtained a rare waiver from the Directors Guild of America to have his name appear only at the end of the film, after the actors' credits, as he felt it was more meaningful for the audience to see their names after their performances.\nMusic.\nThe film features entirely diegetic music, including many songs of Hank Williams Sr. and other country and western and 1950s popular music recording artists. In interviews, Bogdanovich emphasized that a lot of attention was paid to the music being accurate and contemporary to the narrated time span between November 1951 to October 1952, and that no songs were used that were released later than that.\nReception and legacy.\nBox office.\nThe film earned $13.1 million in domestic rentals in North America.\nCritical reception.\n\"Chicago Sun-Times\" critic Roger Ebert gave the film four out of four stars in his original review and named it the best film of 1971. He later added it to his \"Great Movies\" list, writing that \"the film is above all an evocation of mood. It is about a town with no reason to exist, and people with no reason to live there. The only hope is in transgression.\" Vincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" called it a \"lovely film\" that \"rediscovers a time, a place, a film form\u2014and a small but important part of the American experience.\" Gene Siskel of the \"Chicago Tribune\" gave the film four stars out of four and wrote: \"Like few films in recent years, Peter Bogdanovich's \"The Last Picture Show\" ends with us wanting to see more of the people who occupy the small town world that is Anarene, Tex. in 1951. This emotion is not easily achieved. It is a result of a thoro [\"sic\"] \"Peyton Place\" investigation into Anarene's bedrooms, parked cars, football games, movie theater, restaurant, and pool hall.\" Charles Champlin of the \"Los Angeles Times\" called the film \"the most considered, craftsmanlike and elaborate tribute we have yet had to what the movies were and how they figured in our lives.\" Gary Arnold of \"The Washington Post\" called it \"an exceedingly well-made and involving narrative film with decent aims, encouraging us to understand and care about its characters, though not to emulate them.\"\nAs of October 2023[ [update]], review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes displays an approval rating of 98% based on 115 reviews, with an average rating of 9.1/10. The site's critics consensus reads: \"Making excellent use of its period and setting, Peter Bogdanovich's small town coming-of-age story is a sad but moving classic filled with impressive performances.\" According to Metacritic, which assigned a weighted average score of 93 out of 100 based on 15 critics, the film received \"universal acclaim\".\nThe film and its poster are referenced in the title of the 1975 album \"The Last Record Album\" by American rock band Little Feat and in the cover illustration by Neon Park.\nAwards and nominations.\nIt ranked No. 19 on \"Entertainment Weekly\"'s list of the 50 Best High School Movies. In 2007, the film was ranked No. 95 on the American Film Institute's 10th Anniversary Edition of the 100 greatest American films of all time.\nIn April 2011, \"The Last Picture Show\" was re-released in UK and Irish cinemas, distributed by Park Circus. \"Total Film\" magazine gave the film a five-star review, stating: \"Peter Bogdanovich's desolate Texan drama is still as stunning now as it was in 1971.\"\nThe February 2020 issue of \"New York Magazine\" lists \"The Last Picture Show\" as among \"The Best Movies That Lost Best Picture at the Oscars.\"\nHome media.\nThe film was released by The Criterion Collection in November 2010 as part of its box set \"America Lost and Found: The BBS Story\". It included a high-definition digital transfer of Peter Bogdanovich's director's cut, two audio commentaries, one from 1991, featuring Bogdanovich and actors Cybill Shepherd, Randy Quaid, Cloris Leachman, and Frank Marshall; the other from 2009, featuring Bogdanovich \"\"The Last Picture Show\": A Look Back\", (1999) and \"Picture This\" (1990), documentaries about the making of the film, \"A Discussion with Filmmaker Peter Bogdanovich\", a 2009 Q&amp;A, screen tests and location footage, and excerpts from a 1972 television interview with director Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut about the New Hollywood.\nDirector's cut.\nBogdanovich re-edited the film in 1992 to create a \"director's cut\". This version restores seven minutes of footage that Bogdanovich trimmed from the 1971 release because Columbia had imposed a firm 119-minute limit. With this requirement removed in the 1990s, Bogdanovich used the 127-minute cut on LaserDisc, VHS and DVD releases. The original 1971 cut was never released on DVD or Blu-ray for years, though it was released on VHS and LaserDisc through Columbia Tristar Home Video. However, the theatrical cut, along with the more known director's cut, was included as a part of Sony's Columbia Classics Volume 3 4K Blu-ray box set.\nThere are two substantial scenes restored in the director's cut. The first is a sex scene between Jacy and Abilene that plays in the poolhall after it has closed for the night; it precedes the exterior scene where he drops her off home and she says \"What a night. I never thought \"this\" would happen.\" The other major insertion is a scene that plays in Sam's caf\u00e9, where Genevieve watches while an amiable Sonny and a revved-up Duane decide to take their road trip to Mexico; it precedes the exterior scene outside the pool hall when they tell Sam of their plans, the last time they will ever see him.\nSeveral shorter scenes were also restored. One comes between basketball practice in the gym and the exterior at The Rig-Wam drive-in; it has Jacy, Duane and Sonny riding along in her convertible (and being chased by an enthusiastic little dog), singing an uptempo rendition of the more solemn school song sung later at the football game. Another finds Sonny cruising the town streets in the pick-up, gazing longingly into Sam's poolhall, caf\u00e9 and theater, from which he has been banished. Finally, there is an exterior scene of the auto caravan on its way to the Senior Picnic; as it passes the fishing tank where he had fished with Sam and Billy, Sonny sheds a tear for his departed friend and his lost youth.\nTwo scenes got slightly longer treatments: Ruth's and Sonny's return from the doctor, and the boys' returning Billy to Sam after his encounter with Jemmie Sue\u2014both had added dialogue. Also, a number of individual shots were put back in, most notably a Gregg Toland-style deep focus shot in front of the Royal Theatre as everyone gets into their cars.\nSequel.\n\"Texasville\", the 1990 sequel to \"The Last Picture Show\", based on McMurtry's 1987 novel of the same name, was also directed by Bogdanovich, from his own screenplay, without McMurtry this time. The film reunites actors Jeff Bridges, Cybill Shepherd, Timothy Bottoms, Cloris Leachman, Eileen Brennan, Randy Quaid, Sharon Ullrick (n\u00e9e Taggart) and Barc Doyle.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74871", "revid": "50860907", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74871", "title": "Laura (1944 film)", "text": "Film by Otto Preminger\nLaura is a 1944 American film noir produced and directed by Otto Preminger. It stars Gene Tierney and Dana Andrews, along with Clifton Webb, Vincent Price, and Judith Anderson. The screenplay by Jay Dratler, Samuel Hoffenstein, and Betty Reinhardt is based on the 1943 novel \"Laura\" by Vera Caspary. \"Laura\" received five Oscar nominations including for Best Director, winning for Best Black and White Cinematography.\nIn 1999, \"Laura\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". The American Film Institute named it one of the 10 best mystery films of all time, and it also appears on Roger Ebert's \"Great Movies\" series.\nPlot.\nNew York City Police Department Detective Mark McPherson is investigating the murder a of a young, beautiful, highly successful advertising executive Laura Hunt, killed by a shotgun blast to the face just inside the doorway of her apartment. He first interviews charismatic newspaper columnist Waldo Lydecker, an imperious, effete older man who relates how he met Laura and became her mentor. She had become his platonic friend and steady companion, and, wishing more, he used his considerable fame, influence, and connections to advance her career.\nMark also questions Laura's parasitic playboy fianc\u00e9, Shelby Carpenter, a \"kept man\" tethered to Laura's wealthy socialite aunt, Ann Treadwell. Ann is in love with Shelby, but tolerates his infatuation with Laura, apparently out of her practical acceptance of Shelby's need for the affection of a woman closer to his age. Bessie Clary, Laura's loyal and highly distraught housekeeper, is also questioned by Mark. Through the testimony of Laura's friends and reading her letters and diary, Mark becomes obsessed with her \u2212 so much so that Waldo finally accuses him of falling in love with the dead woman. He also learns that Waldo was jealous of Laura's suitors, using his newspaper column and influence to keep them at bay.\nOne night, the detective falls asleep in Laura's apartment in front of her portrait. He is awakened by a woman entering with her own key and is shocked to discover that it is Laura. She finds a dress in her closet that belonged to one of her models, Diane Redfern. Mark concludes that the body assumed to have been Laura was Diane, drawn there for a liaison by Shelby while Laura was away at her country residence. With Laura still alive, unmasking the killer becomes even more urgent. By tapping Laura's phone, Mark follows her to a meeting with Shelby after which Shelby drives to her country residence to retrieve a shotgun. When confronted, Shelby insists that he did not come forward with the information that Laura was alive simply because he was panic-stricken. He explains the shotgun by saying he planned to give it to Laura for protection. Mark tests it against the ballistics from Diane's body and finds that it is not a match.\nAt a party celebrating Laura's return, Mark arrests Laura for the murder of Diane. Upon questioning her, he becomes convinced that she is innocent and that she does not love Shelby. He searches Waldo's apartment, where he becomes suspicious of a clock identical to the one in Laura's apartment. On closer examination, he finds it has a secret compartment. Mark returns to Laura's apartment. Waldo is there and notices a growing bond between Laura and the detective. Waldo insults Mark and is sent away by Laura but pauses on the stairwell outside. Mark examines Laura's clock and finds the shotgun that killed Diane but leaves it there. Laura is confronted with the truth that Waldo is the murderer.\nMark and Laura kiss, and then he locks her into her apartment, warning her to admit no one. After he leaves, Waldo, who had slipped in by the kitchen entrance, retrieves the shotgun and attempts to kill Laura, saying that if he cannot have her, no one can. She deflects his shot and flees just as Mark arrives. Mark's sergeant shoots down Waldo. As he dies, Waldo whispers, \"Goodbye, Laura. Goodbye, my love.\"\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Gene Tierney as Laura Hunt\nProduction.\nOtto Preminger was looking for a theatrical project to direct and first became aware of Vera Caspary's story when her agent offered him the first draft of a play called \"Ring Twice for Laura.\" Preminger liked the high-society setting and the unusual plot twist, but he felt the work needed a major revision and offered to rewrite it with its author. Caspary and he disagreed about the direction they should take it, and she opted to collaborate with writer George Sklar, instead. Marlene Dietrich expressed interest in portraying the title character, but without the attachment of Dietrich or another major star, Caspary was unable to find a producer willing to finance a national tour or a Broadway run and abandoned the project.\nCaspary eventually adapted the play for both a novel with the same title and a sequel, which she titled simply \"Laura\". They were both purchased by 20th Century Fox for $30,000. Fox announced George Sanders and Laird Cregar as the leads.\nInterim studio head William Goetz, serving in that capacity while Darryl F. Zanuck was fulfilling his military duty, assigned Preminger the task of developing the books for the screen. Preminger began working with Jay Dratler, Samuel Hoffenstein, and Betty Reinhardt. Recalling the differences of opinion Caspary and he had, Preminger opted not to involve her until the first draft was completed. He sensed the more interesting character was not Laura, but Waldo Lydecker, and expanded his role accordingly. Caspary was unhappy with the plot changes, though.\nZanuck, with whom Preminger previously had clashed, returned to the studio and was angered to discover Goetz had rehired his nemesis. In retaliation, he announced that Preminger could produce \"Laura\" but not direct it and assigned him to helm \"In the Meantime, Darling\" instead. Several directors, including Lewis Milestone, were offered and rejected \"Laura\" until Rouben Mamoulian finally agreed to direct.\nMamoulian immediately ignored all of Preminger's directives as producer and began to rewrite the script. To Preminger's dismay, he cast Laird Cregar, known for his portrayal of Jack the Ripper in \"The Lodger\", in the key role of Lydecker. The producer felt casting an actor with a reputation for playing sinister roles would lead the audience to become suspicious of Lydecker earlier than necessary. He favored Clifton Webb, a noted Broadway actor, who had not appeared before the cameras since 1930, and who at that time was performing in the No\u00ebl Coward play \"Blithe Spirit\" in Los Angeles.\nFox casting director Rufus LeMaire and Zanuck both objected to Webb because of his effeminate mannerisms, which were exactly what Preminger felt suited the character. Preminger filmed the actor delivering a monologue from the Coward play, and Zanuck agreed that Webb was perfect for the role. Zanuck was similarly campaigning for actor Reginald Gardiner to play the role of Shelby, though Fox contractee Vincent Price finally got the role.\nFilming began on April 27, 1944, and from the start, Mamoulian had problems with his cast. He offered relative newcomers Gene Tierney and Dana Andrews little support, allowed theatrically trained Judith Anderson to play to the balcony instead of reining in her performance, and virtually ignored Webb, who had learned that the director was unhappy with his casting.\nAfter viewing the early rushes, Zanuck called a meeting with Mamoulian and Preminger, each of whom blamed the other for the problems on the set. Preminger finally convinced Zanuck that the material needed a more subtle approach than Mamoulian was willing to give it, and the defeated studio head, in frustration, reluctantly allowed Preminger to dismiss Mamoulian and direct the film himself. Preminger immediately hired a new cinematographer and scenic designer and replaced the portrait of Laura\u00a0\u2013 a crucial element of the film; Mamoulian's wife Azadia had painted the original portrait, but Preminger replaced that with an enlarged photograph (taken by Fox photographer Frank Polony) of Tierney, lightly dabbed with oils to give it the ethereal effect he wanted.\nPreminger initially experienced resistance from his cast, who had been led to believe Preminger was unhappy with their work by the departing Mamoulian. \"Once we got used to Otto, we had a pretty easy time\", Vincent Price recalled in a July 1989 interview. Filming was completed on June 29, slightly over budget, but within the projected timetable.\nZanuck was unhappy with Preminger's first cut of the film and insisted it be given a new ending, in which it was revealed Lydecker had imagined the entire story, but following a screening of the Zanuck version, columnist Walter Winchell approached the studio head and told him, \"I didn't get [the ending]. You've got to change it.\" Having lost again, Zanuck relented and allowed Preminger to reinstate his original finale, telling him, \"This is your success. I concede.\"\nMusic.\nOnce the principal photography had been completed, Preminger hired David Raksin to score the film. The director wanted to use \"Sophisticated Lady\" by Duke Ellington for the main theme, but Raksin objected to the choice. Alfred Newman, music director for Fox, persuaded Preminger to give Raksin a weekend to compose an original tune. Furious, Preminger gave Raksin that weekend, but threatened him with dismissal in case he failed.\nInspired by a \"Dear John\" letter he received from his wife over the course of that weekend, Raksin composed the haunting theme, also titled \"Laura\", for which Johnny Mercer later wrote lyrics. It eventually became a jazz standard recorded by more than 400 artists, including Stan Kenton, Dick Haymes, Woody Herman, Nat King Cole, The Four Freshmen, Charlie Parker, Billy Eckstine, and Frank Sinatra. Spike Jones did a parody version of the song. Preminger was so pleased with Raksin's score that he not only did not dismiss Raksin, but also collaborated with him on four additional films.\nSoundtrack.\nIn 1993, Fox Records released a 27-minute suite of Raksin's score on an album paired with Bernard Herrmann's score for \"Jane Eyre.\" In 2013, Kritzerland released the complete Raksin score, along with test demos and the suite from the original album as bonus tracks.\nTrack listing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReception.\nCritical response.\nThomas M. Pryor of \"The New York Times\" observed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When a murder mystery possessing as much sustained suspense, good acting and caustically brittle dialogue as \"Laura\" ...\u00a0comes along it might seem a little like carping to suggest that it could have been even better. As the story of a strangely fascinating female who insinuates herself into the lives of three very worldly gents, much depends, of course, upon the lady herself\u00a0... Now, at the risk of being unchivalrous, we venture to say that when the lady herself appears upon the scene via a flashback of events leading up to the tragedy, she is a disappointment. For Gene Tierney simply doesn't measure up to the word-portrait of her character. Pretty, indeed, but hardly the type of girl we had expected to meet. For Miss Tierney plays at being a brilliant and sophisticated advertising executive with the wild-eyed innocence of a college junior. Aside from that principal reservation, however, \"Laura\" is an intriguing melodrama\u00a0... Only Miss Tierney seems out of key. Perhaps if Laura Hunt had not had such a build-up, it would have been different. Anyway, the picture on the whole is close to being a top-drawer mystery.\n\"Variety\" said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The film's deceptively leisurely pace at the start, and its light, careless air, only heighten the suspense without the audience being conscious of the buildup. What they are aware of as they follow the story\u00a0... is the skill in the telling. Situations neatly dovetail and are always credible. Developments, surprising as they come, are logical. The dialog is honest, real and adult.\nIn 2002, Roger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Film noir is known for its convoluted plots and arbitrary twists, but even in a genre that gave us \"The Maltese Falcon\", this takes some kind of prize\u00a0... That \"Laura\" continues to weave a spell\u00a0\u2212 and it does\u00a0\u2212 is a tribute to style over sanity\u00a0... All of [the] absurdities and improbabilities somehow do not diminish the film's appeal. They may even add to it\u00a0... [T]he whole film is of a piece: contrived, artificial, mannered, and yet achieving a kind of perfection in its balance between low motives and high style. What makes the movie great, perhaps, is the casting. The materials of a B-grade crime potboiler are redeemed by Waldo Lydecker, walking through every scene as if afraid to step in something.\nPauline Kael called it \"Everybody's favorite chic murder mystery. Gene Tierney is the dead girl who ends up as the heroine; Clifton Webb and Vincent Price are her suitors; Dana Andrews is the charmingly necrophiliac detective; and Judith Anderson is modishly contemptible.\"\nEddie Muller wrote: \"Although it's little more than a succession of dialogue scenes, \"Laura\" mesmerizes, due, in no small measure, to a quick-witted script and the erotic tension pulsing beneath the high-gloss surfaces... The film's eighty-eight minutes of elegant moodiness still beguiles viewers.\"\nOn the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 100% based on 65 reviews, with an average rating of 8.8/10. The website's critics consensus reads, \"A psychologically complex portrait of obsession, \"Laura\" is also a deliciously well-crafted murder mystery.\"\nHome media.\nMagnetic Video released the film on home video however, by 1992, the film had not been available on home video for almost a decade although was available on LaserDisc.\n20th Century Fox Home Entertainment released the film on Region 1 DVD on March 15, 2005. It is in format with audio tracks and subtitles in English and Spanish. Bonus tracks include commentaries by film historian Jeanine Basinger, composer David Raksin, and author Rudy Behlmer; a deleted scene; the original theatrical trailer; and \"Gene Tierney: A Shattered Portrait\" and \"Vincent Price: The Versatile Villain\", two episodes from \"A&amp;E Biography\". In a deleted scene (1:06) with benefactor Webb, \"... the beautiful Tierney was placed in a more feminine role model, and in the end it was decided to delete her for the cinema release of the film\". The scene was restored on January 14, 2019, and presented as an \"extended version\" on DVD releases. The film became available on Blu-ray on February 5, 2012. Eureka Entertainment released the movie on Blu-ray in the United Kingdom on January 14, 2019. Four of the five radio adaptations were included as extras on the disc (with the 1950 episode of The Screen Guild Theater omitted).\nAdaptations.\nRadio.\n\"Laura\" was adapted as a radio play for two different episodes of \"Lux Radio Theater\", the first starring Gene Tierney, Dana Andrews, and Vincent Price (February 5, 1945), and the second starring Gene Tierney and Victor Mature (February 1, 1954). It was also adapted for the May 30, 1948, broadcast of \"Ford Theatre\" with Virginia Gilmore and John Larkin. In addition, \"Laura\" was presented twice on \"The Screen Guild Theater\" (August 20, 1945, and February 23, 1950), both episodes starring Gene Tierney, Dana Andrews, and Clifton Webb.\nTelevision.\nIn 1955, the movie was remade as a presentation of the drama anthology series \"The 20th Century Fox Hour\", starring Dana Wynter in the title role. Robert Stack played McPherson and George Sanders played Lydecker. The director was John Brahm and the script was written by Mel Dinelli.\n\"Laura\" was also adapted for a television production produced by David Susskind, aired on January 24, 1968, starring Lee Radziwi\u0142\u0142 in Gene Tierney's part. Sanders returned in Clifton Webb's role, and Stack in Dana Andrews's. The show was taped in London and the teleplay was written by Truman Capote. It was met with unanimous negative reactions, which was attributed to Radziwi\u0142\u0142's poor acting.\nLegacy.\nDavid Lynch's mystery series \"Twin Peaks\" borrows general plot elements and character names from \"Laura\". Laura Palmer is a murder victim being investigated by a detective who reads her diary throughout his investigation.\nAn episode of \"\" titled \"Aquiel\" was likewise inspired by \"Laura\". In one early draft of the murder mystery episode, the writers struggled with the fact that their initial solution for the mystery seemed too close to the plot of \"Basic Instinct\". Producer Michael Piller suggested they instead look to \"Laura\" as a blueprint. The script was adjusted accordingly, featuring a character in a detective role falling in love with a supposed murder victim through her personal logs, only to discover that she was, in fact, alive.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nStreaming audio"}
{"id": "74872", "revid": "45093283", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74872", "title": "The Learning Tree", "text": "1969 semi-autobiographical film by Gordon Parks\nThe Learning Tree is a 1969 American coming-of-age film written, produced and directed by Gordon Parks, who also scored the film. It depicts the life of Newt Winger, a teenager growing up in Cherokee Flats, Kansas, in the 1920s and chronicles his journey into manhood marked with tragic events. Based on Parks' 1963 semi-autobiographical novel of the same name, \"The Learning Tree\" was the first film directed by a black filmmaker for a major American film studio, Warner Bros.-Seven Arts.\nIn 1989, \"The Learning Tree\" was among the first group of 25 films selected by the Library of Congress for preservation in the United States National Film Registry for being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nIn 1920s Kansas, a group of African-American boys, Newt Winger, Marcus Savage, and friends steal apples from Jake Kiner's orchard, and when Jake (who is white) confronts the boys, he is beaten and left for dead by Marcus, who later is sent to jail for his actions. While chasing after Marcus and the boys, the racist white sheriff shoots dead an innocent black boy crossing a river, and the sheriff is not punished.\nNewt, despite escapades like ending up in a barn during a tornado with a large local girl who takes off her clothes, does well in school and aims to go to college; a white teacher tries to dissuade him, but the white principal opposes the racism of the town and encourages his ambitions.\nWhile Marcus is in jail, Newt begins to work for Jake to make up for his actions and those of his friends and begins a relationship with Arcella Jefferson, a new girl in town, but his relationship with her is destroyed when Chauncey Cavanaugh, a white boy and son of the local judge, impregnates Arcella (implied to be through rape), who ultimately moves away out of shame. (The judge later apologizes to Newt and his family and says things will be taken care of)\nAfter Marcus leaves jail, he works as a janitor at a brothel. Another scene depicts Newt's winning a boxing match at the county fair, in which he beats Marcus.\nOne day when Newt had just woken up from a nap in the loft of Jake's barn, he witnesses the brutal attack and murder of Jake by Booker Savage, Marcus' father, who was stealing liquor. Newt initially keeps quiet about what he has seen, but is bothered that Silas Newhall, a white man and disgruntled employee of Jake, who was at the scene of the crime for another reason, is being accused of a murder he did not commit. Encouraged by his mother, Sarah (who dies from the stress of all the goings-on), Newt reveals to Judge Cavanaugh that Booker committed the murder, and he testifies in court. Newt's testimony leads to the suicide of Booker, who seized a gun at the courthouse. Later, Newt is nearly killed by Marcus, who is then shot in the back by the sheriff while running away and who dies in the same river that Newt's and Marcus's friend was shot in. Newt refuses a lift home from the sheriff, and he walks away to an uncertain future.\nBackground.\nThe film \"The Learning Tree\" is based on Gordon Parks's 1963 semi-autobiographical novel of the same name. Parks also wrote the screenplay, and as a result, the script for the film did not deviate much from the book, except for featuring fewer characters for the sake of running time. In addition to being the screenwriter, he was the director, producer, and music composer. Burnett Guffey served as cinematographer, and Parks was assisted by Jack Aldworth and Fred Giles. Parks tried to include as many black technicians as possible on the film.\nParks personally chose Kyle Johnson to play the character of Newt after a brief meeting with him in a Beverly Hills hotel. However, during the meeting, he gave no indication that he wanted to cast Johnson. Johnson kept getting called for screen tests, and after the fourth test, he learned that he had been hired and that the tests were meant to gauge the abilities of the other actors, not him. Johnson characterized the audition process as \"not normal\".\nAccording to Turner Classic Movies, the original name of the film was \"Learn, Baby, Learn\", then it was changed to its current name. The current title appears to be taken from a line in the film, one that Sarah Winger tells her son Newt: \"Let Cherokee Flats be your learning tree.\"\nFilm production.\n\"The Learning Tree\" was bought by Warner Bros.-Seven Arts in 1969 and became the first film directed by a black person for a major American film studio. Parks later said:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Until a few years ago blacks didn't even dream about getting into movies, except as actors. It was a closed world, sealed off by discrimination. Ken Hyman, the president of Seven Arts, liked my book and knew my photography. We had a meeting that lasted 15 minutes and he gave me the job of directing \"The Learning Tree\". All of those years of prejudice and bigotry were broken down in 15 minutes.\n\"The Learning Tree\" was shot on location in Fort Scott, Kansas, in the fall of 1968, and the production process was scheduled to take three months. Fort Scott had been where Parks grew up, and it was also the basis for the fictional town of Cherokee Flats.\nKyle Johnson remembers that when production began there was a circus in town. As a result, the circus scene in the film features an actual circus rather than a staged one. Moreover, the circus scene included citizens of Fort Scott, who were there for the circus in town anyway.\nAdditionally, Johnson recalls that his \u201cmost enjoyable work as an actor\u201d was done under Gordon Parks. Specifically, Johnson says \u201cI really enjoyed \"The Learning Tree;\" for me it was like being part of a tight-run ship, a well-oiled machine. You do your part, and you recognize its importance and relationship to all the other parts, cast, crew, director and so forth.\u201d\nParks is said to have followed his instincts while filming and encouraged the actors to follow their own instincts while acting. This ease while filming arguably contributed to the fact that scenes were shot in very few takes.\nDuring the film production, executives from Warner Bros. often visited the set. Warner sent representatives over to check on Parks and make sure that production was running smoothly, allegedly because Parks was an African-American director.\nThe US Information Agency produced a film called \"My Father: Gordon Parks\" (1969) that film presents a behind-the-scenes look at the production of a feature film based on \"The Learning Tree,\" produced by Allegro Films and directed by Meyer Odze.\nExodusters.\nIn 1879, many African Americans migrated to Kansas, and they became known as the \"Exodusters\". Among those who traveled were the ancestors of Gordon Parks. His father, Andrew Jackson Parks, was a tenant farmer in Kansas. Given that Gordon Parks was born in Fort Scott, Kansas, in 1912, he was the \"issue of the second generation of exodusters\". His ancestral background played a role in choosing Fort Scott as the filming location for \"The Learning Tree\".\nThe Exodusters earned their name after nearly 6,000 black Americans migrated to Kansas after the Emancipation. Their exodus was prompted by the 1879 Windom Resolution that encouraged African Americans to leave the southern states where they were still met with much hatred, even though the American Civil War had ended a little more than a decade earlier. Kansas promised a fresh start for the Exodusters, who wanted to begin a new life, in a new land, away from the southerners who had once enslaved them.\nDepictions of black manhood.\n\"The Learning Tree\" juxtaposes the lives of Newt Winger and Marcus Savage, two former friends that are trying to find themselves in a white-dominated Midwestern society. Although these two young men have different personalities and different goals in life, both characters represent two examples of black manhood.\nNewt is a young man who tries to adhere to morals, but he is upset by the racial injustice of the day. When adversity occurs, he tries to act with dignity: when he and his friends steal from Jake Kiner, he attempts to make amends by working for him pro bono; when Chauncey Cavanaugh takes a liking to Newt's girlfriend Arcella, he does his best to protect her and ultimately he comes to term with his loss without showing aggression; he tells the truth in the Kiner murder trial despite that it exposes Booker Savage as the killer and shows some African Americans in an unfavorable light. Newt's determination to act ethically is a reflection of his moral character.\nIn contrast, Marcus is a young man who also is upset by the racial injustice of the day, but retaliates with violence. His rocky relationship with his father does not help his psyche and predisposes him to violence. In the case of Marcus, he begins to embody violence, specifically when he beats Kiner and attempts to murder Newt for sending both him and his father to jail.\nSoundtrack.\nGordon Parks composed and wrote the following score for \"The Learning Tree\":\n\"New York Times\" reviewer Roger Greenspun praised the film's score in his review, saying that the music \"telegraphs and then drains each crisis\".\nReception.\nWhen \"The Learning Tree\" premiered at the Trans-Lux East and West in New York City on August 6, 1969, it was well received by critics. Roger Greenspun wrote in his review that the scenes in the film took on a \"kind of ceremonial vitality and lifelikeness\". Parks' and Guffey's strong attention to detail helped to make this film beloved and well-remembered to the American public.\nIt grossed $33,000 in its opening week and reached number one at the US box office in its seventh week of release.\n\"The Learning Tree\" was among the first group of 25 films to be listed on National Film Registry when the registry was created in 1989.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74873", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74873", "title": "Athyriales", "text": ""}
{"id": "74875", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74875", "title": "North Korea/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "74876", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74876", "title": "North Korea/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "74877", "revid": "43903989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74877", "title": "Let's All Go to the Lobby", "text": "1957 American short film\nLet's All Go to the Lobby (officially known as Technicolor Refreshment Trailer No. 1) is an American animated musical advertisement that was produced in the mid-1950s for Filmack Studios. It was played in theaters before the beginning of the main film or before intermission, and features animated food items urging the audience to buy snacks sold in the theater lobby. It was directed by Dave Fleischer with lyrics by Jack Tillar.\nFilmack has continued selling copies of \"Let's All Go to the Lobby\" in the decades since its production and estimates that 80% of independent domestic theaters have screened the advertisement. The film historian Daniel Eagan wrote that it is likely the most-viewed snipe and that it was ubiquitous to the American theater-going experience of the 1960s. The well-known scene of the animated concessions has frequently been parodied in popular culture. In 2000, \"Let's All Go to the Lobby\" was selected for preservation in the US National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nContent.\n\"Let's All Go to the Lobby\" consists of six shots. The most recognizable of these depicts four animated food items (from left to right: a candy bar, popcorn, candy, and a soft drink) singing and walking leftwards. In the foreground before these characters are silhouettes of audience members, creating an illusion of depth, a standard technique of the medium. In a later shot, a group of four consumers are depicted enjoying their purchased food items.\nThe eponymous song of the film is set to the same tune as \"We Won't Be Home Until Morning\", \"The Bear Went Over the Mountain\", \"For He's a Jolly Good Fellow\", and \"Marlbrough s'en va-t-en guerre\" (c.\u20091709). While the origins of the melody are lost, it was already well-enough known in the early 19th century to be used for a passage in \"Wellington's Victory\" (1813) by Ludwig van Beethoven.\nThe film historian Daniel Eagan wrote that \"[w]ith its simple, repetitive lyrics and streamlined animation, \"Let's All Go to the Lobby\" has a hypnotic pull that is as compelling today as it was fifty years ago.\" He also wrote that by choosing not to simply photograph the offered items, the creators of the advertisement avoided using brand names of the products for sale.\nBackground and production.\nThe Chicago-based Filmack Studios, originally known as Filmack Trailer Company, was founded in 1919 by Irving Mack. The company specialized in the production of snipes, an industry term for filmed newsreels, promotional material, merchants, advertisements, previews of coming attractions, courtesy requests for the audience, and notices concerning the concession stand of the movie theater. In 1951, the sales of concession stands represented approximately 20% of movie theaters' revenue. Filmack commissioned a series of Technicolor trailers aimed at informing audiences about a theater's newly installed concession stand. \"Let's All Go to the Lobby\" was one of these films.\nThe lyrics of the song featured in \"Let's All Go to the Lobby\" were written by Jack Tillar. Dave Fleischer is identified as the creator of the advertisement in a catalog of Filmack's releases, which reported that \"trailers were produced exclusively for Filmack by Dave Fleischer\". Specific details of Fleischer's involvement are lacking, and the original production records are considered lost; other production crew are unknown. Production may have started by 1953, but Robbie Mack (a later owner of Filmack) estimates that it was completed c.\u20091955. The release date is typically estimated to be 1957. Filmack still owns the rights to the advertisement and licenses its use by various theater owners.\nLegacy.\nFilmack has continued selling copies of \"Let's All Go to the Lobby\" in the decades since its production. The company estimates that 80% of independent theaters in the United States have screened the film, and Eagan has said that it is likely the most-viewed snipe. In 2000, \"Let's All Go to the Lobby\" was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry by the US Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nThe animation historian Thad Komorowski has stated that while the animation was \"downright primitive\" by the standards of the 1950s, it \"outlast[ed] any other trailer of its kind\". John Owens of \"The Chicago Tribune\" called it \"one of the most iconic movies in American cinema history\". Eagan, who wrote a comprehensive guide to National Film Registry titles, called it \"a cultural touchstone\" and an inherent part of the American theater experience of the 1950s and 1960s.\nIn popular culture.\n\"Let's All Go to the Lobby\"'s scene of singing concessions has been frequently parodied in advertisements of the 2000s. These include a 2006 spot for Chipotle Mexican Grill where a burrito attempts to join the characters, a 2011 spot for the Tribeca Film Festival where the characters are mobsters voiced by the cast of \"The Sopranos\", and a 2013 GEICO commercial where the characters are chided for speaking on their cell phones. It has also been spoofed in popular entertainment including the \"Late Show with David Letterman\", \"The Simpsons\", \"Family Guy\", \"Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters\", and \"\", and appears in fictional depictions of theaters. Lionsgate produced a quarantine-themed version of the snipe to accompany special presentations of films streamed online during the COVID-19 pandemic.\nFootnotes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74878", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74878", "title": "Kuwait/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "74879", "revid": "44477676", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74879", "title": "Northeast Caucasian languages", "text": "Language family\nThe Northeast Caucasian languages, also called East Caucasian, Nakh-Daghestani or Vainakh-Daghestani, or sometimes Caspian languages (from the Caspian Sea, in contrast to \"Pontic languages\" for the Northwest Caucasian languages), is a family of languages spoken in the Russian republics of Dagestan, Chechnya and Ingushetia and in Northern Azerbaijan as well as in Georgia and diaspora populations in Western Europe and the Middle East. According to Glottolog, there are currently 36 Nakh-Dagestanian languages.\nName of the family.\nSeveral names have been in use for this family. The most common term, \"Northeast Caucasian\", contrasts the three established families of the Caucasian languages: \"Northeast Caucasian\", \"Northwest Caucasian\" (Abkhaz\u2013Adyghean) and \"South Caucasian\" (Kartvelian). This may be shortened to \"East Caucasian\". The term \"Nakh(o)-Dagestanian\" can be taken to reflect a primary division of the family into Nakh and Dagestanian branches, a view which is no longer widely accepted, or \"Dagestanian\" can subsume the entire family. The rare term \"North Caspian\" (as in bordering the Caspian Sea) is only used in opposition to the use of \"North Pontic\" (as in bordering the Black Sea) for the Northwest Caucasian languages.\nLinguistic features.\nPhonology.\nHistorically, Northeast Caucasian phonemic inventories were thought to be smaller than those of the neighboring Northwest Caucasian family. However, more recent research has revealed that many Northeast Caucasian languages are much more phoneme-rich than previously believed, with some languages containing as many as 70 consonants.\nIn addition to numerous front obstruents, many Northeast Caucasian languages also possess a number of back consonants, including uvulars, pharyngeals, and glottal stops and fricatives. Northeast Caucasian phonology is also notable for its use of numerous secondary articulations as contrastive features. Whereas English consonant classes are divided into voiced and voiceless phonemes, Northeast Caucasian languages are known to contrast voiced, voiceless, ejective and tense phones, which contributes to their large phonemic inventories. Some languages also include palatalization and labialization as contrastive features. Most languages in this family contrast tense and weak consonants. Tense consonants are characterized by the intensiveness of articulation, which naturally leads to a lengthening of these consonants.\nIn contrast to the generally large consonant inventories of Northeast Caucasian languages, most languages in the family have relatively few vowels, although more on average than the Northwest Caucasian languages. However, there are some exceptions to this trend, such as Chechen, which has at least twenty-eight vowels, diphthongs and triphthongs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMorphology.\nThese languages can be characterized by strong suffixal agglutination. Weak tendencies towards inflection may be noted as well. Nouns display covert nominal classification, but partially overt cases of secondary origin can be observed too. The number of noun classes in individual languages range from two to eight. Regarding grammatical number, there may be a distinction between singular and plural, plurality itself may impact the class to which a noun belongs. In some cases, a grammatical collective is seen. Many languages distinguish \"local\" versus \"functional\" cases, and to some degree also \"casus rectus\" versus \"casus obliquus\".\nThe inflectional paradigms are often based on partially classifying productive stem extensions (absolutive and oblique, ergative and genitive inflection.) Localization is mostly conveyed by postpositions, but it can be also partly based on preverbs. Noun phrases exhibit incomplete class agreement, group inflection (on the noun) with partial attributive oblique marking, which may, in turn, carry a partially determining function.\nVerbs do not agree with person, with a few exceptions like Lak, in which first and second persons are marked with the same suffix and verbs agree with the P argument, and Hunzib in which verbs agree with A argument. Evidentiality is prominent, with reported, sensory and epistemic moods all appearing as a way of conveying the evidence. Epistemic modality is often tied to the tense.\nErgativity.\nMost Northeast Caucasian languages exhibit an ergative\u2013absolutive morphology. This means that objects of transitive sentences and subjects of intransitive sentences both fall into a single grammatical case known as the absolutive. Subjects of transitive sentences, however, carry a different marking to indicate that they belong to a separate case, known as the ergative. This distinction can be seen in the following two Archi sentences. Objects and subjects of intransitive sentences carry no suffix, which is represented by the null suffix, -. Meanwhile, agents of transitive sentences take the ergative suffix, -mu.\nNoun classes.\nNortheast Caucasian languages have between two and eight noun classes. In these languages, nouns are grouped into grammatical categories depending on certain semantic qualities, such as animacy and gender. Each noun class has a corresponding agreement prefix, which can attach to verbs or adjectives of that noun. Prefixes may also have plural forms, used in agreement with a plural noun. The following table shows the noun\u2013adjective agreement paradigm in the Tsez language.\nIn many Northeast Caucasian languages, as well as appearing on adjectives and verbs, agreement can also be found on parts of speech which are not usually able to agree in other language families \u2013 for example on adverbs, postpositions, particles, and even case-marked nouns and pronouns. In the example from Archi below, do\u02d0\u0295zub \u2018big\u2019 and abu \u2018made\u2019, but also the adverb dit\u02d0abu \u2018quickly\u2019 and the personal pronouns nenabu \u2018we\u2019 and belabu \u2018to us\u2019, all agree in number and gender with the argument in the absolutive case, \u03c7\u0295on \u2018cow\u2019.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis kind of clausal agreement has been labelled \u2018external agreement\u2019. The same term is also used for the (cross-linguistically even rarer) phenomenon where a converb agrees with an argument which lies outside the converb's own clause. This is seen in the following example from Northern Akhvakh, where m\u012b\u029f\u014d \u2018not having gone\u2019 has a masculine adverbial suffix (-\u014d), agreeing with hugu ek\u2019wa \u2018the man\u2019.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLanguage classification.\nA long-time classification divided the family into Nakh and Dagestanian branches, whence the term Nakho-Dagestanian. However, attempts at reconstructing the protolanguage suggest that the Nakh languages are no more divergent from Dagestanian than the various branches of Dagestanian are from each other, although this is still not universally accepted. The following outline, based on the work of linguist Bernard Comrie and others, has been adopted by \"Ethnologue\". An Avar\u2013Andi\u2013Dido branch was abandoned, but has been resurrected as the \"New Type\" languages in Schulze (2009, 2013) and Lak\u2013Dargwa has likewise returned.\nOne factor complicating internal classification within the family is that the diachronic development of its respective branches is marked both by an extreme degree of diffusion and divergence followed by secondary \"convergence\", which complicates the comparative method.\nPopulation data is from \"Ethnologue\" 16th ed.\nAvar\u2013Andic family.\nSpoken in the Northwest Dagestan highlands and western Dagestan. Avar is the lingua franca for these and the Tsezic languages and is the only literary language.\nSchulze (2009) gives the following family tree for the Avar\u2013Andic languages:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFigures retrieved from Ethnologue. These languages are spoken in the following rayons of Dagestan: Axvax, Botlikh, Buynaksk (Shura), \u010carodinsky (Tsurib), Gergebil, Gumbetovsky (Baklul), Gunib, Karabudaxkent, Kazbekovsky (Dylym), Lava\u0161a, Tsumada (Agvali), Untsukul, Xebda, Xunzaq and Zaqatala rayon in Azerbaijan.\nDargic (Dargin) dialect continuum.\nSpoken by 492,490 in Dagestan, as well as Azerbaijan, Central Asia and Ukraine. Dargwa proper is a literary language.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDargin\nDargwa is spoken in the following rayons of Dagestan: Aqu\u0161a, Kaitak, Kayakent, Kuba\u010di, Sergokala. Figures derived from Koryakov 2021.\nKhinalug (Xinalug) isolate.\nSpoken in Quba region of Azerbaijan.\nLak isolate.\nSpoken in the Central Dagestan highlands. Lak is a literary language.\nLak is spoken in two rayons of Dagestan: Kumux and Kuli (Va\u010di).\nLezgic family.\nSpoken in the Southeast Dagestan highlands and in Northern Azerbaijan. The Lezgian language or, as the Lezgian people themselves call it, \u041b\u0435\u0437\u0433\u0438 \u0447l\u0430\u043b (\"lezgi ch'al\"), is the biggest in terms of the number of native speakers of all the languages of the Lezgic group (other languages from this group include Tabasaran, Udi, Tsakhur and Rutul). They are spoken in the following rayons of Dagestan: Agul, Akhty, Derbent (Kvevar), Kasumxur, Kurakh, Magaramkent, Rutul, Tabasaran, Usukhchay, Khiv and Quba and Zaqatala in Azerbaijan.\nTabasaran was once thought to be the language with the largest number of grammatical cases at 54, which could, depending on the analysis, instead be the Tsez language with 64.\nLezgian and Tabasaran are literary languages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAll figures retrieved from Ethnologue.\nNakh family.\nSpoken in Chechnya, Ingushetia and Georgia. Chechen and Ingush are official languages of their respective republics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTsezic (Didoic) family.\nSpoken mostly in Southwest Dagestan. None are literary languages. Formerly classified geographically as East Tsezic (Hinukh, Bezta) and West Tsezic (Tsez, Khwarshi, Hunzib), these languages may actually form different subgroupings according to the latest research by Schulze (2009):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAll figures except for Khwarshi were retrieved from the 2021 Russian census. These languages are spoken in the Tsunta and Bezhta areas of Dagestan.\nDisputed connections to other families.\nNorth Caucasian family.\nSome linguists such as Sergei Starostin think that the Northeast and Northwest Caucasian languages are part of a wider North Caucasian family, citing shared vocabulary and typological features as evidence. This proposed family does not include the neighboring Kartvelian languages. This hypothesis is questioned by some linguists.\nConnections to Hurrian and Urartian.\nSome linguists\u2014notably Igor M. Diakonoff and Starostin\u2014see evidence of a genealogical connection between the Northeast Caucasian family and the extinct languages Hurrian and Urartian. Hurrian was spoken in various parts of the Fertile Crescent in the 3rd and 2nd millennia BC. Urartian was the language of Urartu, a powerful state that existed between 1000 BC or earlier and 585 BC in the area centered on Lake Van in current Turkey. The two languages are classified together as the Hurro-Urartian family. Diakonoff proposed the name \"Alarodian\" for the inclusion of Hurro-Urartian into Northeast Caucasian.\nSome scholars, however, doubt that the language families are related or believe that, while a connection is possible, the evidence is far from conclusive.\nProto-language.\nBelow are selected Proto-Northeast Caucasian reconstructions of basic vocabulary items by Johanna Nichols, which she refers to as \"Proto-Nakh-Daghestanian\".\nPossible connections to the origin of agriculture.\nThe Proto-Northeast Caucasian language had many terms for agriculture and Johanna Nichols has suggested that its speakers may have been involved in the development of agriculture in the Fertile Crescent and only later moved north to the Caucasus. Proto-NEC is reconstructed with words for concepts such as \"yoke\" (*...\u019b / *...\u019b\u019b\u2019), as well as fruit trees such as \"apple\" (*h\u0295am(V)c / *h\u0295am(V)\u010d) and \"pear\" (*qur / *qar; *q\u0295ur ?), that suggest agriculture was well developed before the proto-language broke up.\nPhonology.\nA reconstructed phonology is given below from Diakonoff and Starostin (1986).\nThe typical structure of a root is given as *CV(S)CV, if labialized and reduplicated phonemes are regarded as singular phonemes.\nVowels.\nVowels were either short or long.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74880", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74880", "title": "Kyrgyzstan/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "74881", "revid": "34975998", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74881", "title": "Letter from an Unknown Woman", "text": "1922 novella by Stefan Zweig\nLetter from an Unknown Woman (, sometimes appearing without the definite article \"der\") is a novella by Austrian writer Stefan Zweig. The work first appeared in the 1 January 1922 issue of the Viennese \"Neuen Freien Presse\", before being published in book form as part of the collection \"Amok: Novellen einer Leidenschaft\" (Insel Verlag, 1922). The novella tells the story of an author who, while reading a letter written by a woman he does not remember, gets glimpses into her life story. It is generally considered to be Zweig's most famous work of fiction.\nPlot.\nA rich and well-known writer (R.), returning home to Vienna from one of many holidays, finds a long letter from an unknown woman (Fr\u00e4ulein). As a teenager the woman had lived with her poor widowed mother in the same building and had fallen totally in love with both the opulent cultured lifestyle of her neighbour and the handsome charming man himself. Her passion for the writer was not lessened by the flow of attractive women spending the night with him, nor when she had to leave Vienna and moved to Innsbruck when her mother remarried. At age 18 she returned to Vienna, took a job and tried to meet the writer again. He did not recognise her and, without revealing her name, she succeeded in spending three nights with him before he disappeared on a long holiday. Pregnant, she lost her job and had to give birth in a refuge for the indigent. Resolved that their child should have a good life, she spent nights with or became mistress of various rich men but would never marry because her heart belonged always to the writer. Out one night with a current lover, she saw the writer in a night club and went home with him instead. To him, she was just an agreeable companion for that night, as he again did not recognise her. In the 1918 flu pandemic, the child died and she, ill herself, wrote the letter to be posted after her death.\nEnglish translations.\n\"Brief einer Unbekannten\" has been translated into English three times: by Eden and Cedar Paul, as part of a collection entitled \"Passion and Pain\", for Chapman and Hall in 1924; by Jill Sutcliffe, as part of a collection entitled \"The Royal Game and Other Stories\", for Harmony Books in 1981; and by Anthea Bell for Pushkin Press. \nAdaptations.\nFilm.\n\"Narkose\" (1929), the first adaptation, is a German expressionist silent film that was directed by Alfred Abel and written by B\u00e9la Bal\u00e1zs. Here the story of the female protagonist is told through a dream sequence while she is under anesthesia in a maternity ward. The film survives only in fragmentary form.\n\"Only Yesterday\", a 1933 American movie directed by John M. Stahl, was heavily inspired by Zweig's story, while not giving it the credits.\nAnother unofficial adaptation came out in 1943, the Finnish \"Valkoiset ruusut\" (\"White Roses\"), starring Helena Kara and Tauno Palo and directed by Hannu Leminen.\nIn 1948, the first official film version was produced, with a screenplay adaptation by Howard Koch. Starring Joan Fontaine, Louis Jourdan, Mady Christians and Marcel Journet, it was directed by Max Oph\u00fcls. In 1992, \"Letter from an Unknown Woman\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nIn 1957, a Mexican version called \"Feliz A\u00f1o, Amor M\u00edo\", starring Marga L\u00f3pez and Arturo de C\u00f3rdova, was released.\nIn 1962, an Egyptian adaptation, \"Ressalah min emraa maghoula,\" was released. It was directed by Salah Abu Seif and starred Farid al-Atrash and Lobna Abdel Aziz.\nIn 2001, the TV film \"Lettre d'une inconnue\" by French director Jacques Deray became the last production of this artist.\nIn 2004, a Chinese adaptation of the novella was made. It was directed by Xu Jinglei.\nIn 2011, Mongolian film director Naranbaatar made a film adaptation of the novella.\nOpera.\nIn 1975, the mono-opera \u041f\u0438\u0441\u044c\u043c\u043e \u043d\u0435\u0437\u043d\u0430\u043a\u043e\u043c\u043a\u0438 (\"Letter from an Unknown Woman\") was composed by Antonio Spadavecchia (\u0410\u043d\u0442\u043e\u043d\u0438\u043e \u0421\u043f\u0430\u0434\u0430\u0432\u0435\u043a\u043a\u0438\u0430), and staged in the Soviet Union (and later in Russia) in Russian.\nTheatre.\nIn June 2024 a new English language play, adapted by Christopher Hampton and entitled \"Visit From An Unknown Woman,\" premiered at the Hampstead Theatre, London.\nMusic.\nIn December 2017, Canadian/Russian composer Airat Ichmouratov composed Octet in G minor, Op. 56, which was inspired by Stefan Zweig's novella \"Letter from an Unknown Woman\". It was commissioned and premiered by Saguenay and Lafayette String Quartets on 13 January 2018 at Fanny Bay Hall, Fanny Bay, British Columbia, Canada. In November 2018, the composer made an arrangement of the Octet for String Orchestra; this was recorded by the Belarusian State Chamber Orchestra, with Evgeny Bushkov as conductor, and was released by Chandos Records.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74882", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74882", "title": "Laos/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "74883", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74883", "title": "Laos/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "74884", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74884", "title": "Latvia/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "74885", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74885", "title": "Latvia/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "74887", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74887", "title": "Lebanon/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "74888", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74888", "title": "Lebanon/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "74889", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74889", "title": "Lesotho/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "74890", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74890", "title": "Lesotho/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "74891", "revid": "7770027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74891", "title": "Appellate review", "text": ""}
{"id": "74894", "revid": "3046099", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74894", "title": "The Life and Times of Rosie the Riveter", "text": "1980 film by Connie Field\nThe Life and Times of Rosie the Riveter is a 1980 documentary film and the first movie made by Connie Field, about the American women who went to work during World War II to do \"men's jobs.\" In 1996, it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\"\nSummary.\nThe film's title refers to \"Rosie the Riveter\", the cultural icon that represented women who worked the manufacturing plants which produced munitions and material during World War II.\nProduction.\nConnie Field got the idea for the film from a California Rosie the Riveter reunion, and, with grants from the National Endowment for the Humanities and other charitable sources, conducted interviews with many hundreds of women who had gone into war work. Out of these she chose five representatives\u2014three black, two white\u2014all marvelously lively, intelligent, and articulate women who recall their experiences with a mixture of pleasant nostalgia and detached bitterness.\nThe reminiscences are intercut with the realities of the period\u2014old news, films, recruiting trailers, \"The March of Time\" clips, and pop songs such as \"Rosie the Riveter.\" These often serve to highlight the disparities between how women were portrayed in wartime media and the actual experiences of these five women.\nReception and legacy.\n\"The Life and Times of Rosie the Riveter\" premiered at the New York Film Festival in 1980, which at that time was one of the most important film festivals in America, and went on to be screened at over 50 film festivals around the world. The film was released in movie theaters in the United States, England and Australia to rave reviews. \"The Los Angeles Times\" called it \"warm, engaging and poignant\" and went on to say \"the film has that Studs Terkel-like ability to discover the extraordinary in seemingly ordinary people. Terrific.\" Of the Rosies themselves \"The London Times\" said \"the resilience, spirit and humour of Connie Field's indomitable heroines sends you out elated and loving them.\"\nThe film earned fifteen international awards for Best Documentary, was named \"One of the Ten Best Films of the Year\" by a number of publications, including the Village Voice and Film Comment, and was voted \"Best Independent Feature of the Year\" in \"American Film\" magazine. It was originally broadcast on PBS's American Experience and numerous international TV stations such as Channel 4 in England and the South African Broadcasting Corporation. The film has been in active distribution for over 30 years.\n\"The Life and Times of Rosie the Riveter\" was preserved by the Academy Film Archive, in conjunction with the Library of Congress in 2013."}
{"id": "74895", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74895", "title": "Liberia/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "74896", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74896", "title": "Libya/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "74897", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74897", "title": "Lithuania/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "74898", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74898", "title": "Lithuania/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "74900", "revid": "42284705", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74900", "title": "Bridal Veil Falls", "text": "Bridal Veil Falls, Bridalveil Falls or Bridalveil Fall is a frequently used name for waterfalls that observers fancy resemble a bride's veil:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nZimbabwe.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "74902", "revid": "3138265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74902", "title": "Little Fugitive (1953 film)", "text": "1953 film by Morris Engel, Raymond Abrashkin\nLittle Fugitive is a 1953 American independent drama film co-written and co-directed by Raymond Abrashkin (credited as Ray Ashley), Morris Engel, and Ruth Orkin, which tells the story of a child alone on Coney Island. It stars Richie Andrusco as the title character, and Richard Brewster as his older brother. The film was screened at 14th Venice International Film Festival, where it was awarded the Silver Lion, and nominated for Best Writing, Motion Picture Story, at the 26th Academy Awards.\nAn acknowledged influence on the French New Wave, the film is considered by modern-day critics to be a landmark film because of its naturalistic style and groundbreaking use of nonprofessional actors in lead roles. In 1997, it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nThe film is the first and best known of Engel's three feature films. It was followed by \"Lovers and Lollipops\" in 1956 and \"Weddings and Babies\", which was filmed in 1957 and released in 1960. All three films were stylistically similar and were filmed with hand-held 35\u00a0mm cameras. The cameras used for \"Little Fugitive\" and \"Lovers and Lollipops\" did not record sound, so the dialogue and sound effects had to be dubbed subsequent to filming, but \"Weddings and Babies\" holds the distinction of being the first fictional feature filmed with a portable camera that allowed for synchronized sound.\nPlot.\nSeven-year-old Joey Norton lives in an apartment in a lower-middle-class neighborhood of Brooklyn. During the summer, his older brother Lennie has to watch him when their widowed mother is at work, which Lennie resents somewhat. Joey loves horses and likes playing with Lennie and his friends, though they often pick on him.\nOn Lennie's twelfth birthday, he gets a harmonica and some money to spend at Coney Island, where he is excited to go the next day with his friends Harry and Charlie. When he and Joey get home for lunch, however, they learn their grandmother has fallen ill and their mother is leaving for a day to care for her, which means Lennie will have to postpone his trip to Coney Island so he can stay home and babysit Joey. Frustrated, Lennie finds his friends and tells them the news, and they imagine various outlandish and macabre ways of dispatching Joey before deciding to play a prank.\nHarry steals his father's rifle, and Lennie brings Joey to an empty lot to see it. The older boys only pantomime firing, but when it is Joey's turn, Harry puts a bullet in the chamber. Joey closes his eyes when he fires, and Lennie puts ketchup on his shirt and acts as though he has been shot. Charley and Harry tell Joey to run and hide, saying they will give him an hour's head start before notifying the police. Joey takes the six dollars his mother left for Lennie to buy groceries and heads out.\nSpooked by police officers in the street, Joey winds up on a train to Coney Island. He goes on rides, has his picture taken, plays carnival games, and buys a lot of food. By the time he happens upon the pony ride, he does not have enough money left to pay for it, leaving him crestfallen.\nAfter making his way down to the crowded beach, Joey sees a boy collecting empty glass bottles. Although he is not sure what the boy is doing, Joey begins to help, and the boy explains that the five-cent deposit for each bottle can be redeemed at a stand under the boardwalk. The boy's older brother does not let the boy share the money from the modest initial haul with Joey, so Joey sets out on his own to earn money for the pony ride. He alternates between collecting bottles and riding ponies until Jay, the nice man who works at the pony ride, asks who is watching Joey, which causes him to get frightened and run away.\nJoey wanders aimlessly around Coney Island for the rest of the evening and, after sleeping under the boardwalk, the next morning, as well. He is at the pony ride when Jay arrives for work, and this time Jay is able to get Joey's address under the guise of offering Joey a job. Jay looks up Joey's phone number and lets Lennie know where Joey is, but Joey sees Jay greeting a police officer on the way back from the phone and runs off again.\nWhen Lennie gets to the pony ride and learns Joey is gone, he begins to search for his little brother. At one point, he sees Joey from the parachute ride, only to lose him in the crowd on the beach. Eventually, a rainstorm clears the beach, and Lennie sees the lone figure of Joey collecting bottles.\nThe brothers head home, arriving minutes before their mother returns. Thinking they have just been sitting inside watching television since she left, she says that, the following weekend, she is going to take them to get some fresh air at Coney Island.\nCast.\nCast notes.\nThe lead character of Joey was played by Richie Andrusco, a nonprofessional actor who never appeared in another film, and most of the other parts were also portrayed by nonprofessionals. Director/writer/editor Ruth Orkin has a small role as the woman with a baby on the beach. Actor Jay Williams later co-wrote the \"Danny Dunn\" series of juvenile science fiction novels with director/writer/producer Raymond Abrashkin. The Coney Island photographer was played by Will Lee, who went on to play Mr. Hooper on \"Sesame Street\".\nProduction notes.\nThe film was filmed on location at Coney Island and in Brooklyn using a unique concealed strap-on camera, which made it possible for Engel to work without a tripod or a large crew and allowed him to have thousands of beach-going New Yorkers as extras without their knowing it. This innovation proved to be \"the heart and soul of why \"Little Fugitive\" was possible.\" The camera could be seen as a prototype for the Steadicam and was designed by Engel and his friend the inventor Charlie Woodruff, a fellow World War\u00a0II combat photographer who Engel called a \"mechanical and engineering genius.\" Over the years, filmmakers such as Stanley Kubrick and Jean-Luc Godard reportedly were eager to borrow this unique camera.\nEngel's unique camera.\nEngel was an experienced photo-journalist when he was asked in 1939 by his friend Paul Strand to shoot some motion picture film for his film \"Native Land\" using the compact 35mm Bell and Howell Eyemo holding 100 foot rolls that could film about one minute of film. But he was disappointed that Strand put this camera designed for hand-holding on a heavy metal baseplate attached to a heavy wooden tripod.\nDuring World War II he was a still photographer but he probably was familiar with a handheld 35\u00a0mm battery-operated camera developed during the war for combat photography, the Cunningham Combat Camera. The large square camera was mounted a rifle stock, held tightly to the cameraman's chest by handles mounted on each side, and aimed in the general direction of the action, sighted by a top-mounted viewfinder. With a two hundred foot magazine, it could run for two minutes. The other primary motion picture camera used by the military was the Bell and Howell Eyemo, a spring-run camera held to the eye with a 20-second running time.\nAfter the war, Engel and an engineer he met in the service, Charles Woodruff, reconfigured the Cunningham camera into a much smaller camera for civilian purposes. Engel explained, \"Designed for me, it was a compact 35mm, hand held, shoulder cradled, [with] double registration pins and twin lens finder and optical system.\" It used the Cunningham 35mm 200 foot interchangeable magazines which met the camera at the film gate with the lens, motor, shutter, and viewfinder comprising the camera body. Twin lens geared together enabled the viewfinder lens and the camera to be focused together, as on Engel's preferred still camera, the Rolleiflex. Like the Rolleiflex, the viewfinder was viewed from above. Held against the waist, rather than in front of the face, the camera was both steadier and less conspicuous than the Eyemo. \"With a simple shoulder belt support,\" Engel said, \"I was armed with a camera which became the heart of the esthetic and mobile approach to the film the \"Little Fugitive\". This camera was about the same size as the Eyemo, but looked like a giant Ocarina with the camera in the wide part at the top and the smaller curved part below.\nFilm teacher Joel Schlemowitz says, \"The film\u2019s storyline, about a young boy gone on the lam among the boardwalk, beach, and amusements of Coney Island, provided the opportunity to film in situations well matched to this unobtrusive camera's virtues. The Rolleiflex-inspired chest-level configuration also assisted in giving the film its sense of visual rapport with the film's child actor, placing the camera at eye level with the youngster's view of the world.\"\nReception.\nCritical response.\nThe film was greeted by critical acclaim at the time of its initial release. Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut was inspired by its spontaneous production style when making \"The 400 Blows\" (1959), and he said years later that \"Our New Wave would never have come into being if it hadn't been for the young American Morris Engel, who showed us the way to independent production with [this] fine movie.\"\nModern critics have also praised the film. Dennis Schwartz called it \"A remarkable indy classic, made on a shoestring budget by a group of still photographers. It's an affecting lyrical comedy-drama that fully captures the flavor of urban childhood innocence of the 1950s. [...] The dialogue was sparse, the story was unambitious, the film lacked drama, the children were very ordinary and their problem was only a minor one, nevertheless this beautifully realized film caught the world through the innocent eyes of a curious and scared child and left an impression that was hard to shake. It was uplifting to watch because the effort was so genuine.\"\nWhen the film was screened in New York after Engel's death in 2005, film critic Joshua Land wrote: \"\"Little Fugitive\" shines as a beautifully shot document of a bygone Brooklyn\u2014any drama here resides in the grainy black-and-white cinematography, with its careful attention to the changes in light brought on by the inexorably advancing sun [...] Filled with 'Aw, fellas!' period ambience and the mythic imagery of cowboys and horses, comics and baseball, it's a key proto-v\u00e9rit\u00e9 slice of urban America.\"\nOn review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 93% based on 45 reviews, with an average score of 8.4/10; the site's \"critics consensus\" reads: \"A simple story well told, \"The Little Fugitive\" presents a kid's-eye view of the city that feels refreshingly authentic.\"\nAccolades.\nWins\nNominations\nOther honors\nRemake.\nJoanna Lipper completed a remake of the film in 2005, which had its world premiere at the 2006 Seattle International Film Festival as part of the New American Cinema Competition.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74903", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74903", "title": "Horseshoe Falls", "text": "Largest portion of Niagara Falls on the United States\u2013Canada border\nHorseshoe Falls is the largest of the three waterfalls that collectively form Niagara Falls on the Niagara River along the Canada\u2013United States border. Approximately 90% of the Niagara River, after diversions for hydropower generation, flows over Horseshoe Falls. The remaining 10% flows over American Falls and Bridal Veil Falls. It is located between Terrapin Point on Goat Island in the US state of New York, and Table Rock in the Canadian province of Ontario. These falls are also referred to as the Canadian Falls.\nInternational border.\nWhen the boundary line between the United States and Canada was determined in 1819, based on the Treaty of Ghent, the northeastern end of the Horseshoe Falls was in New York, United States, flowing around the Terrapin Rocks, which were once connected to Goat Island by a series of bridges. In 1955, the area between the rocks and Goat Island was filled in, creating Terrapin Point. In the early 1980s the United States Army Corps of Engineers filled in more land and built diversion dams and retaining walls to force the water away from Terrapin Point. Altogether, of the Horseshoe Falls was eliminated. Due to erosion, the Falls will continue to move in relation to the boundary line in the future, possibly altering territorial boundaries between the two countries.\nThe official national maps for both Canada and the United States indicate that a smaller portion of the Horseshoe Falls currently is located within the United States.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74904", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74904", "title": "Little Miss Marker (1934 film)", "text": "1934 film by Alexander Hall\nLittle Miss Marker (also known as The Girl in Pawn) is an American pre-Code 1934 comedy-drama film directed by Alexander Hall. It was written by William R. Lipman, Sam Hellman, and Gladys Lehman after a 1932 short story of the same name by Damon Runyon. It stars Shirley Temple, Adolphe Menjou and Dorothy Dell in a story about a young girl held as collateral by gangsters. It was Temple's first starring role in a major motion picture and was crucial to establishing her as a major film star. It was inducted into the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress in 1998 and has been remade several times.\nPlot.\nA young girl named \"Marky\" is given by her father to a gangster-run gambling operation as a \"marker\" (collateral) for a bet. When he loses his bet and commits suicide, the gangsters are left with her on their hands. They decide to keep her temporarily and use her to help pull off one of their fixed races, naming her as the owner of the horse to be used in the race.\nMarky is sent to live with bookie Sorrowful Jones. Initially upset about being forced to look after her, he eventually begins to develop a father\u2013daughter relationship with her. His fellow gangsters become fond of her and begin to fill the roles of her extended family. Bangles, girlfriend of gang kingpin Big Steve, who has gone to Chicago to place bets on the horse, also begins to care for Marky and to fall in love with Sorrowful, whose own concern for Marky shows he has a warm heart beneath his hard-nosed persona. Encouraged by Bangles and Marky, Sorrowful gets a bigger apartment, buys Marky new clothes and himself a better cut of suit, reads her bedtime stories, and shows her how to pray.\nHowever, being around the gang has a somewhat bad influence on Marky, and she begins to develop a cynical nature and a wide vocabulary of gambling terminology and slang. Worried that her acquired bad-girl attitude means she will not get adopted by a \"good family\", Bangles and Sorrowful put on a party with gangsters dressed up as knights of the Round Table, to rekindle her former sweetness. She is unimpressed until they bring in the horse and parade her around on its back. Returning to New York, Big Steve frightens the horse, which throws her, and she is taken to the hospital. Big Steve goes there to pay back Sorrowful for trying to steal Bangles but is roped into giving Marky the direct blood transfusion she needs for her life-saving operation. Praying for her survival, Sorrowful destroys the drug which, administered to the horse, would have helped it win the race but killed it soon after. Informed that he has \"good blood\" and pleased to have given life for a change, Big Steve forgives Bangles and Sorrowful. They plan to marry and adopt Marky.\nProduction.\nTemple, who had previously auditioned for the role of Marky prior to entering her Fox contract and failed to win the part, was loaned out to Paramount by Fox Film thanks in large part to maneuvering by her mother Gertrude. Her mother, recognizing the potential of the role, arranged for a secret meeting and second audition with the director Alexander Hall. This second audition was successful and Shirley Temple was loaned out to Paramount for $1,000 a week. Temple and Dell struck up a close friendship while filming the movie. The scene in which Temple is refusing her food and using rude language (\"I don't want no mush\" and \"I used to be a sissy\") had to be redone as Dell could not contain her laughter in the first take. This would be Dell's last completed film of her short career. Temple took Dell's death very hard.\nReception.\nThe film was considered a success at the box office. As a result, Paramount offered Fox $50,000 for Temple's contract, but the offer was declined.\nRecognition.\nIn 1998, \"Little Miss Marker\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nRemakes.\nThe film was remade as \"Sorrowful Jones\" (1949) with Bob Hope and Lucille Ball and again as \"Little Miss Marker\" (1980) with Walter Matthau, Julie Andrews, Tony Curtis, Bob Newhart, Brian Dennehy and Lee Grant. Another remake was \"40 Pounds of Trouble\" (1962), starring Tony Curtis as a casino manager who is left with an eight-year-old girl.\nStage musical.\nScott Ellis and David Thompson are working on a musical adaptation of the film to feature songs by Harold Arlen as its score.[1]\nOther references.\nThe plot and title of the film are referenced by the book \"Little Myth Marker\", part of Robert Asprin's MythAdventures series.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74905", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74905", "title": "Malaysia/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "74907", "revid": "48270863", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74907", "title": "The Living Desert", "text": "1953 documentary film by James Algar\nThe Living Desert is a 1953 American nature documentary film that shows the everyday lives of the animals of the desert of the Southwestern United States. The film was written by James Algar, Winston Hibler, Jack Moffitt (uncredited) and Ted Sears. It was directed by Algar, with Hibler as the narrator and was filmed in Tucson, Arizona. The film won the 1953 Oscar for Best Documentary.\nProduction.\n\"The Living Desert\" was the first feature-length film in Disney's \"True-Life Adventures\" series of documentaries focusing on zoological studies; the previous films in the series, including the Oscar-winning \"Seal Island\", were short subjects.\nThe documentary was filmed in Tucson, Arizona. Most of the wildlife shown in the film was donated to what would soon become the Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum.\nThe film was inspired by 10 minutes of footage shot by N. Paul Kenworthy, a doctoral student at the University of California at Los Angeles. Kenworthy's footage of a battle between a tarantula and a wasp intrigued Disney, who funded a feature-length production following the lives of diverse desert species. Disney was highly supportive of Kenworthy's work and its impact on nonfiction filmmaking: \"This is where we can tell a real, sustained story for the first time in these nature pictures\".\nRelease.\nPrior to the production of \"The Living Desert\", Disney was releasing his films through RKO Radio Pictures, but due to a long-frayed relation with the studio, which had little enthusiasm for the producer's documentary releases, Disney opted to sever his relation with RKO and create his own distribution subsidiary \u2013 Buena Vista Distribution, which he named after the street where his office was located. Some pre-existing contracts between RKO and Disney continued until the animated short \"In the Bag\" (1956).\nThe film had its world premiere on November 9, 1953 at the Sutton theatre in New York City. It was packaged with two shorts; the animated short \"Ben and Me\" and the live action short \"Stormy, the Thoroughbred\".\n\"The Living Desert\" received some criticism for bringing unsubtle humor to its scenes of desert life \u2013 Bosley Crowther of \"The New York Times\" called Disney to task for adding jokey musical effects to several of the film's scenes, including hoedown music for a sequence involving a scorpion mating dance. Nonetheless, the film was a commercial success: the $300,000 production earned $4,000,000 at the box office.\nThe film was very popular in Japan surpassing \"Gone With the Wind\" as the highest-grossing film of all time with a gross of over $800,000.\nHonors.\nThe Academy Award that Disney earned for \"The Living Desert\" helped the producer make history as the individual with the most Oscar wins in a single year. At the 26th Academy Awards, in addition to winning the Best Documentary Feature Oscar, Disney also won the Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film for \"Toot, Whistle, Plunk and Boom\", the Academy Award for Best Documentary (Short Subject) for \"The Alaskan Eskimo\" and the Academy Award for Best Short Subject (Two-Reel) for \"Bear Country\".\nIn addition to its Oscar, the film also won the International Prize at the 1954 Cannes Film Festival, an award at the Berlin Film Festival and a special achievement award from the Golden Globe Awards. In 2000, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nHome media.\nThe film had its first home media release on VHS and was also featured in the 2006 DVD Walt Disney Legacy Collection Volume 2: Lands of Exploration. It was also later made available to stream on Disney+\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74908", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74908", "title": "Louisiana Story", "text": "1948 film by Robert J. Flaherty\nLouisiana Story is a 1948 American black-and-white drama film directed and produced by Robert J. Flaherty. The script was written by Flaherty and his wife Frances H. Flaherty. Although it has historically been represented as a documentary film, the events and characters depicted are fictional. The film was commissioned by the Standard Oil Company to promote its drilling ventures in the Louisiana bayous.\nPlot.\nA young Cajun boy and his pet raccoon live an idyllic existence playing in the bayous of Louisiana. His elderly father allows an oil company to drill for oil in the inlet that runs behind their house. An inland barge is towed into the inlet from interconnecting waterways. The rig crew completes its operation and its friendly drillers depart, leaving behind a clean environment and a wealthy family.\nProduction.\n\"Louisiana Story\" was shot on location over the course of 15 months in the Louisiana bayou country, using local residents for actors. Producer Robert J. Flaherty spent three months searching for a locale before filming began.\nAlthough the film was sponsored by the Standard Oil Company, the company's name is not heard or seen, and Flaherty retained full ownership of the film. Of the approximately 300,000 feet of negative film shot, only about 8,000 feet were used in the final cut. Standard Oil used some of the remaining film to create two short promotional films. The film's budget was $258,000.\nThe boy, named in the film as Alexander Napoleon Ulysses Le Tour, but in the credits just identified as \"the boy\", is played by Louisiana native Joseph Boudreaux. When filming a scene involving a fight with an alligator, Boudreaux was so adept at subduing the alligator that the film crew tied a rope around his waist to pull him back to the shore to make the struggle seem more realistic.\nThe film was photographed by Richard Leacock and edited by Helen van Dongen, who were also the associate producers. It was distributed by the independent Lopert Films.\nIn 1952, it was reissued by an exploitation film outfit with a new title, \"Cajun\", on the bottom half of a double bill with another film titled \"Watusi\".\nReception.\nIn a contemporary review for \"The New York Times\", critic Bosley Crowther wrote: \"Like all of Flaherty's pictures, it is a gem of the cinematographer's art and it ripples and flows with deep feeling for beauty and simplicity. ... Within this simple story framework, Flaherty\u2014being his own writer as well as director\u2014has devised a genial. romantic parable. a conspicuously idyllic union of the pulse and rhythm of primitive life with that of the machine. ... Ironically. the most powerful and truly eloquent phases of this film are not those portraying the youngster, beautiful and tender though they be, but those demonstrating the great energy in the operations of a drilling crew.\"\nAwards.\nThe film was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Writing, Motion Picture Story in 1948.\nIn 1949, Virgil Thomson won the Pulitzer Prize for Music for his score, which is based on a famous field tape of authentic Cajun musicians and performed by the Philadelphia Orchestra conducted by Eugene Ormandy.\nIn 1994, \"Louisiana Story\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nThe film was included in the top 10 of the first British Film Institute's \"Sight and Sound\" poll in 1952. It was nominated by the American Film Institute for inclusion in its AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores list in 2005.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74909", "revid": "24902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74909", "title": "Masque", "text": "Courtly entertainment with music and dance\nThe masque was a form of festive courtly entertainment that flourished in 16th- and early 17th-century Europe, though it was developed earlier in Italy, in forms including the intermedio (a public version of the masque was the pageant). A masque involved music, dancing, singing and acting, within an elaborate stage design, in which the architectural framing and costumes might be designed by a renowned architect, to present a deferential allegory flattering to the patron. Professional actors and musicians were hired for the speaking and singing parts. Masquers who did not speak or sing were often courtiers: the English queen Anne of Denmark frequently danced with her ladies in masques between 1603 and 1611, and Henry VIII and Charles I of England performed in the masques at their courts. In the tradition of masque, Louis XIV of France danced in ballets at Versailles with music by Jean-Baptiste Lully.\nDevelopment.\nThe masque tradition developed from the elaborate pageants and courtly shows of ducal Burgundy in the late Middle Ages. Masques were typically a complimentary offering to the prince among his guests and might combine pastoral settings, mythological fables, and the dramatic elements of ethical debate. There would invariably be some political and social application of the allegory. Such pageants often celebrated a birth, marriage, change of ruler or a royal entry and invariably ended with a tableau of bliss and concord.\nMasque imagery tended to be drawn from Classical rather than Christian sources, and the artifice was part of the Grand dance. Masque thus lent itself to Mannerist treatment in the hands of master designers like Giulio Romano or Inigo Jones.\nThe New Historians, in works like the essays of Bevington and Holbrook's \"The Politics of the Stuart Court Masque\" (1998), have pointed out the political subtext of masques. At times, the political subtext was not far to seek: \"The Triumph of Peace\", put on with a large amount of parliament-raised money by Charles I, caused great offence to the Puritans. Catherine de' Medici's court festivals, often even more overtly political, were among the most spectacular entertainments of her day, although the \"intermezzi\" of the Medici court in Florence could rival them.\nDumbshow.\nIn English theatre tradition, a dumbshow is a masque-like interlude of silent mime usually with allegorical content that refers to the occasion of a play or its theme, the most famous being the dumbshow played out in \"Hamlet\" (III.ii). Dumbshows might be a moving spectacle, like a procession, as in Thomas Kyd's \"The Spanish Tragedy\" (1580s), or they might form a pictorial tableau, as one in the Shakespeare collaboration, \"Pericles, Prince of Tyre\" (III.i)\u2014a tableau that is immediately explicated at some length by the poet-narrator, Gower.\nDumbshows were a medieval element that continued to be popular in early Elizabethan drama, but by the time \"Pericles\" (c. 1607\u201308) or \"Hamlet\" (c. 1600\u201302) were staged, they were perhaps quaintly old-fashioned: \"What means this, my lord?\" is Ophelia's reaction. In English masques, purely musical interludes might be accompanied by a dumbshow.\nOrigins.\nThe masque has its origins in a folk tradition where masked players would unexpectedly call on a nobleman in his hall, dancing and bringing gifts on certain nights of the year, or celebrating dynastic occasions. The rustic presentation of \"Pyramus and Thisbe\" as a wedding entertainment in Shakespeare's \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" offers a familiar example. Spectators were invited to join in the dancing. At the end, the players would take off their masks to reveal their identities. In 1377, 130 men came \"disguisedly apparelled\", their faces covered with vizards to entertain Richard II of England.\nCourt masques in England and Scotland.\nIn England, Tudor court masques developed from earlier \"guisings\", where a masked allegorical figure would appear and address the assembled company\u2014providing a theme for the occasion\u2014with musical accompaniment. Costumes were designed by professionals, including Niccolo da Modena. Elizabeth of York paid for costumes for \"disguysings\" in June and December 1502. Minstrels were dressed in white and green Tudor livery. Henry VIII came to Catherine of Aragon's chamber disguised as Robin Hood in January 1510, perhaps causing initial uneasiness, and there was dancing.\nHall's \"Chronicle\" explained the new fashion of Italian-style masque at the English court in 1512. The essential feature was the entry of disguised dancers and musicians to a banquet. They would appear in character and perform, and then dance with the guests, and then leave the venue. At the meeting at Lille in October 1513, when the ladies were dancing after a banquet, Henry VIII and eleven other dancers entered \"richely appareled with bonettes of gold\". At the conclusion of their performance they gave their masque costumes to the audience.\nOn 1 May 1515, Henry VIII and Catherine of Aragon rode from Greenwich Palace to have breakfast in an arbour constructed in a wood at Shooter's Hill. Catherine and her ladies were dressed in Spanish-style riding gear, Henry was in green velvet. The royal guard appeared in disguise as Robin Hood and his men. There was a pageant chariot or car with Lady May and Lady Flora, followed by a masque and dancing.\nAccording to George Cavendish, in January 1527 Henry VIII came to Cardinal Wolsey's Hampton Court or York Place, by boat \"in a masque with a dozen of other maskers all in garments like shepherds made of fine cloth of gold and fine crimson satin paned, and caps of the same with visors\", wearing false beards, accompanied with torch bearers and drummers. Their arrival at the palace water gate was announced by cannon fire. The King's part of the entertainment was organised by William Sandys and Henry Guildford. The masquers played a dice game called mumchance before dancing. Edward Hall described similar masques involving the king's disguised appearance.\nIn the play \"Henry VIII\", by Fletcher and Shakespeare, Wolsley's masques were recalled when Henry in shepherd's disguise meets Anne Boleyn. Anne Boleyn and seven ladies in \"maskyng apparel of straunge fashion\" performed for Henry VIII and Francis I of France at Calais on 27 October 1532. Some of the costume, supplied by the yeoman of the revels Richard Gibson, was described as \"masking gere\".\nMasques at Elizabeth I's court emphasized the concord and unity between Queen and Kingdom. A descriptive narrative of a processional masque is the masque of the Seven Deadly Sins in Edmund Spenser's \"The Faerie Queene\" (Book i, Canto IV). A particularly elaborate masque, performed over the course of two weeks for Queen Elizabeth, is described in the 1821 novel \"Kenilworth\", by Sir Walter Scott. Queen Elizabeth was entertained at country houses during her progresses with performances like the Harefield Entertainment.\nIn Scotland, masques were performed at court, particularly at wedding celebrations, and the royal wardrobe provided costumes. At a banquet at the tournament of the Wild Knight and the Black Lady in 1507, the Black Lady came into the hall at Holyroodhouse with Martin the Spaniard who was equipped with an archery bow and dressed in yellow. A cloud descended from the roof and swept them both away.\nPerformers at a wedding masque at Castle Campbell in 1562 dressed as shepherds. Mary, Queen of Scots, Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley, and David Rizzio took part in a masque in February 1566. Mary attended the wedding of her servant Bastian Pagez, and it was said she wore male costume for the masque, \"which apparel she loved often times to be in, in dancings secretly with the King her husband, and going in masks by night through the streets\". James VI and Anne of Denmark wore masque costumes to dance at weddings at Alloa Tower and Tullibardine Castle. At Tullibardine, James VI and his valet, probably John Wemyss of Logie, wore taffeta costumes and Venetian masks.\nAfter James and Anne became king and queen of England at the Union of the Crowns in 1603, narrative elements of the masque at their court became more significant. Plots were often on classical or allegorical themes, glorifying the royal or noble sponsor. At the end, the audience would join with the actors in a final dance. Ben Jonson wrote a number of masques with stage design by Inigo Jones. Their works are usually thought of as the most significant in the form. Samuel Daniel and Sir Philip Sidney also wrote masques.\nWilliam Shakespeare included a masque-like interlude in \"The Tempest,\" understood by modern scholars to have been heavily influenced by the masques of Ben Jonson and the stagecraft of Inigo Jones. There is also a masque sequence in his \"Romeo and Juliet\" and \"Henry VIII\". John Milton's \"Comus\" (with music by Henry Lawes) is described as a masque, though it is generally reckoned a pastoral play.\nThere is a detailed, humorous, and malicious (and possibly completely fictitious) account by Sir John Harington in 1606 of a masque of Solomon and Sheba at Theobalds. Harington was not so much concerned with the masque itself as with the notoriously heavy drinking at the Court of King James I; \"the entertainment went forward, and most of the presenters went backward, or fell down, wine did so occupy their upper chambers\". As far as we can ascertain the details of the masque, the Queen of Sheba was to bring gifts to the King, representing Solomon, and was to be followed by the spirits of Faith, Hope, Charity, Victory and Peace. Unfortunately, as Harington reported, the actress playing the Queen tripped over the steps of the throne, sending her gifts flying; Hope and Faith were too drunk to speak a word, while Peace, annoyed at finding her way to the throne blocked, made good use of her symbolic olive branches to slap anyone who was in her way.\nFrancis Bacon paid for \"The Masque of Flowers\" to celebrate the marriage of Robert Carr, 1st Earl of Somerset and Frances Howard, Countess of Somerset. James Hay, 1st Earl of Carlisle, was a performer and sponsor of court masques. He wrote about the tight-fitting costumes, that it was the fashion \"to appear very small in the waist, I remember was drawn up from the ground by both hands whilst the tailor with all his strength buttoned on my doublet\".\nReconstructions of Stuart masques have been few and far between. Part of the problem is that only texts survive complete; there is no complete music, only fragments, so no authoritative performance can be made without interpretive invention. By the time of the English Restoration in 1660, the masque was pass\u00e9, but the English semi-opera which developed in the latter part of the 17th century, a form in which John Dryden and Henry Purcell collaborated, borrows some elements from the masque and further elements from the contemporary courtly French opera of Jean-Baptiste Lully.\nIn the 18th century, masques were even less frequently staged. \"Rule, Britannia!\" started out as part of \"Alfred\", a masque about Alfred the Great co-written by James Thomson and David Mallet with music by Thomas Arne which was first performed at Cliveden, country house of Frederick, Prince of Wales. Performed to celebrate the third birthday of Frederick's daughter Augusta, it remains among the best-known British patriotic songs up to the present, while the masque of which it was originally part is remembered by only specialist historians.\nLegacy.\nThe most outstanding humanists, poets and artists of the day, in the full intensity of their creative powers, devoted themselves to producing masques; and until the Puritans closed the English theatres in 1642, the masque was the highest art form in England. But because of its ephemeral nature, not a lot of documentation related to masques remains, and much of what is said about the production and enjoyment of masques is still part speculation.\n17th- and 18th-century masques.\nWhile the masque was no longer as popular as it was at its height in the 17th century, there are many later examples of the masque. During the late 17th century, English semi-operas by composers such as Henry Purcell had masque scenes inset between the acts of the play proper. In the 18th century, William Boyce and Thomas Arne, continued to utilize the masque genre mostly as an occasional piece, and the genre became increasingly associated with patriotic topics. Acis and Galatea (Handel) is another successful example. There are isolated examples throughout the first half of the 19th century.\nLater masques.\nWith the renaissance of English musical composition during the late 19th and early 20th century (the so-called English Musical Renaissance), English composers turned to the masque as a way of connecting to a genuinely English musical-dramatic form in their attempts to build a historically informed national musical style for England. Examples include those by Arthur Sullivan, George Macfarren, and even Edward Elgar, whose imperialistic \"The Crown of India\" was the central feature at the London Coliseum in 2005. Masques also became common as scenes in operettas and musical theatre works set during the Elizabethan period.\nIn the 20th century, Ralph Vaughan Williams wrote several masques, including his masterpiece in the genre, \"Job, a masque for dancing\" which premiered in 1930, although the work is closer to a ballet than a masque as it was originally understood. His designating it a masque was to indicate that the modern choreography typical when he wrote the piece would not be suitable. Vaughan Williams' prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Elizabeth Maconchy composed a masque, \"The Birds\" (1967\u201368), an \"extravaganza\" after Aristophanes.\nConstant Lambert also wrote a piece he called a masque, \"Summer's Last Will and Testament\", for orchestra, chorus and baritone. His title he took from Thomas Nash, whose masque was probably first presented before the Archbishop of Canterbury, perhaps at his London seat, Lambeth Palace, in 1592.\nList of notable masques.\n17th-century masques.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n18th-century masques.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74910", "revid": "6140513", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74910", "title": "Masquerade ball", "text": "Event in which participants attend in costume wearing a mask\nA masquerade ball (or bal masqu\u00e9) is a special kind of formal ball which many participants attend in costume wearing masks. (Compare the word \"masque\"\u2014a formal written and sung court pageant.) Less formal \"costume parties\" may be a descendant of this tradition. A masquerade ball usually encompasses music and dancing. These nighttime events are used for entertainment and celebrations.\u00a0\nHistory.\nMasquerade balls were a feature of the Carnival season in the 15th century, and involved increasingly elaborate allegorical Royal Entries, pageants, and triumphal processions celebrating marriages and other dynastic events of late medieval court life. The \"Bal des Ardents\" (\"Burning Men's Ball\") was held by Charles VI of France, and intended as a \"Bal des sauvages\" (\"Wild Men's Ball\"), a form of costumed ball (\"morisco\"). It took place in celebration of the marriage of a lady-in-waiting of Charles VI of France's queen in Paris on January 28, 1393. The King and five courtiers dressed as wildmen of the woods (woodwoses), with costumes of flax and pitch. If they came too close to a torch, the dancers would catch fire. (This episode may have influenced Edgar Allan Poe's short story \"Hop-Frog\".) Such costumed dances were a special luxury of the Ducal Court of Burgundy.\nMasquerade balls were extended into costumed public festivities in Italy during the 16th century Renaissance (Italian ). They were generally elaborate dances held for members of the upper classes, and were particularly popular in Venice. They have been associated with the tradition of the Venetian Carnival. With the fall of the Venetian Republic at the end of the 18th century, the use and tradition of masks gradually began to decline, until they disappeared altogether.\nThey became popular throughout mainland Europe in the 17th and 18th centuries, sometimes with fatal results. In 1792 Gustav III of Sweden was assassinated at a masquerade ball by the disgruntled nobleman Jacob Johan Anckarstr\u00f6m, an event which Eug\u00e8ne Scribe and Daniel Auber turned into the opera \"Gustave III\". The same event was the basis of Giuseppe Verdi's opera \"A Masked Ball\", although the censors in the original production forced him to portray it as a fictional story set in Boston. And the Masquerade Ball on Mardi Gras in 1778 at the Royal Opera of Versailles almost led to a serious duel within the Royal Family of France. Most masks came from countries like Switzerland and Italy.\nA Swiss count who arrived in Italy in 1708, is credited with introducing to London the Venetian fashion of a semi-public masquerade ball, to which one might subscribe, with the first being held at Haymarket Opera House. London's public gardens, like Vauxhall Gardens, refurbished in 1732, and Ranelagh Gardens, provided optimal outdoor settings, where characters masked and in fancy dress mingled with the crowds. The reputation for unseemly behavior, unescorted women and assignations motivated a change of name, to the Venetian , but as \"The Man of Taste\" observed in 1733:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA standard item of masquerade dress was a \"Vandyke\", improvised on the costumes worn in the portraits of Van Dyck: Gainsborough's \"Blue Boy\" is the most familiar example, and a reminder of the later 18th-century popularity in England for portraits in fancy dress.\nThroughout the century, it is thought that masquerade dances became popular in Colonial America, however, portraits featured the subjects dressed as if they were attendees, but evidence is scant, according to Jennifer Van Horn, that colonials in North Americans actually had the events. Its prominence in England did not go unchallenged; a significant anti-masquerade movement grew alongside the balls themselves. The anti-masquerade writers (among them such notables as Samuel Richardson) held that the events encouraged immorality and \"foreign influence\". While they were sometimes able to persuade authorities to their views, particularly after the Lisbon earthquake of 1755, enforcement of measures designed to end masquerades was at best desultory, and the masquerades went on as semi-private \"subscriptions\". In the 1770s, fashionable Londoners went to the masquerades organized by Teresa Cornelys at Carlisle House in Soho Square, and later to the Pantheon.\nMasquerade balls were sometimes set as a game among the guests. The masked guests were supposedly dressed so as to be unidentifiable. This would create a type of game to see if a guest could determine each other's identities. This added a humorous effect to many masquerades and enabled a more enjoyable version of typical balls.\nOne of the most noted masquerade balls of the 20th century was that held at Palazzo Labia in Venice on 3 September 1951, hosted by Carlos de Beistegui. It was dubbed \"the party of the century\".\nAnother famous ball was The Black and White Ball. It held on November 28, 1966, at the Plaza Hotel in New York City. Hosted by author Truman Capote, the ball was in honor of the \"Washington Post\" publisher Katharine Graham.\nMasks.\nMasquerade masks were worn delicately by the prosperous class at balls. Masquerade masks had many uses including hiding one's identity, and using different colour to express one's freedom of speech and voice one's emotions and opinions without judgement. There were two types of base masquerade masks; black masks and white masks. Designs and patterns were created over the base that was chosen. The main types of masks included masks with a stick (which one could hold to keep the mask in front of their face), the head mask, the full-face mask, and the half face mask. Masquerade masks have been used in classics such as \"The Phantom of the Opera\", \"Romeo and Juliet\", \"Lone Ranger\", and \"Gossip Girl\". They are still used in many types of media today.\nContemporary era.\nIn French Guiana.\nIn French Guiana, throughout the Carnival period, masked balls (known as par\u00e9-masked balls) take place every weekend. These are called Touloulous balls, where the Touloulous (women) are completely disguised and unrecognizable. Recently the Tololos (men) have also taken to wearing disguises.\nIn North America.\nA new resurgence of masquerade balls began in the late 1990s in North America. More recently, the party atmosphere is emphasized and the formal dancing usually less prominent. In present times, masquerade masks are used for costumes during Halloween. Masquerade masks are sold in a wide range of stores in different designs, and colors.\nCultural references.\nThe picturesque quality of the masquerade ball has made it a favorite topic or setting in literature.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74912", "revid": "49387220", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74912", "title": "Love Finds Andy Hardy", "text": "1938 film by George B. Seitz\nLove Finds Andy Hardy is a 1938 American romantic comedy film directed by George B. Seitz and produced by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. It stars Lewis Stone, Mickey Rooney, Judy Garland, Cecilia Parker, and Fay Holden, with Lana Turner, Ann Rutherford, Mary Howard and Gene Reynolds in supporting roles. The story follows teenager Andy Hardy, who becomes entangled with three different girls at once. \nThe screenplay was written by William Ludwig, from stories by Vivien R. Bretherton, and based upon characters created by Aurania Rouverol. It was the first film in which MGM recorded at least part of the soundtrack in stereophonic sound, a practice which was used for a number of the studio's musical comedies beginning the late 1930s. The film was presented in standard monaural sound.\n\"Love Finds Andy Hardy\" was released on July 22, 1938, and was distributed by Loew's Inc. The film was commercially successful and grossed over $2.2 million at the box office. In 2000, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nIn December 1938, Andy Hardy is putting a down payment on a used car, desperate to take his girlfriend Polly Benedict to the Christmas Eve dance in his own car. When Polly tells Andy she will be visiting her grandmother for the next three weeks and will not be able to attend the dance with him, Andy vows to go alone. Judge Hardy, Andy's father, later encounters his son and tells him that he cannot have his own car.\nReturning home for the evening, Judge Hardy runs into 12-year-old Betsy Booth, who is staying with her grandparents for the Christmas holiday. Betsy's grandmother has been effusive about Andy, and Betsy is thrilled to learn he will be her neighbor during her stay. Meanwhile, Judge Hardy's wife Emily learns by telegram that her mother has had a stroke, and leaves immediately for Canada to care for her. Andy meets Betsy while delivering some of his mother's canned preserves. Betsy is taken with Andy, but he does not reciprocate her admiration and leaves quickly.\nBeezy, Andy's friend, asks Andy to date Cynthia, Beezy's girlfriend, while Beezy is out of town over the holiday period, so that she will avoid other men. Andy agrees after Beezy promises to pay him for his efforts. Andy starts going out with Cynthia, but she is bored by sports activities, and they find they only get along when they kiss. After walking Cynthia home, Andy stops in to visit Betsy, who gives him a new radiator cap for his car, but sadly notices he is still covered in Cynthia's lipstick.\nOne morning, Andy receives a telegram from Polly, saying she will be home for the Christmas Eve dance after all. Andy telephones her saying he can't take her to the dance because of a previous engagement. He thereafter opens a letter from Beezy, writing that he found a new girlfriend and will not pay Andy for dating Cynthia. Betsy offers to help Andy pay for his car, but he refuses her aid. That evening, Andy tells his father about the mess he made. Judge Hardy explains his perspective about spending money on a car versus putting it aside as savings\u2014and then discloses his deep concern for Andy's mother. Judge Hardy would like to convey a message to his wife, but there is no telephone at her mother's home and Emily finds telegrams unnerving.\nAndy suggests a message be sent to their mother via ham radio. Andy brings Judge Hardy to the home of twelve-year-old ham radio operator James McMann Jr., who sends a message to Mrs. Hardy in Brigham, Quebec. Impressed with James's help and Andy's ingenuity, Judge Hardy pays the last amount for Andy's car.\nBetsy deceives Cynthia into thinking that Andy's car is an absolute wreck; Cynthia haughtily refuses to go to the Christmas Eve dance with Andy. Andy feels relieved to be able to date Polly again. Andy tries to clear things up with Polly but, having learned of his affair with Cynthia, she angrily refuses to go to the dance with him, claiming she has a date with a college boy. Initially, Andy is dejected at the prospect of not having a date for the dance, but when Betsy comes over, he decides to take her instead.\nAt the dance, Polly's date recognizes Betsy as an accomplished singer and asks her to perform; she proves to be a fantastic singer and quickly wins over the crowd. Betsy and Andy lead the dance in a grand march after Polly leaves in tears. Late that evening at home after the dance, Betsy and the Hardy family are gathered together around the Christmas tree when Mrs. Hardy unexpectedly returns home, as her mother is getting better.\nOn Christmas Day, Betsy explains everything to Polly. Polly and her date from the dance come over to the Hardy home, and Polly's date turns out to be her cousin. Polly's cousin then meets Andy's sister, and they leave together. Betsy expresses her gratitude to Andy for a wonderful evening and leaves. Polly and Andy reconcile.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nProduction of \"Love Finds Andy Hardy\" took place at MGM from mid-May to mid-June 1938. The film placed ninth in Film Daily's annual poll of the top films of 1938. Mickey Rooney began to receive \"star billing\" in subsequent films due to his success in the film, which he worked on simultaneously with \"Boys Town\", released the same year.\nReception.\n\"Love Finds Andy Hardy\" was a commercial success, earning $1,637,000 in the US and Canada and $610,000 elsewhere, resulting in a profit of $1,345,000.\nFilm critic Pauline Kael praised \"Love Finds Andy Hardy\" in her book \"5001 Nights At The Movies\" (p.\u00a0438): \u201cImmensely entertaining. The fourth and perhaps the most charming of the Andy Hardy series, Louis B. Mayer\u2019s make-believe vision of Middle America.\u201d\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74913", "revid": "5020932", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74913", "title": "Love Me Tonight", "text": "1932 film by Rouben Mamoulian\nLove Me Tonight is a 1932 American pre-Code musical comedy film produced and directed by Rouben Mamoulian, with music by Rodgers and Hart. It stars Maurice Chevalier as a tailor who poses as a nobleman and Jeanette MacDonald as a princess with whom he falls in love. It also stars Charles Ruggles as a penniless nobleman, along with Charles Butterworth and Myrna Loy as members of his family.\nThe film is an adaptation by Samuel Hoffenstein, George Marion Jr. and Waldemar Young of the play \"Le Tailleur au ch\u00e2teau\" (\"The tailor at the castle\") by Paul Armont and L\u00e9opold Marchand.\nPlot.\nThe story describes an encounter between a Parisian tailor named Maurice Courtelin (Chevalier) and a family of local aristocrats. These include Vicomte Gilbert de Var\u00e8ze (Ruggles), who owes Maurice a large amount of money for tailoring work; Gilbert's uncle the Duc d'Artelines (C. Aubrey Smith), the family patriarch; d'Artelines' man-hungry niece Valentine (Loy); and his other 22-year-old niece, Princesse Jeanette (MacDonald), who has been a widow for three years. D'Artelines has been unable to find Jeanette a new husband of suitable age and rank. The household also includes three aunts and an ineffectual suitor the Comte de Savignac (Butterworth).\nMaurice custom-tailors clothing for de Var\u00e8ze on credit, but the Vicomte's unpaid tailoring bills become intolerable, so Maurice travels to d'Artelines\u2019 castle to collect the money owed to him. On the way, he has a confrontation with Princesse Jeanette. He immediately professes his love for her, but she haughtily rejects him.\nWhen Maurice arrives at the castle, Gilbert introduces him as \"Baron Courtelin\" in order to hide the truth from the Duc. Maurice is fearful of this scheme at first, but changes his mind when he sees Jeanette. While staying at the castle, he arouses Valentine's desire, charms the rest of the family except for Jeanette, saves a deer's life during a hunt, and continues to woo Jeanette. The Comte de Savignac discovers that Maurice is a fake, but the Vicomte then claims that Maurice is a royal who is traveling incognito for security reasons. Finally, Jeanette succumbs to Maurice's charms, telling him \"Whoever you are, whatever you are, wherever you are, I love you.\"\nWhen Maurice criticizes Jeanette's tailor, the family confronts him for his rudeness, only to catch him and Jeanette alone with Jeanette partially undressed. Maurice explains that he is redesigning Jeanette's riding outfit, and he proves this by successfully altering it, but in the process he is forced to reveal his true identity. Despite her earlier promise, Jeanette recoils from him and runs to her room on hearing that he is a commoner. The entire household is outraged, and Maurice leaves. However, as a train carries him back to Paris, Jeanette struggles with her fears, finally realizes her mistake, and catches up to the train on horseback. When the engineer refuses to stop the train, she rides ahead and stands on the track. The train stops, Maurice jumps out, and the two lovers embrace as steam from the train envelops them.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nThis was Rodgers and Hart's second motion picture. In 1930, dealing with losses from the stock market collapse in 1929, they accepted a lucrative three-picture contract from Jack Warner and went to Hollywood. Unfortunately the film they were assigned had one star who couldn't sing and another with a very limited range, so they were limited in what they could write. When the film flopped in 1931, Warner quickly bought out their contract.\nLater the same year, Paramount Publix, now Paramount Pictures, hired then to work on this film with singing stars Maurice Chevalier and Jeannette McDonald and innovative director Rouben Mamoulian, a recent immigrant from Armenia who had directed the play \"Porgy\" on Broadway three years earlier.\nWorking together the director and songwriters \"devised a singular method of staging a musical film using a previously underutilized tool: the camera itself,\" biographer Todd S. Purdum writes. Rodgers explained, \"What we had in mind was not only moving the camera and the performers, but having the entire scene move. There was no reason why a musical sequence could not be used like dialogue and be performed uninterrupted while the action took the story to whatever locations the director wanted.\"\nMamoulian opened the film, as he had \"Porgy\", with \"a steadily growing symphony of everyday sounds as Paris awakens,\" what Chevalier's character calls \"The Song of Paris.\" Barrios describes the opening in detail: \"As a bell tolls on the soundtrack, a series of shots show Paris in the early morning, each edit hitting with a chime. The camera focuses on a sleepy district where a laborer strikes the pavement with his pickax. Cut to a bum snoring in an alley, then a charwoman sweeping a front step. Thump, snore, swish, and as more people begin their day the sounds grow in number and rhythm, the editing faster and more percussive. Clearly there\u2019s a master in charge and his name is Mamoulian.\"\nPurdum describes the next highlight: A few minutes later, as a brief scene of tailor Chevalier and a customer ends, \"he launches into one of Rodgers and Hart\u2019s all-time great ballads, \"Isn\u2019t It Romantic?\" Seamlessly, without a break, the scene shifts (as does the song) from the tailor, to the customer, to a passing taxi driver and his fare, to soldiers on a troop train, to a gypsy boy who overhears them, to a campfire where the music swells to the strains of gypsy violins, to the bedchamber of Princess Jeanette (played by Jeanette MacDonald) ... The lyrics\u2014really snatches of rhyming sung dialogue\u2014are so perfectly suited to the action that Hart had to write a more generic alternative for the published sheet music.\" Mamoulian's pathbreaking technique was so successful that it has been used in complicated song and dance sequences ever since.\nIn addition to \"Isn\u2019t It Romantic\", the film features the classic Rodgers and Hart songs \"Love Me Tonight\", \"Mimi\", and \"Lover\". \"Lover\" is sung not romantically, as it often is in nightclubs, but comically, as MacDonald's character tries to control an unruly horse.\nIn his book \"Hollywood in the Thirties\", John Baxter wrote, \u201cIf there is a better musical of the Thirties, one wonders what it can be.\u201d In 1990, \"Love Me Tonight\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nMusical numbers.\nSource:\nPost-1934 censorship.\nFor the post-Production Code (Breen Office) re-release (after 1934), \"Love Me Tonight\" was trimmed from 96 to 89 minutes. The missing eight minutes of footage have never been restored and are presumed lost. Known deletions include Myrna Loy's portion of the \"Mimi\" reprise, as under the strictures of the Production Code, her negligee was deemed too revealing.\nRetrospective appraisal.\nThe film has been \u201cdismissed\u201d by a number of critics as an inferior facsimile of Paramount directors Ernst Lubitsch and Malcolm St. Clair. Film historian Tom Milne argues that, on the contrary, Mamoulian \u201cleft his masters far behind\u201d inventing \u201ca delicious parody\u201d while Lubitsch's handling of similar narratives \u201cis merely romantic pastiche.\u201d Milne considers it Mamoulian's \u201cfirst flawless masterpiece.\u201d\nFilm critic Richard Barrios calls \"Love Me Tonight\" \"magical, rapturous, unique, charming, audacious, unforgettable, and, to beat a warhorse, masterpiece.\" He adds, \"It remains less well-known than it warrants even as vastly inferior works are enshrined. . . . It is, after all, quite a provable truth: \"Love Me Tonight\" is a great film, and along with \"Singin' in the Rain\" and a very few others it resides at the very pinnacle of movie musicals, and at the apex of art.\" In 1990, \"Love Me Tonight\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nBiographer Marc Spergel notes a number of the devices Mamoulian brings to bear: \u201cfast-and-slow motion, striking facial close-ups, and shadow-play.\u201d Additionally, the exhibit shows the \u201cmontage style\u201d of Soviet filmmaker Sergei Eisenstein in a number of sequences, notably the final chase scene between equestrian and locomotive.\nMomoulian crafted the Love Me Tonight as a stylistic and thematic parody of those critically acclaimed films directed by Ernst Lubitsch in which Chevalier and MacDonald had recently appeared: \"The Love Parade\" (1929) and \"Monte Carlo\" (1930). whereas Lubitsch's work is distinguished by its restraint and intimacy, a no less impressive achievement. Mamoulian's directing delivers a cinematically \u201cbravura\u201d treatment of the material.\nHome media.\n\"Love Me Tonight\" was released through Kino International DVD on November 25, 2003. Extra features included screenplay excerpts of deleted scenes, audio commentary by Miles Kreuger (Founder and President of the Institute of the American Musical, Inc. and also a good friend of Rouben Mamoulian), production documents, censorship records, and performances from Maurice Chevalier (\"Louise\") and Jeanette MacDonald (\"Love Me Tonight\") from the 1932 short \"Hollywood on Parade\". There are no existing pre-Code uncensored versions of the original film.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74914", "revid": "51012939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74914", "title": "Beatles for Sale", "text": "1964 studio album by the Beatles\nBeatles for Sale is the fourth studio album by the English rock band the Beatles. It was released on 4 December 1964 in the United Kingdom on EMI's Parlophone label. The album marked a departure from the upbeat tone that had characterised the Beatles' previous work, partly due to the band's exhaustion after a series of tours that had established them as a worldwide phenomenon in 1964. \"Beatles for Sale\" was not widely available in the US until 1987, when the Beatles' catalogue was standardised for release on CD. Instead, eight of the album's fourteen tracks, alongside \"I'll Be Back\", which was cut from the US version of the \"Hard Day's Night\" album, and both sides of the single \"I Feel Fine\" / \"She's a Woman\", appeared on Capitol Records' concurrent release, \"Beatles '65\", and the remaining six of the album's fourteen tracks, including both sides of the US single \"Eight Days a Week\" / \"I Don't Want to Spoil the Party\", appeared on Capitol Records' seventh release, \"Beatles VI\", both issued in North America only.\nDuring the sessions, the band ventured into studio experimentation, such as employing a fade-in and incorporating guitar feedback, and supplemented the basic recordings with percussion instruments such as timpani, African hand drums, and chocalho. The album reflects the twin influences of country music and Bob Dylan, whom the Beatles met in New York in August 1964. Partly as a result of the group's hectic schedule, only eight of the tracks are original compositions, with cover versions of songs by artists such as Carl Perkins, Chuck Berry, Buddy Holly and Little Richard being used to complete the album. The original songs introduced darker musical moods and more introspective lyrics, with John Lennon adopting an autobiographical perspective in \"I'm a Loser\" and \"No Reply\". Furthermore, the majority of the songs did not feature themes of love, with only three out of the fourteen tracks mentioning love in a positive light.\n\"Beatles for Sale\" received favourable reviews in the UK musical press, where it held the number one spot for 11 of the 46 weeks that it spent in the top 20. The album was similarly successful in Australia, where the band's cover of Berry's \"Rock and Roll Music\" also topped the singles chart. One of the songs omitted from the US version of the album, \"Eight Days a Week\", became the Beatles' seventh number one in the US when issued as a single there in February 1965. In 2000, the album was voted number 204 in the third edition of Colin Larkin's book \"All Time Top 1000 Albums\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBackground.\nWhen \"Beatles for Sale\" was being recorded, Beatlemania was at its peak. In early 1964, the Beatles had made waves with their television appearances in the US, sparking unprecedented demand for their records there. Over June and July, the band played concerts in Denmark, the Netherlands and Hong Kong, toured Australia and New Zealand, and then returned to Britain for a series of radio and television engagements and to promote their first feature film, \"A Hard Day's Night\". After performing further concerts in Sweden, they began recording the new album in London in mid August, only to then depart for a month-long tour of North America. While in New York, the Beatles met American folk singer Bob Dylan, who introduced the band members to cannabis. Through Dylan's example, the Beatles, particularly John Lennon, were encouraged to write more introspective lyrics than before. For his part, Dylan said he recognised that the Beatles \"were pointing the direction that music had to go\", and he soon began writing songs that embraced youth culture and recording with a rock backing.\n\"Beatles for Sale\" was the Beatles' fourth album release in the space of 21 months. Neil Aspinall, the band's road manager, later reflected: \"No band today would come off a long US tour at the end of September, go into the studio and start a new album, still writing songs, and then go on a UK tour, finish the album in five weeks, still touring, and have the album out in time for Christmas. But that's what the Beatles did at the end of 1964. A lot of it was down to naivet\u00e9, thinking that this was the way things were done. If the record company needs another album, you go and make one.\" Noting the subdued and melancholy tone of much of the album, producer George Martin recalled: \"They were rather war weary during \"Beatles for Sale\". One must remember that they'd been battered like mad throughout 1964, and much of 1963. Success is a wonderful thing but it is very, very tiring.\"\nSongwriting and musical styles.\nAlthough prolific, the songwriting partnership of Lennon and Paul McCartney was unable to keep up with the demand for new material. To make up for the shortfall in output, the Beatles resorted to including several cover versions on the album. This had been their approach for their first two albums \u2013 \"Please Please Me\" and \"With the Beatles\" \u2013 but had been abandoned for \"A Hard Day's Night\". McCartney said of the combination on \"Beatles for Sale\": \"Basically it was our stage show, with some new [original] songs.\"\nThe album features eight Lennon\u2013McCartney compositions. In addition, the pair wrote both sides of the non-album single, \"I Feel Fine\" backed with \"She's a Woman\", which accompanied the LP's release. At this stage in their partnership, Lennon and McCartney rarely wrote together as before, but each would often contribute key parts to songs for which the other was the primary author. Nevertheless, Lennon's level of contribution to \"Beatles for Sale\" outweighed McCartney's, a situation that, as on \"A Hard Day's Night\", author Ian MacDonald attributes to McCartney's commitment being temporarily sidetracked by his relationship with English actress Jane Asher.\nAt the time, Lennon said of the album: \"You could call our new one a Beatles country and western LP.\" Music critic Tim Riley views the album as a \"country excursion\", while MacDonald describes it as being \"dominated by the [country-and-western] idiom\". The impetus for this new direction came partly from the band's exposure to US country radio stations while on tour;&lt;ref name=\"Quantick/BBC\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; in addition, it was a genre that Ringo Starr had long championed. Lennon's \"I'm a Loser\" was the first Beatles song to directly reflect Dylan's influence. Author Jonathan Gould highlights the influence of blues and country-derived rockabilly on the album's original compositions and in the inclusion of songs by Carl Perkins and Buddy Holly. He also comments that Dylan's acoustic folk sound was a style that the Beatles tended to identify as country music.\nMcCartney later said that \"Beatles for Sale\" inaugurated a more mature phase for the band, whereby: \"We got more and more free to get into ourselves. Our student selves rather than 'we must please the girls and make money' \u2026\" According to author Peter Doggett, this period coincided with Lennon and McCartney being feted by London society, from which the pair found inspiration among a network of non-mainstream writers, poets, comedians, film-makers and other arts-related individuals. Doggett says that their social milieu in 1964 represented \"new territory for pop\" and a challenge to British class delineation as the Beatles introduced an \"arty middle-class\" sensibility to pop music.\nRecording.\nThe sessions for \"Beatles for Sale\" began at EMI Studios on 11 August, one month after the release of \"A Hard Day's Night\". The majority of the recording sessions took place during a three-week period beginning on 29 September, following the band's return from the US tour. Much of the production was done on \"days off\" from performances in the UK, and much of the songwriting was completed in the studio.\nGeorge Harrison recalled that the band had become more sophisticated about recording techniques: \"Our records were progressing. We'd started out like anyone spending their first time in a studio \u2013 nervous and naive and looking for success. By this time we'd had loads of hits and were becoming more relaxed with ourselves, and more comfortable in the studio\u00a0\u2026\" The band continued to develop their sound through the use of four-track recording, which EMI had introduced in 1963. They were also allowed greater freedom to experiment by the record company and by George Martin, who was gradually relinquishing his position of authority over the Beatles, as their label boss, throughout 1964, and was increasingly open to their non-standard musical ideas. The sessions resulted in the first use of a fade-in on a pop song, at the start of \"Eight Days a Week\", and the first time that guitar feedback had been incorporated in a pop recording, on \"I Feel Fine\".\nThe band introduced new instrumentation into their basic sound, as a way to illustrate the more nuanced style adopted by Lennon in his lyric writing. This was especially evident in the range of percussion instruments, which, mainly played by Starr, included the band's first use of timpani, African hand drums and chocalho. According to MacDonald, the Beatles adopted a \"less-is-more\" approach in their arrangements; he cites \"No Reply\" as an example of the group beginning to \"master the studio\", whereby doubling basic parts and the use of reverb lent the performance \"depth and space\". As he had done since \"With the Beatles\", Harrison continued to vary his guitar sounds, favouring a Gretsch Tennessean guitar for the first time, in addition to using his twelve-string Rickenbacker 360/12. Author Andr\u00e9 Millard describes this period as one in which the recording studio changed its identity from the Beatles' perspective, from a formal workplace into a \"workshop\" and \"laboratory\".\nRecording was completed on 26 October, partway through the band's four-week tour of the UK. On 18 October, the Beatles had rushed back to London from Hull, to record the A-side of their forthcoming single, \"I Feel Fine\", and three of the album's cover tunes (in a total of five takes). In an interview published the day before this session, Lennon admitted that the need for new original songs was \"becoming a hell of a problem\". The band participated in several mixing and editing sessions before completing the project on 4 November.\nSongs.\nOriginal compositions.\n\"No Reply\".\n\"No Reply\" is about a young man who is unable to contact his apparently unfaithful girlfriend, although he knows she is home. Beatles music publisher Dick James was pleased with the song, saying Lennon had provided \"a complete story\". Reviewer David Rowley said that its lyrics \"read like a picture story from a girl's comic\" and evoked a picture \"of walking down a street and seeing a girl silhouetted in a window, not answering the telephone\". Sequenced as the first track on \"Beatles for Sale\", the song served as an uncharacteristic album opener, given its dramatic and resentful mood.\nMacDonald attributes effectiveness to the acoustic guitar backing and the treatment given to Martin's piano part, which is rendered as \"a darkly reverbed presence\" rather than a distinct instrument. The vocals on the song are \"massively haloed in echo\", contributing to a mid-section providing \"among the most exciting thirty seconds\" of all the Beatles' recordings.\n\"I'm a Loser\".\nMusic critic Richie Unterberger singles out \"I'm a Loser\" as \"one of the very first Beatles compositions with lyrics addressing more serious points than young love\". Rowley considered it to be an \"obvious copy of Bob Dylan\", as when Lennon refers to the listener as a \"friend\", Dylan does the same on \"Blowin' in the Wind\". He also said its intention was to \"openly subvert the simple true love themes of their earlier work\". In Riley's view, \"I'm a Loser\" inaugurates a theme in Lennon's writing, in which his songs serve as \"personal responses to fame\".\n\"Baby's in Black\".\nAs the third track on the album, \"Baby's in Black\" conveys the same sad and resentful outlook of the two preceding songs. Unterberger views it as \"a love lament for a grieving girl that was perhaps more morose than any previous Beatles song\". It was the first song recorded for the album and features a two-part harmony sung by Lennon and McCartney. McCartney recalled: \"'Baby's in Black' we did because we liked waltz-time\u00a0... And I think also John and I wanted to do something bluesy, a bit darker, more grown-up, rather than just straight pop.\" Beatles historian Mark Lewisohn cites the band's dedication to achieving a discordant twanging sound for Harrison's lead guitar part, and Martin's objection to the song opening with this sound, as an example of the Beatles breaking free of their producer's control for the first time. To achieve the desired swelling effect, Lennon knelt on the studio floor and altered the volume control on Harrison's Gretsch as he played.\n\"I'll Follow the Sun\".\n\"I'll Follow the Sun\" was a reworking of an old song. McCartney recalled in a 1988 interview: \"I wrote that in my front parlour in Forthlin Road. I was about 16\u00a0... We had this R&amp;B image in Liverpool, a rock and roll/R&amp;B/hardish image with the leather. So I think songs like 'I'll Follow the Sun', ballads like that, got pushed back to later.\" Author Mark Hertsgaard cites its inclusion as a reflection of the shortage of original material available to the band, since McCartney acknowledged that the song \"wouldn't have been considered good enough\" for their previous releases. Martin nevertheless later named it as his favourite song on \"Beatles for Sale\".\n\"Eight Days a Week\".\n\"Eight Days a Week\" marked the first time the Beatles brought a partly formed song into the studio and completed the writing process as they recorded it. Two recording sessions, totalling nearly seven hours, on 6 October were devoted to the song, during which Lennon and McCartney experimented with various techniques before settling on a final structure and arrangement. Each of the first six takes featured a strikingly different approach to the beginning and end sections of the song; the eventual chiming guitar-based introduction was recorded during a different session and edited in later. The song's opening fade-in served as a counterpoint to pop songs that close with a fade out.&lt;ref name=\"Unterberger/EightDays\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Hertsgaard writes that the surprise provided by the fade-in was heightened for LP listeners due to the track being sequenced at the start of side two. Lennon was later highly dismissive of \"Eight Days a Week\", referring to it in a 1980 interview as \"lousy\".\n\"Every Little Thing\".\nThe dark theme of the album was balanced by \"Every Little Thing\", which Unterberger describes as a \"celebration of what a wonderful girl the guy has\". McCartney said of the song: \"'Every Little Thing', like most of the stuff I did, was my attempt at the next single\u00a0... but it became an album filler rather than the great almighty single. It didn't have quite what was required.\" Musicologist Walter Everett says the chorus's incorporation of \"leaden\" parallel fifth harmonies, supported by Starr's timpani, was the inspiration for a proto-heavy metal version of the song recorded by the English progressive rock band Yes in 1969.\n\"I Don't Want to Spoil the Party\".\nLennon's \"I Don't Want to Spoil the Party\" returns to the sombre mood established by the opening three tracks. MacDonald considers the performance to be the album's \"most overt exercise in country-and-western\", aided by the tight snare sound, Harrison's rockabilly-style guitar solo, and the despondent minor-third harmony part. MacDonald likens the effect to \"I'm a Loser\", in that Lennon's confessional tone is again couched in \"a protective shell of pastiche\".\n\"What You're Doing\".\nThe lyrics of \"What You're Doing\" concern McCartney's relationship with Jane Asher and demonstrate an aggrieved tone that was uncharacteristic of his writing. Author Simon Philo identifies the song's combination of musical arrangement, \"sonic texture\" and lyrics as an early example of the influence of cannabis on McCartney, who said the drug made him start \"really thinking for the first time\". The recording features a syncopated drum pattern and a jangly Rickenbacker guitar riff, as well as an instrumental coda that McCartney introduces by playing high up on the neck of his H\u00f6fner bass. A satisfactory arrangement proved elusive until the band remade the track on the final day of the \"Beatles for Sale\" sessions. While highlighting the studio techniques used to achieve the completed recording, MacDonald considers \"What You're Doing\" to be a possible rival to \"I Feel Fine\" as the Beatles' \"first sound experiment\".\nCover versions.\nSeveral of the album's cover versions had been staples of the Beatles' live shows in Hamburg and at The Cavern Club in Liverpool during the early 1960s. These songs included Chuck Berry's \"Rock and Roll Music\", sung by Lennon, Buddy Holly's \"Words of Love\", sung by Lennon, McCartney and Harrison, and two by Carl Perkins: \"Everybody's Trying to Be My Baby\", sung by Harrison, and \"Honey Don't\", sung by Starr. \"Mr. Moonlight\", which was originally recorded by Dr. Feelgood and the Interns, was Lennon's \"beloved obscurity\", according to Erlewine, and the subject of a remake towards the end of the \"Beatles for Sale\" sessions. A cover of Little Willie John's \"Leave My Kitten Alone\" was taped on 14 August, during the same session as the discarded version of \"Mr. Moonlight\", but was omitted from the album.\nA medley of \"Kansas City\" and \"Hey, Hey, Hey, Hey\" was sequenced as the final song on side one of the LP. In McCartney's description, his performance on the track required \"a great deal of nerve to just jump up and scream like an idiot\"; his efforts were egged on by Lennon, who \"would go, 'Come on! You can sing it better than that, man! Come on, come on! Really throw it!'\" The medley was inspired by Little Richard, who similarly combined Leiber and Stoller's \"Kansas City\" with his own composition, \"Hey, Hey, Hey, Hey!\" Riley considers that, although McCartney's presence on \"Beatles for Sale\" appears relatively slight next to Lennon's, his performance of \"Kansas City\" goes some way to readdressing the balance. Hertsgaard says that the irony evident in Harrison's delivery of \"Everybody's Trying to Be My Baby\" \"allows the Beatles to close the album with a not-so-veiled comment on the oddities of living inside Beatlemania\".\nArtwork.\nThe downbeat mood of \"Beatles for Sale\" was reflected in the album cover, which shows the unsmiling, weary-looking Beatles in an autumn scene in London's Hyde Park. The cover photograph was taken by Robert Freeman, who recalled that the concept was briefly discussed with Brian Epstein and the Beatles beforehand, namely that he produce a colour image of the group shot at \"an outside location towards sunset\". Music journalist Lois Wilson describes the result as \"the very antithesis of the early-'60s pop star\". The cover carried no band logo or artist credit, and the album title was rendered in minuscule type compared with standard LP artwork of the time.\n\"Beatles for Sale\" was presented in a gatefold sleeve \u2013 a rare design feature for a contemporary pop LP and the first of the Beatles' UK releases to be packaged in this way. Part of the inner gatefold spread showed the band members in front of a photo montage of celebrities, including film stars Victor Mature, Jayne Mansfield and Ian Carmichael, all of whom the Beatles had met during 1964. This inner gatefold image anticipated Peter Blake's revolutionary cover design for the Beatles' 1967 album \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\".\nAccording to music journalist Neil Spencer, the album's title was an apt comment on the band's unprecedented commercial value as entertainers, given the wealth of Beatles-related merchandise introduced over the previous year. The sleeve notes for \"Beatles for Sale\" were written by Derek Taylor, who, until a recent falling out with Epstein, had been the band's press officer throughout their rise to international stardom. In his text, Taylor focused on what the Beatles phenomenon would mean to people of the future:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There's priceless history between these covers. When, in a generation or so, a radioactive, cigar-smoking child, picnicking on Saturn, asks you what the Beatle affair was all about, don't try to explain all about the long hair and the screams! Just play them a few tracks from this album and he'll probably understand. The kids of AD 2000 will draw from the music much the same sense of well being and warmth as we do today.\nRelease.\n\"Beatles for Sale\" was released in the United Kingdom on EMI's Parlophone label on 4 December 1964. On 14 November, four days after completing their UK tour, the Beatles filmed mimed performances of \"I'm a Loser\" and \"Rock and Roll Music\", along with both sides of the \"I Feel Fine\" single, for broadcast on a special edition of the TV show \"Thank Your Lucky Stars\". The band also promoted the two records with a BBC Light Programme session, for which they recorded live versions of \"I'm a Loser\", \"Honey Don't\", \"Everybody's Trying to Be My Baby\" and \"I'll Follow the Sun\", and an appearance on \"Ready Steady Go!\", where \"Beatles for Sale\" was represented by mimed performances of \"Baby's in Black\" and \"Kansas City\u00a0/ Hey, Hey, Hey, Hey\". The group included \"I'm a Loser\", \"Everybody's Trying to Be My Baby\", \"Baby's in Black\", \"Honey Don't\" and \"Rock and Roll Music\" in the set list for their \"Another Beatles' Christmas Show\" presentation, held at London's Hammersmith Odeon from 24 December until 16 January 1965.\nThe album began its 46-week run on the UK charts on 12 December, and a week later displaced \"A Hard Day's Night\" from the top position. After seven weeks at number 1, \"Beatles for Sale\" was displaced by the Rolling Stones' \"The Rolling Stones No. 2\" but it returned to the top on 27 February 1965 for a week. After being again displaced by \"The Rolling Stones No. 2\", \"Beatles for Sale\" overtook it for a second time on 1 May, remaining there for another three weeks.&lt;ref name=\"OCC/Albums\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; It was then displaced by \"The Freewheelin' Bob Dylan\", which was superseded a week later by \"Bringing It All Back Home\", Dylan's first \"electric\" album. From the start of 1965 until mid-May, \"Beatles for Sale\" remained in the top three chart positions. Eight of the album's tracks were later issued on two four-song EPs: \"Beatles for Sale\" and \"Beatles for Sale No. 2\", released in April and June 1965, respectively. In the UK, \"Beatles for Sale\" was the top-selling album of 1964 and the second-highest seller of 1965.\nThe concurrent Beatles release in the United States, \"Beatles '65\", included eight songs from \"Beatles for Sale\", omitting the tracks \"Kansas City\u00a0/ Hey, Hey, Hey, Hey!\", \"Eight Days a Week\" (a number one hit single in the US in early 1965), \"What You're Doing\", \"Words of Love\", \"Every Little Thing\" and \"I Don't Want to Spoil the Party\". It instead included \"I'll Be Back\", which was one of the songs cut from the US version of \"A Hard Day's Night\", and \"I Feel Fine\" and \"She's a Woman\". The six omitted tracks received an LP release in America on \"Beatles VI\" in 1965. \"Beatles '65\" was released eleven days after \"Beatles for Sale\" and became the fastest-selling album of the year in the United States.\nThe cover of the Australian release of the LP featured individual photographs of the Beatles taken at one of the group's Sydney concerts in June 1964. Issued as a single in Australia, \"Rock and Roll Music\" was a number 1 hit there for four weeks. The song also topped singles charts in Norway and Sweden.\nCD release.\nOn 26 February 1987, \"Beatles for Sale\" was officially released on compact disc (catalogue number CDP 7 46438 2), as were the band's first three albums. The following month, \"Beatles for Sale\" re-entered the UK albums charts, peaking at number 45. Having been available previously only as an import in the US, the album was also issued on LP and cassette there on 21 July 1987.\nEven though \"Beatles for Sale\" was recorded on four-track tape, the first CD version was available only in mono. The album was digitally remastered and issued on CD in stereo for the first time on 9 September 2009.\nCritical reception and legacy.\nThe album received favourable reviews in the UK musical press. Writing in the \"NME\", Derek Johnson said that it was \"worth every penny asked\", adding: \"It's rip-roaring, infectious stuff, with the accent on beat throughout.\" Chris Welch of \"Melody Maker\" found the music \"honest\" and inventive, and predicted: \"\"Beatles For Sale\" is going to sell, sell, sell. It is easily up to standard and will knock out pop fans, rock fans, R&amp;B and Beatles fans \u2026\"\nIn a more recent assessment, \"Q\" found the album title to hold a \"hint of cynicism\" in depicting the Beatles as a \"product\" to be sold. AllMusic editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine said that \"the weariness of \"Beatles for Sale\" comes as something of a shock\" after \"the joyous \"A Hard Day's Night\"\". He also cited it as \"the group's most uneven album\" yet added that its best moments find them \"moving from Merseybeat to the sophisticated pop/rock they developed in mid-career\".\nTom Ewing of \"Pitchfork\" said, \"Lennon's anger and the band's rediscovery of rock 'n' roll mean \"For Sale\"'s reputation as the group's meanest album is deserved\". Neil McCormick of \"The Daily Telegraph\" commented that \"if this is a low point, they still sound fantastic\", adding that \"the Beatlemania pop songs are of a high standard, even if they are becoming slightly generic.\" Writing in \"The Rolling Stone Album Guide\", Rob Sheffield said that the album contains some poor cover versions yet \"I'm a Loser\" and \"What You're Doing\" indicate that the band were continuing to progress. He added: \"The harmonies of 'Baby's in Black,' the hair-raising 'I still loooove her' climax of 'I Don't Want to Spoil the Party,' the eager hand claps in 'Eight Days a Week' \u2013 it all makes 'Mr. Moonlight' easy to forgive.\" In his review for BBC Music, David Quantick highlights Lennon's \"brilliant, throat-ripping version\" of \"Rock and Roll Music\" and describes the album as \"joyous, inventive and exciting\", despite the Beatles' fatigue, and a \"transitional\" work that showed the group developing their studio craft.\n\"I'm a Loser\" served as a precursor to the 1965 folk-rock explosion, which was led by the Byrds and defined by a combination of Dylanesque lyrics and Beatles-style harmonies. According to \"The Encyclopedia of Country Music\", \"I Don't Want to Spoil the Party\" can be seen \"with hindsight\" as an early example of country rock, anticipating the Byrds' work in that style, particularly their 1968 album \"Sweetheart of the Rodeo\". In a February 1970 interview following a recording session with Starr and Harrison, Stephen Stills, then part of the supergroup Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp; Young, said he first began listening to the Beatles around the time of \"Beatles for Sale\", adding: \"that's still where I'm at, incidentally, and so is everybody else \u2013 and maybe at that time they were at their biggest and most isolated, and thus at their closest.\"\n\"Beatles for Sale\" was ranked the 71st-best album in the 1987 edition of Paul Gambaccini's book \"\", based on submissions from an international panel of 81 critics and broadcasters. In 2000, it was voted number 204 in the third edition of Colin Larkin's book \"All Time Top 1000 Albums\".\nPersonnel.\nAccording to Ian MacDonald:\nThe Beatles\nAdditional musician\nCharts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCertifications and sales.\n\u2020 BPI certification awarded only for sales since 1994.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74917", "revid": "13678090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74917", "title": "Magical Maestro", "text": "1952 film by Tex Avery\nMagical Maestro is a 1952 American animated short comedy film directed by Tex Avery and produced by Fred Quimby for MGM Cartoons. Distributed by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, the short was released on February 9, 1952. It features the Great Poochini (played by Butch Dog), a canine opera singer who spurns a magician. The magician is able to replace Poochini's normal conductor prior to the show through disguise. In 1993, \"Magical Maestro\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\", making it the only Tex Avery cartoon so far to be inducted.\nPlot.\nAttention-craving Mysto the Magician rudely interrupts a world-famous opera singer, the great Poochini (a pun on opera composer Giacomo Puccini), in the midst of rehearsal and asks to perform an opening act at the show that night. Mysto's tricks primarily come from his magic wand, which can summon flowers and rabbits. Poochini is not impressed by Mysto's tricks and kicks him bodily out of the opera house.\nMysto realizes that he can pass himself off as the orchestra conductor, using his wand as a baton, and get revenge on Poochini. As the performance begins, he freezes the conductor in place; steals his tuxedo, nose, and wig; and takes his place to conduct the music. As Poochini (performed by the Colombian baritone Carlos Julio Ram\u00edrez) sings the \"Largo al factotum\" aria from Gioacchino Rossini's 1816 opera \"The Barber of Seville\", Mysto unleashes a variety of tricks with his wand. He begins by summoning rabbits and flowers and tricking Poochini into removing his own pants, changes his clothing several times, and causes him to sing in other styles. At one point, Poochini notices a hair protruding onto the screen (the \"hair gag\"; see below) and briefly pauses in his singing to pluck it loose and toss it aside.\nAn irate audience member in a balcony seat interferes with the performance three times. He first throws an armload of fruit at Poochini, turning him into a Carmen Miranda-esque singer, then sprays him with black ink from a fountain pen, causing him to sing tenor in the fashion of the Ink Spots. Finally the man drops an anvil on Poochini's head, crushing him to a shorter height and changing his vocals to a spoken bass line in a parody of the group's \"Top &amp; Bottom\" format. After one rabbit washes the ink off Poochini's face with a fire hose and another one works his arm like an automobile jack to get him back up to full height, Mysto turns him into a Hawaiian singer.\nIn the final bars of the aria, Mysto's borrowed wig falls off and Poochini recognizes him. He takes the wig and wand for himself and levitates Mysto onto the stage when he tries to flee. Poochini uses several of the magician's own gimmicks against him in quick succession, with the curtain falling to flatten Mysto and his rabbits and end the cartoon.\nHistory.\nThe concept of cartoons with insinuating situations is hardly new\u2014Tex Avery especially featured a few quick jokes of this nature in his cartoons. \"Magical Maestro\", for example, shows Poochini with a male and female rabbit on each arm. He lowers his arms behind his back and when he raises them again, he now has an additional dozen baby rabbits on them, six on each arm.\nThis cartoon features a gimmick only seen in Tex Avery films, the \"hair gag\". If a film loaded into a projector at a movie theater had acquired some dirt and dust (e.g. during re-spooling) an actual hair could become caught in the projector gate and would sometimes skitter and move, causing the image of a gigantic hair to appear on the screen. While singing, Poochini notices a hair on the bottom edge of the screen and pauses briefly to pluck it and toss it aside, one of many ways in which Avery's characters broke the fourth wall. The gag had previously been used in the 1941 short \"Aviation Vacation\", also directed by Avery.\nThe role of Poochini is portrayed by Butch the Irish dog, a frequent star of Avery's cartoons of that era (often alongside Droopy).\nInfluence.\nThe \"hair gag\" would later be used by English comedian Benny Hill in the closing chase sequence of his April 25, 1984 show. As he is being chased by medical staff and an ambulance in and around a hospital area, he notices a hair moving around the bottom right corner of the screen, and at a certain point stops his pursuers long enough for him to pluck the hair out before the chase resumes.\nThe \"Tom and Jerry Tales\" episode \"Way-Off Broadway\" features a gag similar to Poochini's transformations, in that Tom is forced to adapt to various pieces of music when Jerry changes them on a radio.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74922", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74922", "title": "Torts", "text": ""}
{"id": "74924", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74924", "title": "VERDI", "text": ""}
{"id": "74927", "revid": "24465790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74927", "title": "Apostolic Faith Church", "text": "Pentecostal Christian denomination\nThe Apostolic Faith Church of Portland, Oregon (AFC), also known as the Apostolic Faith Mission of Portland, Oregon, is an international Holiness Pentecostal denomination of Christianity, with nationwide reach and headquartered in Portland, Oregon, United States. It was founded in 1907 by Florence L. Crawford, who was affiliated with William J. Seymour and the Azusa Street Revival of Los Angeles, California. By 1908 Crawford had independently founded what would become the Apostolic Faith Church. The Superintendent General of the Apostolic Faith Church is Olusola Adesope.\nThe Apostolic Faith Church has a presence in the United States, Canada and across Africa, Asia, Europe, Central and South America, and Australia. In 2023, the AFC had 2,396 churches served by 3,551 clergy across the globe. There are thirteen churches in Canada, fifty-nine in the United States, over one thousand in Africa, thirty throughout the Philippines, Korea, and Japan, fifty-four across Europe, and over one hundred in the Caribbean. Church-affiliated groups also regularly assemble in other parts of the world and recently include India. In some locations, member churches carry the name Trinity Apostolic Faith Church in order to differentiate themselves from non-affiliated churches in the same area.\nHistory.\nThe founder of the Apostolic Faith Church was Florence L. Crawford. Crawford was a participant in the Azusa Street Revival. This revival began in 1906 at the Apostolic Faith Mission in Los Angeles. The Azusa Street Mission, as it was called, quickly became the center of the Holiness Pentecostal movement mainly through the publication of \"The Apostolic Faith\" newspaper. Seymour appointed Crawford as the state director of the Pacific Coast Apostolic Faith movement where she would help other missions and churches join the movement. Crawford's break with Seymour was complete by 1911. She began an independent work in Portland, Oregon, with the same name as Seymour's mission and most of the churches under her supervision followed her.\nThis considerably weakened Seymour's undisputed leadership of the burgeoning Pentecostal movement as most of the churches which had fed the movement chose alignment with Crawford. According to Crawford, the separation was necessitated by rumors that Seymour had abandoned the Wesleyan position that entire sanctification was a second work of grace after conversion. Crawford's mission gained further influence when Clara Lum, editor of \"The Apostolic Faith\", transferred the paper, under controversial circumstances, to the Portland mission in mid-1908. \"The Apostolic Faith\" title changed to the \"Light of Hope\" and then \"The Higher Way\" before reverting back to \"The Apostolic Faith\" in 2017, and it is still published today.\nAs part of the COVID-19 pandemic, the company received between $150,000 and $350,000 in federally backed small business loans from Columbia State Bank as part of the Paycheck Protection Program. The company stated it would allow them to retain an unstated number of jobs.\nDoctrine.\nThrough the years, the Apostolic Faith Church's leaders have maintained the doctrines outlined in Seymour's editions of the \"Apostolic Faith\" papers printed in 1906 through 1908. As a Trinitarian and fundamental church, their doctrinal position centers on a born-again experience, supports the Wesleyan teaching of holiness (Christian perfection), and stresses the need of sanctified believers to receive the Pentecostal experience of the baptism of the Holy Spirit; the Apostolic Faith Church teaches conditional security with respect to salvation. The Apostolic Faith Church affirms the doctrine of outward holiness, in which modesty in speech and dress is emphasized (including the non-use of jewelry), along with abstinence from alcohol and tobacco. Their teachings are in direct conflict with Calvinistic beliefs regarding sin, predestination, and eternal security.\nThe doctrinal statement of the Apostolic Faith Church can be found on the headquarters' website. The text of the page is reprinted below:\nThe denomination teaches that speaking in tongues is only acceptable in a human language, but one which the person speaking has never learned. They do not take a collection during services but have containers where donations can be deposited. Membership is not by formally joining the church but when one is \"saved\" one is considered a member. They are one of the early groups that had bus ministries, ministries to ships, nursing homes, street meetings, and jail meetings.\nLiterature is printed in many languages and is free. All literature is prayed over for the recipients to receive healing and answers to prayers from God. Services include instrumental and vocal music, congregational singing of hymns, a time for individuals to share personal testimonies, Scripture reading, and an inspired message based on the Bible. Many of the churches have a choir and orchestra. A prayer meeting is held before every service, and all meetings end with an altar call, with the altar being benches at the front of the sanctuary where everyone is invited to come pray together. Ministers are not formally trained but are chosen by elders who laid hands on the person after it was believed they were called.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74928", "revid": "1171346", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74928", "title": "Manhatta", "text": "1922 film\nManhatta (1921) is a short documentary film directed by painter Charles Sheeler and photographer Paul Strand.\nProduction background.\n\"Manhatta\" documents the early 20th-century look of Manhattan. With the city as subject, the film consists of 65 shots sequenced in a loose non-narrative structure, beginning with the Staten Island ferry approaching Manhattan and concludes with a sunset view from a skyscraper. Often considered by some to be the first American avant-garde film, its primary objective is to explore the relationship between photography and film. Camera movement is kept to a minimum, as is incidental motion within each shot. Each frame provides a view of the city that has been carefully arranged into abstract compositions.\n\"Manhatta\" was a collaboration between painter/photographer Charles Sheeler and photographer Paul Strand. The film features intertitles that include excerpts from the writings of Walt Whitman.\nPreservation status.\nIn 1995, the film was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress, being deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". Restoration proved difficult, as the negative was lost, and only a single, heavily damaged 35mm print remained in existence. It was restored for the DVD set \"\" in October 2005. The film was completely restored in January 2009 by archivist Bruce Posner, in collaboration with film restoration company Lowry Digital. Posner spent close to four years returning the film to its original glory. The Museum of Modern Art and Anthology Film Archives also commissioned a new score from New York composer Donald Sosin.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74930", "revid": "43942669", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74930", "title": "Manhattan (1979 film)", "text": "Film by Woody Allen\nManhattan is a 1979 American romantic comedy-drama film directed by Woody Allen and produced by Charles H. Joffe from a screenplay written by Allen and Marshall Brickman. Allen co-stars as a twice-divorced 42-year-old comedy writer who dates a 17-year-old girl (Mariel Hemingway) but falls in love with his best friend's (Michael Murphy) mistress (Diane Keaton). Meryl Streep and Anne Byrne also star.\n\"Manhattan\" was Allen's first film in black-and-white, and was shot in 2.35:1 widescreen. It features music by George Gershwin, including \"Rhapsody in Blue\", which inspired the film. Allen described the film as a combination of \"Annie Hall\" and \"Interiors\".\nUpon its release in April 1979 by United Artists, \"Manhattan\" received critical acclaim and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for Hemingway and Best Original Screenplay for Allen and Brickman. Its North American box-office receipts of $39.9 million made it Allen's second biggest box-office success (adjusted for inflation). It ranks 46th on AFI's 100 Years...100 Laughs list and number 63 on Bravo's \"100 Funniest Movies\". In 2001, the United States Library of Congress deemed the film \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry.\nPlot.\nThe film opens with a montage of Manhattan, accompanied by George Gershwin's \"Rhapsody in Blue\", with an unseen narrator composing ideas for a book about a man who loves New York City. The narrator is Isaac Davis, a twice-divorced 42-year-old television comedy writer. Isaac is dating Tracy, a 17-year-old high school student. Isaac's best friend is Yale Pollack, a college professor married to Emily. After a double date, Yale tells Isaac he is having an affair. Isaac is stunned, but keeps Yale's secret. \nWhile Isaac and Tracy are visiting the Guggenheim Museum, they unexpectedly meet Yale, on a date with Mary Wilkie, the woman Yale described to Isaac. Isaac is annoyed and offended by Mary's cultural snobbery and intellectual pretentiousness, and confides to Tracy how he doesn't understand Yale's behavior. Several days later, Isaac meets Mary again at an Equal Rights Amendment fundraiser at the Museum of Modern Art. Mary and Isaac have coffee, and Mary invites Isaac to walk her dog with her. Mary and Isaac walk to a park under the Queensboro Bridge, and talk until sunrise. \nIn spite of his attraction to Mary, Isaac continues his relationship with Tracy, but emphasizes to her theirs cannot be a serious relationship. Tracy reveals she is in love with Isaac, and has been accepted to an acting program in London. Isaac encourages Tracy to take full advantage of the opportunity and dismisses her feelings for him, urging Tracy to think of him and their relationship as \"...just an interesting detour on life's highway.\"\nYale breaks up with Mary, and suggests to Isaac he date her. Isaac breaks up with Tracy, who is devastated when Isaac tells her he is in love with someone older. Mary and Isaac begin dating. Emily, curious about Isaac's new girlfriend, organizes a double date, despite the awkwardness between Isaac, Mary, and Yale. As the couples walk past a bookstore, Isaac sees a book written by his ex-wife: \"Marriage, Divorce, and Selfhood\". Emily reads aloud passages from the book, amusing Mary and Yale and humiliating Isaac. \nUpon returning home, Mary tells Isaac she is still in love with Yale and wants to break up. Furious and hurt, Isaac walks to the college where Yale teaches, and angrily confronts him. Isaac demands to know why Yale suggested he date Mary, and criticizes Yale's rationalizations for his extramarital affairs. Yale argues he met Mary first, he is in love with her, and excuses his behavior by saying he is only human. Later, Isaac talks with Emily about Yale's cheating and their breakup, and Emily reveals her anger at Isaac for introducing Mary to Yale.\nIn the d\u00e9nouement, Isaac lies on his sofa, dictating ideas for his book. He muses about, \"the things that make life worth living\" and lists various works of art, music, and literature, and unexpectedly says, \"Tracy's face.\" Isaac pauses, then sets down the microphone. Unable to reach Tracy by phone, Isaac runs to Tracy's family's apartment building just as she is leaving for London. Isaac tells Tracy he's changed his mind, and he doesn't want her to go because, \"I don't want that thing I like about you to change.\" Tracy says all the plans have been made and she has to go, but reassures Isaac, \"not everybody gets corrupted...you have to have a little faith in people!\" Isaac smiles slightly, and breaks the fourth wall as the film closes with another montage of the Manhattan skyline and \"Rhapsody in Blue\". An instrumental version of \"Embraceable You\" plays over the credits.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Woody Allen as Isaac Davis\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nAccording to Allen, the idea for \"Manhattan\" originated from his love of Gershwin's music. He was listening to one of the composer's albums of overtures and thought, \"this would be a beautiful thing to make ... a movie in black and white ... a romantic movie.\" Allen has said that \"Manhattan\" was \"like a mixture of what I was trying to do with \"Annie Hall\" and \"Interiors\"\" and that it deals with the problem of people trying to live a decent existence in an essentially junk-obsessed contemporary culture without selling out, admitting that he himself could conceive of giving away all of his \"possessions to charity and living in much more modest circumstances,\" adding that he has \"rationalized [his] way out of it so far, but [he] could conceive of doing it.\"\nIn his autobiography \"Apropos Of Nothing\" (2020), Allen writes that Tracy is based on Stacey Nelkin, his real-life girlfriend in the second half of the 1970's. When Allen and Marshall Brickman wrote the movie, \"we called the character Mariel Hemingway played 'Tracy' instead of 'Stacey' in a burst of creative inspiration. I know the picture did her justice, as we have remained friends still.\"\nForty years later, Christina \"Babi\" Engelhardt claimed that the film was partially based on her unconfirmed relationship with Allen, which allegedly began when she was 17 after they met at a restaurant in New York in 1976. But Nelkin, who dated Allen when she was 17 to 19, has confirmed that Tracy is based on her. Engelhardt later said she presumes that Tracy is \"a composite\" of Nelkin and \"any number\" of other \"presumed\" girls Allen was dating at the time, calling herself \"a fragment\".\nFilming.\nAllen talked to cinematographer Gordon Willis about how fun it would be to shoot the film in black and white, Panavision aspect ratio (2.35:1) because it would give \"a great look at New York City, which is sort of one of the characters in the film\". Allen decided to shoot his film in black and white because that was how he remembered it from when he was small. \"Maybe it's a reminiscence from old photographs, films, books and all that. But that's how I remember New York.\" The film was shot on location with the exception of some of the scenes in the planetarium, which were filmed on a set.\nThe famous Queensboro Bridge shot was done at five in the morning. The production had to bring their own bench as there were no park benches at the location. The bridge had two sets of necklace lights on a timer controlled by the city. When the sun came up, the bridge lights went off. Willis made arrangements with the city to leave the lights on and that he would let them know when they got the shot. Afterward, they could be turned off. As they started to shoot the scene, one string of bridge lights went out, and Allen was forced to use that take.\nAfter finishing the film, Allen was very unhappy with it and asked United Artists not to release it. He offered to make a film for no fee instead. He later said: \"I just thought to myself, 'At this point in my life, if this is the best I can do, they shouldn't give me money to make movies.'\"\nMusic.\nAll titles of the soundtrack were compositions by George Gershwin. They were performed by the New York Philharmonic under Zubin Mehta and the Buffalo Philharmonic under Michael Tilson Thomas.\nA part of the first movement of Mozart's Symphony No. 40 is heard in a concert scene.\nRelease.\n\"Manhattan\" premiered at the Ziegfeld Theatre in New York City on April 18, 1979. It opened in 27 theaters in New York City, Los Angeles and Toronto on April 25, then expanded to an additional 256 theaters nationwide on May 4, before adding a further 117 screens a week later. The film was shown out of competition at the 1979 Cannes Film Festival in May.\nReception.\nBox office.\nThe film grossed $485,734 ($16,749 per screen) in its opening weekend and after expanding nationwide, it had grossed $3.5 million after 13 days. It grossed $39.9 million in its entire run in the United States and Canada, making the film the 17th highest-grossing picture of the year. Adjusted for ticket price inflation (as of 2017), \"Manhattan\" grossed $141,484,800, making it Allen's second biggest box-office hit, following 1977's \"Annie Hall\".\nCritical response.\nThe film received largely positive reviews and holds a rating of 93% on Rotten Tomatoes based on reviews from 71 critics, with an average rating of 8.5/10. The website's consensus reads: \"One of Woody Allen's early classics, \"Manhattan\" combines modern, bittersweet humor and timeless romanticism with unerring grace.\" On Metacritic it has a weighted average score of 83% based on 10 critics' reviews, indicating \"universal acclaim\".\nGary Arnold, in \"The Washington Post\", wrote: \"\"Manhattan\" has comic integrity in part because Allen is now making jokes at the expense of his own parochialism. There's no opportunity to heap condescending abuse on the phonies and sell-outs decorating the Hollywood landscape. The result appears to be a more authentic and magnanimous comic perception of human vanity and foolhardiness.\"\nIn his review for \"Newsweek\", Jack Kroll wrote: \"Allen's growth in every department is lovely to behold. He gets excellent performances from his cast. The increasing visual beauty of his films is part of their grace and sweetness, their balance between Allen's yearning romanticism and his tough eye for the fatuous and sentimental \u2013 a balance also expressed in his best screen play [\"sic\"] yet.\"\nIn his contemporary review for the \"Chicago Sun-Times\", Roger Ebert, who gave the film three and a half out of four stars at the time but gave it a full four in a 2001 retrospective review, wrote: \"Diane Keaton gives us a fresh and nicely edged New York intellectual. And Mariel Hemingway deserves some kind of special award for what's in some ways the most difficult role in the film.\" Ebert included the film in his list of \"The Great Movies\". Gene Siskel of the \"Chicago Tribune\" awarded it four out of four stars, calling it \"a remarkable motion picture. \"Manhattan\" may turn out to be the year's best comedy \"and\" drama.\"\nVincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" called the film \"extraordinarily fine and funny\" with \"superb\" performances from Keaton and Hemingway. Charles Champlin of the \"Los Angeles Times\" called it \"harder, harsher, crueler, deeper-going, more assertive but in the end no less life-affirming than \"Annie Hall\"\", and declared \"Manhattan\" \"even better\" than that film.\nStanley Kauffmann of \"The New Republic\" wrote: \"\"Manhattan\" is a faulty film, but it's moderately amusing\". Alexander Walker of the \"London Evening Standard\" wrote: \"So precisely nuanced is the speech, so subtle the behaviour of a group of friends, lovers, mistresses and cuckolds who keep splitting up and pairing off like unstable molecules\".\nRetrospective reviews and lists.\nIn 2007, J. Hoberman wrote in \"The Village Voice\": \"The New York City that Woody so tediously defended in \"Annie Hall\" was in crisis. And so he imagined an improved version. More than that, he cast this shining city in the form of those movies that he might have seen as a child in Coney Island\u2014freeing the visions that he sensed to be locked up in the silver screen.\"\nIn October 2013, readers of \"The Guardian\" voted it the best film directed by Woody Allen.\nAccolades.\nIn \"Empire\"'s 2008 poll of the 500 greatest movies ever made, \"Manhattan\" was ranked number 76. \"The New York Times\" placed the film on its \"Best 1000 Movies Ever\" list. The film was number 63 on Bravo's \"100 Funniest Movies\". In 2001, the United States Library of Congress deemed it \"culturally, historically or aesthetically significant\" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry. It is also ranked No. 4 on Rotten Tomatoes' 25 Best Romantic Comedies.\nThe film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:\nHome media.\nAllen wanted to preserve Willis's compositions and insisted that the aspect ratio be preserved when the film was released on video (an unusual request in a time when widescreen films were normally panned and scanned for TV and video release). As a result, all copies of the film on video (and most television broadcasts) were letterboxed, originally with a gray border.\n\"Manhattan\" was first released on Blu-ray on January 24, 2012, alongside Allen's 1977 film \"Annie Hall\". Both releases included the films' original theatrical trailer.\nLegacy.\n\"Manhattan\"'s screenplay was performed in front of a live audience at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art on November 15, 2012, as part of Jason Reitman's Live Read series. Actors read the script, narrowed to six speaking parts, and still photographs from the movie were projected behind them. The cast included Stephen Merchant as Isaac Davis, Olivia Munn as Mary Wilkie, Shailene Woodley as Tracy, Michael Murphy reprising his role as Yale Pollack, Mae Whitman as Emily Pollack, Erika Christensen as Jill Davis, and Jason Mantzoukas as Dennis. In keeping with the project's focus on impermanence and spontaneity, there were no rehearsals, shows were announced only days prior, and the names of some cast members were withheld entirely; performances were not recorded.\n\"Manhattan\"'s portrayal of a middle-aged man dating a teenager, which drew little criticism at the time of its release, attracted more scrutiny in the late 2010s as Allen's reputation came into question in the wake of renewed sexual abuse allegations by his daughter Dylan Farrow.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74931", "revid": "41509767", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74931", "title": "Inside Nazi Germany", "text": "Inside Nazi Germany is a 1938 short documentary film about Nazi Germany directed by Jack Glenn. It is an episode of the newsreel series \"The March of Time\".\nProduction.\nJulien Bryan shot over 25,000 feet of film for the project.\nRelease.\nThe Chicago Board of Censors banned the film stating that it was \"unfriendly to the German government\", but Police Commissioner James P. Allman overruled them. Warner Bros. refused to show the film in any of its theaters.\nReception.\nIn 1993, \"Inside Nazi Germany\" was deemed \"culturally significant\" by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74934", "revid": "1320159060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74934", "title": "Help!", "text": "1965 studio album by the Beatles\nHelp! is the fifth studio album by the English rock band the Beatles and the soundtrack to the film \"Help!\". It was released on 6 August 1965 by Parlophone. Seven of the fourteen songs, including the singles \"Help!\" and \"Ticket to Ride\", appeared in the film and take up the first side of the vinyl album. The second side includes \"Yesterday\", the most-covered song ever written. The album was met with favourable critical reviews and topped the Australian, German, British and American charts.\nDuring the recording sessions for the album, the Beatles continued to explore the studio's multitracking capabilities to layer their sound. \"Yesterday\" features a string quartet, the band's first use of Baroque sensibilities, and \"You've Got to Hide Your Love Away\" includes a flute section. The North American release is a true soundtrack album, combining the first seven songs with instrumental music from the film. The omitted tracks are instead spread across the Capitol Records LPs \"Beatles VI\", \"Rubber Soul\" and \"Yesterday and Today\".\nIn the US, \"Help!\" marked the start of artistic recognition for the Beatles from mainstream critics, including comparisons to the European art music tradition. It was nominated in the category of Album of the Year at the 1966 Grammys Awards, marking the first time that a rock band had been recognised in this category. In 2000, it was voted 119th in the third edition of Colin Larkin's book \"All Time Top 1000 Albums\". In 2020, it was ranked 266th on \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's list of the \"500 Greatest Albums of All Time\". In September 2013, after the British Phonographic Industry changed its sales award rules, \"Help!\" was certified platinum for recorded sales since 1994.\nBackground.\nIn 1964, the Beatles appeared in their first feature film, \"A Hard Day's Night\". Despite initial scepticism, reviews were near universal in their acclaim, elevating the Beatles' prestige as artists. With the aim of making one film a year, work began on a second Beatles picture for 1965 release. It would once again be directed by Richard Lester and produced by Walter Shenson, but written by Marc Behm and Charles Wood instead of Alun Owen. It was given the working title \"Eight Arms to Hold You\", one of Ringo Starr's \"Ringoisms\"; the name stuck until early April, long enough to even appear on the US \"Ticket to Ride\" single, but John Lennon and Paul McCartney presumed it would be too difficult to write a compelling song with that title, so \"Help!\" was chosen instead.\nAccording to McCartney, most of the songwriting for \"Help!\" was done at Kenwood, Lennon's house in Weybridge. McCartney also wrote some songs, e.g. \"Yesterday\" and \"I've Just Seen a Face\", at his girlfriend Jane Asher's family home, 57 Wimpole Street in London. At this time, the Beatles were heavily influenced by Bob Dylan, especially Lennon, who later referred to it as his \"Dylan period\". Mark Hertsgaard writes that while Dylan's influence was \"evident\" on \"Beatles for Sale\", \"Help!\" is where it became \"fully realized\". Additionally, \"Help!\" is the first Beatles album on which drugs made a significant impact. Dylan in 1964 had introduced them to cannabis, which they smoked habitually while filming \"Help!\", and they first encountered LSD in spring 1965. According to Alexis Petridis, drugs motivated the Beatles on \"Help!\" to take their songwriting to \"new emotional depths\", such as on \"You've Got to Hide Your Love Away\" and \"Ticket to Ride\".\nRecording and production.\nRecording history.\nFollowing their Christmas 1964 shows, the Beatles took a month's break before beginning work on \"Help!\" All of the recording sessions took place in Studio Two of EMI Recording Studios (now Abbey Road Studios). The first set of sessions began on 15 February with \"Ticket to Ride\" and continued through the 20th, after which the group flew to the Bahamas to begin filming. They took with them a tape of the 11 songs recorded so that Lester and Shenson could decide which ones to use in the film.\nSeveral songs recorded during these initial sessions were not included on the \"Help!\" album. Lennon's \"Yes It Is\" was relegated to the B-side of the \"Ticket to Ride\" single and a cover of Larry Williams' \"Bad Boy\" was put on the North American album \"Beatles VI\". Two Lennon\u2013McCartney compositions were rejected for release altogether. The first was \"If You've Got Trouble\", originally written for Ringo Starr as his obligatory lead vocal for the album. One take was attempted on 18 February before it was abandoned. The other was \"That Means a Lot\", a song Ian MacDonald views as \"an attempt by McCartney to rewrite Lennon's 'Ticket to Ride'\". Two versions were attempted, one on 20 February and a \"re-make\" on 30 March, but it was ultimately given to a friend of the band, singer P. J. Proby, to record. Proby's version was released as a single and reached number 30 on the UK chart. Both \"If You've Got Trouble\" and take 1 of \"That Means a Lot\" were eventually released on \"Anthology 2\" in 1996, along with other outtakes from the \"Help!\" sessions. Additionally, the last song recorded in this time was \"Wait\", which would not be released until the Beatles' next album, \"Rubber Soul\".\nAccording to Mark Lewisohn, 14 June 1965 saw \"[a] remarkable day's work\" and showcased McCartney's musical abilities in varying styles; the Beatles recorded his songs \"I've Just Seen a Face\", \"I'm Down\", and \"Yesterday\". \"Yesterday\" began with just McCartney singing and playing acoustic guitar, but he and producer George Martin decided to add a string quartet. Martin later described it as when, \"I started to leave my hallmark on [the Beatles'] music, when a style started to emerge which was partly of my making.\" \"I'm Down\" was released as the B-side of \"Help!\" but not included on the album.\nInnovations and techniques.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWe still haven't made the sort of sound we want to, and we don't even know what we're after.\n\u2013 John Lennon during the recording of \"Help!\"\nLewisohn writes that 1965 introduced the part of the Beatles' career where they put less focus on live performances and took \"a more serious application in the recording studio.\" He identifies multiple new recording practices used on \"Help!\", one being \"to rehearse songs with a tape machine running, spooling back to record properly over the rehearsed material.\" Another involved adding numerous overdubs to rhythm tracks without considering them as comprising new takes; because of this, many songs on \"Help!\" are documented as having needed only a small number of takes, yet they still required hours of work. Martin also began placing the guitar parts on different tracks than the bass and drums, accomplishing \"a more satisfying stereo image\" according to Walter Everett.\nAccording to Hertsgaard, \"Help!\" showed \"a major acceleration in the Beatles' ongoing search for fresh sounds.\" He points out that half of the songs feature instruments the Beatles had never used before, including electric piano, flutes, a volume/tone pedal, and most famously \"Yesterday\"'s strings. \"Help!\" is also the first Beatles album to feature the Epiphone Casino, first purchased by McCartney around December 1964 before quickly becoming a staple of the group's instrumentation. Before the recording of \"Yesterday\", the flutes on \"You've Got to Hide Your Love Away\" were played by John Scott, only the second outside musician to appear on a Beatles track (after Andy White).\nSongs.\nSide one.\nThe song \"Help!\" was written primarily by Lennon. He originally conceived it at a slower tempo and regretted speeding it up to make it more commercial. Although it was only written out of need for a titular song, Lennon remained extremely proud of \"Help!\" from the Beatles' break-up to his death, even once calling it his favorite Beatles song he wrote. He felt it was one of his \"real\" songs, explaining in an interview: \"The whole Beatle thing was just beyond comprehension. I was eating and drinking like a pig and I was fat as a pig, dissatisfied with myself ... later, I knew I was really crying out for help. So it was my period.\"\nMcCartney's \"The Night Before\" is the first Beatles song to feature electric piano, played by Lennon. McCartney and George Harrison played the guitar solo together, doubling each other in octaves.\nLennon specified \"You've Got to Hide Your Love Away\" as exemplifying his \"Dylan period\". A connection has been suggested between the lyric and Beatles manager Brian Epstein's homosexuality, which he kept private due to British law at the time.\n\"I Need You\" was George Harrison's first songwriting contribution since \"Don't Bother Me\" in 1963. He wrote it for his girlfriend Pattie Boyd, whom he met while filming \"A Hard Day's Night\". Its unusual guitar sound was achieved using a volume/tone pedal \u2013 the first time a guitar pedal was used on a Beatles song. A year after Harrison's death in 2001, Tom Petty sang it at the Concert for George.\nMcCartney wrote \"Another Girl\" while holidaying at a villa in Hammamet, Tunisia. He played lead guitar on the track as Harrison was struggling with it.\n\"You're Going to Lose That Girl\" was written by Lennon and McCartney together, though McCartney credited it 60\u201340 to Lennon. Some have interpreted it as a continuation of \"She Loves You\" due to it revisiting the theme of a love triangle.\n\"Ticket to Ride\" was another song Lennon and McCartney wrote together, but they later disagreed on how much each of them contributed. Lennon said in 1980, \"Paul's contribution was the way Ringo played the drums.\" In \"\", McCartney responded: \"John just didn't take the time to explain that we sat down together and worked on that song for a three-hour songwriting session, and at the end of it we had all the words, we had the harmonies, and we had all the little bits. ... We wrote the melody together ... Because John sang it, you might have to give him 60 per cent of it.\"\nThe meaning of the phrase \"ticket to ride\" has been debated. As was rumored at the time, it was partially inspired by the town Ryde in the Isle of Wight, where McCartney's cousin owned a pub that he and Lennon had performed at in the early 1960s. Another story goes that Lennon used \"ticket to ride\" to refer to cards given to prostitutes in Hamburg by health authorities. Lennon touted the song as \"one of the earliest heavy metal records made.\"\nSide two.\n\"Act Naturally\", written by Johnny Russell and first recorded by Buck Owens in 1963, was chosen by Ringo Starr to be his vocal contribution to the album. Recorded at the end of the \"Help!\" sessions, it was the last-recorded cover song the Beatles would officially release until \"Maggie Mae\" in 1970. In 1989, Owens and Starr recorded another version together.\n\"It's Only Love\" was originally written by Lennon under the title \"That's a Nice Hat (Cap)\". Five guitar layers were used on the track, including Harrison's which was run through a Leslie speaker. Lennon was highly critical of the song in later years: \"That's the one song I really hate of mine. Terrible lyric.\"\n\"You Like Me Too Much\" began the precedent of Harrison providing two or more songs to each Beatles album. It once again features Lennon on electric piano, but also George Martin and McCartney on a Steinway grand piano.\nFor \"Tell Me What You See\", McCartney drew inspiration for his lyrics from a religious verse that hung on a wall in Lennon's childhood home. McCartney later described it as a filler song, \"Not awfully memorable.\"\nMcCartney wrote \"I've Just Seen a Face\" at the home of his girlfriend Jane Asher's family, at 57 Wimpole Street in London. It would become one of McCartney's favorite Beatles songs and among the only ones he would perform with his later band Wings.\nThe album's penultimate track, \"Yesterday\", came partially to McCartney in his sleep. He spent about a month playing it to people to make sure he had not plagiarised it. He then wrote working lyrics for it under the title \"Scrambled Eggs\". \"Yesterday\" was later recognized by \"Guinness World Records\" as the most-covered pop song in history.\nThe album ends with a cover of Larry Williams' \"Dizzy Miss Lizzy\". Lennon in particular was a fan of Williams and, along with \"Bad Boy\", the Beatles also recorded his song \"Slow Down\".\nAlbum cover.\nThe album cover shows the Beatles with their arms positioned to spell out a word in flag semaphore. According to cover photographer Robert Freeman, \"I had the idea of semaphore spelling out the letters 'HELP'. But when we came to do the shot, the arrangement of the arms with those letters didn't look good. So we decided to improvise and ended up with the best graphic positioning of the arms.\"\nOn the UK Parlophone release, the letters formed by the Beatles appear to be \"NUJV\", while the slightly re-arranged US release on Capitol Records appeared to indicate the letters \"NVUJ\", with McCartney's left hand pointing to the Capitol logo. The Capitol LP was issued in a \"deluxe\" gatefold sleeve with several photos from the film and was priced $1 more than standard Capitol releases at the time.\nCompact disc release.\nThere have been four CD releases of \"Help!\". The first was on 30 April 1987, using the 14-song UK track line-up. Having been available only as an import in the US in the past, the original 14-track UK version replaced the original US version with its release on LP and cassette as well on 21 July 1987. As with the CD release of the 1965 \"Rubber Soul\" album, the \"Help!\" CD featured a contemporary stereo digital remix of the album prepared by Martin in 1986. Martin had expressed concern to EMI over the original 1965 stereo mix, claiming it sounded \"very woolly, and not at all what I thought should be a good issue\". Martin went back to the original four-track tapes and remixed them for stereo. One of the most notable changes is the echo added to \"Dizzy Miss Lizzy\", something that was not evident on the original mix of the LP.\nWhen the album was originally released on CD in Canada, pressings were imported from other countries, and used the 1987 remix. However, when the Disque Am\u00e9ric and Cinram plants in Canada started pressing the album, the original 1965 stereo mix was used by mistake. This was the only source for the 1965 stereo mix in its entirety until the release of the mono box set in 2009.\nThe 2009 remastered stereo CD was released on 9 September. It was \"created from the original stereo digital master tapes from Martin's CD mixes made in 1986\". The original 1965 stereo mix was included as a bonus on the mono CD contained in \"The Beatles in Mono\" boxed set.\nThe 1965 stereo mix was reissued again on the \"Help!\" CD contained in the Beatles collection \"The Japan Box\" released in 2014.\nCritical reception.\nContemporary reviews.\n\"Help!\" was another worldwide critical success for the Beatles.&lt;ref name=\"Halpin/LTW\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Derek Johnson of the \"NME\" said that the LP \"maintains the Beatles' usual high standards\" and was a \"gay, infectious romp which doesn't let up in pace or sparkle from start to finish \u2013 with the exception of one slow track\". Despite the band's introduction of new instrumentation into their sound, particularly a string quartet on \"Yesterday\", the reviewer also wrote of the album: \"It's typical Beatles material, and offers very few surprises. But then, who wants surprises from the Beatles?\" While typical of the light and snappy pop music reviews at the time, according to music journalist Michael Halpin, these comments angered McCartney, who, like his bandmates, believed that artists should constantly develop through their work.\nIn the United States, where the mainstream press had long focused on the Beatlemania phenomenon and had derided the group's music, as well as rock 'n' roll generally, the summer of 1965 coincided with the first examples of artistic recognition for the Beatles from the country's cultural mainstream. Among these endorsements, Richard Freed of \"The New York Times\" likened the band's songs to works from the European art music tradition. Adding to what he described as the Beatles' impact on \"serious music\", Freed cited musicologists and composers such as Leonard Bernstein and Abram Chasins as admirers of the group's work. Along with several nominations for \"Yesterday\", \"Help!\" was nominated in the category of Album of the Year at the 1966 Grammys Awards. The nomination marked the first time that a rock band had been recognised in this category.\nRetrospective assessments.\nIn his review of the Beatles' 1987 CD releases, for \"Rolling Stone\" magazine, Steve Pond remarked on the \"unstoppable momentum\" evident in the band's pre-\"Rubber Soul\" albums and recommended \"Help!\" \"for the relatively quiet and understated way in which they consolidated their strengths\". Writing in 2004 edition of \"The Rolling Stone Album Guide\", Rob Sheffield says that the US version of \"Help!\" was \"utterly ruined\" through the replacement of the Beatles songs with the soundtrack music, and that, as a result, the album remained relatively overlooked. He describes the full album as \"a big step forward\" and \"the first chapter in the astounding creative takeoff the Beatles were just beginning\".\nMark Kemp of \"Paste\" considers it to be the equal of \"A Hard Day's Night\" and cites \"Help!\", \"Ticket to Ride\" and \"Act Naturally\" as highlights, along with Harrison's return as a songwriter. Kemp identifies \"Yesterday\" as \"the album's masterpiece\" and a song that \"set the stage for one of the most groundbreaking and innovative periods in The Beatles' career, not to mention pop music in general\". Neil McCormick of \"The Daily Telegraph\" says that the album evokes \"a band in transition, shifting slightly uncomfortably from the pop thrills of Beatlemania to something more mature\", with Lennon's writing increasingly autobiographical and the group's sound growing more sophisticated. McCormick concludes: \"\"Help!\" may not be their greatest album, but it contains some of their greatest early songs.\"\nIn 2000, \"Help!\" was voted 119th in the third edition of Colin Larkin's book \"All Time Top 1000 Albums\". In 2006, it was recognised as one of the \"Most Significant Rock Albums\" in the \"Greenwood Encyclopedia of Rock History\". Two years before then, Tor Milde, music critic for the Norwegian newspaper \"Verdens Gang\", ranked it at number 20 on his list of \"The 100 Best Pop and Rock Albums of All Time\". In 2003, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked \"Help!\" number 332 on their list of the \"500 Greatest Albums of All Time\", raising the ranking to number 331 in the 2012 update and then number 266 in the 2020 list.\nNorth American Capitol release.\nThe North American version, the band's eighth Capitol Records album and tenth overall, includes the songs in the film plus selections from the film's orchestral score composed and conducted by Ken Thorne, which contains one of the first uses of the Indian sitar on a rock/pop album, and its very first use on a Beatles record. \"Ticket to Ride\" is the only song on the American release in Duophonic stereo (also known as \"fake stereo\") reprocessed from the mono mix. Likewise, the mono version of the album uses a folded-down stereo mix of \"Help!\" instead of the true mono version used on the single, which features a different vocal track. \"Help!\" is available on CD as part of \"The Capitol Albums, Volume 2\" box set. This CD contains both the stereo and mono fold-down versions as heard on the American LP release. A second CD release of this album, which contains the seven songs in true mono mixes, was issued in 2014 individually and as part of the Beatles' \"The U.S. Albums\" box set.\nAll of the non-film tracks from side two of the Parlophone album were spread out through three American albums. Three were already issued on the previously released \"Beatles VI\": \"You Like Me Too Much\", \"Tell Me What You See\" and \"Dizzy Miss Lizzy\". \"I've Just Seen A Face\" and \"It's Only Love\" were placed on the Capitol \"Rubber Soul\", with its follow-up album \"Yesterday and Today\" receiving the remaining two tracks: \"Yesterday\" and \"Act Naturally\".\nThe American version of \"Help!\" reached the number one spot on the \"Billboard\" Top LPs chart for nine weeks starting on 11 September 1965.\nCharts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCertifications and sales.\nIn the US, the album sold 1,314,457 copies by 31 December 1965 and 1,594,032 copies by the end of the decade.\nPersonnel.\nAccording to Mark Lewisohn and Alan W. Pollack. \nThe Beatles\nAdditional musicians\nSurround versions.\nThe songs included in the soundtrack of the film \"Help!\" (tracks 1\u20137) were mixed into 5.1 surround sound for the film's 2007 DVD release.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74935", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74935", "title": "Macau/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "74937", "revid": "44645729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74937", "title": "Master Hands", "text": "1936 film\nMaster Hands is a 1936 sponsored documentary film short which shows what work is like in a Chevrolet automobile factory. It was produced by the Jam Handy Organization, a pioneer in industrial film production.\nCredits.\nNotables for this film include original music by Samuel Benavie, cinematography by Gordon Avil, and film editing by Vincent Herman.\nLegacy.\nIn 1999, \"Master Hands\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74940", "revid": "50097956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74940", "title": "Marian Anderson", "text": "African-American contralto (1897\u20131993)\nMarian Anderson (February 27, 1897\u00a0\u2013 April 8, 1993) was an American contralto. She performed a wide range of music, from opera to spirituals. Anderson performed with renowned orchestras in major concert and recital venues throughout the United States and Europe between 1925 and 1965.\nAnderson was an important figure in the struggle for African-American artists to overcome racial prejudice in the United States during the mid-twentieth century. In 1939, during the period of racial segregation, the Daughters of the American Revolution (DAR) refused to allow Anderson to sing to an integrated audience in Constitution Hall in Washington, D.C. The incident placed Anderson in the spotlight of the international community on a level unusual for a classical musician. With the aid of First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt and her husband, President Franklin D. Roosevelt, Anderson performed a critically acclaimed open-air concert on Easter Sunday, April 9, 1939, on the Lincoln Memorial steps in the capital. The event was featured in the documentary \"\". She sang before an integrated crowd of more than 75,000 people and a radio audience in the millions.\nOn January 7, 1955, Anderson became the first African-American singer to perform at the Metropolitan Opera. In addition, she worked as a delegate to the United Nations Human Rights Committee and as a Goodwill Ambassador for the United States Department of State, giving concerts all over the world. She participated in the civil rights movement in the 1960s, singing at the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom in 1963. The recipient of numerous awards and honors, Anderson was awarded the first Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1963, the Congressional Gold Medal in 1977, the Kennedy Center Honors in 1978, the National Medal of Arts in 1986, and a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 1991.\nEarly life and education.\nMarian Anderson was born in Philadelphia on February 27, 1897, to John Berkley Anderson and Annie Delilah Rucker. Her father sold ice and coal at the Reading Terminal in downtown Philadelphia and eventually also sold liquor. Before her marriage, Anderson's mother was briefly a student at the Virginia Seminary and College in Lynchburg, and worked as a schoolteacher in Virginia. As she did not obtain a degree, Annie Anderson was unable to teach in Philadelphia under a law that was applied only to black teachers and not white ones. She therefore earned an income caring for small children. Marian was the eldest of the three Anderson children. Her two sisters, Alyse (1899\u20131965) and Ethel (1902\u201390), also became singers. Ethel married James DePreist and their son James Anderson DePreist was a noted conductor.\nAnderson's parents were both devout Christians and the whole family was active in the Union Baptist Church, which, during her youth, stood in a building constructed by the congregation in 1889 at 709 S. 12th Street in South Philadelphia. Marian's aunt Mary, her father's sister, was particularly active in the church's musical life and convinced her niece to join the junior church choir at the age of six. In that role, she got to perform solos and duets, often with her aunt. Aunt Mary took Marian to concerts at local churches, the YMCA, benefit concerts, and other community music events throughout the city. Anderson credited her aunt's influence as the reason she pursued her singing career. Beginning as young as six, her aunt arranged for Marian to sing for local functions where she was often paid 25 or 50 cents for singing a few songs. As she got into her early teens, Marian began to make as much as four or five dollars for singing, a considerable sum for the early 20th century. At the age of 10, Marian joined the People's Chorus of Philadelphia under the direction of singer Emma Azalia Hackley, where she was often a soloist.\nWhen Anderson was 12, her father received a head injury while working at the Reading Terminal before Christmas 1909. Soon afterwards, her father died following heart failure. He was 37 years old. Marian and her family moved into the home of her father's parents, Benjamin and Isabella Anderson. Her grandfather had been born a slave and was emancipated in the 1860s. He relocated to South Philadelphia, the first person in his family to do so. When Anderson moved into his home, the two became very close, but he died just a year after the family moved there.\nAnderson attended Stanton Grammar School, graduating in 1912. Although her family could not pay for any music lessons or high school, Anderson continued to perform wherever she could and learn from anyone willing to teach her. Throughout her teenage years, she remained active in her church's musical activities and was now involved heavily in the adult choir. She became a member of the Baptists' Young People's Union and the Camp Fire Girls, which provided her with some, though limited, musical opportunities. Eventually, the People's Chorus of Philadelphia and the pastor of her church, Reverend Wesley Parks, along with other leaders of the black community, raised the money she needed to get singing lessons with Mary Saunders Patterson and to attend South Philadelphia High School, from which she graduated in 1921.\nUndaunted, Anderson pursued studies privately in her native city through the continued support of the Philadelphia black community, first with Agnes Reifsnyder, then Giuseppe Boghetti. She met Boghetti through the principal of her high school. Anderson auditioned for him by singing \"Deep River\"; he was immediately brought to tears. Boghetti scheduled a recital of English, Russian, Italian and German music at The Town Hall in New York City in April 1924; it took place in an almost empty hall and received poor reviews.\nIn 1923, Anderson made her first recordings for the Victor Talking Machine Company in Camden, New Jersey.\nEarly career.\nIn 1925, Anderson got her first big break at a singing competition sponsored by the New York Philharmonic. As the winner, she performed in concert with the orchestra on August\u00a026, 1925, a performance that scored immediate success with both the audience and music critics. Anderson continued her studies with Frank La Forge in New York. During this time, Arthur Judson, director of the New York Philharmonic, became her manager. Over the next several years, she made a number of concert appearances in the United States, but racial prejudice prevented her career from gaining momentum. In 1928, she made her first performance at Carnegie Hall.\nRosenwald Fund.\nDuring her fall 1929 concert schedule, Anderson sang at Orchestra Hall in Chicago, for which she received measured praise. Critic Herman Devries from the \"Chicago Evening American\" wrote, \"[Anderson] reached near perfection in every requirement of vocal art\u2014the tone was of superb timbre, the phrasing of utmost refinement, the style pure, discreet, musicianly. But after this there was a letdown, and we took away the impression of a talent still unripe, but certainly a talent of potential growth.\" In the audience were two representatives from Julius Rosenwald's philanthropic organization, the Rosenwald Fund. The organization's representatives, Ray Field and George Arthur, encouraged Anderson to apply for a Rosenwald Fellowship, from which she received $1500 to study in Berlin.\nEuropean tours.\nAnderson went to Europe, where she spent a number of months studying with Sara Charles-Cahier and Geni Sadero before launching a highly successful European singing tour. In the summer of 1930, she went to Scandinavia, where she met the Finnish pianist Kosti Vehanen, who became her regular accompanist and her vocal coach for many years. She also met Jean Sibelius through Vehanen after he had heard her in a concert in Helsinki. Moved by her performance, Sibelius invited them to his home and asked his wife to serve champagne in place of the traditional coffee. Sibelius complimented Anderson on her performance; he felt that she had been able to penetrate the Nordic soul. The two struck up an immediate friendship, which further blossomed into a professional partnership, and for many years Sibelius altered and composed songs for Anderson. He created a new arrangement of the song \"Solitude\" and dedicated it to Anderson in 1939. Originally \"The Jewish Girl's Song\" from his 1906 incidental music to \"Belshazzar's Feast\", it later became the \"Solitude\" section of the orchestral suite derived from the incidental music.\nIn 1933, Anderson made her European debut in a concert at Wigmore Hall in London, where she was received enthusiastically. In the first years of the 1930s, she toured Europe, where she did not encounter the prejudices she had experienced in America. Anderson, accompanied by Vehanen, continued to tour throughout Europe during the mid-1930s. Before going back to Scandinavia, where fans had \"Marian fever\", she performed in Russia and the major cities of Eastern Europe. She became a favorite of many conductors and composers of major European orchestras quickly. During a 1935 tour in Salzburg, the conductor Arturo Toscanini told her she had a voice \"heard once in a hundred years.\"\nAmerican tours.\nIn 1934, impresario Sol Hurok offered Anderson a contract with more favorable terms than she had with Arthur Judson. Hurok became her manager and persuaded her to return to America to perform. In 1935, Anderson made her second recital appearance at The Town Hall, New York City, which received highly favorable reviews from music critics. She spent the next four years touring throughout the United States and Europe. She was offered opera roles by several European houses, but Anderson declined all of them due to her lack of acting experience. She did, however, record a number of arias in the studio, which became bestsellers.\nAnderson's accomplishments as a singer did not make her immune to the Jim Crow laws in the 1930s. Although she gave approximately seventy recitals a year in the United States, Anderson was still turned away by some American hotels and restaurants. In the midst of this discrimination, Albert Einstein, a champion of racial tolerance, hosted Anderson on many occasions, the first being in 1937 when she was denied a hotel room while performing at Princeton University. Einstein's first hosting of Anderson became the subject of a play, \"My Lord, What a Night\", in 2021. She last stayed with him months before he died in 1955.\n1939 Lincoln Memorial concert.\nIn 1939, Sarah Corbin Robert, president general of the Daughters of the American Revolution (DAR) denied permission to Anderson for a concert on April 9 at DAR Constitution Hall under a white performers-only policy in effect at the time. In addition to the policy on performers, Washington, DC, was a segregated city, and Black patrons were upset that they would have to sit at the back of Constitution Hall. Furthermore, Constitution Hall did not have the segregated public bathrooms then required by DC law for such events. Other DC venues were not an option: for example, the District of Columbia Board of Education declined a request for the use of the auditorium of Central High School, a white public high school.\nThe next day, Charles Edward Russell, a co-founder of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and chair of the DC citywide Inter-Racial Committee, held a meeting of the Marian Anderson Citizens Committee (MACC). This included the National Negro Congress, the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, the American Federation of Labor, and the Washington Industrial Council-CIO, church leaders and activists in the city, and numerous other organizations. MACC elected Charles Hamilton Houston as its chairman and on February 20, the group picketed the Board of Education, collected signatures on petitions, and planned a mass protest at the next board meeting.\nIn the ensuing furor, thousands of DAR members, including First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt, resigned from the organization. Roosevelt wrote to the DAR: \"I am in complete disagreement with the attitude taken in refusing Constitution Hall to a great artist... You had an opportunity to lead in an enlightened way and it seems to me that your organization has failed.\"\nAfrican-American novelist Zora Neale Hurston, however, criticized Roosevelt's failure to condemn the simultaneous decision of the Board of Education of the District of Columbia, now the District of Columbia State Board of Education, to exclude Anderson from singing at the segregated white Central High School. Hurston declared \"to jump the people responsible for racial bias would be to accuse and expose the accusers themselves. The District of Columbia has no home rule; it is controlled by congressional committees, and Congress at the time was overwhelmingly Democratic. It was controlled by the very people who were screaming so loudly against the DAR. To my way of thinking, both places should have been denounced, or neither.\"\nAs the controversy grew, the American press overwhelmingly supported Anderson's right to sing. The \"Philadelphia Tribune\" wrote, \"A group of tottering old ladies, who don't know the difference between patriotism and putridism, have compelled the gracious First Lady to apologize for their national rudeness.\" The \"Richmond Times-Dispatch\" wrote, \"In these days of racial intolerance so crudely expressed in the Third Reich, an action such as the D.A.R.'s ban... seems all the more deplorable.\" With the support of Eleanor Roosevelt, President Roosevelt and Walter White, then-executive secretary of the NAACP, and Anderson's manager, Sol Hurok, persuaded Secretary of the Interior Harold L. Ickes to arrange an open-air concert on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial. The concert was performed on Easter Sunday, April 9. Anderson was accompanied, as usual, by Vehanen. They began the performance with a dignified and stirring rendition of \"My Country, 'Tis of Thee\". The event attracted a crowd of more than 75,000 in addition to a national radio audience of millions.\nTwo months later, in conjunction with the 30th NAACP conference in Richmond, Virginia, Eleanor Roosevelt gave a speech on national radio (NBC and CBS) and presented Anderson with the 1939 Spingarn Medal for distinguished achievement. In 2001, a was chosen for the National Film Registry, and in 2008, NBC radio coverage of the event was selected for the National Recording Registry.\nMid-career.\nDuring World War II and the Korean War, Anderson entertained troops in hospitals and at bases. In 1943, she sang at the Constitution Hall, having been invited by the DAR to perform before an integrated audience as part of a benefit for the American Red Cross. She said of the event, \"When I finally walked onto the stage of Constitution Hall, I felt no different than I had in other halls. There was no sense of triumph. I felt that it was a beautiful concert hall and I was very happy to sing there.\" In contrast, the District of Columbia Board of Education continued to bar her from using the high school auditorium in the District of Columbia.\nFord 50th Anniversary Show.\nOn June 15, 1953, Anderson headlined \"The Ford 50th Anniversary Show\", which was broadcast live from New York City on both NBC and CBS. Midway through the program, she sang \"He's Got the Whole World in His Hands\". She returned to close the program with her rendition of the \"Battle Hymn of the Republic\". The program attracted an audience of 60\u00a0million viewers. Forty years after the broadcast, television critic Tom Shales recalled the broadcast as both \"a landmark in television\" and \"a milestone in the cultural life of the '50s\".\nThe Metropolitan Opera.\nOn January 7, 1955, Anderson became the first African American to sing with the Metropolitan Opera in New York. At the invitation of director Rudolf Bing, she sang the part of Ulrica in Giuseppe Verdi's \"Un ballo in maschera\" (opposite Zinka Milanov, then Herva Nelli, as Amelia). Anderson later said about the evening, \"The curtain rose on the second scene and I was there on stage, mixing the witch's brew. I trembled, and when the audience applauded and applauded before I could sing a note, I felt myself tightening into a knot.\" Although she never appeared with the company again, Anderson was named a permanent member of the Metropolitan Opera company. The following year, her autobiography, \"My Lord, What a Morning\", was published, and became a bestseller.\nPresidential inaugurations and goodwill ambassador tours.\nIn 1957, she sang for President Dwight D. Eisenhower's inauguration, and toured India and the Far East as a goodwill ambassador through the U.S. State Department and the American National Theater and Academy. She traveled in 12 weeks, giving 24 concerts. After that, President Eisenhower appointed her a delegate to the United Nations Human Rights Committee. The same year, she was elected Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. In 1958, she was officially designated a delegate to the United Nations, a formalization of her role as \"goodwill ambassadress\" of the U.S.\nOn January 20, 1961, she sang for President John F. Kennedy's inauguration, and in 1962 she performed for President Kennedy and other dignitaries in the East Room of the White House and toured Australia. She was active in supporting the civil rights movement during the 1960s. She performed benefit concerts in aid of the America-Israel Cultural Foundation, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and the Congress of Racial Equality. In 1963, she sang at the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom. That same year, she received one of the newly reinstituted Presidential Medal of Freedom, which is awarded for \"especially meritorious contributions to the security or national interest of the United States, World Peace or cultural or other significant public or private endeavors.\" She also released an album, \"Snoopycat: The Adventures of Marian Anderson's Cat Snoopy\", which included short stories and songs about her beloved black cat. That same year, Anderson concluded her farewell tour, after which she retired from public performance. The international tour began at Constitution Hall on Saturday October 24, 1964, and ended on April 18, 1965, at Carnegie Hall. In 1965, she christened the nuclear-powered ballistic-missile submarine .\nLater life.\nAlthough Anderson retired from singing in 1965, she continued to appear publicly. She often narrated Aaron Copland's \"Lincoln Portrait\", with her nephew James DePriest conducting. In 1976, Copland conducted a performance with the Philadelphia Orchestra at Saratoga. Her achievements were recognized with many honors, including the University of Pennsylvania Glee Club Award of Merit in 1973; the United Nations Peace Prize, New York City's Handel Medallion, and the Congressional Gold Medal, all in 1977; Kennedy Center Honors in 1978; the George Peabody Medal in 1981; the National Medal of Arts in 1986; and a Grammy Award for Lifetime Achievement in 1991. A half-ounce gold commemorative medal was embossed with her portrait by the United States Treasury Department in 1980. Four years later, she was the first person to be honored with the Eleanor Roosevelt Human Rights Award of the City of New York. She was awarded 24 honorary doctoral degrees, by Howard University, Temple University, Smith College, Saint Mary's College and many other colleges and universities.\nPersonal life.\nOn July 17, 1943, Anderson became the second wife of architect Orpheus H. \"King\" Fisher in Bethel, Connecticut. Fisher had asked her to marry him when they were teenagers, but she declined at that time because she feared it would have forestalled her music career. The wedding was a private ceremony performed by United Methodist pastor Rev. Jack Grenfell and was the subject of a short story titled \"The 'Inside' Story\", written by Rev. Grenfell's wife, Dr. Clarine Coffin Grenfell, in her book \"Women My Husband Married, including Marian Anderson\". According to Dr. Grenfell, the wedding was originally supposed to take place in the parsonage, but because of a bake sale on the lawn of the Bethel United Methodist Church, the ceremony was moved at the last minute to the Elmwood Chapel, on the site of the Elmwood Cemetery in Bethel, in order to keep the event private.\nBy this marriage she gained a stepson, James Fisher, from her husband's previous marriage to Ida Gould, a white woman.\nIn 1940, seeking a retreat away from the public eye, Anderson and Fisher purchased a three-story Victorian farmhouse on a farm in Danbury, Connecticut, after an exhaustive search throughout New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut. Through the years, he built many structures on the property, including an acoustic rehearsal studio he designed for his wife. The property remained Anderson's home for almost 50 years.\nFrom 1943, she resided at the farm that Orpheus had named Marianna Farm. The farm was on Joe's Hill Road, in the Mill Plain section of western Danbury. She constructed a three-bedroom ranch house as a residence, and she used a separate one-room structure as her studio. In 1996, the farm was named one of 60 sites on the Connecticut Freedom Trail. The studio was moved to downtown Danbury as the Marian Anderson studio.\nAs a town resident, Anderson wished to live as normally as possible, declining offers to be treated in restaurants and stores as a celebrity. She was known to visit the Danbury State Fair and sang at the city hall on the occasion of the lighting of Christmas ornaments. She gave a concert at the Danbury High School, served on the board of the Danbury Music Center, and supported the Charles Ives Center for the Arts and the Danbury Chapter of the NAACP.\nIn 1986, Orpheus Fisher died after 43 years of marriage. Anderson remained in residence at Marianna Farm until 1992, one year before her death. Although the property was sold to developers, various preservationists as well as the City of Danbury fought to protect Anderson's studio. Their efforts proved successful, and the Danbury Museum and Historical Society received a grant from the state of Connecticut, relocated and restored the structure, and opened it to the public in 2004. In addition to seeing the studio, visitors can see photographs and memorabilia from milestones in Anderson's career.\nIn 1992, Anderson relocated to the home of her nephew, conductor James DePreist, in Portland, Oregon. She died there on April 8, 1993, of congestive heart failure, at the age of 96. She is interred at Eden Cemetery, in Collingdale, Pennsylvania.\nLegacy.\nThe life and art of Anderson has been commemorated by writers, artists, and city, state, and national organizations. The following is a selected list:\nMarian Anderson Award.\nAnderson established the Marian Anderson Award in 1943 after she was awarded The Philadelphia Award in 1940, which included $25,000 in prize money (). Anderson used the money to establish a singing competition to help support young singers. The prize fund was exhausted in due course and disbanded in 1976. In 1990, the award was re-established and issued annually up to 2019, when the last award was granted to Kool &amp; the Gang.\nIn 1998, the Marian Anderson Award prize money was restructured to be given to an established artist, not necessarily a singer, who exhibits leadership in a humanitarian area.\nIn 2020 and 2021, ceremonies were canceled due to the COVID-19 pandemic.\nIn 2022, the Award moved from a private operation to a program administered by Play On Philly, a classical music education organization aimed at local youth. Instead of an annual award ceremony, the funds were used to create the \"Marian Anderson Young Artist Program\", a tuition-free program with a mission to \"serve those individuals whose communities have historically been excluded from the highest levels of musical excellence due to structural barriers in our country.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "74941", "revid": "2372606", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74941", "title": "Body cavity", "text": "Internal space within a multicellular organism\nA body cavity is any space or compartment, or potential space, in an animal body. Cavities accommodate organs and other structures; cavities as potential spaces contain fluid.\nThe two largest human body cavities are the ventral body cavity, and the dorsal body cavity. In the dorsal body cavity the brain and spinal cord are located.\nThe membranes that surround the central nervous system organs (the brain and the spinal cord, in the cranial and spinal cavities) are the three meninges. The differently lined spaces contain different types of fluid. In the meninges for example the fluid is cerebrospinal fluid; in the abdominal cavity the fluid contained in the peritoneum is a serous fluid.\nIn amniotes and some invertebrates the peritoneum lines their largest body cavity called the coelom.\nMammals.\nMammalian embryos develop two body cavities: the intraembryonic coelom and the extraembryonic coelom (or chorionic cavity). The intraembryonic coelom is lined by somatic and splanchnic lateral plate mesoderm, while the extraembryonic coelom is lined by extraembryonic mesoderm. The intraembryonic coelom is the only cavity that persists in the mammal at term, which is why its name is often contracted to simply \"coelomic cavity\". Subdividing the coelomic cavity into compartments, for example, the pericardial cavity / pericardium, where the heart develops, simplifies discussion of the anatomies of complex animals.\nCavitation in the early embryo is the process of forming the blastocoel, the fluid-filled cavity defining the blastula stage in non-mammals, or the blastocyst in mammals.\nHuman body cavities.\nThe dorsal (posterior) cavity and the ventral (anterior) cavity are the largest body compartments.\nThe dorsal body cavity includes the cranial cavity, enclosed by the skull and contains the brain, and the spinal cavity, enclosed by the spine, and contains the spinal cord. \nThe ventral body cavity includes the thoracic cavity, enclosed by the ribcage and contains the lungs and heart; and the abdominopelvic cavity. The abdominopelvic cavity can be divided into the abdominal cavity, enclosed by the ribcage and pelvis and contains the kidneys, ureters, stomach, intestines, liver, gallbladder, and pancreas; and the pelvic cavity, enclosed by the pelvis and contains bladder, anus and reproductive system.\nVentral body cavity.\nThe ventral cavity has two main subdivisions: the thoracic cavity and the abdominopelvic cavity. The thoracic cavity is the more superior subdivision of the ventral cavity, and is enclosed by the rib cage. The thoracic cavity contains the lungs surrounded by the pleural cavity, and the heart surrounded by the pericardial cavity, located in the mediastinum. The diaphragm forms the floor of the thoracic cavity and separates it from the more inferior abdominopelvic cavity. \nThe abdominopelvic cavity is the largest cavity in the body occupying the entire lower half of the trunk. Although no membrane physically divides the abdominopelvic cavity, it can be useful to distinguish between the abdominal cavity, and the pelvic cavity. The abdominal cavity occupies the entire lower half of the trunk, anterior to the spine, and houses the organs of digestion. Just under the abdominal cavity, anterior to the buttocks, is the pelvic cavity. The pelvic cavity is funnel shaped, and is located inferior and anterior to the abdominal cavity, and houses the organs of reproduction.\nDorsal body cavity.\nThe dorsal body cavity contains the cranial cavity, and the spinal cavity.\nThe cranial cavity is a large, bean-shaped cavity filling most of the upper skull where the brain is located. The spinal cavity is the very narrow, thread-like cavity running from the cranial cavity down the entire length of the spinal cord.\nIn the dorsal cavity, the cranial cavity houses the brain, and the spinal cavity encloses the spinal cord. Just as the brain and spinal cord make up a continuous, uninterrupted structure, the cranial and spinal cavities that house them are also continuous. The brain and spinal cord are protected by the bones of the skull and vertebral column and by cerebrospinal fluid, a colorless fluid produced by the brain, which cushions the brain and spinal cord within the dorsal body cavity.\nDevelopment.\nAt the end of the third week of gestation, the neural tube, which is a fold of one of the layers of the trilaminar germ disc, called the ectoderm, appears. This layer elevates and closes dorsally, while the gut tube rolls up and closes ventrally to create a \"tube on top of a tube\". The mesoderm, which is another layer of the trilaminar germ disc, holds the tubes together and the lateral plate mesoderm, the middle layer of the germ disc, splits to form a visceral layer associated with the gut and a parietal layer, which along with the overlying ectoderm, forms the lateral body wall. The space between the visceral and parietal layers of lateral plate mesoderm is the primitive body cavity. When the lateral body wall folds, it moves ventrally and fuses at the midline. The body cavity closes, except in the region of the connecting stalk. Here, the gut tube maintains an attachment to the yolk sac. The yolk sac is a membranous sac attached to the embryo, which provides nutrients and functions as the circulatory system of the very early embryo.\nThe lateral body wall folds, pulling the amnion in with it so that the amnion surrounds the embryo and extends over the connecting stalk, which becomes the umbilical cord, which connects the fetus with the placenta. If the ventral body wall fails to close, ventral body wall defects can result, such as ectopia cordis, a congenital malformation in which the heart is abnormally located outside the thorax. Another defect is gastroschisis, a congenital defect in the anterior abdominal wall through which the abdominal contents freely protrude. Another possibility is bladder exstrophy, in which part of the urinary bladder is present outside the body. In normal circumstances, the parietal mesoderm will form the parietal layer of serous membranes lining the outside (walls) of the peritoneal, pleural, and pericardial cavities. The visceral layer will form the visceral layer of the serous membranes covering the lungs, heart, and abdominal organs. These layers are continuous at the root of each organ as the organs lie in their respective cavities. The peritoneum, a serum membrane that forms the lining of the abdominal cavity, forms in the gut layers and in places mesenteries extend from the gut as double layers of peritoneum. Mesenteries provide a pathway for vessels, nerves, and lymphatics to the organs. Initially, the gut tube from the caudal end of the foregut to the end of the hindgut is suspended from the dorsal body wall by dorsal mesentery. Ventral mesentery, derived from the septum transversum, exists only in the region of the terminal part of the esophagus, the stomach, and the upper portion of the duodenum.\nFunction.\nThese cavities contain and protect delicate internal organs, and the ventral cavity allows for significant changes in the size and shape of the organs as they perform their functions.\nAnatomical structures are often described in terms of the cavity in which they reside. The body maintains its internal organization by means of membranes, sheaths, and other structures that separate compartments.\nThe lungs, heart, stomach, and intestines, for example, can expand and contract without distorting other tissues or disrupting the activity of nearby organs. The ventral cavity includes the thoracic and abdominopelvic cavities and their subdivisions. The dorsal cavity includes the cranial and spinal cavities.\nOther animals.\nOrganisms can be also classified according to the type of body cavity they possess, such as pseudocoelomates and protostome coelomates.\nCoelom.\nIn amniotes and some invertebrates, the coelom is the large cavity lined by mesothelium, an epithelium derived from mesoderm. Organs formed inside the coelom can freely move, grow, and develop independently of the body wall while fluid in the peritoneum cushions and protects them from shocks.\nArthropods and most molluscs have a reduced (but still true) coelom, the hemocoel (of an open circulatory system) and the smaller gonocoel (a cavity that contains the gonads). Their hemocoel is often derived from the blastocoel.\nReferences.\n\"This Wikipedia entry incorporates text from the freely licensed Connexions http:// edition of Anatomy &amp; Physiology http:// text-book by OpenStax College\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74942", "revid": "48898971", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74942", "title": "Meet Me in St. Louis", "text": "1944 American musical film by Vincente Minnelli\nMeet Me in St. Louis is a 1944 American Christmas musical film in Technicolor made by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. Divided into a series of seasonal vignettes, starting with Summer 1903, it relates the story of a year in the life of the Smith family in St. Louis leading up to the opening of the Louisiana Purchase Exposition (most commonly referred to as the World's Fair) in the spring of 1904. The film stars Judy Garland, Margaret O'Brien, Mary Astor, Lucille Bremer, Tom Drake, Leon Ames, Marjorie Main, Harry Davenport, June Lockhart and Joan Carroll.\nThe film was adapted by Irving Brecher and Fred F. Finklehoffe from a series of short stories by Sally Benson originally published in \"The New Yorker\" magazine called \"The Kensington Stories\" and later in novel form as \"Meet Me in St. Louis\". The film was directed by Vincente Minnelli, who met Garland on the set and later married her. Tony Award-winning designer Lemuel Ayers served as the film's art director.\nUpon its release, \"Meet Me in St. Louis\" was both a critical and a commercial success. It became the second-highest-grossing film of 1944, second only to \"Going My Way\", and was also MGM's most successful musical of the 1940s. In 1994, the film was deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry.\nGarland debuted the standards \"The Trolley Song\", \"The Boy Next Door\" and \"Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas\", all written by Hugh Martin and Ralph Blane for the film, and all of which became hits after the film was released. The film's producer Arthur Freed also wrote and performed one of the songs.\nPlot.\nThe backdrop for the film is St. Louis, Missouri, in the year preceding the 1904 Louisiana Purchase Exposition World's Fair.\nIn the summer of 1903, the Smith family leads a comfortable upper-middle class life. Alonzo Smith and his wife Anna have a son, Lon Jr., and four daughters: Rose, Esther, Agnes, and Tootie. Esther, the second-oldest daughter, is in love with the boy next door, John Truett, although he does not notice her at first. Tootie rides with iceman Mr. Neely and debates whether St. Louis is the nation's top city. Rose, the eldest daughter, hopes in vain to receive a marriage proposal from Warren Sheffield.\nEsther finally meets John properly when he is a guest at the Smiths' party and hopes to meet him again on a trolley ride to the construction site of the World's Fair.\nOn Halloween, Tootie and Agnes attend a bonfire. Later, after Tootie appears with a split lip and lost tooth, she claims that John tried to kill her. Esther confronts John, physically attacking and scolding him. After Esther returns, Tootie and Agnes confess the truth: John was trying to protect them from the police after a dangerous prank went wrong. Upon learning the truth, Esther apologizes to John and he kisses her.\nMr. Smith announces that he is to be sent to New York City on business and they will all move there after Christmas. The family is devastated by the news, especially Rose and Esther, whose romances, friendships and educational plans are threatened. Esther is also aghast because they will miss the World's Fair. Although Mrs. Smith is also upset, she reconciles with her husband and they sing a tender duet at the piano.\nAn elegant ball takes place on Christmas Eve. John cannot take Esther because he was too late to pick up his tuxedo. Esther is relieved when her grandfather offers to escort her instead. At the ball, Esther and Rose plot to ruin the evening of Warren's date Lucille Ballard by filling her dance card with losers. They are surprised to find that Lucille is warm, friendly, and not a snob. Lucille suggests that Warren should be with Rose, allowing her to be with Lon. Esther switches her dance card with Lucille's and takes on the clumsy and awkward partners. After being rescued by Grandpa, Esther is overjoyed when John appears in a tuxedo and they dance for the rest of the evening. Later, John proposes to Esther and she accepts, but their future is uncertain because she must still move to New York.\nEsther returns home to find Tootie waiting impatiently for Santa Claus and worrying about whether she can bring all her toys with her to New York. After Esther sings Tootie a poignant rendition of \"Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas\", a neurotic Tootie destroys the snowmen that they must leave behind. Esther reassures Tootie that they will be together no matter where they go. Mr. Smith, who has witnessed the girls outside, begins to have second thoughts. After thinking in the living room, he summons the family downstairs and announces that they will not move to New York, much to everyone's surprise and joy. Warren rushes into the Smith home, declares his love for Rose, and announces that they will marry at the first possible opportunity. Realizing that it is now Christmas, the Smiths celebrate.\nThe next spring, at the World's Fair, the family gathers overlooking the Grand Lagoon just as thousands of lights around the grand pavilion are illuminated.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nThe film is based on \"The Kensington Stories\", a series of sentimental family stories by Sally Benson that appeared in \"The New Yorker\" in 1942 and later in novel form as \"Meet Me in St. Louis\". Shortly after the publication of the stories, Arthur Freed, who had enjoyed previous success with Judy Garland in MGM musicals, convinced studio head Louis B. Mayer to purchase the film rights for $25,000, and Benson was also hired to work on the screen adaptation. The idea for the film was also inspired by \"Life with Father\", a nostalgic family play that had been running on Broadway to great success and acclaim since 1939.\nWhile Freed and his writers developed the script, director Vincente Minnelli, whose background was in set and costume design, prepared the film's design. Minnelli worked with designer Lemuel Ayers on set design and with art director E. Preston Ames to capture the evocative quality of paintings by Thomas Eakins, a popular artist and illustrator at the time in which the story takes place.\nA staff of six writers worked with Benson to capture the essence of her stories, including Doris Gilbert, who had worked with Benson previously. Freed hired the husband-and-wife team of Victor Heerman and Sarah Mason in mid-1942 to add an element of intrigue to the script. They introduced a blackmail plot involving Esther Smith, which Freed found inappropriate, so he tasked staff writer William Ludwig, a specialist in adolescent romance, to excise the blackmail plot and weave courtship stories into the screenplay. By February 1943, Freed was satisfied with Ludwig's script and distributed copies around MGM and to the principal cast members. However, Garland was dissatisfied with the script, feeling its plot to be weak and her character too juvenile. Mayer agreed, and Freed brought in a pair of writers to revise Ludwig's script who added the storyline of the family's looming move to New York. Freed liked the changes but Garland remained unhappy with the script.\nFreed's conflict with producer Joseph L. Mankiewicz, Garland's lover who was developing what would become \"The Pirate\" with Garland in mind for the lead role, nearly caused \"Meet Me in St. Louis\" to be indefinitely postponed. The situation was resolved when Mankiewicz left MGM for Fox, and Freed's project was given the green light with a preliminary budget of $1,395,000 and plans to begin production in early October 1943. However, production was delayed because of studio problems and Technicolor Inc.'s heavy schedule, and the project finally entered production on December 7, 1943, with shooting scheduled for 58 days and a budget that had increased to $1,500,000. Nearly half of the film's budget was devoted to sets ($497,000) and music ($234,000). Story and continuity costs exceeded $132,000 because of the numerous rewrites. Garland was paid $2,500 per week, Margaret O'Brien $250 per week and Minnelli $1,000 per week while producing the film.\nGarland, unhappy with the script and unsure of herself as a leading lady, also suffered severe emotional problems, an acute addiction to amphetamines and numerous physical ailments such as recurring migraine headaches. Production reports show that she disrupted the schedule with fits of hysteria, habitual lateness and occasional absences, missing an entire week of shooting because she claimed to be suffering from an ear infection. Garland also balked at Minnelli's heavy schedule of rehearsals and prerecording sessions in the months preceding filming, but Minnelli won her confidence and the two became lovers, cohabiting by the time of the film's post-production and marrying soon after its release. Earlier in the production, Garland had a brief affair with her costar Tom Drake.\nProduction delays were also caused by illnesses suffered by O'Brien, Mary Astor (pneumonia) and Joan Carroll (appendicitis), but Minnelli used the delays to prepare O'Brien's most demanding and important scenes. Severe rains and flooding in the Los Angeles region caused further delays in the production of exterior scenes. Filming began on December 1, 1943, and was completed on April 7, 1944, behind schedule and with a final budget near $1.8 million. The first rough cut exceeded two hours in length, so the writers suggested edits that brought the film down to 113 minutes for its preview screenings in the summer of 1944. MGM, encouraged by overwhelmingly positive audience previews, held the film's release for the Christmas season.\nMinnelli's idea to introduce each season segment with a greeting-card illustration dissolving into live action was most likely influenced by a similar technique used in Orson Welles' 1942 film \"The Magnificent Ambersons\".\nFreed's process for \"Meet Me in St. Louis\" established a pattern for Minnelli's future musicals: budgets in excess of $1 million, preproduction schedules sometimes exceeding a full year, shooting schedules of three to six months and postproduction phases of six months or longer.\nMusic.\nThe musical score for the film was adapted by Roger Edens, who also served as an uncredited associate producer. Georgie Stoll conducted the orchestrations of Conrad Salinger. Some of the songs in the film are from around the time of the St. Louis Exposition, and others were written for the film.\nDeleted song.\nGarland's prerecording of \"Boys and Girls Like You and Me\" survives, but the cut film footage has been lost. This song was originally composed by Rodgers and Hammerstein for their Broadway musical \"Oklahoma!\", but was cut prior to its opening.\nRelease.\nOriginal theatrical run.\nThe premiere was held in St. Louis on November 22, 1944, and at New York's Astor Theatre one week later. MGM held its general release for the Christmas season due to overwhelmingly positive audience previews. It became MGM's second most profitable film after \"Gone with the Wind\" and solidified the studio's reputation for high-quality musicals.\nTelevision.\nThe film aired on the \"Lux Radio Theatre\" in December 1946, with Judy Garland and Margaret O'Brien reprising their roles. In 1959, CBS aired a television version featuring a new cast, including Jane Powell and Tab Hunter. A pilot for a TV series adaptation was filmed in 1966 but was not picked up for further production.\nHome media.\n\"Meet Me in St. Louis\" has had several home media releases over the decades, reflecting its enduring legacy in popular culture. The film was first released on VHS and LaserDisc by MGM/UA Home Video in 1989, offering improved audio and video quality of the LaserDisc release compared to VHS.\nIn 2004, Warner Home Video issued a two-disc DVD set to celebrate the film's 60th anniversary. This edition featured a restored version of the film along with audio commentaries, behind-the-scenes footage, and other supplementary materials. A Blu-ray edition was released in 2011 by Warner Home Video. This release included many bonus features from the 2004 DVD. In 2023, the Warner Archive Collection introduced an updated Blu-ray version, further enhancing the picture and sound quality to modern standards.\nReception.\nUpon its 1944 release, \"Meet Me in St. Louis\" was a gigantic critical and commercial success. During its initial theatrical release, it earned a then-massive $5,016,000 in the US and Canada and $1,550,000 elsewhere, resulting in a profit of $2,359,000.\nIn a contemporary review for \"The New York Times\", critic Bosley Crowther called the film \"warm and beguiling\" and wrote: \"Let those who would savor their enjoyment of innocent family merriment with the fragrance of dried-rose petals and who would revel in girlish rhapsodies make a bee-line right down to the Astor. For there's honey to be had inside. ... In the words of one of the gentlemen, it is a ginger-peachy show.\"\n\"Time\" called \"Meet Me in St. Louis\" \"one of the year's prettiest pictures\" and noted: \"Technicolor has seldom been more affectionately used than in its registrations of the sober mahoganies and tender muslins and benign gaslights of the period. Now &amp; then, too, the film gets well beyond the charm of mere tableau for short flights in the empyrean of genuine domestic poetry. These triumphs are creditable mainly to the intensity and grace of Margaret O'Brien and to the ability of director Minnelli &amp; Co. to get the best out of her.\" O'Brien drew further praise from \"Time:\" \"[Her] song and her cakewalk done in a nightgown at a grown-up party, are entrancing acts. Her self-terrified Halloween adventures richly set against firelight, dark streets, and the rusty confabulations of fallen leaves, bring this section of the film very near the first-rate.\"\nWriting in \"The New Yorker\", Wolcott Gibbs praised the film as \"extremely attractive\" and called the dialogue \"funny in a sense rather rare in the movies,\" although he felt that the film was too long.\nIn 2005, Richard Schickel included the film in Time.com's list of the 100 best films, saying: \"It had wonderful songs [and] a sweetly unneurotic performance by Judy Garland...Despite its nostalgic charm, Minnelli infused the piece with a dreamy, occasionally surreal, darkness and it remains, for some of us, the greatest of American movie musicals.\" Film historian Karina Longworth also noted its fantastical and surreal elements, calling it \"a gothic art film in disguise as a standard Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer musical\".\nProducer Arthur Freed remarked: \"\"Meet Me in St. Louis\" is my personal favorite. I got along wonderfully with Judy, but the only time we were ever on the outs was when we did this film. She didn't want to do the picture. Even her mother came to me about it. We bumped into some trouble with some opinions \u2013 Eddie Mannix, the studio manager, thought the Halloween sequence was wrong, but it was left in. There was a song that Rodgers and Hammerstein had written, called \"Boys and Girls Like You and Me\", that Judy did wonderfully, but it slowed up the picture and it was cut out. After the preview of the completed film, Judy came over to me and said, 'Arthur, remind me not to tell you what kind of pictures to make.' [It] was the biggest grosser Metro had up to that time, except for \"Gone With the Wind\".\"\nThe film holds a 99% \"Fresh\" rating on the review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes based on 81 reviews with an average score of 8.70/10. The site's critics' consensus for the film reads: \"A disarmingly sweet musical led by outstanding performances from Judy Garland and Margaret O'Brien, \"Meet Me in St. Louis\" offers a holiday treat for all ages.\" Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the a score of 94 out of 100, based on 18 critics, indicating .\nSource material.\nThe plot points for the film originate from the following of Sally Benson's stories published in \"The New Yorker\":\nIn popular culture.\n\"The Trolley Song\" is performed regularly by performers on Main Street, U.S.A. at the Disney Parks and Resorts.\nThe movie is featured in the 2005 film \"The Family Stone\". The \"Have Yourself a Merry Christmas\" scene plays on a television as the character Susannah watches and talks about how it is her favorite scene.\nThe film's snowmen scene was parodied in the December 16, 2023 episode of \"Saturday Night Live\", with comedians Chloe Troast and Kate McKinnon playing the characters of Esther Smith and Tootie Smith, respectively.\nIn the 2023 film \"A Haunting in Venice\", characters Nicholas and Desdemona recount their days traveling with soldiers watching the first half of this film every night.\nIn the 2008 movie \"Sex and the City\" Carrie, Sarah Jessica Parker, on New Year's eve is watching this DVD that Louise, Jennifer Hudson gave her.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74947", "revid": "18632153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74947", "title": "Material equivalence", "text": ""}
{"id": "74948", "revid": "684386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74948", "title": "Memphis Belle", "text": "Memphis Belle may refer to:\nFilms.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "74951", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74951", "title": "Meshes of the Afternoon", "text": "1943 silent short film\nMeshes of the Afternoon is a 1943 American experimental silent short film directed by and starring wife-and-husband team, Maya Deren and Alexandr Hackenschmied.\nThe film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress in 1990 due to its cultural and historical significance.\nThe film is in the public domain in the United States because it was published in the United States between 1928 and 1977 and without a copyright notice.\nPlot.\nA woman (Maya Deren) notices someone on the street as she walks back to her home. She enters her room and falls asleep in a chair. As soon as she drifts off, she experiences a dream in which she repeatedly tries to chase a mysterious hooded figure with a mirror for a face but is unable to catch it. With each failed attempt, she re-enters her house and encounters numerous household objects, including a key, a bread knife, a flower, a telephone, and a phonograph. The woman follows the hooded figure to her bedroom, where she sees the figure hide the knife under a pillow. Throughout the film, she witnesses multiple versions of herself, each representing fragments of the dream she has already experienced.\nIn one instance, the woman attempts to kill her sleeping body with the knife but is abruptly awakened by a man (Alexandr Hackenschmied). The man leads her to the bedroom, and she realizes that everything she saw in the dream was actually happening. She notices that the man\u2019s posture resembles that of the hooded figure when it hid the knife under the pillow. She tries to injure him but fails.\nTowards the end of the film, the man walks into the house and sees a broken mirror being dropped onto wet ground. He then finds the woman in the chair, who was previously asleep but is now dead.\nThe film\u2019s narrative is circular, repeating several motifs: a flower on a long driveway, a falling key, an unlocked door, a knife in a loaf of bread, a mysterious Grim Reaper\u2013like cloaked figure with a mirror for a face, a phone off the hook, and an ocean. Through creative editing, distinct camera angles, and slow motion, the surrealist film portrays a world in which it becomes increasingly difficult to distinguish reality from illusion.\nBackground and production.\nThe film was the product of Deren and Hackenschmied's desire to create an avant-garde personal film that dealt with complex psychology, like the surrealist films \"Un Chien Andalou\" (1929) and \"L'Age d'Or\" (1930) by Salvador Dal\u00ed and Luis Bu\u00f1uel.\nDeren and Hackenschmied, who changed his name to Alexander Hammid in 1942, wrote, directed, and performed in the film. Although Deren is usually credited as its principal artistic creator, filmmaker Stan Brakhage, who knew the couple, has claimed in his book \"Film at Wit's End\" that \"Meshes\" was in fact largely Hammid's creation and that their marriage began to suffer when Deren received more credit. Other sources claim that Hammid's role in the creation of \"Meshes of the Afternoon\" is mainly as cameraperson. Deren made extensive storyboards for all of her films, including camera movements and camera effects. She wrote about these techniques in professional filmmaking magazines. The ideas and execution of the film are mostly attributable to Deren. Hammid also acknowledged Deren as the sole creator of \"Meshes of the Afternoon\".\nThe original print had no score. However, a musical score influenced by classical Japanese music was added in 1959 by Deren's third husband, Teiji Ito.\nIn 1990, \"Meshes of the Afternoon\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\", going into the registry in the second year of voting. In 2015 the BBC named the film the 40th greatest American movie ever made. In 2022, it was voted the 16th greatest film of all time in the \"Sight &amp; Sound\" poll.\nAnalysis.\nIn the early 1970s, J. Hoberman claimed that \"Meshes of the Afternoon\" was \"less related to European surrealism\" and more related to \"Hollywood wartime \"film noir\"\".\nDeren explained that \"Meshes\" \"...is concerned with the interior experiences of an individual. It does not record an event which could be witnessed by other persons. Rather, it reproduces the way in which the subconscious of an individual will develop, interpret and elaborate an apparently simple and casual incident into a critical emotional experience.\"\nLewis Jacobs's discussion.\nWriting about \"Meshes of the Afternoon\", Lewis Jacobs credits Maya Deren with being the first film maker since the end of World War II to \"inject a fresh note into experimental film production\".\nFurther in his discussion of experimental cinema in postwar America, Jacobs says the film \"attempted to show the way in which an apparently simple and casual occurrence develops subconsciously into a critical and emotional experience. A girl comes home one afternoon and falls asleep. In a dream she sees herself returning home, tortured by loneliness and frustration and impulsively committing suicide. The story has a double climax, in which it appears that the imagined, the dream, has become real.\u201d\nDeren uses specific cinematic devices in this film to convey deeper meaning. In a particular scene, Deren is walking up a normal set of stairs, and each time she pushes against the wall, it triggers the camera to move in that direction, almost as if the camera is part of her body. As she pulls herself up the last stair, the top of the stairs leads her to a window in her bedroom, which breaks the expectations of the viewer. In doing so, Deren destroys the normal sense of time and space. There is no longer a sense of what space she is in, nor for how long it was there. Deren constantly asks the viewer to pay attention and remember certain things by repeating the same actions over and over with only very subtle changes.\nA recognizable trait of Deren's work is her use of the subjective and objective camera. For instance, shots in \"Meshes of the Afternoon\" cut from Deren looking at an object, to Deren's point of view, looking at herself perform the same actions that she has been making throughout the film. This conveys the meaning of Deren's dual personality or ambivalent feelings towards the possibility of suicide. It is Lewis Jacobs's opinion that \"the film is not completely successful, it skips from objectivity to subjectivity without transitions or preparation and is often confusing.\" An example of Jacobs's comment would be when Deren cuts to her point of view, which normally is an objective shot, but in this POV shot she is watching herself, which is subjective. The viewer cannot expect Deren's POV shot to contain herself.\nJoseph Brinton's discussion.\nIn Joseph Brinton's 1947 essay \"Subjective Camera or Subjective Audience\", he states that \"the symbolic picturization of man\u2019s subconscious in Maya Deren\u2019s experimental films suggests that the subjective camera can explore subtleties hitherto unimaginable as film content. As the new technique can clearly express almost any facet of everyday human experience, its development should presage a new type of psychological film in which the camera will reveal the human mind, not superficially, but honestly in terms of image and sound.\"\nJacobs' critique that \"the film is not completely successful, it skips from objectivity to subjectivity without transitions or preparation and is often confusing\", represents one point of view. However, others take the film's approach to be a direct representation on the character's thought patterns in a time of crisis: \"Such a film should indeed endow the cinema with a wholly new dimension of subjective experience, permitting the audience to see a human being both as others see him and as he sees himself.\"\nMuseum of Modern Art.\nIn the Museum of Modern Art retrospective (2010), it was suggested that the pieces of the mirror falling into the ocean waves set up \"At Land\" (1944) as a direct sequel, while Deren's last scene in the latter film (running with her hands up with a chess piece in one of them) is then echoed by a scene in \"Ritual in Transfigured Time\" (1946) with that character still running.\nPossible influences.\nJean Cocteau.\n\"Meshes of the Afternoon\" resembles Jean Cocteau's 1930 film \"Blood of a Poet\" in its representation of a subjective point of view. \"Meshes of the Afternoon\" and Cocteau's film also share the same imagery in many instances; however, Deren repeatedly claimed to have never seen the film and denied any influence by Cocteau.&lt;ref name=\"Anthology Film Archives/Film Culture\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nIn the fall of 1945, Deren wrote to Victor Animatograph Corp. that she had now seen Cocteau's film multiple times and expressed interest in publishing a commentary on it. The proposed article was never written.\nSalvador Dali and Luis Bu\u00f1uel.\nThe work of Salvador Dal\u00ed and Luis Bu\u00f1uel has been suggested by some critics as a possible influence. Deren reportedly detested this comparison because of the surrealist movement's interest in the entertainment value of its subject more than its meaning.\nSigmund Freud and Carl Jung.\nViewers have attempted to decode the symbolism in the film from a Freudian or Jungian point of view to uncover possible messages about identity and sexuality. Deren adamantly objected to those who saw her film as symbolic; for her, the objects in the film were just that, objects \"whose value and meaning is defined and confirmed by their actual function in the context of the film as a whole\". Deren wanted her audiences to appreciate the art for its conscious value and spent much of her later career delivering lectures and writing essays on her film theory.\nAccolade.\n\"Meshes of the Afternoon\" won the Grand Prix International for avant-garde film at the 1947 Cannes Film Festival.\nLegacy.\nA cloaked, mirror-faced figure appears in John Coney's 1974 Sun Ra vehicle \"Space Is the Place.\nThe dreamlike (or nightmarish) atmosphere of \"Meshes\" has influenced many subsequent films, notably David Lynch's \"Lost Highway\" (1997). Wendy Haslem of the University of Melbourne's Cinema Studies department wrote about the parallels between the two:\nMaya Deren was a key figure in the development of the New American Cinema. Her influence extends to contemporary filmmakers like David Lynch, whose film \"Lost Highway\" (1997) pays homage to \"Meshes of the Afternoon\" in his experimentation with narration. Lynch adopts a similar spiraling narrative pattern, sets his film within an analogous location and establishes a mood of dread and paranoia, the result of constant surveillance. Both films focus on the nightmare as it is expressed in the elusive doubling of characters and in the incorporation of the \u201cpsychogenic fugue,\u201d the evacuation and replacement of identities, something that was also central to the voodoo ritual.\nJim Emerson, the editor of RogerEbert.com, has also noted the influence of \"Meshes\" within David Lynch's film \"Inland Empire\" (2006).\nHowever, Lynch has denied he ever saw the film or even heard of Deren.\nIn 2010, the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) opened an exhibition that dealt with Deren's influence on three experimental filmmakers, Barbara Hammer, Su Friedrich and Carolee Schneemann, as part of a year-long retrospective there on representation of women. Su Friedrich conceived her short film \"Cool Hands, Warm Heart\" (1979) in direct homage to \"Meshes of the Afternoon\", and used the flower and knife motifs similarly in that film.\nKristin Hersh's song \"Your Ghost\" is inspired by the film, and the song's music video uses several motifs from the film, including a spinning record, a telephone, and a key on a woman's tongue. Likewise, Milla Jovovich's video for \"Gentleman Who Fell\" reproduces other motifs such as the mirror-faced figure, the reappearing key, the knife, and the shifting staircase effect.\nIndustrial metal pioneers Godflesh used a still from the film for the cover of their 1994 EP \"Merciless\", as did alternative rock band Primal Scream for their 1986 single \"Crystal Crescent\".\nExperimental electronic artist Sd Laika used samples from the film's soundtrack for the track \"Meshes\" on his debut album.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74952", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74952", "title": "Disjunction", "text": ""}
{"id": "74953", "revid": "1316356764", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74953", "title": "Spike (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)", "text": "Character in Buffy the Vampire Slayer and Angel\nWilliam \"Spike\" Pratt, played by James Marsters, is a fictional character created by Joss Whedon and David Greenwalt for the television series \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" and \"Angel\". Spike is a vampire and played various roles on the shows, including villain, anti-hero, trickster and romantic interest. For Marsters, the role as Spike began a career in science fiction television, becoming \"the obvious go-to guy for US cult [television].\" For creator Whedon, Spike is the \"most fully developed\" of his characters. The character was intended to be a brief villain, with Whedon originally adamant to not have another major \"romantic vampire\" character like Angel. Marsters says \"Spike was supposed to be dirty and evil, punk rock, and then dead.\" However, the character ended up staying through the second season, and then returning in the fourth to replace Cordelia as \"the character who told Buffy she was stupid and about to die.\"\nWithin the series' narrative, William was an unsuccessful aspiring poet in the Victorian era who was mocked and called \"William the Bloody\" because of his \"bloody awful\" poetry. Sired by the vampire Drusilla (Juliet Landau), William became an unusually passionate and romantic vampire, being very violent and ready to battle, but not as cruel as his companions. Alongside Drusilla, Darla (Julie Benz) and Angelus (David Boreanaz), Giles thinks William acquired the nickname Spike for his preferred method of torturing people with railroad spikes, but it is revealed it is because his poetry was \"so bad you could stick a railroad spike through your head.\" He was noted for killing two vampire Slayers; one in China in 1900 during the Boxer Rebellion, the other was Nicki Wood in 1977 New York, where Spike acquired his trademark leather duster. During the second season of the series, Spike comes to Sunnydale hoping to kill a third Slayer, Buffy Summers (Sarah Michelle Gellar), with whom he later forges an uneasy alliance. Over the course of \"Buffy\", Spike falls in love with the Slayer, reacquires his soul to prove himself to Buffy and dies a hero in the show's series finale. He is subsequently resurrected in the first episode of the fifth season of the spin-off series \"Angel\".\nConsidered a \"breakout character\", Spike proved immensely popular with fans of \"Buffy\". The character appears substantially in Expanded Universe materials such as comic books and tie-in novels. Following the cancellation of \"Angel\" in 2004, Whedon considered creating a \"Spike\" film spin-off. Canonically, the character appears in issues of the comic books \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer Season Eight\" (2007\u201311), \"\" (2007\u201309), \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer Season Nine\", \"Angel &amp; Faith\" (both 2011\u20132013) and several \"Spike\" limited series, spinning off from both \"Buffy\" and \"Angel\". Currently the character is in the canonical comic \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer Season Eleven \" (2016\u20132017) and in \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer Season Twelve\" (2018).\nAppearances.\nTelevision.\nEarly history.\nSpike's story before he appears in Sunnydale unfolds in flashbacks scattered, out of sequence, among numerous episodes of both \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" and \"Angel\". The first flashback occurs in \"Buffy\" season 5's \"Fool for Love\", and reveals William as in fact a meek, young man of aristocratic background (and an aspiring poet) who lived in London with his mother, Anne. Anne would often sing the folksong \"Early One Morning\" to her son, right up until the time he was turned into a vampire. William's surname is given as \"Pratt\" in the non-canon comic ' and is written on the label of his jar of blood in the comic ' #002. This surname became official with the publication of the canon comic \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer Season 11\" #7, in which Buffy calls him by it. The name William Pratt may allude to horror actor Boris Karloff, whose birth name was William Henry Pratt, and can also be understood as the British slang term \"prat\", describing a person of arrogant stupidity.\nSpike is one of the youngest recurring vampires on the show, though the evidence of his age is contradictory, as the concept of the character evolved over time. When he was introduced in \"School Hard\" (season 2), Giles read that he was \"barely 200,\" implying that he was either born or sired in 1797 or slightly earlier. In \"The Initiative\" (season 4) he said he was 126, thus born or sired in 1874. Flashbacks in \"Fool for Love\" (season 5) show that Spike was sired as an adult in 1880. Assuming he was in his early to mid-20s when he was sired, Spike would be in his 140s during the series. In the comic \"\" #002, Spike's jar of blood has a label giving his assumed human birth date in 1853, about 27 years before he was sired.\nIn 1880, William was a struggling poet, often mocked by his peers who called him \"William the Bloody\" behind his back because his poetry was so \"bloody awful.\" The true origins of this nickname were not revealed until three years after it was first mentioned in season 2, when it was believed to have purely violent connotations. William showed a strong capacity for loyalty and devoted love, which remained after his siring. After his romantic overtures were rejected by the aristocratic Cecily, William wandered the streets despondently and bumped into Drusilla. She consoled him, drained him of blood and made him drink of her blood, thus transforming him into a vampire \u2013 \"siring\" him, in the jargon of the series. Spike's grand-sire, Angelus, became his mentor (leading Spike occasionally to describe him loosely as his sire): \"Drusilla sired me, but you, you made me a monster.\" Whereas new vampires in the Buffyverse often delight in killing their families once they become evil, William was a notable exception. Having always been very close to his mother, he turned her into a vampire to save her from tuberculosis. But his mother, as a vampire, taunted William and insinuated he had always had a sexual fascination with her. William chose to stake her because he found he could not bear to see his mother behaving like the soulless vampire he had made of her. She, like most vampires, lacked his unusual capacity for some of the softer human emotions, like love and compassion.\nAfter staking his mother, William began a new life with Drusilla, to whom he was utterly devoted. Euphoric with his newfound vampiric abilities, he adopted the poses and trappings of a cultural rebel, affecting a working class East London accent and embracing impulsiveness and extreme violence. He adopted the nom de guerre \"Spike\" based on his habit of torturing people with railroad spikes \u2013 possibly prompted by criticism of his poetry: \"I'd rather have a railroad spike through my head than listen to that awful stuff.\" In \"The Weight of the World\", Spike mentions having spent \"the better part of a century\" in delinquency, suggesting criminal activities other than killing for blood. In the company of Drusilla, Angelus, and Darla, Spike terrorized Europe and Asia for almost two decades. He had a strained relationship with Drusilla's sire Angelus, who continued a sexual relationship with her despite Spike's strong disapproval. Although Angelus did enjoy the company of another male vampire in their travels, he found Spike's recklessness and lust for battle to be unnecessary risks. Angelus regarded killing as an art, not a sport, and killed for the sheer act of evil; Spike did it for amusement and the rush.\nIn 1894, Spike and Angelus developed a rivalry with the enigmatic Immortal, who later had Spike sent to prison for tax evasion. In 1900, Spike killed Xin Rong, a Chinese Slayer while in China during the Boxer Rebellion. In 1943, he was captured by Nazis for experimentation and taken aboard a submarine, where he was briefly reunited with Angel. By the 1950s, Spike had reunited with Drusilla, and they traveled to Italy. At some point, Spike also became a rival of the famous vampire Dracula. The enmity between Spike and Dracula was explored in the comic series \"Spike vs. Dracula\", in which their mutual hatred is caused when Spike, along with Darla and Drusilla, slaughtered the Romani (gypsy) tribe who had cursed their patriarch Angelus with a soul, although it is unclear if either Spike or Drusilla knew precisely why Darla was so angry with the tribe. That clan (unknown to Spike) was favored by Dracula, and he sought revenge for their deaths. Spike later mentions in a conversation with Riley Finn, \"Dracula? bugger owes me \u00a311, for one thing,\" because Dracula tossed Spike's signed copy of Bram Stoker's \"Dracula\" in a fire in 1898. Spike also notes that Dracula's fame has done more damage to vampires than any Slayer, since it made their weaknesses more widely known. Spike attended Woodstock in 1969, whereupon he accidentally became high after ingesting the blood of a hippie. He claims to have spent the six hours following the incident \"watching my hand move\". In 1977, he fought and killed a second Slayer, Nikki Wood, aboard a subway train in New York City, taking from her a black leather duster which he wears throughout his appearances on \"Buffy\" and \"Angel\" until it is destroyed in an explosion in season 5 of \"Angel\", whereupon he gets a new one that looks exactly like the old one (\"The Girl in Question\"). At some point post-1977, Billy Idol allegedly \"stole\" Spike's look and made it famous as his own (as revealed in season 7\u2019s \"Sleeper\"; see \"Appearance\" below); Spike's thoughts on this are unrecorded. Inasmuch as Buffy knew of the \"theft\" as of \"Sleeper,\" Spike presumably shared the detail with her in an undepicted moment.\nSpike's flashback appearances, in chronological order, include:\nSunnydale.\nSpike first arrives in Sunnydale in season 2 of \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\", in the episode \"School Hard\", accompanied by Drusilla. Spike and Dru were modeled on Sid Vicious and Nancy Spungen; punk, \"badass\" vampires to contrast sharply with the more ceremonial tradition of the Master and the Order of Aurelius from season 1. Spike is in fact a fan of Sid Vicious' band The Sex Pistols and punk band The Ramones. In the final scene of the episode \"Lovers Walk\", he can be seen singing to a cover of \"My Way\" by Gary Oldman, who portrayed Vicious in the film \"Sid and Nancy\". Spike's first act in Sunnydale is to attack Buffy and a large group of people at her school, making his first appearance the deadliest of any of \"Buffy\"'s \"Big Bads\".He very nearly kills Buffy, but Buffy's mother distracts Spike long enough for Buffy to recover by hitting him in the head with a fire axe. Throughout season 2, Spike and Dru are the canon's most prominent example of affection between vampires, displaying the humanity and intricacies of vampire relationships. Spike was initially conceived as a disposable villain to be killed off, but proved so popular with fans that Joss Whedon decided to merely injure him instead, in the episode \"What's My Line, Part Two\". Spike is crushed by a collapsing pipe organ and left paralyzed. (Later, it is revealed that Spike's injuries have healed and that he has been deceiving everyone by remaining in his wheelchair, feigning injury.)\nSpike and Drusilla are major enemies of Buffy for much of the second season. They arrive shortly after Drusilla is seriously weakened by an angry mob in Prague, as recounted in the canon comic book \"The Problem with Vampires\". Spike is a devoted caretaker to Drusilla in her weakened condition and initially hopes the Hellmouth's energy can help restore her strength. He reunites with Angel and seems genuinely pleased to see him, but is disgusted to find that Angel has a soul (whether or not Spike in fact knew that Angel's acquisition of a soul is why he left the group nearly a century before has never been made clear) and is in love with the current Slayer, Buffy Summers. When Angel loses his soul and rejoins Spike and Dru, Spike's initial celebration soon turns to resentment when Angelus pursues Drusilla as a lover and taunts him. Spike decides to ally himself with Buffy against Angelus; as he explains to Buffy, in addition to wanting Drusilla back, he also wants to \"save the world\":\nSpike reappears in the season 3 episode \"Lovers Walk\", in a drunken depression after Drusilla, offended by his alliance with Buffy, dumps him for a Chaos Demon. He kidnaps Willow and Xander, and forces Willow to conduct a love spell for him to make Drusilla love him again, even coercing Buffy and Angel to help him in exchange for the safe return of their friends. The excitement of a brawl with the Mayor's vampires helps him see that Drusilla left him because he had begun to go soft; he resolves to win her back by torturing her until she likes him again, and tells Buffy where to find Willow and Xander. He also tells Buffy and Angel that they can never be 'just friends' because of their love for one another. This insight foreshadows Spike's later role as the \"truth-seer\" of the group.\nSpike returns to Sunnydale alone in season 4, in the episode \"The Harsh Light of Day\", briefly living with Harmony Kendall, a shallow former classmate of Buffy, now a vampire. He is in Sunnydale to look for the Gem of Amarra, a ring which makes a vampire effectively invulnerable. He finds it and attacks Buffy in daylight, but she wrests the ring from his finger and sends it to Angel. Spike goes to Los Angeles, and hires a vampire named Marcus to torture Angel in order to get the ring, but Marcus takes the ring himself and Angel finally destroys it.\nAfter being captured by the Initiative and implanted with a cerebral microchip which punishes him with debilitating pain whenever he harms or attempts to harm any non-demon life forms (he initially assumes it works the same with anything living), Spike turns to the Scooby Gang for protection, bartering his knowledge of the Initiative. (Though he still spars with Buffy, provided he has no real intent on harming her) His inability to bite is comically compared to impotence, much to Spike's constant humiliation; in \"Doomed\", he attempts to commit suicide by staking himself at Xander's house, but is stopped by Willow and Xander. Eventually, he inadvertently discovers that he can harm demons and enthusiastically joins a fight with this knowledge, showing that he's less concerned about what side he's fighting on than fighting for the thrill of it. Occasionally helping the Scooby Gang by providing them with information and/or combat assistance in exchange for cash or for the joy of fighting, but having no qualms about betraying them to such enemies as Faith and Adam. In season 4, Spike was introduced to fill the antagonistic role that Cordelia had in seasons 1 to 3; as Joss Whedon explains on the DVD featurette, \"All of our characters got to the point where they were loving and hugging, and it was sort of like, where's Cordelia?\" Spike appeared in every episode thereafter with the exception of \"The Body\".\nIn season 5, after some erotic dreams, Spike becomes aware to his horror that he has fallen in love with Buffy. He becomes a more active participant in the Scooby Gang, jumping into several of Buffy's fights to provide assistance, whether she wants it or not. When Buffy rejects his advances, Spike attempts to prove his love by kidnapping her so that she can witness him killing Drusilla for her, to little avail; in her disgust, Buffy un-invites him from her house (something she had not bothered to do in almost three years since their alliance against Angelus) and alienates him from the group.\nSpike then has Warren Mears make a robot in Buffy's likeness, programmed to love and obey him. Though Buffy is disgusted by this, her hostility towards him fades considerably when she learns that Spike refused, even under intense torture, to reveal the identity of the Key to Glory, nearly laying down his life to protect Buffy's sister Dawn. Buffy is moved by this unexpected loyalty and kisses him, saying she will not forget what he has done. In the days and hours leading up to the final showdown with Glory, Spike fights by Buffy's side, earning her trust and a re-invitation to her house. Spike displays unabashed grief after Buffy dies in the showdown with Glory. He honors her memory by remaining loyal to the Scoobies, fighting at their side and serving the role of babysitter / older brother / protector to Dawn, helping Willow and Tara to raise her in Buffy's absence.\nAfter Buffy is resurrected at the beginning of season 6, she is despondent and detached from her friends. During this time, her relationship to Spike deepens and she is able to talk to him about things she feels she cannot share with the Scooby Gang. She gets drunk with Spike, and calls him \"a neutered vampire who cheats at kitten poker.\" After a demon's spell makes them express their emotions in song, and Buffy sings \"I want the fire back\", Buffy and Spike begin a physical relationship, consummated two episodes later. The relationship is frequently violent, with Buffy most often initiating both the violence and the sex between them; the violence is made all the easier when Spike finds that (as a side effect of Willow's resurrection spell) his chip now does not stop him from harming Buffy. Buffy threatens to kill Spike if he ever tells anyone about their relationship. Both are unsatisfied; Buffy is ashamed of her dark desires, while Spike obsessively craves the love, trust, and affection that she is unwilling to give. In \"As You Were\", Buffy tells Spike she is using him and ends their relationship. Believing he still has a chance with Buffy after seeing her reactions of jealousy and hurt when he has a drunk sexual encounter with Anya, Spike corners her and makes aggressive sexual advances. When she refuses him, he grows desperate and attacks her, nearly raping her in the process\u2014though Buffy manages to kick him off long enough for him to realize what he was about to do and stop himself. Simultaneously horrified by his actions and angry with his status as somewhere between man and monster, Spike leaves Sunnydale soon after. He makes his way to a remote area of Africa, where he seeks out a legendary demon shaman and undergoes the Demon Trials, a series of gruelling physical challenges, in return for a wish. Having proven his worthiness by surviving the trials, Spike is granted his wish, which is then revealed to be to have his soul restored.\nIn season 7, a re-ensouled Spike must cope with the guilt of his past actions and try to win back Buffy's trust. But under influence of the First Evil's hypnotic trigger, Spike unknowingly starts killing again. Upon discovering what he has done, he begs Buffy to stake him, but she refuses and takes him into her house, telling him she has seen him change. Buffy guards and cares for Spike throughout his recovery, telling Spike she believes in him, a statement which later sustains him throughout his imprisonment and torture at the hands of the First. When Spike's chip begins to malfunction, causing him intense pain and threatening to kill him, Buffy trusts him enough to order the Initiative operatives to remove it from his head. When Nikki Wood's son Robin tries to kill Spike, he unwittingly frees Spike from his hypnotic trigger: the song \"Early One Morning\", a favorite of his mother, which evokes Spike's traumatic memories of his mother's abusive behavior toward him after she turned; after Spike is able to address these issues, he realizes his mother had always loved him, knowledge which frees him from the First's control.\nLater in the season, Spike and Buffy achieve an emotional closeness; he alone stays loyal to her when the Scoobies and Potentials mutiny against her, and his words and encouragement give a depressed Buffy the strength to continue fighting. They spend three nights together, one of which Spike describes as the best night of his life, just holding her. It is unclear whether they resume their sexual intimacy during the third night; creator Joss Whedon says on the DVD commentary for \"Chosen\" that he intentionally left it to the viewers to decide how they felt the relationship progressed. In the final battle inside the Hellmouth, Spike, wearing a mystical amulet, sacrifices himself to destroy the Turok-Han and close the Hellmouth. He is slowly incinerated in the process, but not before Buffy tells him \"I love you.\" He replies, \"No, you don't; but thanks for saying it.\" Even as he burns and crumbles to dust, Spike laughs and revels in the destruction around him and the burning presence of his soul, glad to be able to see the fight to its end. In dying to save the world, he becomes a Champion.\nLos Angeles.\nSpike had previously appeared in the season 1 episode of \"Angel\" \"In the Dark\", Spike goes to Los Angeles at the same time as Oz arrives to give Angel the Gem of Amarra, Spike's objective was to get the ring and kill Angel. Oz gives Angel the ring who then hides it in the sewer, just as he is about to leave for another case, he is ambushed by Spike who hits him with a wooden plank, Angel defeats Spike but Spike warns him that he will get the ring one way or another. Angel takes precaution and goes on a manhunt for Spike, Angel finally finds him, chases him through the alley, and corners him only to fall into Spike's trap. Spike captures Angel and hires a vampire named Marcus to torture Angel until he tells him where the ring is. After a while Spike gets bored with waiting so he goes to Angel's apartment to find the ring and leaving Marcus to torture Angel, he gets to the apartment only to find Cordelia and Doyle aiming at him with weapons and demanding to know where Angel is. Spike reveals Angel's location and tells them that the only way he will release Angel is if they find him the ring. Cordelia and Doyle find the ring in the sewer and head straight to Spike. When they arrive at the location they find out that Spike had lied about releasing Angel. Taking precautions however, they then throw the ring away and just as Spike was about to retrieve it, Oz bursts through the wall in his van and rescues Angel. Spike looks for the ring but finds out that Marcus took it. Spike begins smashing Marcus's things and shouting about how he is going to work alone from now on until a hole that was in the ceiling lets sunlight in and sets the back of his hair on fire.\nDespite his apparent death at the end of \"Buffy\"'s final season, Spike returns in the fifth and final season of the spin-off series \"Angel\". Resurrected by the amulet in the Los Angeles branch of supernatural law firm Wolfram &amp; Hart, he spends seven episodes as an incorporeal being akin to a ghost; he starts to understand being one when he battles \"the Reaper\" Matthias Pavayne. During this time he realizes he is being slowly pulled into hell. Later he becomes corporeal, due to a mysterious gift that arrives at the office of Wolfram and Hart. After this, Spike takes on Angel to prove which one of them is the Champion spoken of in the Shanshu Prophecy. Spike defeats Angel, but the prophecy remains ambiguous (the Cup of Torment is revealed as a fake containing Mountain Dew). Manipulated by Lindsey McDonald into \"helping the helpless\", Spike becomes a sort of rival to Angel; resembling the heroic Champion Angel was in earlier seasons before becoming disillusioned and corrupted by the bureaucracy of Wolfram &amp; Hart. Soon afterward he is kidnapped by the psychotic Slayer Dana, who believes he was responsible for kidnapping and torturing her as a child. Cordelia comments on this strange turn of events after coming out of her coma in \"You're Welcome\", exclaiming to Angel, \"Okay, Spike's a hero, and you're CEO of Hell, Incorporated. What freaking bizarro world did I wake up in?\"\nWhen Fred is killed by Illyria, Spike mourns her death and decides to join Team Angel in her honor. Upon learning that Buffy is now dating The Immortal, Spike and Angel travel to Rome on the pretext of business but spend most of the time there trying to find Buffy. In the end, they fail to catch up with her. (The blonde glimpsed in Rome is later revealed to be a decoy Buffy, set up by Andrew Wells, who had researched the history between Angel, Spike and The Immortal, and thought the idea would be \"hilarious\".) During the final episodes of \"Angel\", Spike is the first to vote for Angel's plan to wound the Senior Partners by massacring the Circle of the Black Thorn. He then spends what might be his last hours on Earth returning to his mortal roots as a frustrated poet, triumphantly knocking them dead (figuratively) in an open mic poetry slam at a bar. After single-handedly (literally, he held the baby in one hand and a sword in the other) rescuing an infant and destroying the Fell Brethren, Spike joins Angel, Illyria, and a badly wounded Charles Gunn in the alley behind the Hyperion as the series draws to an end, preparing to incur the apocalyptic wrath of the Senior Partners, as a way of going out in a blaze of glory that will probably cost their lives.\nLiterature.\nSpike appears significantly in a number of canonical Expanded Universe literature concurrent with and subsequent to the television series, including both \"Buffy\" and \"Angel\" comic books. Many of these novels and comic books concern Spike's backstory in the periods between the events shown in flashbacks in the television series. From 2007, both Dark Horse Comics and IDW Publishing began telling canonical continuations of \"Buffy\" and \"Angel\", respectively. Marsters himself wrote for the miniseries \"Spike &amp; Dru\" in 2000. The collection also featured the Christopher Golden stories \"The Queen of Hearts\", \"All's Fair\", \"Paint the Town Red\" and \"Who Made Who?\", set in or around episodes of \"Buffy\" in seasons 2 and 4; \"Who Made Who\" is set during the \"Buffy\" episode \"Lovers Walk\" and depicts the disintegration of his relationship with Drusilla when they were together in Brazil. After \"Buffy\" finished in 2003, Spike appeared in a comic story from the canonical \"Tales of the Vampires\" series. Written by series writer Drew Goddard, \"The Problem with Vampires\" establishes his adventures in Prague prior to his introduction \"Buffy\" episode \"School Hard\". Christopher Golden's 2000 novel \"\" depicts Spike killing a Slayer named Sophie in the 1940s, contradicting the two Slayers whom Spike is later established to have killed; the second Slayer Spike killed was established as New Yorker Nikki Wood. The short story \"Voodoo Lounge\" from the collection \"Tales of the Slayer\" is a sequel to this novel. Golden's 2006 novel, \"Blackout\", is truer to the series' chronology by depicting Spike's fatal encounter with Slayer Nikki Wood in 1977. Diana G. Gallagher's 2005 novel \"Spark and Burn\" depicts the struggling early-season 7 Spike remembering an account of his life, amounting to a chronological character history of Spike's life from the 19th century to the time of the framing device.\n Most Spike-centric stories, however, have been published subsequent to \"Angel\"'s finale episode. The 2005 IDW comic book ', by Peter David, depicts Spike's encounter with the vengeance demon Halfrek, explaining his recognition of her in \"Buffy\" episode \"Older and Far Away\", and clarifying that she was in fact his beloved Cecily. Mutant Enemy approved the story, even though IDW did not have rights to a \"Buffy\"-only character like Halfrek, because of her importance to Spike's backstory, on the condition that the story's timing was deliberately ambiguous. Following \"Angel\"'s cancellation, Spike immediately appeared in the \"Angel\" miniseries \"Spike vs. Dracula\" by Peter David, a sequel to the \"Buffy\" episode \"Buffy vs. Dracula\" and expanding on the characters' century-old rivalry established in that episode. Scott Tipton's 2006 comic ' is detective fiction set during season 5, and also features allusions to Spike's activities in the late 1940s. Tipton's ' in 2006 is a season 5 story that acts as a sequel to the 1999 \"Buffy\"/\"Angel\" crossover episodes \"The Harsh Light of Day\" and \"In the Dark\", featuring the immortality-bestowing Gem of Amarra in 2005 Los Angeles. Lastly, writer Brian Lynch teamed up with Franco Urru to produce the story arc ' (2006\u201307), depicting Spike's stay in a supernatural medical facility. Although originally of the same ambiguous relationship to canon, the characters it introduced would reappear in the canonical \"Angel\" comic books to come later. Whedon appreciated Lynch's writing of Spike in \"Asylum\" so much that he commissioned him to co-write the canonical continuation of the series, ', in 2007. Lynch and Urru also penned ', featuring Spike and Lorne doing battle with the muppet demons of Angel episode \"Smile Time\" in Japan. In the explicitly canonical Whedon stories of 2007, Spike and Angel first appear in a joint cameo in \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer Season Eight\" (Dark Horse) as part of Buffy's sexual fantasies. In the Dark Horse Presents #24 \"Season Eight\" tie-in, \"Always Darkest\", Spike and Angel appear (again in a dream sequence) at Buffy's side when she is fighting Caleb, but to her dismay the two start flirting with and kissing one another. Spike appears in \"Season Eight\" properly at the conclusion of the \"Twilight\" story arc. Lynch's \"Spike\" series features some collaboration with Whedon to connect the IDW and Dark Horse series' continuities. IDW had planned to launch the series as a \"bona fide\" ongoing series, and as such it establishes a support cast for Spike suited to his position headlining the title. The transfer of \"Angel\" rights from IDW to Dark Horse necessitated that it end instead as an 8-issue miniseries.\nIn IDW's ', Spike does not appear until the second issue, written by Brian Lynch with art by Franco Urru (the creative team of ' and \"\") with plotting and \"executive production\" by Whedon himself. In \"Angel: After the Fall\", Spike has adjusted to Los Angeles' new status as a literal hell on Earth; he and Illyria both serve together as the Demon Lords of Beverly Hills, living in the Playboy Mansion after the death of Hugh Hefner and served by a harem of human and demon females known collectively as the \"Spikettes.\" How Spike and Illyria got to be Lords of Los Angeles is detailed in the \"Spike: After the Fall\" (2008) miniseries, which also introduces a human friend for Spike in Jeremy Johns. In their new capacity, Spike and Illyria secretly rescue humans and benevolent demons, evacuating them into the care of Connor, Nina Ash, and Gwen Raiden. Spike rallies alongside Angel against the other demon Lords. When vampire Gunn causes Illyria to revert to her monster form, memories of Fred from Spike and Wesley are transplanted into her to restore her humanity. After the Senior Partners revert time to before the Fall, Spike begins a loosely affiliated relationship with the reformed Angel Investigations company, collaborating with Angel and his associates while maintaining independence. Spike continues to appear in the ongoing \"Angel\" spin-off series by IDW, under the pens of Kelley Armstrong, Bill Willingham and others. As part of its \"After the Fall\" franchise, IDW also published Bill Williams' miniseries, \"Spike: The Devil You Know\" (2010), which follows Spike's journey from Los Angeles to Las Vegas, where he acquires a spaceship and a crew of alien bugs after learning from Wolfram &amp; Hart of a prophecy concerning the impending apocalypse (featured in \"Buffy\") which has driven them to abandon this dimension.\nSpike's IDW series feeds into the \"Twilight\" and \"Last Gleaming\" arcs of \"Buffy Season Eight\", concluding that series in 2011. In \"Season Eight\", Spike and his crew come to Buffy's aid to help prevent the end of the universe. Due to his own research into the prophecies concerning this apocalypse, Spike is able to lead Buffy and friends to the site of the final showdown with Twilight. When Buffy's decision sees the world lose its magic, Spike is the only one to be emphatically supportive of the decision she had to make. In the follow-up series \"Season Nine\" (2011\u20132013), Spike bases his ship in San Francisco to be near Buffy, but eventually leaves due to the complicatedness of their relationship, setting up the miniseries \"Spike: A Dark Place\" (2012), which follows Spike and his insectoid crew aboard his spaceship. Dark Horse also gives the \"Spike\" title a new stylised logo, distinct from the \"Angel\"-typeface logo used prior. The arc serves to divest Spike of the ship and crew, and sets up his 2013 crossover stint in \"Angel &amp; Faith\" ahead of an eventual return to the main \"Buffy\" series. In issues of \"Angel &amp; Faith\", Spike helps Angel defeat a demon in possession of Giles' soul, but leaves London where they are based without hesitation when he learns that Dawn is gravely unwell back in San Francisco. He returns to San Francisco to provide comfort to Dawn who is rapidly fading away without magic in the world to sustain her form. However, his memories of her start to quickly fade and recordings he makes of himself talking about her turn to static. Spike appears unconcerned he missed the chance to talk to Buffy who, along with Willow and Xander, has gone to find magic to save Dawn at the Deeper Well in England. When nobody can remember the name of Buffy's sister, he phones her boyfriend Xander, and also warns him that the rogue Slayer Simone Doffler has been seeking a way to become the ultimate vampire. When the others return and Dawn is restored Buffy thanks him for staying with her sister, Spike says all that matters to him is that Dawn is safe again. Spike continues to appear in \"Season 10\", in which he and Buffy finally resume their romantic relationship while juggling the responsibility of rewriting the new rules of magic with the rest of the Scoobies. In \"Season 11\", he alongside Willow and Buffy, enter a demon internment camp where they uncover a government plot to drain the world's magic. In the final fight against White House Press Secretary Johanna Wise, who spearheaded the conspiracy, he and Buffy sustain serious magical burns\u2013though both are nearly fully recovered soon after due to augmented supernatural healing abilities. In the final issue, they tell each other they love each other and kiss.\nCharacterization.\nPersonality.\nAs a human, William's core personality traits were passion and loyalty, though both were heavily sublimated by the conventions of Victorian England. As a product of his time, he channelled these attributes in conventional pursuits, such as nurturing an unrequited romance, an active scholarly life, and care for his ill mother. Highly creative and imaginative, William devoted considerable time to study, reflection, and literary arts, particularly romantic poetry. While his most fervent aspiration was to achieve recognition and acceptance by his peers, romantic interests, and literary community, his pervasive fear of rejection held him back from taking risks; as such, most of his contemporaries regarded him as a timid object of ridicule.\nUpon becoming a vampire, his newfound romance with Drusilla, acceptance into a new peer group with Angel and Darla, mixed with the radical changes to his physiology (particularly physical strength), completely dissolved his fears in an experience he considered to be \"profound.\" The sudden erosion of his societal and emotional barriers created dramatic shifts in his attitude and behaviors, allowing him to craft an entirely new persona that was enthusiastic to the point of recklessness, fearless in confrontation, and which reveled in having the power to flout laws and traditional morality. William so embraced this lifestyle that he no longer felt his name was appropriate, instead adopting the name, \"Spike\", as his infamy grew for torturing victims with railroad spikes; in his words, he \"had to die before [he] really felt alive\". Spike is also rare among vampires because he does not fear Slayers; he seeks them out and has killed two by the time he arrives in Sunnydale.\nSpike is a highly perceptive and emotionally intelligent vampire, which starkly contrasts his raucous \"devil-may-care\" attitude. As a soulless vampire, his core personality remained intact but less inhibited, exhibiting the capacity for passion and deep affection, loyalty, and aesthetic appreciation. Later, after securing the return of his soul, his conscience returned without his old inhibitions, leaving his love of \"a good brawl\" unapologetically intact. Similarly, Spike's intense zest for life (a passion for art, love of life, devotion to specific people) remains consistent.\nQuick wit is one of the character's hallmarks, as Spike enjoys verbal sparring as much as physical fighting; in all his appearances, he has a habit of pithy remarks and glib insults, even toward the few he does not view as antagonists. Among his favorite targets are Angel, Xander, Giles, and (to a lesser extent) Buffy \u2013 in season 5's episode The Gift as he and Giles are leaving to fight Glory, he wryly paraphrases Giles' quotation of Shakespeare's Henry V 'we band of brothers' speech to 'we band of buggered'. Joss Whedon credits this antipathy as what convinced him in the episode \"Lovers Walk\" to bring Spike back as a cast regular. As James Marsters put it, \"I was supposed to be the one who stood at the side and said, 'Buffy, you're stupid, and we're all gonna die'.\"\nSpike often nicknames people, both as insults and as terms of endearment; for example, he calls Dawn \"Little Bit\" or \"the Niblet\". Spike's classical romanticism also manifests in his frequent references to poetry, songs, and literature; on occasion he even waxes poetic on the nature of love, life, and unlife as being driven by blood, reasoning that blood is more powerful than any supernatural force because it is what separates the living from the dead.\nFrequently, the power of Spike's passions override his physical limitations. His pain tolerance, in particular, is exceptionally high due to his willingness to disregard physical discomfort in favor of his goals, interpersonal attachments, and general defiance of any limitation. Notably, when Glory tortures him to reveal the identity of the Key, he defies and insults her at every opportunity; privately, he later reveals in confidence that he would rather die than see Buffy hurt. In terms of his defiant nature, he often treats his vulnerability to the sun as simply an annoying inconvenience. He drives in broad daylight in vehicles with blacked-out windows (often listening to punk rock while he does so), and on several occasions travels outside during the day using only a blanket for cover.\nSince becoming a vampire, Spike's core personality trait of loyalty has occasionally been at odds with his resentment of being controlled. While he prefers to see himself as a rebel against any kind of authority, he recognizes that his devotion has allowed others to manipulate him and, at times, for him to put self-imposed limits on himself for the sake of others. In an extreme example, Angel was able to manipulate Spike's allegiance based on his attachment to Drusilla; in a less extreme example, he often modifies his crass tendencies around Dawn to keep from disappointing Buffy, though he ceases when she is not around.\nLike many characters in the series, Spike has battled depression at times; however, this was less a tendency towards self-pity or a psychological character trait than a reaction to new limitations. After being 'chipped' by the Initiative, Spike's inability to act out violence put him at odds with his desire to resist control and authority, and he became sullen when the pain inflicted by the chip was simply too powerful to resist. Upon realizing that he could still battle (and kill) demons and other supernatural creatures, his confidence immediately returned. Later, Spike's greatest internal conflict arose due to simultaneously wanting to kill the Slayer (Buffy) due to her authority and position as the \"one thing\" that vampires fear, until discovering that he was sexually and romantically attracted to Buffy as a person. Recognizing that his affection for her gave her power over him caused him a great deal of self-doubt; seeing no other means to reconcile the dissonance, he chose instead to 'rebel' against his vampire nature itself, and eventually seek to be re-ensouled and purify his passions.\nAppearance.\nSpike has a punk look which strongly resembles English rock musician Billy Idol; humorously, Buffy claims that Billy Idol in fact \"stole\" his look from Spike. His hair is peroxide blond for the duration of his time on \"Buffy\" and \"Angel\", although in flashbacks it can be seen in its natural medium brown state as well as dyed black. His nails are often painted black and was often paired with \u201cguyliner\u201d.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBuffy: I need some help. I'm looking for this guy. Bleach-blonde hair, leather jacket, British accent? Kind of sallow, but in a hot way?&lt;br&gt;\nBouncer: Yeah, yeah, I know the guy. Billy Idol wannabe?&lt;br&gt;\nBuffy: Actually, Billy Idol stole his look from... Never mind.\n \"Sleeper\"\nA Y-shaped scar on Marsters's left eyebrow, received during a mugging, was worked into the show; make-up artist Todd McIntosh decided to shave out his eyebrow in order to make it more prominent. He also included the scar on Spike's \"vamp face\" prosthesis, albeit slightly altered as though the skin has stretched. In Spike's first appearances the wound still looks fresh, but it gradually fades until, in \"Angel\" season 5, it is barely visible. A flashback in \"Fool for Love\" reveals that Spike received the scar from the sword of the first Slayer he killed in 1900.\nSpike usually wears long black leather coats, including one that he took from a Nazi officer and another that he took as a trophy from Nikki Wood, the second Slayer he killed. He wore the Slayer's black duster for over twenty-five years. When the coat was destroyed by a bomb from the Immortal in Italy, Spike heartbrokenly declared it to be irreplaceable; but the Italian branch of Wolfram &amp; Hart quickly supplied him with a whole wardrobe of new ones, nearly identical, which he happily began wearing. His trademark look includes the leather duster, a black T-shirt or v-neck shirt and black denim pants, usually with heavy boots or Doc Martens. He also wore a red long-sleeved shirt fairly often, particularly during the earlier seasons of \"Buffy\", and a bright blue shirt early in Season 6 &amp; 7. He explained that the shirt was supposed to show Buffy that he had changed and give him confidence (because the First was messing with his head and he did not want Buffy to think he was still evil or crazy). But later, he returned to his trademark look, commenting that he was back.\nPowers and abilities.\nIn addition to possessing the common powers and weaknesses of vampires, Spike's age and experience makes him a highly effective, skilled, and versatile fighter in both armed and unarmed combat. For example, he is able to briefly overcome Illyria during a testing of her abilities prior to her powers being greatly reduced by Wesley. Illyria criticizes his (and others') ability to adapt, calling it \"compromise.\" He is able to withstand excessive amounts of pain for extended periods of time, particularly when properly motivated, as seen in the episodes \"Intervention\" and \"Showtime\". While not as skilled or as sadistic as Angelus, Spike also proves himself to be effective at torture, noting he had gained \"screams, various fluids, and a name\" from Doctor Sparrow. Much like Angel, he is highly proficient in various forms of martial arts, and his typical fighting style blends karate, kung fu, and others.\nSpike often displays insight and skills in perception and observation, especially with regard to relationships and personalities, so long as the relationship in question does not concern him personally. This ability allows him to wield powerful psychological weapons as easily and effectively as physical ones. For example, when he wants to create disharmony among the Scoobies, Spike divides-and-conquers with \"The Yoko Factor\", exploiting tensions that exist under the surface to alienate Buffy and her friends against each other. Spike's skills of analysis allowed him to realize Willow was barely holding it together after Oz's departure even though Giles and Buffy thought she was doing better, to be the first to see through Tara's abusive and controlling family, forced Buffy and Angel to admit that they were more than \"just friends\" and identify when and why some relationships, such as between Buffy and Riley, are not meant to last, masterfully feeding Riley's insecurities in an effort to sabotage his relationship with Buffy, so Spike can pursue her. He also predicted that Willow would go fighting against Glory after what she did to Tara even though Buffy believed that she had talked Willow out of the suicidal attempt because he would do so if Glory hurt the people he loved.\nHis analytical skills and intuitive insight also help him in battle from time to time, helping him to defeat, or hold his own against, very formidable adversaries. For example, he explains to Buffy he was able to defeat two Slayers because he sensed and exploited their secret desires to be free of their burden. In \"Time Bomb\", he identifies Illyria's fighting style as a Tae Kwon Do/Brazilian Capoeira / Ninjitsu hybrid.\nWhile many vampires cling to the mannerisms and speech patterns prevalent at the time they were sired, Spike has been shown to easily adjust to changing fashions and styles over the decades and displays an impressive knowledge of both British and American popular culture, demonstrating another aspect of his potential for analysis and adaptability.\nAlthough capable of developing sound battle strategies, Spike (particularly in the days before receiving his chip and being re-ensouled) often loses patience with anything more complicated than outright attack.\nHe is also impatient to fight the Slayer upon his initial arrival in Sunnydale; the attack is supposed to coincide with the Night of St. Vigeous (when a vampire's natural abilities are enhanced), but he \"couldn't wait\" to go after the Slayer and recklessly leads a mass assault against Buffy at Sunnydale High, which fails and results in the deaths of many Aurelian vampires. However, Spike did exercise patience throughout the latter half of season 2 of \"Buffy\", when he used a wheelchair for several months after a brutal battle with the Scoobies in the episode \"What's My Line\" left him paraplegic. Feigning weakness, he endured torturous weeks watching Angelus sexually pursue Dru as he waited for the right time to strike against his enemy.\nSpike's \"vampire constitution\" provides him with an extremely high tolerance for alcohol (which he regularly consumes in copious quantities). His experience in crime gives him skill at picking locks, hotwiring cars and picking pockets. He is also capable of easily operating various vehicles, such as various cars, a Honda CB400T motorcycle (\"Bargaining part 2\"), and a Winnebago (\"Spiral\"). He has also been shown using video game systems and a computer, treating injuries, and playing poker and pool. Spike is also seen speaking/understanding Latin, Luganda (a language of Uganda, where he meets the demon shaman), and the language of Fyarl demons, two of whom he once employed as muscle during his pre-Sunnydale days. He is also shown to be capable of recognizing literature; in the last episode of season 5, he paraphrases a line from the St. Crispin's Day Speech while in conversation with Giles after Buffy tells them her plan of attack on Glory.\nWhen Spike was transformed into a ghost-like intangible state following the destruction of Sunnydale and the Hellmouth and his subsequent materialization at Wolfram &amp; Hart, he was capable of walking through solid objects. He was initially unable to make contact with objects around him until he learned how to focus his abilities through desire, allowing him to make brief contact with people and things if he concentrated enough. This ability was relatively useless in a fight; he was unable to pick up a wooden bar to hit the demon Tezcatcatl in \"The Cautionary Tale of Numero Cinco\", and required a few moments to properly punch a cyborg strangling Gunn in \"Lineage\". Naturally, he lost these capabilities when he was recorporealized by Lindsey.\nUnproduced spin-off movie.\nIn 2004, Joss Whedon set plans for a \"Spike\" movie. The film, if ever greenlit, would star James Marsters, Alyson Hannigan and Amy Acker. At a 2006 convention, Acker stated the film was not going ahead due to money issues.\nReception.\nIn 1999, Spike won a TV Guide Award for \"Scariest Villain.\"\nFor his role of Spike, James Marsters won Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor in a TV Series in 2000 and 2003, and was nominated for the award in 1999, 2001, 2002, and 2004.\nSpike is also featured in \"Forbes\" magazine's \"Hollywood's Most Powerful Vampires\" list along with Angel.\nSpike was ranked #2 out of 177 on \"BuzzFeed\"'s list of \"117 Buffyverse Characters, Ranked From Worst To Best.\nSpike was placed first in \"SFX\" magazine's \"Top 50 Vampires\" on television and movies list. The same list featured rival Angel in the third place. Spike was described as an \"antihero in the true sense of the word, Spike is morally ambiguous and ready to fight pretty much anyone, for fun. But underneath it all, he loves deeply and earnestly in a way that remains achingly human. Although, ironically, his personality remains pretty much the same, whether he has a soul or not \u2014 in stark (and more entertaining) contrast to Angel.\" Other Buffyverse vampires to appear on the list included Drusilla (at 10th place), Darla (at 25th place), Vampire Willow (at 32nd place), Harmony Kendall (at 31st place), and the Master (at 39th place).\nIn 2017, Spike made the list of \"25 Villains We Love to Hate from the last 25 years\" for the 25th anniversary of Syfy.\nTVLine ranked Spike as 6th on their Best TV Vampires of All Time list in 2020. He shares the list with fellow Buffyverse characters Drusilla (at 19th place), Darla (at 18th place), and Angel (at 1st place).\nIn 2021, when discussing accusations of workplace harassment by Whedon, Marsters said that Whedon intended for Spike to be killed off from \"Buffy\" because \"in Joss's world evil is not cool\" and the show already had \"a sexy vampire\" in Angel. Because of the positive audience reaction, the network insisted that Spike survive. Marsters said, \"I was basically ruining [Joss's] show,\" changing it from parables about teenage adolescence to one in which \"those problems are kind of sexy.\"\nMarsters recalled that the \"Buffy\" audience loved Spike and demanded more of the character. That annoyed Whedon so much that he pushed Marsters against a wall and told him, \"I don't care how popular you are, okay? You are dead, you are dead, you are dead, you got me?\" Marsters believed that Whedon was not joking about killing off his character and said that he would not disagree with the veracity of his \"Buffy\" castmates' harassment allegations. He cited another incident in which Marsters told Whedon, \"It must be wonderful to wind up this universe and watch it play out.\" Whedon responded, \"Yeah, it's great, James, except I have to keep winding!\" Marsters described both conversations as examples of Whedon's intensity toward the cast, caused by the great pressure the show creator put on himself.\nIn 2022, \"British GQ\" placed Spike in 11th place on their \"Pop culture's best vampires\" list. He is the only vampire from the Buffyverse to be featured. That same year, \"Syfy\" placed Spike on their list of their \"fanged favorites from television and film.\"\nIn a 2023 interview, James Marsters said he would've killed off his character in \"a heartbeat\" if he was in charge of the series after he noticed that Spike was changing the fan perspective toward the vampires on the show. The original idea for \"Buffy\" was that vampires were just metaphors for the challenges of high school or the challenges of life,\" he explained. \"They were designed to be overcome; they were designed to die. \"Buffy\" is not an Anne Rice kind of thing, where you're supposed to feel for the vampires. It's why we're hideously ugly when we bite someone. They did not want that to be a sensual kind of thing. It was supposed to be horrific.\" Because of this, Marsters said, the decision to keep weaving Spike into the show's longterm arc was \"a weird fit.\" He admitted that he thought \"they never really knew what to do\" with his character, who quickly became a fan favorite, or how he should be part of the larger storyline.\" Every season, the writers would come to him and admit not knowing what to do with the character, but were eventually \"able to figure something out\" for Spike to do each episode.\n\"MovieWeb\" placed Spike in 1st place on their 25 All-Time Best Vampires in Movie and TV History list in 2023.\nIn the summer of 2024, \"Comic Book Resources\" listed Spike as 10th place on their 25 Strongest Vampires list. Angel is also featured on the list at 15th place.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74954", "revid": "1314538815", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74954", "title": "Or", "text": "Or or OR may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "74955", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74955", "title": "Logical or", "text": ""}
{"id": "74956", "revid": "45093283", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74956", "title": "The Miracle of Morgan's Creek", "text": "1944 film by Preston Sturges\nThe Miracle of Morgan's Creek is a 1944 American screwball comedy film written and directed by Preston Sturges, starring Eddie Bracken and Betty Hutton, and featuring Diana Lynn, William Demarest and Porter Hall. Brian Donlevy and Akim Tamiroff reprise their roles from Sturges' 1940 film \"The Great McGinty\". Set against the backdrop of World War II-era America, its plot follows a wayward young woman who, after attending a party with soldiers in her small town, awakens to find herself married and pregnant, with no memory of her new suitor's identity.\nSturges began developing the idea for the film in the late 1930s, and wrote both Hutton's and Demarest's roles with the actors in mind. Principal photography took place between late 1942 and early 1943. Early into production, the film was met by considerable objections from the Hays Office for its candid depiction of an unwed pregnant mother, as well as for its representation of American soldiers, which the United States War Department felt might be potentially unflattering.\nThe film's narrative structure is shaped around the titular \"miracle\"\u2014the lead character's birth of sextuplets\u2014being revealed at the end of the film, and Paramount Pictures promoted it with the suggestion that audiences and the press avoid revealing its surprise ending.\nReleased in January 1944, \"The Miracle of Morgan's Creek\" was met by critical praise at the time of its release, and continues to receive generally positive reception in modern reviews. It was nominated for a 1945 Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay. In 2001, it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\" The film ranks #54 on the American Film Institute's 100 Years... 100 Laughs list of the top 100 funniest films in history.\nPlot.\nTrudy Kockenlocker is the daughter of the town constable of Morgan's Creek. Against her father's orders, she attends a wild farewell party for a group of soldiers at which she hits her head on a chandelier while dancing. The next morning, Trudy is in a daze and slowly begins to recall the previous night's events. She had married a soldier but cannot remember his name, except that \"it had a \"z\" in it. Like Ratzkywatzky...or was it Zitzkywitzky?\" She believes that she and the groom had used fake names, so she does not know how to get in touch with him and cannot remember what he looks like. She also does not have the marriage license.\nTrudy learns that she became pregnant that night as well. Norval Jones, a local 4-F boy who has been in love with Trudy for years, steps in to help out, but Trudy's overprotective father becomes involved and complicates matters. Norval and Trudy devise a plan: they will get married secretly under false names, which will provide her a marriage certificate with the fake name of Ratzkywatzky and help her avoid a scandal. Later, Trudy will get a divorce, and she and Norval will get married legitimately.\nAt the rushed wedding ceremony, in which Norval wears an antique WW1 \"doughboy\" uniform, a frazzled Norval mistakenly signs his real name and the minister calls the police. Norval is brought to the Kockenlocker house where military, state and federal officers fight with Constable Kockenlocker over jurisdiction. Norval is accused of abducting Trudy, impersonating a soldier, impairing the morals of a minor, resisting arrest and perjury. Trudy's father arrests Norval and locks him in the town jail after the justice of the peace rips up the fake marriage certificate. Trudy then tells her father the truth about the marriage, her pregnancy and Norval's attempt to pose as her groom. Her father agrees to let Norval escape so that he can find Trudy's real husband.\nNeeding money to begin his quest but with the bank where he works closed for the night, Norval sneaks into the bank with the constable's assistance to take $900 while leaving his bonds there that are worth the same amount. Trying to open a safe, Norval trips the burglar alarm, so Trudy and her sister Emmy tie up their father at the police station to make it look as if he had been incapacitated by a burglar. After months in hiding, Norval appears at his attorney's office, where he learns that the constable was fired after his ruse was not believed and that the Kockenlockers have moved out of town. Norval's attorney urges him to disappear, but Norval is determined to find Trudy. However, he is spotted in town by the bank manager, who alerts the police.\nNear the end of her pregnancy at Christmastime, the constable approaches the city council to tell them that Trudy wants to tell the real story and exonerate Norval. But before she can do so, Trudy goes into labor and is rushed to the hospital, where she gives birth to sextuplets, all boys. After receiving the news, Governor McGinty and The Boss demand that Norval be set free, with the charges dropped. Trudy's first marriage is annulled and Trudy and Norval are declared to be married after all. The governor even gives Norval a retroactive commission in the state guard, entitling him to legally wear a uniform, and Trudy's father is named police chief.\nWhen Norval discovers that Trudy has given birth to six boys, he is overwhelmed, and the film ends with this epilogue on a title card:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But Norval recovered andbecame increasingly happyfor, as Shakespeare said:\"Some are \"born\" great, some\"achieve\" greatness, and somehave greatness \"thrust uponthem\".\"THE END\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;*Eddie Bracken as Norval Jones\nAnalysis.\nSturges biographer Diane Jacobs identifies unconventional family life as the core theme of \"The Miracle at Morgan's Creek\", citing that the families portrayed in the film parallel Sturges's own family life with Isadora Duncan and Aleister Crowley.\nAndrew Katzenstein in The New York Review of Books&lt;ref name=\"nyRB/screwball\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; writes \"a parody of the Virgin Birth with the Holy Ghost taking the form of a GI\", \"Joseph is her long-suffering admirer, Norval (Eddie Bracken), emasculated by Trudy and by the army, which won\u2019t let him serve because of minor (and likely psychosomatic) vision trouble. The Christ Child multiplies into sextuplets, all male, who soon become a propaganda tool against the Axis.\"\nProduction.\nScreenplay.\nSturges developed the idea for \"The Miracle of Morgan's Creek\" in the late-1930s: The original story revolved around his heroine, Trudy Kockenlocker, a woman who becomes pregnant by a wealthy banker's son who refuses to marry her, leading her to being cared for by a hermit before she gives birth to sextuplets. The story eventually was reshaped into something \"far less sentimental\", featuring the character of Trudy becoming pregnant by a soldier, with the character of Norval, her friend, pursuing her.\nDescribing the screenplay, Sturges biographer Diane Jacobs notes that the film features small-town characters who \"are as diverse and scrappy as city folk. And though perpetually thrown together, they certainly do not blend. Nor do they easily inhabit their landscape.\" Unlike Sturges's previous screenplays, \"Easy Living\" (1937) and \"The Lady Eve\" (1941), which blend elements of farce and comedy, Jacobs notes that \"The Miracle of Morgan's Creek\" instead combines farce and melodrama, \"maximizing the pain and violence inherent in both forms.\"\nCasting.\nWhile Sturges was completing \"The Great Moment\" (1944), he pitched the idea for the film intending to cast Betty Hutton and Harry Carey in the lead roles as Trudy and Norval. Hutton was cast in the lead role of Trudy, while Eddie Bracken was cast as Norval. The role of Papa Kockenlocker was written with William Demarest in mind, while Sturges chose to cast pianist Diana Lynn as Trudy's sister.\nFilming.\nPrincipal photography took place between October 21 to December 23, 1942, with additional scenes shot on February 25, 1943. Outdoor scenes were shot at the Paramount Ranch in Agoura, California. Sturges was reported to have been \"moody\" on the set, partly attributed to the pressure he had received from the production code over the film's controversial content. Bracken stated that he and Sturges \"never had any real problems\" on set, but did note that the director was often harshly critical of the actors, which Bracken felt was a method Sturges employed to help \"deepen the performances.\"\nDespite Paramount's wishes to maintain a tight shooting schedule, Sturges was liberal with his use of film stock, sometimes shooting sequences up to fifty times, inflating the production budget against the studio's wishes. Executive Buddy DeSylva expressed anger over Sturges' shooting methods, stating in a letter to Sturges:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I think it is absolutely disgraceful. You, along with every other director, have been warned that the Company must conserve film. [That you could] waste this much film when you had at least two takes that might have been used actually amounts to sabotage...\u00a0 No other director on the lot needs fifty takes to get a scene. Either you do not properly explain to the actors what they are called on to do, or you engage inadequate actors, or perhaps get so upset after take #15 or #20 that they are no longer capable of giving you what you desire.\nCensorship.\nProblems arose with Hays Office censors early into the film's production because of its subject matter, particularly its candid representation of an unwed pregnant woman. In October 1942, after a story conference, the office sent Paramount a seven-page letter outlining their concerns, including those about lines spoken by the 14-year-old character Emmy and the Trudy character having been drunk and then pregnant. The office wanted the filmmakers to be \"extremely careful in handling a subject of this kind because of the delicate nature of the high point of the story,\" and to refrain from reiterating the basic facts of the story after they have been presented. In December 1942, they also warned about making any metaphorical comparisons between Trudy's situation and the virgin birth of Jesus.\nAdditional concerns were raised about the portrayal of American soldiers as rowdy and lacking \"proper conduct.\" In a February 1943 letter by the United States War Department, they urged the filmmakers to ensure that the scene in which the soldiers depart for their deployment \"should result in giving the audience the feeling that these boys are normal, thoroughly fit American soldiers who have had an evening of clean fun.\"\nThere were so many objections raised from the censors that Sturges began production with only 10 approved script pages.\nSturges' intent was to \"show what happens to young girls who disregard their parents' advice and who confuse patriotism with promiscuity,\" and had included in his script a sermon for the pastor to deliver, expressing Sturges' opinions, but the scene was cut by the studio because the pastor was depicted in too comic a manner.\nMusic.\nIn addition to the music score by Charles Bradshaw and Leo Shuken, two songs appear in the film:\nRelease.\nAlthough shot in 1942 and early 1943, \"The Miracle of Morgan's Creek\" was withheld from distribution until early 1944, because Paramount had a backlog of unreleased films, including Sturges' \"The Great Moment\" (1944). In September 1942, Paramount sold a number of films, such as \"I Married a Witch\", to United Artists, which needed to keep its distribution pipeline filled, but Paramount held on to \"The Miracle of Morgan's Creek\" because it was directed by Sturges, waiting for an opportunity to release it.\nBox office.\nThe film premiered at New York's Paramount Theatre on January 19, 1944. To promote the film, Paramount aired a 20-minute preview on the some 400 television sets then in use in New York City on March 21, 1944, with stills from the film, narration by Eddie Bracken and an interview with Diana Lynn. Paramount asked reviewers not to reveal the ending to avoid spoiling it for those who had not yet seen the film. It is believed that Sturges also withheld the ending from the Hays Office.\nAlthough the Hays Office received many letters of protest because of its subject matter, the film was Paramount's highest-grossing film of 1944, taking in $9 million in box-office receipts while playing to standing-room-only audiences in some theaters.\n\"The Miracle of Morgan's Creek\" is one of the few Paramount sound films produced before 1950 that still belong to Paramount Pictures and not EMKA, Ltd./NBCUniversal, along with \"Bride of Vengeance\", \"My Friend Irma\", \"Rope of Sand\", \"Sorry, Wrong Number\", and \"The Buccaneer\".\nCritical response.\n\"The Miracle of Morgan's Creek\" received overwhelmingly favorable reviews from critics upon release.&lt;ref name=\"variety/1200414218\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"Klawans/Sturges-Films\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nBosley Crowther wrote in \"The New York Times\": \"a more audacious picture\u2014a more delightfully irreverent one\u2014than this new lot of nonsense at the Paramount has never come slithering madly down the path. Mr. Sturges ... has hauled off this time and tossed a satire which is more cheeky than all the rest...It's hard to imagine how he ever got away with such a thing, how he ever persuaded the Hays boys that he wasn't trying to undermine all morals. Not only does he boldly make mad Christmas over a fact of approaching maternity but he frankly satirizes the sort of marriage that is significantly featured by a shotgun. No coying around with tiny garments in this one, no waiting the event with bated breath...Maybe the humor is forced a little, and it may be slightly difficult at times to understand precisely what in heck is going on. But that doesn't make any difference. At those times, you can catch your breath.\"\nCritic James Agee, writing in \"The Nation\", noted that \"the Hays office has either been hypnotized into a liberality for which it should be thanked, or has been raped in its sleep\"&lt;ref name=\"Nation/Agee/miracle\" &gt;&lt;/ref&gt; to allow the film to be released. In a second review, Agee described the film as \"a little like taking a nun on a roller coaster... The overall result is one of the most violently funny comedies, one of the most original, vigorous and cheerfully outrageous moving pictures that ever came out of Hollywood. The picture also has its faults\u2014both as fun and as cinema... Most of the finest human and comic potentialities of the story are lost because Sturges is so much less interested in his characters than in using them as hobbyhorses for his own wit.\"\nIn 1944, National Board of Review critic James Shelly Hamilton was baffled: \"He mingles all kinds of hodge-podge things together with a Gothic exuberance and an amorality mixed with disillusionment. He shies away from a deeply emotional scene. He is obviously going somewhere. But where? And when is he going to arrive?\".&lt;ref name=\"nytimes/Crowther/Conquering-Hero\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nIn 1944, writing in the \"Los Angeles Times\", reviewer Edwin Schallert wrote: \"It is a feature that is intensely, even stridently, a departure from the normal Hollywood output...you can have all the fun you wish out of this picture if you won't try to take it too seriously at any time. It belongs essentially to the screwball comedy school, and goes to most outlandish lengths in its climax, which has the misfortune to show up the whole thing.\"\nIn 1945, Film Daily's 23rd-Annual poll, asking hundreds of critics to name their top sixty films for 1943\u201344, \"The Miracle of Morgan's Creek\" was the 15th-most named. Also, it was included in 1943-44's top boxoffice attractions by the trade magazines Fame, Showman's Trade Review, and Boxoffice Barometer.\nGeneral and later President Dwight D. Eisenhower was an outspoken fan of the film.\nLater reviews.\nIn 1991, Pauline Kael wrote, \"This is one of Preston Sturges's surreal-slapstick-satire-conniption-fit comedies, and part of our great, crude heritage.\"\nIn 1987, British critic Leslie Halliwell gave it three of four stars, stating: \"Weird and wonderful one-man assault on the Hays Office and sundry other American institutions such as motherhood and politics: an indescribable, tasteless, roaringly funny m\u00eal\u00e9e, as unexpected at the time as it was effective, like a kick in the pants to all other film comedies.\"\nReviews from review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes indicate an 87% approval rate with an average of 8.2/10 based on 30 reviews. Its critics' consensus says: \"\"The Miracle of Morgan's Creek\" finds director Preston Sturges at his most zanily subversive -- not to mention hilarious.\" Metacritic assigned a weighted average of 86 out of 100 based on 15 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\" and labelling it a \"must see\".\nIn a positive review of nine out of ten stars by Mike Massie, writing for \"Gone With The Twins\", states the film is \"handled with a spectacular hilarity and cleverness; when the hole is dug this deep, the only way out is through further outrageousness.\" Jeffrey M. Anderson of \"Combustible Celluloid\" gave a rating of three-and-a-half stars out of four, noting the zany tone of the film, and positively questioning how Sturges got away with such a film, especially during the era of the Hays Code.\nHome media.\nThe film was released on DVD and VHS on September 6, 2005.\nLegacy.\nIn 2001, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\" In 2006, it was voted by \"Premiere\" one of \"The 50 Greatest Comedies of All Time.\"\nThe film is recognized by the American Film Institute in these lists:\nThe 1958 film \"Rock-A-Bye Baby\", starring Jerry Lewis, was loosely based on \"The Miracle of Morgan's Creek\". Sturges received a credit for that film, but did not actually participate in the project.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74957", "revid": "18139633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74957", "title": "Logical and", "text": ""}
{"id": "74958", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74958", "title": "Europa Island/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "74959", "revid": "1212740812", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74959", "title": "Conjunction", "text": "Conjunction may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "74960", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74960", "title": "Miss Lulu Bett (novel)", "text": "1920 novel by Zona Gale\nMiss Lulu Bett is a 1920 novel by American writer Zona Gale, later adapted for the stage. It was a bestseller at the time of its initial publication, but gradually fell out of favor through changing tastes and social conditions. It was the first play by a woman to win a Pulitzer Prize for Drama,\nPlot summary.\nThe story concerns a woman, Lulu, who lives with her sister's family, essentially acting as a servant. She does not complain about her position but is not happy. When her brother-in-law's brother, Ninian, comes to visit, there is a certain attraction between them. While joking around one evening they find themselves accidentally married, due to the laws of the state requiring little more than wedding vows to be recited while a magistrate is in the room for a marriage to count as legal. On learning this, Ninian and Lulu decide they like the idea of being married and choose to remain together. However, within a month, Lulu is back home, having discovered that Ninian was already legally married: 18 years prior he had wed a girl who left him after 2 years, but he had forgotten about it. Lulu considers this a reasonable story, but her brother-in-law, Dwight, insists that it would be a humiliation to the family to reveal such a thing, and insists that she tell everyone instead that Ninian grew bored with her and left her. Lulu is unable to see why this should be a less humiliating story, and begins to complain about her circumstances for the first time. She also notices that her teenage niece, Di, is unhappy, and also seems to be trying to use marriage as a way to escape her circumstance. Lulu eventually has to prevent Di from eloping, and is finally inspired to move out of her sister's home and live independently.\nAdaptations.\nGale first adapted the novel for a play that opened on Broadway on December 27, 1920, starring Carroll McComas.\nTwo endings were written for the play, the original as seen in December 1920 (and the ending that won Gale the Pulitzer Prize from Drama; the first woman ever to do so) has Lulu starting a life on her own and undertaking adventures of her own as we hear in her final lines, \"Good-by. Good-by, all of you. I'm going I don't know where-to work at I don't know what. But I'm going from choice!\"\nThe revised ending is more typical and would have been a bit more commercially acceptable and far less challenging to the audiences of the day. In this ending, Ninian appears just as Lulu decides to go off on her own life to work and live elsewhere. He asks her forgiveness and she agrees saying \"I forgave you in Savannah, Georgia.\"\nIn 1921 the work was adapted for a silent film of the same name by Clara Beranger, directed by William C. deMille, starring Lois Wilson, Milton Sills, Theodore Roberts, Helen Ferguson, Mabel Van Buren, Ethel Wales and May Giraci."}
{"id": "74961", "revid": "28066471", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74961", "title": "Rubber Soul", "text": "1965 studio album by the Beatles\nRubber Soul is the sixth studio album by the English rock band the Beatles. It was released on 3 December 1965 in the United Kingdom on EMI's Parlophone label, accompanied by the non-album double A-side single \"We Can Work It Out\" / \"Day Tripper\". The original North American release, issued by Capitol Records, contains ten of the fourteen songs and two tracks withheld from the band's \"Help!\" (1965) album. \"Rubber Soul\" was described as an important artistic achievement by the band, meeting a highly favourable critical response and topping sales charts in Britain and the United States for several weeks.\nThe recording sessions took place in London over a four-week period beginning in October 1965. For the first time in their career, the Beatles were able to record an album free of concert, radio or film commitments. Often referred to as a folk rock album, particularly in its Capitol configuration, \"Rubber Soul\" incorporates a mix of pop, soul and folk musical styles. The title derives from the colloquialism \"plastic soul\" and was the Beatles' way of acknowledging their lack of authenticity compared to the African-American soul artists they admired. After \"A Hard Day's Night\" (1964), it was the second Beatles LP to contain only original material.\nThe songs demonstrate the Beatles' increasing maturity as lyricists, and in their incorporation of brighter guitar tones and new instrumentation such as sitar, harmonium and fuzz bass, the group striving for more expressive sounds and arrangements for their music. The project marked a progression in the band's treatment of the album format as an artistic platform, an approach they continued to develop with \"Revolver\" (1966) and \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\" (1967). The four songs omitted by Capitol, including the February 1966 single \"Nowhere Man\", later appeared on the North American release \"Yesterday and Today\" (1966).\n\"Rubber Soul\" was highly influential on the Beatles' peers, leading to a widespread focus away from singles and onto creating albums of consistently high-quality songs. It has been recognised by music critics as an album that opened up the possibilities of pop music in terms of lyrical and musical scope, and as a key work in the creation of styles such as psychedelia and progressive rock. Among its many appearances on critics' best-album lists, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked it fifth on the magazine's 2012 list of the \"500 Greatest Albums of All Time\". In 2000, it was voted at number 34 in the third edition of Colin Larkin's book \"All Time Top 1000 Albums\". The album was certified 6\u00d7 platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) in 1997, indicating shipments of at least six million copies in the US. In 2013, \"Rubber Soul\" was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) for UK sales since 1994.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBackground.\nMost of the songs on \"Rubber Soul\" were composed soon after the Beatles' return to London following their August 1965 North American tour. The album reflects the influence of their month in America.&lt;ref name=\"Lewisohn/MojoSpecial\"&gt;Lewisohn, Mark. \"High Times\". In: .&lt;/ref&gt; They set a new attendance record when they played to over 55,000 at Shea Stadium on 15 August, met Bob Dylan in New York and their longtime hero Elvis Presley in Los Angeles. Although the Beatles had released their album \"Help!\" that same month, the requirement for a new album in time for Christmas was in keeping with the schedule established with EMI in 1963 by Brian Epstein, the group's manager, and George Martin, their record producer.\nIn their new songs, the Beatles drew inspiration from soul music acts signed to the Motown and Stax record labels, particularly the singles they heard on US radio that summer, and from the contemporary folk rock of Dylan and the Byrds. Author Robert Rodriguez highlights the Byrds as having achieved \"special notice as an American act that had taken something from the Brits, added to it, then sent it back\". In doing so, Rodriguez continues, the Byrds had joined the Beatles and Dylan in \"a common pool of influence exchange, where each act gave and took from the other in equal measure\". According to music critic Tim Riley, \"Rubber Soul\" served as a \"step toward a greater synthesis\" of all the elements that throughout 1965 represented a \"major \"rock 'n' roll\" explosion\", rather than just the emergence of folk rock. Citing Dylan and the Rolling Stones as the Beatles' artistic peers during this period, he says that on \"Rubber Soul\" these two acts \"inspire rather than influence their sound\".\nTwo years after the start of Beatlemania, the band were open to exploring new themes in their music through a combination of their tiring of playing to audiences full of screaming fans, their commercial power, a shared curiosity gained through literature and experimentation with hallucinogenic drugs, and their interest in the potential of the recording studio. According to Ringo Starr, \"Rubber Soul\" was the Beatles' \"departure record\", written and recorded during a period when, largely through the influence of marijuana, \"We were expanding in all areas of our lives, opening up to a lot of different attitudes.\" The album was especially reflective of John Lennon's maturation as a songwriter, as he was encouraged to address wider-ranging issues than before through Dylan's example. George Harrison's outlook had been transformed by his and Lennon's experiences with the hallucinogenic drug LSD; he said the drug had revealed to him the futility of the band's widespread fame by \"open[ing] up this whole other consciousness\".\nAuthor Mark Prendergast recognises \"Rubber Soul\" as \"the first Beatles record which was noticeably drug-influenced\". Lennon called it \"the pot album\". Marijuana appealed to the band's bohemian ideal. Paul McCartney, who was the only Beatle still living in central London, said it was typical of a move away from alcohol and into \"more of a beatnik scene, like jazz\".\nProduction.\nRecording history.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Rubber Soul\" was a matter of having all experienced the recording studio, having grown musically as well, but [getting] the knowledge of the place, of the studio. We were more precise about making the album, that's all, and we took over the cover and everything.\n\u2013 John Lennon\nRecording for \"Rubber Soul\" began on 12 October 1965 at EMI Studios (now Abbey Road Studios) in London; final production and mix down took place on 15 November. During the sessions, the Beatles typically focused on fine-tuning the musical arrangement for each song, an approach that reflected the growing division between the band as a live act and their ambitions as recording artists. The album was one of the first projects that Martin undertook after leaving EMI's staff and co-founding Associated Independent Recording (AIR). Martin later described \"Rubber Soul\" as \"the first album to present a new, growing Beatles to the world\", adding: \"For the first time we began to think of albums as art on their own, as complete entities.\" It was the final Beatles album that recording engineer Norman Smith worked on before being promoted by EMI to record producer. The sessions were held over thirteen days and totalled 113 hours, with a further seventeen hours (spread over six days) allowed for mixing.\nThe band were forced to work to a tight deadline to ensure the album was completed in time for a pre-Christmas release. They were nevertheless in the unfamiliar position of being able to dedicate themselves solely to a recording project, free of touring, filming and radio engagements. The Beatles ceded to two interruptions during this time. They received their MBEs at Buckingham Palace on 26 October, from Queen Elizabeth II, and on 1\u20132 November, the band filmed their segments for \"The Music of Lennon &amp; McCartney\", a Granada Television tribute to the Lennon\u2013McCartney songwriting partnership. According to author Christopher Bray, this intensive recording made \"Rubber Soul\" not just unusual in the Beatles' career but \"emphatically unlike those LPs made by other bands\". From 4 November \u2013 by which point only around half the required number of songs were near completion \u2013 the Beatles' sessions were routinely booked to finish at 3 am each day.\nAfter \"A Hard Day's Night\" in 1964, \"Rubber Soul\" was the second Beatles album to contain only original material. As the band's main writers, Lennon and McCartney struggled to complete enough songs for the project. After a session on 27 October was cancelled due to a lack of new material, Martin told a reporter that he and the group \"hope to resume next week\" but would not consider recording songs by any other composers. The Beatles completed \"Wait\" for the album, having taped its rhythm track during the sessions for \"Help!\" in June 1965. They also recorded the instrumental \"12-Bar Original\", a twelve-bar blues in the style of Booker T. &amp; the M.G.'s. Credited to Lennon, McCartney, Harrison and Starr, it remained unreleased until 1996.\nThe group recorded \"Day Tripper\" and \"We Can Work It Out\" during the \"Rubber Soul\" sessions for release as a single accompanying the album. To avoid having to promote the single with numerous television appearances, the Beatles chose to produce film clips for the two songs, the first time they had done so for a single. Directed by Joe McGrath, the clips were filmed at Twickenham Film Studios in south-west London on 23 November.\nStudio aesthetic and sounds.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n[On \"Rubber Soul\"] the Beatles demonstrated an ability to reach beyond the confines of acceptable rock and roll techniques and bring to the studio truly innovative ideas such as layering bass and fuzz-bass guitars, creating rhymes in different languages, mixing modes on a single song, utilizing tape manipulation to give instruments entirely new sounds, and introducing the sitar \u2013 a most unusual instrument for a rock band.\n\u2013 Music journalist Chris Smith\nLennon recalled that \"Rubber Soul\" was the first album over which the Beatles took control in the studio and made demands rather than accept standard recording practices. According to Riley, the album reflects \"a new affection for recording\" over live performance. Author Philip Norman similarly writes that, with the Beatles increasingly drawn towards EMI's large cache of \"exotic\" musical instruments, combined with their readiness to incorporate \"every possible resource of the studio itself\" and Martin's skills as a classical arranger, \"Implicitly, from the very start, this [music] was not stuff intended to be played live on stage.\"\nAccording to Barry Miles, a leading figure in the UK underground whom Lennon and McCartney befriended at this time, \"Rubber Soul\" and its 1966 follow-up, \"Revolver\", were \"when [the Beatles] got away from George Martin, and became a creative entity unto themselves\". In 1995, Harrison said that \"Rubber Soul\" was his favourite Beatles album, adding: \"we certainly knew we were making a good album. We did spend more time on it and tried new things. But the most important thing about it was that we were suddenly hearing sounds that we weren't able to hear before.\"\nDuring the sessions, McCartney played a solid-body Rickenbacker 4001 bass guitar, which produced a fuller sound than his hollow-body Hofner. The Rickenbacker's design allowed for greater melodic precision, a characteristic that led McCartney to contribute more intricate bass lines. For the rest of his Beatles career, the Rickenbacker would become McCartney's primary bass for studio work. Harrison used a Fender Stratocaster for the first time, most notably in his lead guitar part on \"Nowhere Man\". The variety in guitar tones throughout the album was also aided by Harrison and Lennon's use of capos, such as in the high-register parts on \"If I Needed Someone\" and \"Girl\".\nOn \"Rubber Soul\", the Beatles departed from standard rock and roll instrumentation, particularly in Harrison's use of the Indian sitar on \"Norwegian Wood\". Having been introduced to the string instrument on the set of the 1965 film \"Help!\", Harrison's interest was fuelled by fellow Indian music fans Roger McGuinn and David Crosby of the Byrds, partway through the Beatles' US tour. Music journalist Paul Du Noyer describes the sitar part as \"simply a sign of the whole band's hunger for new musical colours\", but also \"the pivotal moment of \"Rubber Soul\"\". The Beatles also made use of harmonium during the sessions, marking that instrument's introduction into rock music.\nThe band's willingness to experiment with sound was further demonstrated in McCartney playing fuzz bass on \"Think for Yourself\" over his standard bass part, and their employing a piano made to sound like a baroque harpsichord on \"In My Life\".&lt;ref name=\"Easlea/BBC\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The latter effect came about when, in response to Lennon suggesting he play something \"like Bach\", Martin recorded the piano solo with the tape running at half-speed; when played back at normal speed, the sped-up sound gave the illusion of a harpsichord. In this way, the Beatles used the recording studio as a musical instrument, an approach that they and Martin developed further with \"Revolver\". In Prendergast's description, \"bright ethnic percussion\" was among the other \"great sounds\" that filled the album.\nLennon, McCartney and Harrison's three-part harmony singing was another musical detail that came to typify the \"Rubber Soul\" sound. According to musicologist Walter Everett, some of the vocal arrangements feature the same \"pantonal planing of three-part root-position triads\" adopted by the Byrds, who had initially based their harmonies on the style used by the Beatles and other British Invasion bands. Riley says that the Beatles softened their music on \"Rubber Soul\", yet by reverting to slower tempos they \"draw attention to how much rhythm can do\". Wide separation in the stereo image ensured that subtleties in the musical arrangements were heard; in Riley's description, this quality emphasised the \"richly textured\" arrangements over \"everything being stirred together into one high-velocity mass\".\nMcCartney said that as part of their increased involvement in the album's production, the band members attended the mixing sessions rather than let Martin work in their absence. Until late in their career, the \"primary\" version of the Beatles' albums was always the monophonic mix. According to Beatles historian Bruce Spizer, Martin and the EMI engineers devoted most of their time and attention to the mono mixdowns, and generally regarded stereo as a gimmick. The band were not usually present for the stereo mixing sessions.\nBand dynamics.\nWhile Martin recalled the sessions as having been \"a very joyful time\", Smith felt \"something had happened between \"Help!\" and \"Rubber Soul\"\", and the family atmosphere that had once characterised the relationship between the Beatles and their production team was absent. He said the project revealed the first signs of artistic conflict between Lennon and McCartney, and friction within the band as more effort was spent on perfecting each song. This also manifested in a struggle over which song should be the A-side of their next single, with Lennon insisting on \"Day Tripper\" (of which he was the primary writer) and publicly contradicting EMI's announcement about the upcoming release.\nIn addition, a rift was growing between McCartney and his bandmates as he continued to abstain from taking LSD. The revelations provided by the drug had drawn Lennon and Harrison closer, and were then shared by Starr when, during the band's stay in Los Angeles that August, he agreed to try LSD for the first time.\nSongs.\nOverview.\nPop historian Andrew Grant Jackson describes \"Rubber Soul\" as a \"synthesis of folk, rock, soul, baroque, proto-psychedelia, and the sitar\". According to author Joe Harrington, the album contained the Beatles' first \"psychedelic experiments\", heralding the transformational effect of LSD on many of the original British Invasion acts. Author Bernard Gendron dismisses the commonly held view that \"Rubber Soul\" is a folk rock album; he cites its incorporation of baroque and Eastern sounds as examples of the Beatles' \"nascent experimentalism and eclectic power of appropriation\", aspects that he says suggest an artistic approach that transcends the genre. According to \"The Encyclopedia of Country Music\", building on the Beatles' 1964 track \"I Don't Want to Spoil the Party\", the album can be seen in retrospect as an early example of country rock, anticipating the Byrds' \"Sweetheart of the Rodeo\" album.\nFurther to Lennon's more introspective outlook in 1964, particularly on \"Beatles for Sale\", the lyrics on \"Rubber Soul\" represent a pronounced development in sophistication, thoughtfulness and ambiguity. According to music critic Greil Marcus, \"the Beatles were still writing about love, but this was a new kind of love: contingent, scary and vital\", and so, while the music was \"seduction, not assault\", the \"emotional touch\" was tougher than before. Author James Decker considers it significant that \"Rubber Soul\" \"took its narrative cues more from folk crossovers such as Bob Dylan and the Byrds than from the Beatles' pop cohorts\". In particular, the relationships between the sexes moved from simpler boy-girl love songs to more nuanced and negative portrayals. In this way, Lennon and McCartney offered candid insights into their personal lives.\nSide one.\n\"Drive My Car\".\nThe album opens with a pair of lead guitar parts that are soon rendered off-metre by the arrival of McCartney's bass. \"Drive My Car\" is a McCartney composition with substantial contribution from Lennon with the lyrics. Harrison, as the Beatles' most knowledgeable soul-music enthusiast, contributed heavily to the recording by suggesting they arrange the song with a dual guitar\u2013bass riff in the style of Otis Redding's contemporary single \"Respect\". In their joint lead vocals, McCartney and Lennon sing dissonant harmonies, a quality that is furthered by Harrison's entrance and signifies what Everett terms a \"new jazzy sophistication \u2026 in the vocal arrangement\".\nThe lyrics convey an actress's desire to become a film star and her promise to the narrator that he can be her chauffeur. According to Riley, the song satirises the \"ethics of materialism\" and serves as a \"parody of the Beatles' celebrity status and the status-seekers they meet\". Author and critic Kenneth Womack describes the lyrics as being \"loaded with sexual innuendo\", and he says that the female protagonist challenged the gendered expectations of a mid-1960s pop audience, as an \"everywoman\" with ego and a clear agenda.\n\"Norwegian Wood (This Bird Has Flown)\".\nLennon said he wrote \"Norwegian Wood\" about an extramarital affair and that he worded the narrative to hide the truth from his wife, Cynthia. The lyrics sketch a failed meeting between the singer and a mysterious girl, where she goes to bed and he sleeps in the bath;&lt;ref name=\"Unterberger/NW\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; in retaliation at the girl's aloofness, the singer decides to burn down her pine-panelled home. Arranged in time, and in the English folk style, the song has a Mixolydian melody that results in a drone effect in the acoustic guitars, complementing the sitar part, though switches to parallel scale of E Dorian during its middle eight. The narrative draws heavily on Dylan's style through its use of ambiguity. In author Jonathan Gould's description, the song is an \"emotional black comedy\", while Decker recognises it as a continuation of the \"interrogation of sexual ambiguities\" and \"muddled sense of power\" displayed in \"Drive My Car\".\n\"You Won't See Me\".\nWritten by McCartney, \"You Won't See Me\" reflects the difficulties he was experiencing in his relationship with actress Jane Asher due to her refusal to put her acting career second to his needs. Gould identifies the song as the third consecutive track in which the narrative conveys miscommunication. McCartney described its music as \"very Motown-flavored\", with a \"feel\" inspired by Motown bassist James Jamerson. The verses use the same chord sequence as the Four Tops' hit \"It's the Same Old Song\", which was titled by its writers, the Holland\u2013Dozier\u2013Holland team, in acknowledgement that they had already used the same pattern in their composition \"I Can't Help Myself\".\n\"Nowhere Man\".\nLennon recalled that \"Nowhere Man\" came to him fully formed one night at his home in Surrey, after he had struggled to write anything for several hours. The song reflects the existential concerns raised by his experiences with LSD, and, like \"I'm a Loser\" and \"Help!\", his self-loathing during a time he later called his \"fat Elvis period\". It was the first Beatles song to completely avoid boy\u2013girl relationships, and through Lennon conveying his feelings of inadequacy in the third person, the first example of a literary character in the Beatles' work. Riley views the message as a precursor to the \"I'd love to turn you on\" theme of \"A Day in the Life\" and, aided by the band's performance, optimistic in tone as Lennon \"sings for the unsung, the people who have shut themselves off from life\".\nHeavy equalisation was applied to the electric guitar parts through a series of faders, giving them a treble-rich texture that, as with the harmony vocals, recalls the Byrds' sound. In Prendergast's description, the track \"burst[s] forth with all the gusto of newly discovered psychedelia\", as Lennon's lead vocal \"luxuriates in an opiated haze of production and Harrison's Fender Stratocaster solo fuzzes with all the right hallucinatory sparkle\".\n\"Think for Yourself\".\nHarrison's lyrics to \"Think for Yourself\" suggest the influence of Dylan's September 1965 single \"Positively 4th Street\", as Harrison appears to rebuke a friend or lover. The song's accusatory message was unprecedented in the Beatles' work; Jackson identifies it as the band's contribution to a \"subgenre\" of protest songs that emerged in 1965, in which artists railed against \"oppressive conformity itself\" rather than political issues. Everett describes the composition as \"a tour de force of altered scale degrees\". He adds that, such is the ambiguity throughout, \"its tonal quality forms the perfect conspirator with the text's and the rhythm's hesitations and unexpected turns.\" Gould writes that, in its dialogue with Harrison's vocal, McCartney's fuzz bass suggests \"the snarls of an enraged schnauzer, snapping and striking at its lead\".\n\"The Word\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n[\"The Word\" is] all about gettin' smart. It's the marijuana period... it's the love-and-peace thing. The word is \"love,\" right? It seems like the underlying theme to the universe. Everything that was worthwhile got down to this one, love, love thing.\n\u2013 John Lennon\nIn his book \"1965: The Year Modern Britain Was Born\", Bray recognises \"The Word\" as marking the start of the Beatles' \"high psychedelic period\". Lennon's exhortation that \"The word is love\" anticipates the ethos behind the counterculture's 1967 Summer of Love. The lyrics focus on the concept of universal love as a path to spiritual enlightenment, with what Decker terms \"proselytizing zeal\" on the narrator's part. Author Ian MacDonald recognises the \"distant influence\" of Wilson Pickett's \"In the Midnight Hour\" and James Brown's \"Papa's Got a Brand New Bag\" on the song's rhythm, and highlights Starr's drumming (for its \"feast of eccentric 'backwards fills'\") and McCartney's dextrous bass playing. The arrangement also includes seven vocal parts and Martin playing suspended chords on harmonium.\n\"Michelle\".\n\"Michelle\" was conceived by McCartney in the late 1950s. During a writing session for \"Rubber Soul\", Lennon added a new middle eight, part of which was taken from Nina Simone's recent cover of \"I Put a Spell on You\".&lt;ref name=\"Halpin/Louder\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; MacDonald identifies the song as another example of the Beatles' \"comedy song\" approach, which, in a contemporary interview, McCartney had suggested was a possible new direction for the group. In Womack's view, the French phrases in the lyrics accentuate the premise whereby a language barrier separates two lovers, and the narrative conveys an acceptance that their relationship is doomed to fail, such that the singer is already looking back nostalgically at what could have been. Gould describes the performance as \"sentimental \u2026 French cabaret\" which, following McCartney's declaration of \"I love you\", leads into a guitar solo by Harrison that represents \"one of Jean-Paul Sartre's existential caf\u00e9 workers\".\nSide two.\n\"What Goes On\".\nThe Beatles had attempted to record an early version of Lennon's \"What Goes On\" in 1963. With little time to complete \"Rubber Soul\", the song was reworked by Lennon and McCartney as a vocal spot for Starr, who also received his first songwriting credit, as co-composer. The song is in the country style favoured by Starr, and in its lyrics the singer laments his lover's deceit. In Everett's description, the arrangement includes Harrison's rockabilly-inflected lead guitar, played on his Gretsch Tennessean, contrasting with Lennon's \"Steve Cropper-styled Memphis 'chick' rhythm part\".\n\"Girl\".\nLennon said he wrote \"Girl\" about an archetypal woman he had been searching for and would finally find in Yoko Ono, the Japanese artist he met in November 1966. In the lyrics, he also expresses his disdain for Christian moral values. The song was the final track recorded for the album. The composition incorporates aspects of Greek folk music, while the arrangement includes an instrumental passage set as a German two-step and an acoustic guitar part played to sound like a Greek bouzouki. High equalisation was applied to Lennon's vocal over the choruses to capture the hissing sound as he drew breath \u2013 an effect that also suggested he was inhaling on a marijuana joint. McCartney recalled that he and Harrison sang \"Tit-tit-tit\" on the middle eights to capture the \"innocence\" of the Beach Boys singing \"La-la-la\" on one of their recent songs. Riley likens the musical arrangement to a \"scene from the old world\" and he concludes of the song: \"The old-fashioned atmosphere conveys desire and deception, and Lennon sings it as much to console himself as to make sense of its bewildering proportions ('And she promises the earth to me and I believe her/After all this time I don't know why'). It's the sympathetic side of the anger in 'Norwegian Wood.'\"\n\"I'm Looking Through You\".\nLike \"You Won't See Me\" and \"We Can Work It Out\", \"I'm Looking Through You\" focuses on McCartney's troubled relationship with Asher. Gould describes it as the \"disillusioned sequel\" to McCartney's other 1965 songs centring on \"a face-to-face (if not necessarily eye-to-eye) encounter between two lovers\". Decker likens the lyrics to a less philosophical version of \"Think for Yourself\" in which \"the narrator has grown, yet the woman has failed to keep up.\" The composition contrasts acoustic-based verses with harsher, R&amp;B-style instrumental sections, suggesting a combination of the folk rock and soul styles. The Beatles had taped two versions of the song before achieving the final version, which they recorded during the last, frantic day of the \"Rubber Soul\" sessions. In its final form, the song gained a middle eight where previously there had been a twelve-bar blues jam.\n\"In My Life\".\nLennon credited a remark made by BBC journalist Kenneth Allsop, who had asked why his songs appeared to lack the wordplay and childhood focus evident in his 1964 book \"In His Own Write\", as the catalyst for \"In My Life\". Lennon considered the song to be his \"first real major piece of work\". The lyrics evoke his youth in Liverpool and reflect his nostalgia for a time before the onset of international fame. McCartney recalled writing the melody on his own and said that the song's musical inspiration came from Smokey Robinson and the Miracles; according to Lennon, McCartney merely assisted in writing what he called \"the middle-eight melody\". In Gould's description, \"In My Life\" \"owed a conscious debt\" to the Miracles' contemporary hit \"The Tracks of My Tears\" and thereby served as \"the most recent installment in the lively cultural exchange between Motown's Hitsville Studios and EMI's Abbey Road\".\nMartin's Bach-inspired piano solo was overdubbed in the Beatles' absence, over a section that they had left empty. Womack says that the baroque aspect of this contribution furthers the song's nostalgic qualities, a point also made by Gould, who adds that, by revisiting the past and presenting emotional themes that are resolved in the narrative, \"In My Life\" serves as the album's only song that \"sounds the Beatles' original ground theme of happiness-in-relationship\".\n\"Wait\".\n\"Wait\" was a Lennon composition to which McCartney contributed a middle eight. Gould includes the song among a category of Beatles \"'coming home' songs\", while Riley pairs it with \"It Won't Be Long\" but adds that, relative to that 1963 song, in \"Wait\" \"the lovers' reunion has more anxiety than euphoria goading the beat.\" The band completed the track on the final day of recording for the album, overdubbing tone-pedal lead guitar, percussion and a new vocal by McCartney onto the June 1965 rhythm track. MacDonald writes that, although Lennon and McCartney would most likely have viewed the subject matter as dated even in June, the group's performance gives the song the required \"drive and character\" for \"Rubber Soul\", particularly Starr's approach to the rhythm changes between its contrasting sections.\n\"If I Needed Someone\".\nHarrison wrote \"If I Needed Someone\" as a love song to Pattie Boyd, the English model to whom he became engaged in December 1965 and married the following month. In the song's Rickenbacker 12-string guitar riff, the Beatles returned the compliment paid to them earlier in 1965 by the Byrds, whose jangly guitar-based sound McGuinn had sourced from Harrison's playing the previous year. In MacDonald's view, the song is influenced \"far more\" by Indian classical music than by the Byrds, through Harrison's partly Mixolydian melody and the presence of drone. The latter aspect is furthered by McCartney's arpeggiated bass line in A major continuing over the chord change to a \u266dVII triad.\nThe detached, dispassionate tone in the lyrics has invited alternative interpretations. Gould refers to it as \"a rueful rain check of a love song\" directed to the \"right person at the wrong time\"; according to Jackson, \"the lyrics address all the women of the world, saying that had he met them earlier [before committing to Boyd], it might have worked out, but now he was too much in love (but give me your number just in case)\".\n\"Run for Your Life\".\nLennon wrote \"Run for Your Life\" based on \"Baby Let's Play House\", which was one of Presley's early singles on the Sun record label. Lennon retained a line from the Presley track \u2013 \"I'd rather see you dead, little girl, than to be with another man\". The lyrical theme is jealousy, betraying an overtly misogynistic quality that Decker finds at odds with the Beatles' approach to making the album. Performed in the country style, it was the first track recorded for the album and features a descending guitar riff played by Harrison and slide guitar parts.\nNorth American format.\nAdhering to the company's policy for the Beatles' albums in the United States, Capitol Records altered the content of \"Rubber Soul\" for its release there. They removed \"Drive My Car\", \"Nowhere Man\", \"What Goes On\" and \"If I Needed Someone\", all of which were instead issued on the Beatles' next North American album, \"Yesterday and Today\", in June 1966. The four songs were replaced with \"I've Just Seen a Face\" and \"It's Only Love\", which had been cut from \"Help!\" as part of Capitol's reconfiguring of that LP to serve as a true soundtrack album, consisting of Beatles songs and orchestral music from the film.\nThrough the mix of predominantly acoustic-based songs, according to Womack, the North American release \"takes on a decidedly folk-ish orientation\". Capitol sequenced \"I've Just Seen a Face\" as the opening track, reflecting the company's attempt to present \"Rubber Soul\" as a folk-rock album, and \"It's Only Love\" opened side two. Gould writes that the omission of songs such as \"Drive My Car\" provided a \"misleading idea\" of the Beatles' musical direction and \"turned the album title into an even more obscure joke\", since the result was the band's least soul- or R&amp;B-influenced album up to this point. The stereo mixes used by Capitol contained two false starts at the beginning of \"I'm Looking Through You\", while \"The Word\" also differed from the UK version due to the double-tracking of Lennon's lead vocal, the addition of an extra falsetto harmony and the panning treatment given to one of the percussion parts.\nTitle and artwork.\nThe album title was intended as a pun combining the falseness intrinsic to pop music and rubber-soled shoes. Lennon said the title was McCartney's idea and referred to \"English soul\". In a 1966 press conference, Starr said they called the album \"Rubber Soul\" to acknowledge that, in comparison to American soul artists, \"we are white and haven't got what they've got\", and he added that this was true of all the British acts who attempted to play soul music. McCartney recalled that he conceived the title after overhearing an American musician describing Mick Jagger's singing style as \"plastic soul\". In Phillip Norman's view, the title served as \"a sly dig at their archrivals (and private best mates) the Rolling Stones\", with the added implication that the Beatles' \"variety\" of soul music \"at least was stamped out by a good strong northern [English] Wellington boot\".\n\"Rubber Soul\" was the group's first album not to feature their name on the cover, an omission that reflected the level of control they had over their releases and the extent of their international fame. The cover photo of the Beatles was taken by photographer Robert Freeman in the garden at Lennon's house. The idea for the \"stretched\" effect of the image came about by accident when Freeman was projecting the photo onto an LP-size piece of cardboard for the Beatles' benefit, and the board fell slightly backwards, elongating the projected image. Harrison said the effect was appropriate since it allowed the group to lose \"the 'little innocents' tag, the naivety\" and it was in keeping with their emergence as \"fully fledged potheads\". Author Peter Doggett highlights the cover as an example of the Beatles, like Dylan and the Stones, \"continu[ing] to test the limits of the portrait\" in their LP designs.\nThe distinctive lettering was created by illustrator Charles Front, who recalled that his inspiration was the album's title: \"If you tap into a rubber tree then you get a sort of globule, so I started thinking of creating a shape that represented that, starting narrow and filling out.\" The rounded letters used on the sleeve established a style that became ubiquitous in psychedelic designs and, according to journalist Lisa Bachelor, \"a staple of poster art for the flower power generation\".&lt;ref name=\"Bachelor/Guardian\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nRelease.\nEMI's Parlophone label issued \"Rubber Soul\" on 3 December 1965. The \"We Can Work It Out\" / \"Day Tripper\" single was also released that day and was the first example of a double A-side single in Britain.&lt;ref name=\"White/OCC\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; EMI announced that it had pressed 750,000 copies of the LP to cater to local demand. Its advance orders of 500,000 almost equalled the total sales for the new single and were described by the \"Daily Mirror\"'s show business reporter as marking a new record for pre-release orders for an LP.\nOn the day of the album's release, the Beatles performed at the Odeon Cinema in Glasgow, marking the start of what would be their final UK tour. Weary of Beatlemania, the group had conceded to do a short tour, although they refused to reprise their Christmas Show from the 1963\u201364 and 1964\u201365 holiday seasons. They performed both sides of the single throughout the tour, but only \"If I Needed Someone\" and \"Nowhere Man\" from the new album. In the United States, \"Rubber Soul\" was their tenth album and their first to consist entirely of original songs. The release took place there on 6 December.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFor most American teens, the arrival of the Beatles' \"Rubber Soul\"... was unsettling. Instead of cheerleading for love, the album's songs held cryptic messages about thinking for yourself, the hypnotic power of women, something called \"getting high\" and bedding down with the opposite sex. Clearly, growing up wasn't going to be easy.&lt;ref name=\"Myers/WSJ\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\n\u2013 Historian Marc Myers\nIn an interview following the album's release, McCartney said that although people had \"always wanted us to stay the same\", he saw no reason for the Beatles to pander to such limitations, adding, \"\"Rubber Soul\" for me is the beginning of my adult life.\" Lennon commented, \"You don't know us if you don't know \"Rubber Soul\".\"\nAccording to Beatles biographer Nicholas Schaffner, Freeman's cover photo was viewed as \"daringly surreal\" and led some fans to write to the band's official fanzine, \"Beatles Monthly\", alarmed that the image \"made their heroes look like corpses\". In her study of the Beatles' contemporary audience, sociologist Candy Leonard writes that some young listeners were challenged by the band's new musical direction, but \"With \"Rubber Soul\", the Beatles came to occupy a role in fans' lives and a place in their psyches that was different from any previous fan\u2013performer relationship.\" Singer-songwriter Elvis Costello, who was an eleven-year-old fan at the time, later recalled thinking that the band had \"lost their minds\". He added: \"I didn't understand a word, I didn't think it was any good, and then six weeks later you couldn't live without the record. And that's good \u2013 that's when you trust the people who make music to take you somewhere you haven't been before.\"\nCommercial performance.\n\"Rubber Soul\" began its 42-week run on the \"Record Retailer\" LPs chart (subsequently adopted as the UK Albums Chart) on 12 December 1965. The following week it replaced the \"Sound of Music\" soundtrack at the top of the chart, where it remained for eight weeks in total. On the national chart compiled by \"Melody Maker\", \"Rubber Soul\" entered at number 1 and held the position for thirteen weeks; it remained in the top ten until mid July 1966. In the United States, \"Rubber Soul\" topped the \"Billboard\" Top LPs chart on 8 January 1966, having sold 1.2\u00a0million copies there within nine days of release. These initial sales were unprecedented for an LP and were cited by \"Billboard\" magazine as evidence of a new market trend in the US in which pop albums started to match the numbers of singles sold. The album was number 1 for six weeks in total; it remained in the top twenty until the start of July, before leaving the chart in mid December. As the more popular of the joint A-sides, \"We Can Work It Out\" became the Beatles' sixth consecutive number 1 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart, all of which were achieved over a twelve-month period from January 1965.\nWhile British albums typically avoided including previously released songs, the lack of a hit single on the North American version of \"Rubber Soul\" added to the album's identity there as a self-contained artistic statement. Everett writes that in the US the album's \"hit\" was \"Michelle\", through its popularity on radio playlists. After their inclusion on the EMI-format LP, \"Norwegian Wood\", \"Nowhere Man\" and \"Michelle\" were each issued as singles in various markets outside Britain and America, with \"Norwegian Wood\" topping the Australian chart in May 1966. \"Nowhere Man\"'s first release in North America was as a single A-side, backed by \"What Goes On\", in February, before both tracks appeared on \"Yesterday and Today\". \"Nowhere Man\" topped \"Record World\"'s singles chart in the US and Canada's \"RPM\" 100 chart, but peaked at number 3 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. In July, Parlophone released an EP titled \"Nowhere Man\", which contained \"Nowhere Man\", \"Michelle\" and two other songs from \"Rubber Soul\".\nThe album was also the source of hit songs for several other contemporary artists. \"Michelle\" became one of the most widely recorded of all the Beatles' songs. Cover versions of \"Girl\", \"If I Needed Someone\" and \"Nowhere Man\" similarly placed on UK or US singles charts in 1966.\nIn the UK, \"Rubber Soul\" was the third highest-selling album of 1965, behind \"The Sound of Music\" and \"Beatles for Sale\",&lt;ref name=\"Mawer/1965\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and the third highest-selling album of 1966, behind \"The Sound of Music\" and \"Revolver\".&lt;ref name=\"Mawer/1966\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The extent of its commercial success there surprised the music industry, which had sought to re-establish the LP market as the domain of adult record-buyers. From early 1966, record companies in the UK ceased their policy of promoting adult-oriented entertainers over rock acts, and embraced budget albums for their lower-selling artists to cater to the increased demand for LPs. In the US, \"Rubber Soul\" was the fourth highest-selling album of 1966, as reported in \"Billboard\".&lt;ref name=\"BB/TopOf66\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; According to figures published in 2009 by former Capitol executive David Kronemyer, further to estimates he gave in \"MuseWire\" magazine, \"Rubber Soul\" sold 1,800,376 copies in America by the end of 1965 and 2,766,862 by the close of the decade. As of 1997, it had shipped over 6 million copies there. In 2013, after the British Phonographic Industry altered its sales award protocol, the album was certified Platinum based on UK sales since 1994.\nCritical reception.\nContemporary reviews.\nCritical response to \"Rubber Soul\" was highly favourable. Allen Evans of the \"NME\" wrote that the band were \"still finding different ways to make us enjoy listening to them\" and described the LP as \"a fine piece of recording artistry and adventure in group sound\". While outlining to American readers the differences in the UK-format release, \"KRLA Beat\" said \"Rubber Soul\" was an \"unbelievably sensational\" work on which the Beatles were \"once again\u00a0... setting trends in this world of pop\". \"Newsweek\" lauded the Beatles as \"the Bards of Pop\", saying that the album's combination of \"gospel, country, baroque counterpoint and even French popular ballads\" lent the band a unique style in which their songs were \"as brilliantly original as any written today\". Like \"Newsweek\", \"The New York Times\" had belittled the group when they first performed in America in February 1964, but following the release of \"Rubber Soul\", entertainment critic Jack Gould wrote an effusive tribute in the newspaper's Sunday magazine. In \"HiFi/Stereo Review\", Morgan Ames wrote that, like other supportive professional musicians, he recognised the devices the band employed as \"they tromp on the art of music\", and while he viewed their formal musicality as limited, he expressed joy at its effectiveness. Having opened the review by saying, \"The Beatles sound more and more like music\", he concluded of the album: \"Their blend is excellent, their performance smooth, and their charm, wit and excitement run high.\"\nThe writers of \"Record Mirror\"'s initial review found the LP lacking some of the variety of the group's previous releases but also said: \"one marvels and wonders at the constant stream of melodic ingenuity stemming from the boys, both as performers and composers. Keeping up their pace of creativeness is quite fantastic.\" By contrast, Richard Green wrote in the same magazine that most of the album \"if recorded by anyone but the Beatles, would not be worthy of release\", with many of the tracks devoid of \"the old Beatles excitement and compulsiveness\". Green acknowledged that his was an unpopular opinion, before stating: \"Judging LPs strictly on their merits, recent albums from Manfred Mann, the Beach Boys and Jerry Lee Lewis rank high above \"Rubber Soul\".\"\nIn another review that Richard Williams later cited as an example of the British pop press not being \"quite ready\" for the album, \"Melody Maker\" found the Beatles' new sound \"a little subdued\" and said that tracks such as \"You Won't See Me\" and \"Nowhere Man\" \"almost get monotonous \u2013 an un-Beatle-like feature if ever there was one\". Author Steve Turner also highlights the comments made by the \"Melody Maker\" and \"Record Mirror\" reviewers, who were typically aged over 30, as indicative of how UK pop journalists lacked \"the critical vocabulary\" and \"the broad musical perspective\" to recognise or engage with progressive music. Turner adds that \"Rubber Soul\" \"may have perplexed the old guard of entertainment correspondents, but it was a beacon for fledgling rock critics (as they would soon be called)\". Among the few newspaper columnists seriously reviewing rock music was Ralph J. Gleason, jazz critic for the \"San Francisco Chronicle\", who credited \"Rubber Soul\" with \"experimenting far past the style of outright imitations of Negro rhythm and blues artists\" which had often characterised the Beatles' earlier work. In a February1966 article, he contended it was \"one of the most universally appealing albums ever issued\", extending the band's reach beyond teenagers to \"[a]ll ages, all colors, all sexes, [and] all social and economic levels\".\nIn a September 1966 review of \"Revolver\", \"KRLA Beat\" said that the title of \"Rubber Soul\" had \"become a standard phrase used to describe a creation of exceptional excellence in the field of music\", such that several highly regarded releases had since earned the description \"a '\"Rubber Soul\" in its field'\". Writing in \"Esquire\" in 1967, Robert Christgau called it \"an album that for innovation, tightness, and lyrical intelligence was about twice as good as anything they or anyone else (except maybe the Stones) had done previously\".\nRetrospective assessment.\nAccording to Decker, notwithstanding the band's advances in 1964, music critics generally view \"Rubber Soul\" as the Beatles' \"'transitional' album ... from successful pop act to unparalleled masters of the studio\". It is frequently cited by commentators as the first of their \"classic\" albums. Greil Marcus described it as the best of all the band's LPs. In his 1979 essay on the Beatles in \"The Rolling Stone Illustrated History of Rock &amp; Roll\", Marcus wrote: \"\"Rubber Soul\" was an album \"made\" as an album; with the exception of 'Michelle' (which, to be fair, paid the bills for years to come), every cut was an inspiration, something new and remarkable in and of itself.\"\nNeil McCormick of \"The Daily Telegraph\" wrote in 2009: \"this is where things start to get very interesting\u00a0... \"Rubber Soul\" is the result of their first extended period in the studio. The production is open and spacious, adorned but not yet overcrowded with new instruments and ideas. The songs themselves are like little Pop Art vignettes, where the lyrics are starting to match the quality of the melodies and arrangements.\" Scott Plagenhoef of \"Pitchfork\" describes the album as \"the most important artistic leap in the Beatles' career \u2013 the signpost that signaled a shift away from Beatlemania and the heavy demands of teen pop, toward more introspective, adult subject matter\". Paul Du Noyer wrote in his review for \"Blender\" in 2004: \"Their talent was already a source of wonder, but now the songs themselves were turning mysterious. Under the influence of Bob Dylan \u2013 and, it might be said, marijuana \u2013 the Fab Four laced their tunefulness with new introspection, wordplay and social comment. University professors and newspaper columnists started taking note.\"\nWriting in \"Paste\", Mark Kemp says that the influence of Dylan and the Byrds seems overt at times but the album marks the start of the Beatles' peak in creativity and, in the context of 1965, offered \"an unprecedented synthesis of elements from folk-rock and beyond\".&lt;ref name=\"Kemp/Paste\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; According to Richie Unterberger of AllMusic, the album's lyrics represented \"a quantum leap in terms of thoughtfulness, maturity, and complex ambiguities\", while the music was similarly progressive in its use of sounds beyond \"the conventional instrumental parameters of the rock group\". He adds that \"Rubber Soul\" is \"full of great tunes\" from Lennon and McCartney notwithstanding their divergence from a common style, and demonstrates that Harrison \"was also developing into a fine songwriter\". Writing in the \"Encyclopedia of Popular Music\", Colin Larkin describes it as \"not a collection of would-be hits or favourite cover versions \u2026 but a startlingly diverse collection, ranging from the pointed satire of 'Nowhere Man' to the intensely reflective 'In My Life'.\" In the 2004 edition of \"The Rolling Stone Album Guide\", Rob Sheffield recognises \"Help!\" as \"the first chapter in the [Beatles'] astounding creative takeoff\", after which the band \"grew up with an album of bittersweet romance, singing adult love ballads that feel worldly but not jaded\".\nIn an article coinciding with the 50th anniversary of its release, for \"The Guardian\", Bob Stanley lamented that \"Rubber Soul\" was often overlooked in appraisals of the Beatles' recording career, whereas \"Revolver\" and \"The Beatles\" had each gained in stature to surpass \"Sgt. Pepper\". Stanley highlighted \"Rubber Soul\" as having been \"a good 18 months ahead of its time\" and \"the first album of the rock era that \"sounded\" like an album\". Also writing in December 2015, in \"Rolling Stone\", Sheffield especially admired the singing and the modern qualities of the female characters depicted in the lyrics. He said that the album was \"way ahead of what anyone had done before\" and, given the short period in which they had to record, he called it the Beatles' \"accidental masterpiece\".&lt;ref name=\"Sheffield/RS\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nConversely, Jon Friedman of \"Esquire\" finds the work vastly overrated, with only the Lennon-dominated songs \"Norwegian Wood\", \"Nowhere Man\", \"In My Life\" and \"Girl\" worthy of praise, and he dismisses it as \"dull\" and \"the Beatles' most inconsequential album\". Although he considers that McCartney \"comes off third-string\" to Lennon and Harrison, Plagenhoef defends the album's subtle mood; highlighting the influence of cannabis on the Beatles throughout 1965, he writes: \"With its patient pace and languid tones, \"Rubber Soul\" is an altogether much more mellow record than anything the Beatles had done before, or would do again. It's a fitting product from a quartet just beginning to explore their inner selves on record.\" In his review for Rough Guides, Chris Ingham highlights the musical arrangements, three-part harmonies and judicious use of new sounds, in addition to the band's improved musicianship and songwriting. He says that \"Rubber Soul\" usually trails the Beatles' next four albums in critics' assessments of their work, yet \"it's undoubtedly their pre-acid, pre-antagonism masterpiece: beat music as high art\".\nInfluence and legacy.\nRivals' response.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt was the most out-there music they'd ever made, but also their warmest, friendliest and most emotionally direct. As soon as it dropped in December 1965, \"Rubber Soul\" cut the story of pop music in half \u2013 we're all living in the future this album invented. Now as then, every pop artist wants to make a \"Rubber Soul\" of their own.\n\u2013 Rob Sheffield, 2015\nMusic historian Bill Martin says that the release of \"Rubber Soul\" was a \"turning point\" for pop music, in that for the first time \"the \"album\" rather than the song became the basic unit of artistic production.\" In author David Howard's description, \"pop's stakes had been raised into the stratosphere\" by \"Rubber Soul\", resulting in a shift in focus from singles to creating albums without the usual filler tracks. The release marked the start of a period when other artists, in an attempt to emulate the Beatles' achievement, sought to create albums as works of artistic merit and with increasingly novel sounds. According to Steve Turner, by galvanising the Beatles' most ambitious rivals in Britain and America, \"Rubber Soul\" launched \"the pop equivalent of an arms race\".\nBrian Wilson of the Beach Boys described \"Rubber Soul\" as \"the first album I listened to where every song was a gas\" and planned his band's next project, \"Pet Sounds\", as an attempt to surpass it. \"Rubber Soul\" similarly inspired Pete Townshend of the Who and the Kinks' Ray Davies, as well as Jagger and Keith Richards of the Rolling Stones, who issued their first album of all-original material, \"Aftermath\", in April 1966. The album was also an influence on Bob Dylan, Stevie Wonder and the Byrds. John Cale recalled that \"Rubber Soul\" was an inspiration as he and Lou Reed developed their band the Velvet Underground. He said it was the first time \"you were forced to deal with them as something other than a flash in the pan\" and especially admired Harrison's introduction of Indian sounds.&lt;ref name=\"Alexander/Mojo\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nIn his chapter on \"Rubber Soul\" in the Cambridge Companion to Music's volume on the Beatles, James Decker credits the album with effecting the \"transformation\" of 1960s pop. In addition to citing it as the precedent for early experimental works by bands including the Kinks, Love and Jefferson Airplane, Decker writes that \"Rubber Soul\" presented \"a variety of techniques hitherto unexplored in popular music\" while encouraging listeners \"to be cognizant of more flexible dimensions of pop music and to \"desire\" and \"expect\" them as well\". Music historian Simon Philo also sees it as heralding the experimentation that characterised late-1960s rock. He describes it as an album-length confirmation of the \"transformation of pop's range and reach\" that the Beatles had first achieved when \"Yesterday\", McCartney's introspective and classically orchestrated ballad, topped US singles charts in late 1965. In a 1968 article on the Beach Boys, Gene Sculatti of \"Jazz &amp; Pop\" recognised \"Rubber Soul\" as the model for \"Pet Sounds\" and \"Aftermath\", as well as \"the necessary prototype that no major rock group has been able to ignore\".\nCultural legitimisation of pop music.\n\"Rubber Soul\" is widely viewed as the first pop album to make an artistic statement through the quality of its songs, a point that was reinforced by its artsy cover photo. The belated acceptance of the Beatles by the editors of \"Newsweek\" was indicative of the magazine's recognition of the band's popularity among American intellectuals and the cultural elite. This in turn was reflected in \"The Village Voice\"'s appointment of Richard Goldstein, a recent graduate and New Journalism writer, to the new position of rock critic, in June 1966, and the Beatles' central role in achieving cultural legitimisation for pop music over 1966\u201367. Referring to the praise afforded the band, particularly the Lennon\u2013McCartney partnership, by \"Newsweek\" in early 1966, Michael Frontani writes: \"The Beatles had a foothold in the world of art; in the months that followed, their efforts would lead to the full acceptance and legitimization of rock and roll as an art form.\"\nPaul Williams launched \"Crawdaddy!\" in February 1966 with the aim of reflecting the sophistication brought to the genre by \"Rubber Soul\" and Dylan's \"Bringing It All Back Home\" \u2013 the two albums that, in music journalist Barney Hoskyns' description, \"arguably gave birth to 'rock' as a more solid concept than 'pop'\". According to Sculatti, \"Rubber Soul\" was \"the definitive 'rock as art' album, revolutionary in that it was a completely successful creative endeavor integrating with precision all aspects of the creative (rock) process \u2013 composition of individual tracks done with extreme care, each track arranged appropriately to fit beside each other track, the symmetrical rock 'n' roll album\". Christopher Bray describes it as \"the album that proved that rock and roll could be suitable for adult audiences\", \"the first long-playing pop record to really merit the term 'album'\" and the LP that \"turned pop music into high art\". Historian Marc Myers similarly credits it with \"mark[ing] rock's shift from formulaic pop to studio experimentation and high art\".\nAccording to Du Noyer, through \"Rubber Soul\"'s blurring of the traditionally distinct dividing line between pop and high culture, and the perceived inferiority of singles, \"a rift occurred [in the UK] between pop and rock\". He quotes writer Nik Cohn's complaints that the \"danger signs\" for pop music's loss of innocence were apparent on \"Rubber Soul\", and poet Philip Larkin's comment that \"[The Beatles'] fans stayed with them, and the nuttier intelligentsia, but they lost the typists in the Cavern.\" Du Noyer says the album started a process that grew to become a \"gulf between albums and singles, between rock or pop\" that \"shape[d] British music for decades\".\nDevelopment of subgenres.\nThe album coincided with rock 'n' roll's development into a variety of new styles, a process in which the Beatles' influence ensured them a pre-eminent role. Andrew Loog Oldham, the Rolling Stones' manager and producer at the time, has described \"Rubber Soul\" as \"the album that changed the musical world we lived in then to the one we still live in today\". \"Norwegian Wood\" launched what Indian classical musician Ravi Shankar called \"the great sitar explosion\", as the Indian string instrument became a popular feature in raga rock and for many pop artists seeking to add an exotic quality to their music. The harpsichord-like solo on \"In My Life\" led to a wave of baroque rock recordings. \"Rubber Soul\" was also the release that encouraged many folk-music aficionados to embrace pop. Folk singer Roy Harper recalled: \"They'd come onto my turf, got there before me, and they were kings of it, overnight. We'd all been outflanked...\"\nAuthor George Case, writing in his book \"Out of Our Heads\", identifies \"Rubber Soul\" as \"the authentic beginning of the psychedelic era\". Music journalist Mark Ellen similarly credits the album with having \"sow[ed] the seeds of psychedelia\",&lt;ref name=\"Kubernik/RBP\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; while Christgau says that \"psychedelia starts here.\" Writing in \"The Sydney Morning Herald\" in July 1966, Lillian Roxon reported on the new trend for psychedelia-themed clubs and events in the US and said that \"Rubber Soul\" was \"the classic psychedelic album now played at all the psychedelic discotheques\". She attributed pop's recent embrace of psychedelia and \"many of the strange new sounds now in records\" to the LP's influence.\nIn Myers' view, the Capitol release \"changed the direction of American rock\".&lt;ref name=\"Mochari/Inc\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In the ongoing process of reciprocal influence between the band and US folk rock acts, the Beatles went on to inspire the San Francisco music scene. Recalling the album's popularity in the Haight-Ashbury district of San Francisco, where Jefferson Airplane were based, journalist Charles Perry said: \"You could party hop all night and hear nothing but \"Rubber Soul\".\" Perry also wrote that \"More than ever the Beatles were the soundtrack of the Haight-Ashbury, Berkeley and the whole circuit\", where pre-hippie students suspected that the album was inspired by drugs.\nCiting a quantitative study of tempos in music from the 1960s, Walter Everett identifies \"Rubber Soul\" as a work that was \"made more to be thought about than danced to\", and an album that \"began a far-reaching trend\" in its slowing-down of the tempos typically used in pop and rock music. While music historians typically credit \"Sgt. Pepper\" as the birth of progressive rock, Everett and Bill Martin recognise \"Rubber Soul\" as the inspiration for many of the bands working in that genre from the early 1970s.\nAppearances on best-album lists and further recognition.\n\"Rubber Soul\" was voted fifth in Paul Gambaccini's 1978 book \"\", based on submissions from a panel of 47 critics and broadcasters including Richard Williams, Christgau and Marcus. In the first edition of Colin Larkin's book \"All Time Top 1000 Albums\", in 1994, it was ranked at number 10, and in 1998 it was voted the 39th greatest album of all time in the first \"Music of the Millennium\" poll, conducted by HMV and Channel 4. It was listed at number 34 in the third edition of Larkin's \"All Time Top 1000 Albums\", published in 2000.\nSince 2001, \"Rubber Soul\" has appeared in critics' best-albums-of-all-time lists compiled by VH1 (at number 6), \"Mojo\" (number 27) and \"Rolling Stone\" (number 5). It was among \"Time\" magazine's selection of the \"All-Time 100 Albums\" in 2006 and was favoured over \"Revolver\" in Chris Smith's book \"101 Albums That Changed Popular Music\" three years later. In 2012, \"Rolling Stone\" again placed it at number 5 on the magazine's revised list of the \"500 Greatest Albums of All Time\". In September 2020, \"Rubber Soul\" was ranked at number 35 on the same publication's new list.\n\"Rubber Soul\" appeared in \"Rolling Stone\"'s 2014 list of the \"40 Most Groundbreaking Albums of All Time\", where the editors concluded: \"You can say this represents 'maturity,' call it 'art' or credit it for moving rock away from singles to album-length statements \u2013 but regardless \"Rubber Soul\" accelerated popular music's creative arms race, driving competitors like the Stones, the Beach Boys and Dylan to dismantle expectations and create new ones.\" Three years later, \"Pitchfork\" ranked it at number 46 on the website's \"200 Best Albums of the 1960s\". In his commentary with the entry, Ian Cohen wrote: \"Every Beatles album fundamentally shaped how pop music is understood, so \"Rubber Soul\" is one of the most important records ever made, by default... Even in 2017, whenever a pop singer makes a serious turn, or an anointed serious band says they've learned to embrace pop, \"Rubber Soul\" can't help but enter the conversation.\"\nIn 2000, \"Rubber Soul\" was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame, an award bestowed by the American Recording Academy \"to honor recordings of lasting qualitative or historical significance that are at least 25 years old\". The album has been the subject of multi-artist tribute albums such as \"This Bird Has Flown\" and \"Rubber Folk\". Writing in December 2015, Ilan Mochari of \"Inc.\" magazine commented on the unusual aspect of a pop album's 50th anniversary being celebrated, and added: \"Over the next several years, you can bet you'll read about the 50th anniversary of many other albums \u2013 thematic volumes composed by bands or songwriters in the tradition \"Rubber Soul\" established. All of which is to say: \"Rubber Soul\", the Beatles' sixth studio album, was the record that launched a thousand ships.\"\nCompact disc reissues.\n\"Rubber Soul\" was first released on compact disc on 30 April 1987, with the fourteen-song UK track line-up now the international standard. As with \"Help!\", the album features a contemporary stereo digital remix prepared by George Martin. Martin had expressed concern to EMI over the original 1965 stereo mix, claiming it sounded \"very woolly, and not at all what I thought should be a good issue\". He went back to the original four-track tapes and remixed them for stereo.\nA newly remastered version of \"Rubber Soul\", again using the 1987 Martin remix, was released worldwide as part of the reissue of the entire Beatles catalogue on 9 September 2009. The album is available both as an individual CD release and as part of the \"Beatles (The Original Studio Recordings)\" box set. The accompanying \"Beatles in Mono\" box set contains two versions of the album: the original mono mix and the 1965 stereo mix.\nThe Capitol version was re-released in 2006, first as part of the \"Capitol Albums, Volume 2\" box set, using original mixes of the Capitol album, and then in 2014, individually and in the box set \"The U.S. Albums\".\nTrack listing.\nOriginal North American release.\nCompared to the UK/worldwide release, the original North American release of \"Rubber Soul\" dropped four tracks (\"Drive My Car\", \"Nowhere Man\", \"What Goes On\" and \"If I Needed Someone\") and added two others (\"I've Just Seen A Face\" and \"It's Only Love\"). In addition, the mixes (supervised by Dave Dexter Jr.) are in some cases slightly different from the UK/worldwide versions. Notably, the North American stereo version of \"I'm Looking Through You\" contains two false guitar starts not heard elsewhere, while \"The Word\" also differs from the UK version, with several different and additional vocal parts, and the panning treatment given to one of the percussion parts.\nPersonnel.\nAccording to Mark Lewisohn and Ian MacDonald, except where noted:\nThe Beatles\nProduction and additional personnel\nCharts.\nWeekly charts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74962", "revid": "42407475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74962", "title": "Modern Times (film)", "text": "1936 comedy film by Charles Chaplin\nModern Times is a 1936 American part-talkie comedy film produced, written and directed by Charlie Chaplin. In Chaplin's last performance as the iconic Little Tramp, his character struggles to survive in the modern, industrialized world. The film also stars Paulette Goddard, Henry Bergman, Tiny Sandford and Chester Conklin.\n\"Modern Times\" has won many awards and honors, and is widely considered one of the greatest films ever. It was one of the first 25 films selected by the Library of Congress for preservation in the National Film Registry for being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nThe Tramp works on an assembly line, where he suffers greatly due to the stress and pace of the repetitive work. He eventually suffers a nervous breakdown and runs amok, getting stuck within a machine and throwing the factory into chaos; he is then sent to the hospital. Following his recovery, the now-unemployed Tramp is mistakenly arrested in a Communist demonstration. In jail, he accidentally ingests smuggled cocaine, and in his subsequent delirium, he avoids being put back in his cell. When he returns, he stumbles upon a jailbreak and knocks the convicts unconscious for which he is hailed as a hero and given special treatment. When he is informed that he will soon be released due to his heroic actions, he argues unsuccessfully that he prefers life in jail.\nUpon release, he applies for a new job with a shipbuilder but leaves after causing an accident. Soon after, he runs into an orphaned girl, Ellen, who is fleeing the police after stealing a loaf of bread. Determined to go back to jail and to save her from arrest, the Tramp tells the police that he is the thief and asks to be arrested, but a witness reveals his deception and he is freed. He then eats an enormous amount of food at a cafeteria without paying to get arrested, and once again encounters Ellen in a paddy wagon after he is put in it. It soon crashes, however, and she convinces him to escape with her. The Tramp then gets a job as a night watchman at a department store, and encounters three burglars led by \"Big Bill,\" a fellow worker from the factory, who explains that they are hungry and desperate. After sharing drinks with them, he wakes up the next morning during opening hours and is arrested once again for failing to call the police on the burglars and for sleeping in the store's clothes on a desk, shocking a customer and the storekeeper.\nDays later, Ellen takes him to a run-down shack to live in. The next morning, he reads about an old factory's re-opening and lands a job as a mechanic's assistant. The other workers then suddenly decide to go on strike, and tell the Tramp to leave with them. Outside the factory, he accidentally launches a brick at a policeman and is arrested again.\nHe is released two weeks later, and learns that Ellen is now a caf\u00e9 dancer. She gets him a job as a singer and waiter, but he goes about his duties clumsily. During his floor show, he loses his cuffs, which bear the lyrics to his song, but he rescues the act by improvising the lyrics using gibberish and by pantomiming. When police arrive to arrest Ellen for her earlier escape, the two are forced to flee again, and Ellen despairs that their struggles are all pointless, but the Tramp reassures her. At a bright dawn, they walk down the road towards an uncertain but hopeful future.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Charlie Chaplin as a factory worker (The Tramp)\nProduction.\nDuring a European tour promoting \"City Lights\", Chaplin got the inspiration for \"Modern Times\" from both the lamentable conditions of the continent through the Great Depression, along with a conversation with Mahatma Gandhi in which they discussed modern technology. Chaplin did not understand why Gandhi generally opposed it, though he granted that \"machinery with only consideration of profit\" had put people out of work and ruined lives.\nChaplin began preparing the film in 1934 as his first \"talkie\", and went as far as writing a dialogue script and experimenting with some sound scenes. However, he soon abandoned these attempts and reverted to a silent format with synchronized sound effects and sparse dialogue. The dialogue experiments confirmed his long-standing conviction that the universal appeal of his \"Little Tramp\" character would be lost if the character ever spoke on screen. Most of the film was shot at \"silent speed\", 18 frames per second, which when projected at \"sound speed\", 24 frames per second, made the slapstick action appear even more frenetic. The duration of filming was long for the time, beginning on October 11, 1934, and ending on August 30, 1935.\nChaplin biographer Jeffrey Vance has noted: \u201cChaplin recognized that \"Modern Times\" was the valedictory for the Tramp and deliberately included many gags and sequences as a loving farewell to the character and an homage to the visual comedy tradition.\"\nThis film also famously uses matte painting in the harrowing skating scene where Charlie skates blindfolded, not realizing he is constantly near the edge and very likely could fall down. The illusory drop had been matte-painted, and Chaplin was never in actual danger while filming this scene \u2014 in reality, he skated on a plain floor, with a ledge for him to discern when to stop. This can be observed in the fact that, at one moment, Chaplin's back wheel briefly disappeared behind the painting. This most likely escaped the eyes of Chaplin, which could be the reason he left it in.\nThe reference to drugs seen in the prison sequence is somewhat daring for the time (since the production code, established in 1930 and enforced since 1934, forbade the depiction of illegal drug use in films); Chaplin had made drug references before in one of his most famous short films, \"Easy Street\", released in 1917.\nMusic.\nAccording to the official documents, the music score was composed by Chaplin himself, and arranged with the assistance of Alfred Newman, who had collaborated with Chaplin on the music score of his previous film \"City Lights\". Newman and Chaplin had a falling out near the end of the \"Modern Times\" soundtrack recording sessions, leading to Newman's angry departure.\nThe romance theme was later given lyrics, and became the pop standard \"Smile\", first recorded by Nat King Cole. A cover of this song by Jimmy Durante was also used in the trailer for the 2019 film \"Joker\", in which the lead character also watches scenes from a showing of \"Modern Times\" after sneaking into a movie theatre.\n\"Modern Times\" was the first film where Chaplin's voice is heard as he performs L\u00e9o Daniderff's comical song \"Je cherche apr\u00e8s Titine\". Chaplin's version is also known as \"The Nonsense Song\", as his character sings it in gibberish. The lyrics are nonsensical but appear to contain words from French and Italian; the use of deliberately half-intelligible wording for comic effect points the way towards Adenoid Hynkel's speeches in \"The Great Dictator\".\nAccording to film composer David Raksin, Chaplin wrote the music as a young man wanting to make a name for himself. He would sit, often in the washroom, humming tunes and telling Raksin to \"take this down\". Raksin's job was to turn the humming into a score and create timings and synchronization that fit the situations. Chaplin was a violinist and had some musical knowledge, but he was not an orchestrator and was unfamiliar with synchronization. Along with Edward B. Powell, Raksin did receive screen credit for the music arrangements. Raksin later created scores for films including \"Laura\" and \"The Day After\".\nReception.\n\"Modern Times\" is often hailed as one of Chaplin's greatest achievements, and it remains one of his most popular films. It holds an approval rating of 98% on Rotten Tomatoes based on 108 reviews, with a weighted average of 9.4/10. The website's critical consensus reads, \"A slapstick skewering of industrialized America, \"Modern Times\" is as politically incisive as it is laugh-out-loud hilarious.\" Metacritic reports an aggregated score of 96/100 based on 4 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\".\nNaming it the https://, \"Flickside\" writes: \"Chaplin's \"Modern Times\" is a thoughtful critique on the anxieties of modernization dealt with pathos and humour.\" Contemporary reviews were very positive. Frank Nugent of \"The New York Times\" wrote: \"'Modern Times' has still the same old Charlie, the lovable little fellow whose hands and feet and prankish eyebrows can beat an irresistible tattoo upon an audience's funnybone or hold it still, taut beneath the spell of human tragedy ... Time has not changed his genius.\" \"Variety\" called it \"grand fun and sound entertainment\". \"Film Daily\" wrote: \"Charlie Chaplin has scored one of his greatest triumphs.\" John Mosher of \"The New Yorker\" wrote that Chaplin \"manufactures some superb laughs ... In all, it's a rambling sketch, a little at loose ends at times, sometimes rather slight in effect, and now and then secure in its rich, old-fashioned funniness.\" Burns Mantle called the film \"another hilariously rowdy success\".\nWriting for \"The Spectator\" in 1936, Graham Greene strongly praised the film, noting that, although there had always been a bit of a dated feel to his previous works, Chaplin \"has at last definitely entered the contemporary scene\". Greene noted that, whereas prior Chaplin films had featured \"fair and featureless\" heroines, the casting of Paulette Goddard suggested that his female characters might be presented with more personality than previously. He also voiced concern that the film would be considered to be a Communist film when in reality Chaplin's message was predominantly apolitical: \"[Chaplin] presents, he doesn't offer political solutions.\"\nFrench philosophers Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir and Maurice Merleau-Ponty named their journal, \"Les Temps modernes\", after it.\n\"Modern Times\" earned $1.8 million in North American theatrical rentals during its release, becoming one of the top-grossing films of 1936. It was the most popular film at the British box office in 1935\u201336.\nThe iconic depiction of Chaplin working frantically to keep up with an assembly line inspired later comedy routines including Disney's \"Der Fuehrer's Face\" (Donald Duck alternately assembling artillery shells and saluting portraits of Adolf Hitler) and an episode of \"I Love Lucy\" titled \"Job Switching\" (Lucy and Ethel trying to keep up with an ever-increasing volume of chocolate candies, eventually stuffing them in their mouths, hats, and blouses). The opening of a fantasy sequence in the film, in which the unemployed factory worker trips over a footstool upon entering the living room of his \"dream home\" with the Gamin, inspired a similar opening to \"The Dick Van Dyke Show\".\nThis was Chaplin's first overtly political-themed film, and its unflattering portrayal of industrial society generated controversy in some quarters upon its initial release. Writing in \"The Liberal News\", the official magazine of the British Liberal Party, in October 1936, Willoughby Dewar observed that \"Modern Times\" \"should be seen by every Young Liberal. It is, among other things, a piece of first-class Liberal propaganda.\" In Nazi Germany, propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels banned the film from being shown because of its alleged advocacy of communism.\nThe film exhibits slight similarities to a lesser-known 1931 French film directed by Ren\u00e9 Clair entitled \"\u00c0 nous la libert\u00e9\" (\"Liberty for Us\")\u00a0\u2013 the assembly line sequence is an instance in that both films depict it, but in different ways. The German film company Tobis Film, hungry for cash, sued Chaplin following the film's release but to no avail. They sued again after World War II (considered revenge for Chaplin's anti-Nazi statements in \"The Great Dictator\"). This time, they settled with Chaplin out of court. Clair, a friend and huge admirer of Chaplin who was flattered that the film icon would depict a similar subject, was deeply embarrassed by Tobis Film's action and was never part of the case.\nAn American copyright infringement case brought over 1934 a book titled \"Against Gray Walls or Lawyer's Dramatic Escapes\" was dismissed after the court found the film and book were so dissimilar that the record did not show copying.\nThe film did attract criticism for being almost completely silent. Chaplin feared that the mystery and romanticism of the Tramp character would be ruined if he spoke, and also that it would alienate his fans in non-English speaking territories. His future films, however, would be full-fledged \"talkies\"\u00a0\u2013 although without the character of the Little Tramp.\nChaplin biographer Jeffrey Vance has written of the reception and legacy of this classic comedy: \"Modern Times\" is perhaps more meaningful now than at any time since its first release. The twentieth-century theme of the film, farsighted for its time\u2014the struggle to eschew alienation and preserve humanity in a modern, mechanized world\u2014profoundly reflects issues facing the twenty-first century. The Tramp's travails in \"Modern Times\" and the comedic mayhem that ensues should provide strength and comfort to all who feel like helpless cogs in a world beyond control. Through its universal themes and comic inventiveness, Modern Times remains one of Chaplin's greatest and most enduring works. Perhaps more important, it is the Tramp's finale, a tribute to Chaplin's most beloved character and the silent-film era he commanded for a generation.\nThe film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:\n\"The Village Voice\" ranked \"Modern Times\" at No. 62 in its Top 250 \"Best Films of the Century\" list in 1999, based on a poll of critics. In January 2002, the film was included on the list of the \"Top 100 Essential Films of All Time\" by the National Society of Film Critics. The film was voted at No. 74 on the list of \"100 Greatest Films\" by the prominent French magazine \"Cahiers du cin\u00e9ma\" in 2008. In the 2012 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" polls, it was ranked the 63rd-greatest film ever made in the critics' poll and 20th in the directors' poll. In the earlier 2002 version of the list the film ranked 35th among critics. In 2015, \"Modern Times\" ranked 67th on BBC's \"100 Greatest American Films\" list, voted on by film critics from around the world. The film was voted at No. 12 on the list of \"The 100 greatest comedies of all time\" by a poll of 253 film critics from 52 countries conducted by the BBC in 2017. In 2021 the film ranked 49th on Time Out magazine's list of \"The 100 best movies of all time\".\nThe film was included by the Vatican in a list of important films compiled in 1995, under the category of \"Art\".\nRestoration.\nA digitally restored version of the film was released in 2003. The French company MK2 searched the world for good copies of the original footage, cut them together and processed each of the 126,000 frames, removing scratches and dust, and ensuring optimal image stability and balanced black and white tone levels. The restored version was first shown at the Cannes Film Festival in 2003.\nIn 2013 Cineteca di Bologna and the Criterion Collection effected further digital improvements of the 2003 version, as noted in a preface ahead of the title.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74963", "revid": "3046099", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74963", "title": "Modesta", "text": "1956 film\nModesta is a 1956 short film that stars Antonia Hidalgo and Juan Ortiz Jim\u00e9nez.\nPlot.\nA feminist manifesto set in Puerto Rico, in which a peasant woman rebels against her husband's authoritarianism. She and the other women of her community organize the Liberated Women League to fight for their rights.\nProduction.\nThe movie was adapted by Benjamin Doniger, Luis A. Maisonet and Ren\u00e9 Marqu\u00e9s from a story by Domingo Silas Ortiz and produced by DIVEDCO. It was also directed by Doniger.\nLegacy.\nIn 1998, \"Modesta\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\", one of the few Latino films to distinguished that honor. It is also in the public domain.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74964", "revid": "50807766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74964", "title": "Gauss's law", "text": "Foundational law of electromagnetism relating electric field and charge distributions\nIn electromagnetism, Gauss's law, also known as Gauss's flux theorem or sometimes Gauss's theorem, is one of Maxwell's equations. It is an application of the divergence theorem, and it relates the distribution of electric charge to the resulting electric field.\nDefinition.\nIn its integral form, it states that the flux of the electric field out of an arbitrary closed surface is proportional to the electric charge enclosed by the surface, irrespective of how that charge is distributed. Even though the law alone is insufficient to determine the electric field across a surface enclosing any charge distribution, this may be possible in cases where symmetry mandates uniformity of the field. Where no such symmetry exists, Gauss's law can be used in its differential form, which states that the divergence of the electric field is proportional to the local density of charge.\nThe law was first formulated by Joseph-Louis Lagrange in 1773, followed by Carl Friedrich Gauss in 1835, both in the context of the attraction of ellipsoids. It is one of Maxwell's equations, which forms the basis of classical electrodynamics. Gauss's law can be used to derive Coulomb's law, and vice versa.\nQualitative description.\nIn words, Gauss's law states:\nThe net electric flux through any hypothetical closed surface is equal to 1/\"\u03b5\"0 times the net electric charge enclosed within that closed surface. The closed surface is also referred to as Gaussian surface.\nGauss's law has a close mathematical similarity with a number of laws in other areas of physics, such as Gauss's law for magnetism and Gauss's law for gravity. In fact, any inverse-square law can be formulated in a way similar to Gauss's law: for example, Gauss's law itself is essentially equivalent to Coulomb's law, and Gauss's law for gravity is essentially equivalent to Newton's law of gravity, both of which are inverse-square laws.\nThe law can be expressed mathematically using vector calculus in integral form and differential form; both are equivalent since they are related by the divergence theorem, also called Gauss's theorem. Each of these forms in turn can also be expressed two ways: In terms of a relation between the electric field E and the total electric charge, or in terms of the electric displacement field D and the \"free\" electric charge.\nEquation involving the E field.\nGauss's law can be stated using either the electric field E or the electric displacement field D. This section shows some of the forms with E; the form with D is below, as are other forms with E.\nIntegral form.\nGauss's law may be expressed as:\nformula_1\nwhere \u03a6\"E\" is the electric flux through a closed surface S enclosing any volume V, Q is the total charge enclosed within V, and \"\u03b5\"0 is the electric constant. The electric flux \u03a6\"E\" is defined as a surface integral of the electric field:\nformula_2 formula_3 formula_4\nwhere E is the electric field, dA is a vector representing an infinitesimal element of area of the surface, and \u00b7 represents the dot product of two vectors.\nIn a curved spacetime, the flux of an electromagnetic field through a closed surface is expressed as\nformula_5 formula_6 formula_7\nwhere formula_8 is the speed of light; formula_9 denotes the time components of the electromagnetic tensor; formula_10 is the determinant of metric tensor; formula_11 is an orthonormal element of the two-dimensional surface surrounding the charge formula_12; indices formula_13 and do not match each other.\nSince the flux is defined as an \"integral\" of the electric field, this expression of Gauss's law is called the \"integral form\".\nIn problems involving conductors set at known potentials, the potential away from them is obtained by solving Laplace's equation, either analytically or numerically. The electric field is then calculated as the potential's negative gradient. Gauss's law makes it possible to find the distribution of electric charge: The charge in any given region of the conductor can be deduced by integrating the electric field to find the flux through a small box whose sides are perpendicular to the conductor's surface and by noting that the electric field is perpendicular to the surface, and zero inside the conductor.\nThe reverse problem, when the electric charge distribution is known and the electric field must be computed, is much more difficult. The total flux through a given surface gives little information about the electric field, and can go in and out of the surface in arbitrarily complicated patterns.\nAn exception is if there is some symmetry in the problem, which mandates that the electric field passes through the surface in a uniform way. Then, if the total flux is known, the field itself can be deduced at every point. Common examples of symmetries which lend themselves to Gauss's law include: cylindrical symmetry, planar symmetry, and spherical symmetry. See the article Gaussian surface for examples where these symmetries are exploited to compute electric fields.\nDifferential form.\nBy the divergence theorem, Gauss's law can alternatively be written in the \"differential form\":\nformula_14\nwhere \u2207 \u00b7 E is the divergence of the electric field, \"\u03b5\"0 is the vacuum permittivity and \u03c1 is the total volume charge density (charge per unit volume).\nEquivalence of integral and differential forms.\nThe integral and differential forms are mathematically equivalent, by the divergence theorem. Here is the argument more specifically.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_proof/styles.css\" /&gt;Outline of proof\nThe integral form of Gauss's law is:\n formula_15 formula_4formula_17\nfor any closed surface S containing charge Q. By the divergence theorem, this equation is equivalent to:\nformula_18\nfor any volume V containing charge Q. By the relation between charge and charge density, this equation is equivalent to:\nformula_19\nfor any volume V. In order for this equation to be \"simultaneously true\" for \"every\" possible volume V, it is necessary (and sufficient) for the integrands to be equal everywhere. Therefore, this equation is equivalent to:\nformula_20\nThus the integral and differential forms are equivalent.\nEquation involving the D field.\nFree, bound, and total charge.\nThe electric charge that arises in the simplest textbook situations would be classified as \"free charge\"\u2014for example, the charge which is transferred in static electricity, or the charge on a capacitor plate. In contrast, \"bound charge\" arises only in the context of dielectric (polarizable) materials. (All materials are polarizable to some extent.) When such materials are placed in an external electric field, the electrons remain bound to their respective atoms, but shift a microscopic distance in response to the field, so that they're more on one side of the atom than the other. All these microscopic displacements add up to give a macroscopic net charge distribution, and this constitutes the \"bound charge\".\nAlthough microscopically all charge is fundamentally the same, there are often practical reasons for wanting to treat bound charge differently from free charge. The result is that the more fundamental Gauss's law, in terms of E (above), is sometimes put into the equivalent form below, which is in terms of D and the free charge only.\nIntegral form.\nThis formulation of Gauss's law states the total charge form:\nformula_21\nwhere \u03a6\"D\" is the D-field flux through a surface S which encloses a volume V, and \"Q\"free is the free charge contained in V. The flux \u03a6\"D\" is defined analogously to the flux \u03a6\"E\" of the electric field E through S:\nformula_22 formula_15 formula_24\nDifferential form.\nThe differential form of Gauss's law, involving free charge only, states:\nformula_25\nwhere \u2207 \u00b7 D is the divergence of the electric displacement field, and \"\u03c1\"free is the free electric charge density.\nEquivalence of total and free charge statements.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_proof/styles.css\" /&gt;Proof that the formulations of Gauss's law in terms of free charge are equivalent to the formulations involving total charge.\nIn this proof, we will show that the equation\nformula_26\nis equivalent to the equation\nformula_27\nNote that we are only dealing with the differential forms, not the integral forms, but that is sufficient since the differential and integral forms are equivalent in each case, by the divergence theorem.\nWe introduce the polarization density P, which has the following relation to E and D:\nformula_28\nand the following relation to the bound charge:\nformula_29\nNow, consider the three equations:\nformula_30\nThe key insight is that the sum of the first two equations is the third equation. This completes the proof: The first equation is true by definition, and therefore the second equation is true if and only if the third equation is true. So the second and third equations are equivalent, which is what we wanted to prove.\nEquation for linear materials.\nIn homogeneous, isotropic, nondispersive, linear materials, there is a simple relationship between E and\u00a0D:\nformula_31\nwhere \u03b5 is the permittivity of the material. For the case of vacuum (aka free space), \"\u03b5\" = \"\u03b5\"0. Under these circumstances, Gauss's law modifies to\nformula_32\nfor the integral form, and\nformula_33\nfor the differential form.\nRelation to Coulomb's law.\nDeriving Gauss's law from Coulomb's law.\nStrictly speaking, Gauss's law cannot be derived from Coulomb's law alone, since Coulomb's law gives the electric field due to an individual, electrostatic point charge only. However, Gauss's law \"can\" be proven from Coulomb's law if it is assumed, in addition, that the electric field obeys the superposition principle. The superposition principle states that the resulting field is the vector sum of fields generated by each particle (or the integral, if the charges are distributed smoothly in space).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_proof/styles.css\" /&gt;Outline of proof\nCoulomb's law states that the electric field due to a stationary point charge is:\nformula_34\nwhere\nUsing the expression from Coulomb's law, we get the total field at r by using an integral to sum the field at r due to the infinitesimal charge at each other point s in space, to give\nformula_35\nwhere \"\u03b4\"(r) is the Dirac delta function, the result is\nformula_36\nUsing the \"sifting property\" of the Dirac delta function, we arrive at\nformula_37\nwhich is the differential form of Gauss's law, as desired.\nSince Coulomb's law only applies to stationary charges, there is no reason to expect Gauss's law to hold for moving charges based on this derivation alone. In fact, Gauss's law does hold for moving charges, and, in this respect, Gauss's law is more general than Coulomb's law.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_proof/styles.css\" /&gt;Proof (without Dirac Delta)\nLet formula_38 be a bounded open set, and formula_39\nBy the assumption of spherical symmetry, the integrand is a constant which can be taken out of the integral. The result is\nformula_40\nwhere r\u0302 is a unit vector pointing radially away from the charge. Again by spherical symmetry, E points in the radial direction, and so we get\nformula_41\nwhich is essentially equivalent to Coulomb's law. Thus the inverse-square law dependence of the electric field in Coulomb's law follows from Gauss's law.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74966", "revid": "88809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74966", "title": "Morocco (film)", "text": "1930 film by Josef von Sternberg\nMorocco is a 1930 American pre-Code romantic drama film directed by Josef von Sternberg and starring Gary Cooper, Marlene Dietrich, and Adolphe Menjou. Based on the 1927 novel \"Amy Jolly\" (the on-screen credits state: from the play 'Amy Jolly') by Benno Vigny and adapted by Jules Furthman, the film is about a cabaret singer and a Legionnaire who fall in love during the Rif War, and whose relationship is complicated by his womanizing and the appearance of a rich man who is also in love with her. The film is famous for a scene in which Dietrich performs a song dressed in a man's tailcoat and kisses another woman (to the embarrassment of the latter), both of which were considered scandalous for the period.\nDietrich was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role, von Sternberg for Best Director, Hans Dreier for Best Art Direction, and Lee Garmes for Best Cinematography. In 1992, \"Morocco\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nIn Mogador, Morocco in the late 1920s, a unit of the French Foreign Legion returns from a campaign. Among the legionnaires is Private Tom Brown. Meanwhile, on a ship bound for Mogador is the disillusioned nightclub singer Amy Jolly. Wealthy La Bessi\u00e8re tries to make her acquaintance, but she rebuffs him.\nAmy becomes the headliner at a nightclub. After a performance, she sells apples to audience members, including La Bessi\u00e8re and Brown. When Amy gives the latter his \"change\", she slips him her key.\nOn the way to Amy's house, Tom encounters Adjutant Caesar's wife. She clearly has a clandestine relationship with him, which she desires to maintain, but Tom rejects her. He enters Amy's house and the two become acquainted. Amy is embittered with life and men after repeated betrayals, and asks if Tom can restore her faith in men. He answers that he is the wrong man for that. Unwilling to risk heartbreak yet again, she asks him to leave before anything serious happens.\nBack in the street, Tom encounters Caesar's wife again, while her husband watches undetected from the shadows. Meanwhile, Amy changes her mind and comes after Tom, who heads back with her to her house. Madame Caesar hires two ruffians to attack Tom, but he manages to seriously wound both.\nThe next day, Tom is brought before Caesar, who is Tom's commanding officer, for injuring the two natives. Amy helps Tom's case by testifying that he was attacked, but Caesar makes Tom aware that he knows about Tom's involvement with his wife. La Bessi\u00e8re, whose affections for Amy continue unabated, knows of her feelings for Tom and offers to use his influence to lighten Tom's punishment. Instead of a court-martial, Tom is reassigned to a detachment commanded by Caesar that is leaving soon for Amalfa Pass. Suspecting that Caesar intends to rid himself of his romantic rival while they are gone, Tom decides to desert and run away with Amy.\nTom goes to Amy's nightclub dressing room. He overhears La Bessi\u00e8re offer to marry Amy, and her politely reject the proposal, before knocking on the door. La Bessi\u00e8re leaves Amy alone with Tom, who tells her that, if she will join him, he will desert and board a freighter to Europe. She agrees to go along and asks Tom to wait while she performs. Once he is alone, he notices a lavish bracelet that La Bessi\u00e8re has given to Amy. Though he has fallen in love with her, Tom decides Amy would be better off with a rich man than with a poor Legionnaire. He writes on the mirror, \"I changed my mind. Good luck!\" and leaves.\nIn the morning, Amy, after a drunken, miserable night, arrives in the town square with La Bessi\u00e8re so she can bid Tom farewell. She asks La Bessi\u00e8re about some women following the company, remarking that the women must be mad. He responds, \"I don't know. You see, they love their men.\"\nOn the way to Amalfa Pass, Tom's detachment runs into a machine-gun nest. Caesar orders Tom to deal with it, and Tom suspects it is a suicide mission. To his surprise, Caesar decides to accompany him. After drawing his pistol (apparently to kill Tom), Caesar is shot and killed by the enemy.\nBack in Mogador, Amy accepts La Bessi\u00e8re's marriage proposal and tries to make herself love him, but she still pines for Tom. At an engagement party, she hears the return of the remains of Tom's detachment. She leaves the party and is told Tom was wounded and left behind to recuperate in a hospital. She informs La Bessi\u00e8re that she must go to Tom, and, wanting only her happiness, he drives her to the hospital. It turns out Tom had been faking an injury to avoid combat and, when this was discovered, he was assigned to a new unit in the Legion. Amy goes to a bar where Tom was, briefly talks with him, and when he leaves, finds he carved into the table the name \"Amy\", showing he still loves her, which surprises her.\nNext morning, Amy and La Bessi\u00e8re watch Tom's new unit readying for their march. Tom and Amy briefly speak. The two wave goodbye. When Amy sees a handful of women following the legionnaires, she impulsively leaves La Bessi\u00e8re, kicks off her high-heeled shoes, joins them, following Tom into the desert.\nCast.\nUncredited (in order of appearance)\nBackground.\nEven before Josef von Sternberg's \"The Blue Angel\" was released to international acclaim in 1930, Paramount Pictures took a keen interest in its new star, Marlene Dietrich. When the Berlin production was completed in January, Sternberg departed Germany before its premiere on April 1, confident his work would be a success. Legend has it that Dietrich included a copy of author Benno Vigny's story \"Amy Jolly\" in a going-away gift package to Sternberg when he sailed for America. He and screenwriter Jules Furthman would write a script for \"Morocco\" based on the Vigny story.\nOn the basis of test footage Sternberg provided from the yet unreleased \"The Blue Angel\", producer B. P. Schulberg agreed to bring Dietrich to Hollywood in February 1930 under a two-picture contract. When she arrived in the United States, Sternberg welcomed her with gifts, including a green Rolls-Royce Phantom II, which featured in some scenes of \"Morocco\".\nDietrich \"was subjected to the full power of Paramount's public relations machine\", launching her into \"international stardom\" \"before\" American moviegoers had seen her as Lola Lola in \"The Blue Angel\", which appeared in U.S. theaters in 1931.\nProduction.\nThe character of Amy was toned down considerably from the novel. As in the book, in the film the name \"aimee jolie\" (French for \"beloved and pretty\") is meant ironically as Amy is portrayed as a fallen star past her prime, a desperately lonely woman lost in despair who has gone to Morocco to die. However, in the book, the character of Amy was a prostitute and a drug addict, both of which were unacceptable even under the looser censorship in 1930 Hollywood, and these aspects of Amy's character were removed from the film during the script-writing. Likewise, the ending was changed from the book to the film. In the book, Amy abandons Tom and at the conclusion of the novel, boards a ship to Buenos Aires. Sternberg disliked the ending in the book, and gave the film the more romantic ending where Amy chooses to be with Brown by going with him into the Sahara.\nSternberg's depiction of \"picturesque\" Morocco elicited a favorable response from the Moroccan government, which ran announcements in \"The New York Times\" inviting American tourists to enjoy the country \"just as Gary Cooper [was seduced by the] unforgettable landscapes and engaging people.\" However, the film was filmed entirely in southern California, and Sternberg felt compelled to personally reassure the Pasha of Marrakesh that \"Morocco\" had not been shot in his domain.\nCinematographer Lee Garmes and Sternberg (himself a skilled camera technician) developed the distinctive lighting methods that served to enhance Dietrich's best facial features, while obscuring her slightly bulbous nose.\nAccording to Robert Osborne of Turner Classic Movies, Cooper and Sternberg did not get along. Sternberg filmed so as to make Cooper look up at Dietrich, emphasizing her at his expense. Cooper complained to his studio bosses and got it stopped. Cooper greatly disliked Sternberg, complaining that he received little in the way of direction from him about how to play Brown. It was open knowledge on the set that Sternberg and Dietrich were lovers, and Cooper felt that he was very much a secondary figure in the film as Sternberg devoted all of his attention to Dietrich. As a way of compensation, Cooper brought his mistress, the Mexican actress Lupe V\u00e9lez, onto the set and went out of his way to demonstratively show his affections by having her sit on his lap between takes and passionately kissing her as often as possible.\nShooting for \"Morocco\" was completed in August 1930.\nThe final scene of \"Morocco\" is recreated in the 1946 Mexican film \"Enamorada\", directed by Emilio Fern\u00e1ndez.\nRadio Adaptation.\n\"Morocco\" was adapted as a one-hour radio broadcast by the \"Lux Radio Theatre\" on June 1, 1936 (under the title \"The Legionnaire and the Lady\"), with Marlene Dietrich reprising her film role, and with Clark Gable assuming the role of the Legionnaire. This was \"Lux Radio's\" debut broadcast from Hollywood, following its move from New York City.\nHome media.\nMorocco was released by Universal Studios in DVD on April 25, 2011, under label Universal Vault Series.\nReception.\nPremiering in New York City on December 6, 1930, \"Morocco\"'s success at the box office was \"immediate and impressive\".\nAccolades for the film were issued by Soviet director Sergei Eisenstein, screenwriter Robert E. Sherwood, and filmmaker Charles Chaplin, who said of the film, \"yes, [Sternberg] is an artist ... it is his best film [to date].\"\nIn a contemporary review, the French critic Michel Vauclaire wrote: \"Every year in the US, half a dozen novels are published about the Legion, in general very severe and quite fantastic. It's obviously on this sort of fiction that Sternberg has based his research. Perhaps the film reflects the American public's idea of the Legionaries. In France, despite its dramatic pretensions, it will raise a laugh\".\nThe film garnered Academy Award nominations for Best Director (Sternberg), Best Actress (Dietrich), Best Art Direction (Hans Dreier), and Best Cinematography (Lee Garmes), though it did not win any awards.\nTitled \"The Legionnaire and the Lady\", Marlene Dietrich and Clark Gable performed the story on radio as the first Lux Radio Theatre broadcast on June 1, 1936.\nThe Japanese filmmaker Akira Kurosawa cited this movie as one of his 100 favorite films.\nBox Office.\nDirector von Sternberg reported in his 1965 autobiography that producer Adolph Zukor informed him that Paramount \u201chad been saved from bankruptcy\u201d by the box office success of \"Morocco\".\nRetrospective appraisal.\nCharles Silver, curator at the Museum of Modern Art's Department of Film, offers this assessment of \"Morocco\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Sternberg was the first director to attain full mastery and control over what was essentially a new medium by restoring the fluidity and beauty of the late silent period. One of the key elements in this was his understanding of the value of silence itself. \"Morocco\" contains long sections sustained only by its stunning visual beauty, augmented with appropriate music and aural effects. Sternberg was the first artist to make an authentic virtue of the arrival of sound.\nTheme.\nWith \"Morocco\", Sternberg examines the \"interchange of masculine and feminine characteristics\" in a \"genuine interplay between male and female.\"\nTom Brown.\nThe character of Tom Brown was portrayed as an example of a lost soul, a tough, jaded American serving in the French Foreign Legion with a name that was so bland that it was clearly a pseudonym. In the film, it is strongly implied that Brown was attempting to escape a painful past by enlisting in the French Foreign Legion, which famously \"asks no questions\" about an applicant's background. Likewise, Brown seems to have no future beyond fighting for a cause that he does not believe in Morocco and seemingly sleeping with every women in sight. It is only when he meets Amy that he finds someone that he actually cares about and a reason to be hopeful about the future. Most notably, Brown who was portrayed as an entirely cynical, selfish character prior to meeting Amy displays an altruistic side as he encourages Amy to marry the rich man La Bessi\u00e8re who is more capable of supporting her financially than he is under his private's salary. Despite his efforts to push Amy out of his life, when he is alone, he carves the \"Amy Jolly\" onto the table along with a heart.\n\"When Love Dies\": Dietrich's male impersonation.\nDietrich's \"butch performance\" dressed in \"top hat, white tie and tails\" includes a \"mock seduction\" of a pretty female cabaret patron, whom Dietrich \"outrages with a kiss.\" Dietrich's costume simultaneously mocks the pretensions of one lover (Menjou's La Bessi\u00e8re) and serves as an invitation to a handsome soldier-of-fortune (Cooper's Tom Brown), the two men being presented by Sternberg as contrasting conceptions of masculinity.\"\nThis famous sequence provides an insight into Dietrich's character, Amy Jolly, as well as the director himself: \"Dietrich's impersonation is an adventure, an act of bravado that subtly alters her conception of herself as a woman, and what begins as self-expression ends in self-sacrifice, perhaps the path also of Sternberg as an artist.\"\nLa Bessi\u00e8re's humiliation.\nDietrich's devoted suitor, Menjou's La Bessi\u00e8re, \"part stoic, part sybarite, part satanist\", is destined to lose the object of his desire. Menjou's response to Dietrich's desertion reveals the nature of the man and presents a key thematic element of the film:\nIn Menjou's pained politeness of expression is engraved the age-old tension between Apollonian and Dionysian demands of art, between pride in restraint and passion in excess ... when Dietrich kisses him goodbye, Menjou clutches her wrist in one last spasmodic reflex of passion, but the other hand retains its poise at his side, the gestures of form and feeling thus conflicting to the very end of the drama.\nThe La Bessi\u00e8re character has autobiographical overtones for Sternberg, as Menjou has looks and mannerisms that resemble the director. Critic Andrew Sarris observed: \"Sternberg has never been as close to any character as he is to this elegant expatriate.\"\nDietrich's high-heeled march into the dunes.\n\"(There has been the criticism that an effect of a trek across the desert in high heels is unrealistic and while not noted would reach a definition of camp. The observation is technically correct. Dietrich's character \"does\" set out in her society shoes but within yards breaks her stride and removes them.)\"&lt;br&gt;\nThe \"absurdity\" of the closing sequence, in which Dietrich, \"sets out into the desert sands on spike heels in search of Gary Cooper\", was noted by critics at the time of the film's release. The image, however odd, is part of the \"dream d\u00e9cor\" that abandoned \"documentary certification\" to create \"a world of illusions.\" As Sarris points out, \"The complaint that a woman in high heels would not walk off into the desert is nonetheless meaningless. A dream does not require endurance, only the will to act.\"\nFilm historian Charles Silver considers the final scene as one that \"no artist today would dare attempt\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The film's unforgettable ending works dramatically because it comes at a moment of panic, one in a series of such moments that have brought Dietrich to the brink. Sternberg says, 'The average human being lives behind an impenetrable veil and will disclose his deep emotions only in a crisis which robs him of control.' Amy Jolly had hidden behind her veil for many years and many men, and her emergence, the sublimation of her fear and pride to her desire, is one of the most supremely romantic gestures in film.\"\nAccolades.\nThe film was ranked 83rd on the American Film Institute's 2002 list AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74967", "revid": "2325890", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74967", "title": "Motion Painting No. 1", "text": "1947 animated film by Oskar Fischinger\nMotion Painting No. 1 (1947) is an independent short animated film in which film artist Oskar Fischinger put images in motion to the music of Johann Sebastian Bach's \"Brandenburg Concerto no. 3, BWV 1048\".\nProduction.\nThe film was created by applying oil paint on Plexiglas. Fischinger filmed each brushstroke over the course of 9 months.\nLegacy.\nIn 1997, the film was selected for inclusion in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". The Academy Film Archive preserved \"Motion Painting No. 1\" in 2000, though they do not have distribution rights.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74968", "revid": "13560851", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74968", "title": "A Movie", "text": "1958 experimental collage film directed by Bruce Conner\nA Movie (styled as A MOVIE) is a 1958 experimental collage film by American artist Bruce Conner. It combines pieces of found footage taken from various sources such as newsreels, soft-core pornography, and B movies, all set to a score featuring Ottorino Respighi's \"Pines of Rome\".\nThe film is recognized as a landmark work in American experimental cinema, particularly as an early example of found footage. \"A Movie\" was inducted into the National Film Registry in 1994.\nContent.\n\"A Movie\" opens with its longest shot, an extended production credit with Bruce Conner's name. After the opening credits, the countdown leader is interrupted by a shot of an undressed woman removing her stockings. Once the countdown completes, an intertitle falsely announces \"The End\" of the film. The film moves into a montage of cavalry, tanks, race cars, and a charging elephant.\nAnother false ending precedes footage of zeppelins and tightrope walkers. In one well-known sequence, a man in a submarine looks through a periscope to see a woman posing in a bikini, leading to the launch of a torpedo and a mushroom cloud. This leads to water sporting accidents and racing mishaps. As the musical score swells, a succession of violent scenes ensues, including aerial bombings, the \"Hindenburg\" disaster, and firing squads. The film closes with a scuba diver exploring a shipwreck.\nBackground.\nBruce Conner developed the concept for \"A Movie\" many years before he began working on it. He was inspired early on by a battle scene in the Marx Brothers' \"Duck Soup\" that builds a montage from stock footage. He envisioned a film combining images and sounds from many different movies and, when watching movies, often imagined possible sequences that could be created from them.\nConner and Larry Jordan began the Camera Obscura Film Society during the late 1950s. Conner was interested in the film leader used by projectionists that went unseen by the audience. He had a filmstrip given to him by writer Lee Streiff which showed a nude woman, and he thought about inserting the strip in the countdown leader at a Camera Obscura screening of \"Triumph of the Will\". When Jordan found out about the plan, he threatened to quit the society. Conner decided that the only way for him to carry out this vision would be to insert such a sequence in a film of his own.\nProduction.\nJordan showed Conner how to edit film and offered him the use of a Griswold film splicer. Describing cinema as \"a rich man's art form\", Conner looked to store-bought footage as an economical alternative to shooting original material. He purchased a condensed Hopalong Cassidy western, a short novelty film called \"Thrills and Spills\", a Castle home movie containing German propaganda, and a newsreel compilation titled \"Headlines of 1953\".\nConner primarily worked in assemblage at the time, and he originally planned to use the film as part of an installation piece. The installation would fill a cube into which people could walk. The film would have no soundtrack; instead, the installation would play the film as a loop with sound coming from tape players, radio, and television. However, Conner was not able to fulfill his original vision. The cost of a rear projection machine for the installation was prohibitively expensive.\nHe decided to make the film a stand-alone work and edited the segments together using a radio to time them. During one editing session, Respighi's \"Pines of Rome\" came on the radio and synced well with the ending. \"Pines of Rome\" had been used ten years earlier by Kenneth Anger for his avant-garde short film \"Fireworks\". Conner made a recording from the first, second, and fourth movements and added the music to the completed image track. He was unsure how to clear the rights to the music and used the recording without authorization. He completed the film on a budget of $350 ().\nRelease.\n\"A Movie\" premiered June 10, 1958, at the East and West Gallery in San Francisco. It was part of a reception for Conner's first solo art show. Shortly after, the film was acquired for distribution by Cinema 16 in New York. When local distributor Canyon Cinema emerged in the early 1960s, \"A Movie\" was one of its more well-known offerings.\nLegacy.\nAt its 1960 Creative Film Awards Presentation, the Creative Film Foundation gave \"A Movie\" an Award of Distinction, with Michael McClure describing its comedy \"not [as] a free laugh but the reconstruction of human depth, achievement and emotion\". It has gone on to be recognized as a landmark piece of avant-garde cinema. In 1994, \"A Movie\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nFilmmaker Peter Hutton has cited \"A Movie\" as an influence on his work. Artist Christian Marclay first saw the film as a student, and it influenced his own practice of appropriating materials and establishing new connections between them. Alan Berliner's 1985 film \"Everywhere at Once\" uses \"Pines of Rome\" for its soundtrack in an homage to \"A Movie\". Jennifer Proctor remade it in 2010 as \"A Movie by Jen Proctor\". Her digital remake follows the original nearly shot for shot, using footage downloaded from YouTube and LiveLeak.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74969", "revid": "24902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74969", "title": "Multiple SIDosis", "text": "Multiple SIDosis is a 1970 short film in which a single performer creates an entire multi-part performance of the song \"Nola\". It is an example of a kind of one-man-band musical performance.\nSummary.\n\"Multiple SIDosis\", written by, directed by and starred Sid Laverents, features as many as twelve split-screen \"copies\" of Laverents playing various conventional and improvised instruments simultaneously. The separately-recorded performances of the various parts were overdubbed and visually composited to create the final piece.\nTechnique.\nThe overdubbing technique has been used before and since in professional recording studios, to allow a single performer to create an entire multi-instrument song. Digital technology has made the technique much easier for amateurs to employ today, but no such labour-saving devices were available to Laverents.\nLegacy.\nIn 2000, \"Multiple SIDosis\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\"."}
{"id": "74970", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74970", "title": "Predicate logic", "text": ""}
{"id": "74971", "revid": "4616967", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74971", "title": "The Music Box", "text": "1932 short film by James Parrott\nThe Music Box is a Laurel and Hardy short film comedy released in 1932. It was directed by James Parrott, produced by Hal Roach and distributed by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. The film, which depicts the pair attempting to move a piano up a long flight of steps, won the first Academy Award for Best Live Action Short (Comedy) in 1932. In 1997, it was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". The film is widely seen as the most iconic Laurel and Hardy short, with the featured stairs becoming a popular tourist attraction.\nPlot.\nIn a music store, a woman arranges for the purchase and delivery of a player piano as a birthday surprise for her husband. Upon disclosing her address at 1127 Walnut Avenue to the store manager, the Laurel and Hardy Transfer Company is enlisted to transport the instrument using their horse-drawn freight wagon.\nEncountering a formidable challenge in the form of a lengthy stairway leading to the residence, the duo attempts to navigate the piano up the steps. Amidst their arduous efforts, they inadvertently cause the instrument to descend the stairs multiple times, resulting in a series of mishaps and encounters with various individuals, including a nursemaid, a cop, and the imposing Professor Theodore von Schwartzenhoffen. Remaining persistent, Laurel and Hardy eventually succeed in reaching the top, only to face further misfortune as the piano rolls back down, dragging Ollie along. After carrying the piano to the top again, they are told a simpler route is available, so they carry the piano all the way back down in order to drive it up. Despite finding no one there, they get the instrument into the house, making a mess of the living room in the process.\nTheir struggles culminate in a confrontation with the irate Professor, who resides at the address. Infuriated by the mess and the piano, an instrument he detests, he destroys it with an axe just as his wife returns. Upon learning he was the piano's intended recipient, the professor regrets his actions and agrees to sign for the delivery. A final mishap involving an ink-spraying pen causes him to lose his temper once more, prompting Laurel and Hardy to hastily depart.\nCast.\nUncredited cast\nLocation.\nThe steps, 133 with multiple landings, which are the focal point of \"The Music Box,\" still exist in the Silver Lake district of Los Angeles, near the Laurel and Hardy Park. The steps are a public staircase that connects Vendome Street (at the base of the hill) with Descanso Drive (at the top of the hill), and are located at 923-925 North Vendome Street near the intersection of Del Monte Drive. A plaque commemorating the film was set into one of the lower steps.\nThe steps can also be seen in the Charley Chase silent comedy \"Isn't Life Terrible?\" (1925), during a scene in which Chase is trying to sell fountain pens to Fay Wray. The steps are also used, for a gag similar to \"Hats Off\" and \"The Music Box\", in \"Ice Cold Cocos\" (1926), a Billy Bevan comedy short directed by Del Lord. The steps are also referenced in \"The Laurel and Hardy Love Affair\", a short story by Ray Bradbury, as the meeting place of the couple in the story, who call each other Ollie and Stan in homage to the comedic duo.\nAlthough similar in appearance, the staircase is not the same one used by The Three Stooges in their 1941 film \"An Ache in Every Stake\". Those stairs (147 steps in length) are approximately two miles northeast, located at 2212 Edendale Place in the Silver Lake district of Los Angeles.\nReception.\nThe short was popular with audiences in 1932 and generally well received by critics. After previewing \"The Music Box\" in late February that year, the New York trade paper \"The Film Daily\" assured theater owners that the comedy \"is up to the Laurel-Hardy standard, and should score easily.\" \"Motion Picture Herald\", after previewing the film in March, described it as \"great fun\" and noted, \"Unusually long for a comedy [short], it is well worth the extra length.\" The Chicago-based movie magazine \"Motion Picture\" is even more enthusiastic about the comedy in its June 1932 issue:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Laurel and Hardy's] latest \"short\" lasts thirty minutes. And it is a fast and funny half-hour. Perhaps they got their idea from Charlie Chaplin, who once was screamingly funny as a piano-mover's helper\u2014but don't hold that against them. They have improved on Chaplin, which is no easy task. Not with a pair as absurdly, ridiculously, and insanely awkward as these two. The gags are almost as side-splitting as they are.\nNot all contemporary reviews, however, were positive. \"Variety\", the entertainment industry's leading paper in 1932, did not publish its review of \"The Music Box\" until November 22, over seven months after MGM officially released the short to theaters. The reviewer, Alfred Greason, wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Less than average subject for this comedy pair, who depend on house wrecking for their laughs instead of upon the laughs within the situations themselves. Any pair of clowns can make haw-haws out of roughhouse; this pair have reached distinction by reason of a comic quality within themselves. Resort to house wrecking argues lack of resources in the 'script' department.\nLeslie Halliwell gave it four of four stars: \"Quintessential Laurel and Hardy, involving almost all their aspects including a slight song and dance.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74972", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74972", "title": "Jeanne Sauv\u00e9", "text": "Governor General of Canada from 1984 to 1990\nJeanne Mathilde Sauv\u00e9 (; n\u00e9e\u00a0Beno\u00eet; April 26, 1922 \u2013 January 26, 1993) was a Canadian politician, journalist and stateswoman who served as the 23rd governor general of Canada from 1984 to 1990 and as the 29th speaker of the House of Commons from 1980 to 1984. She was the first woman to hold either office, and is to date the only woman to serve as speaker of the House of Commons.\nSauv\u00e9 was born in Prud'homme, Saskatchewan, and educated in Ottawa and Paris, prior to working as a journalist for the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC). She was then elected to the House of Commons in 1972, whereafter she served as a minister of the Crown until 1980, when she became the Speaker. She was in 1984 appointed by Queen Elizabeth II as the 23rd governor general since Canadian Confederation, on the recommendation of Prime Minister of Canada Pierre Trudeau, to replace Edward Schreyer as vicereine, and she occupied the post until succeeded by Ray Hnatyshyn in 1990. She was the first woman to serve as Canada's governor general and, while her appointment as the Queen's representative was initially and generally welcomed, Sauv\u00e9 caused some controversy during her time as vicereine, mostly due to increased security around the office, as well as an anti-monarchist attitude towards the position.\nOn November 27, 1972, Sauv\u00e9 was sworn into the Queen's Privy Council for Canada. She subsequently founded and worked with the Sauv\u00e9 Foundation until her death, caused by Hodgkin's lymphoma, on January 26, 1993.\nThe highest trophy for the Canadian Ringette Championships, the major national competition for the sport of ringette, is named in her honour. Initially called the Jeanne Sauv\u00e9 Cup, it was post-humously renamed the Jeanne Sauv\u00e9 Memorial Cup.\nEarly life, youth, and first career.\nSauv\u00e9 was born in the Fransaskois community of Prud'homme, Saskatchewan, to Charles Albert Beno\u00eet and Anna Vaillant, and three years later moved with them to Ottawa, where her family had previously lived. In Ottawa, her father would take her to see the bronze bust on Parliament Hill of Canada's first female Member of Parliament (MP), Agnes Macphail. Sauv\u00e9 studied at Notre Dame du Rosaire Convent in Ottawa, becoming head of her class in her first year, and continued her education at the University of Ottawa, working for the government of Canada as a translator in order to pay her tuition. At the same time, Sauv\u00e9 actively involved herself in student and political affairs; at the age of 20, she became the national president of the Young Catholic Students Group, which employed her in 1942, necessitating her move to Montreal.\nIt was there that Sauv\u00e9 met Maurice Sauv\u00e9, and the two married on September 24, 1948, the same year the couple moved to London; Maurice had obtained a scholarship to the London School of Economics, and Sauv\u00e9 worked as a teacher and tutor. Two years later, they moved to Paris, where Sauv\u00e9 was employed as the assistant to the director of the Youth Secretariat at UNESCO, and in 1951, she enrolled for one year at the Sorbonne, graduating with a degree in French civilization. Sauv\u00e9 and her husband returned to Canada near the end of 1952, where the couple settled in Saint-Hyacinthe, Quebec, and in 1959 had one child, Jean-Fran\u00e7ois. Sauv\u00e9 then became a founding member of the Institute of Political Research and was hired as a journalist and broadcaster with the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation's French-language broadcaster, Radio-Canada.\nAfter success on her first radio programme, \"F\u00e9mina\", Sauv\u00e9 was moved to CBC television and focused her efforts on covering political topics on both radio and television, in both English and French. She soon drew attention to herself and was frequently invited by her friend G\u00e9rard Pelletier as a panellist on the controversial show \"Les Id\u00e9es en Marche\", there revealing her left-wing political ideologies. This absorption of a woman into the traditionally male world of political journalism and commentary was unusual, yet Sauv\u00e9 managed to be taken seriously, even being given her own television show, \"Opinions\", which covered \"such taboo subjects as teenage sex, parental authority, and student discipline\". On air from 1956 to 1963, \"it was the show that made Jeanne famous\". However, Sauv\u00e9 also attracted negative attention due to her husband's eventual elevation as a Crown minister; in a piece in \"The Globe and Mail\", Progressive Conservative MP Louis-Joseph Pigeon expressed concern over the wife of a minister being paid \"fabulous sums by the CBC\", calling the circumstances a \"shame and a scandal\".\nParliamentary career.\nIt was the Liberal Party that wooed Sauv\u00e9 into politics, asking her to run as a candidate in the Montreal riding of Ahuntsic during the 1972 federal election. Though she found campaigning arduous, saying: \"I felt uneasy for the first time in my life when I was campaigning\u00a0... I must say I had qualms about it myself\", Sauv\u00e9 won, becoming one of five female MPs. She was subsequently both sworn into the Queen's Privy Council and appointed as Minister of State for Science and Technology in the Cabinet chaired by Pierre Trudeau, thus becoming the first woman from Quebec to become a minister of the Crown and the sole female in that Cabinet. Sauv\u00e9 ran again in the election two years later, re-winning Ahuntsic, and was given the environment portfolio until 1975, when she was appointed Minister of Communications.\nIn the 1979 election, Sauv\u00e9 won the riding of Laval-des-Rapides, but the Liberals lost their majority in the commons to the Progressive Conservative Party; she thus lost her Cabinet position. She remained MP for her riding after the federal election of 1980, which saw both the Liberals returned to majority position.\nSpeaker of the House of Commons.\nTrudeau returned to position of prime minister in the 32nd Canadian Parliament, and selected Sauv\u00e9 as his choice for the speaker of the House of Commons. Because she strongly desired to campaign for the \"No\" forces in the weeks leading up to Quebec's 1980 referendum on separation from Canada, Sauv\u00e9 initially refused the offer to run for the non-partisan position. But she eventually acquiesced after Trudeau convinced her that she was the right person for the job and she received permission from the leaders of all the parties in the House of Commons to engage in the federalist campaign in Quebec. She became the first female Speaker of the House.\nIn her early days as speaker, Sauv\u00e9 often made mistakes with the names of MPs or the ridings they represented\u2014once calling on the Prime Minister as the \"leader of the opposition\"\u2014and occasionally miscarried procedural rulings, which led to MPs addressing her with increasing curtness. Further, all 32 of the New Democratic Party MPs in the house walked out in protest of what they viewed as a bias on Sauv\u00e9's part; they felt she allowed Liberal MPs to ask more questions than those from any other party. In a CBC interview, Sauv\u00e9 conceded that the NDP members may have been right that the Liberals may have been allowed more questions over two or three days, but, on the whole, each party received an equal number of opportunities. It was also speculated that MPs had taken to showboating for the television cameras that had recently been installed in the chamber.\nSauv\u00e9 did, however, find success in implementing reforms that professionalised the speaker's tasks of managing expenses and staff for the House of Commons, cutting back on the excess bureaucracy, personnel, overtime waste, and costs she discovered upon her installation. Once the changes were made, Sauv\u00e9 had reduced the commons' support personnel by 300 and saved $18\u00a0million out of the annual expenses, all of which, to some, actually improved overall service. Sauv\u00e9 was lauded, by MPs and the media alike, for her courage in challenging the establishment. Other MPs, though, stated that she had gone too far and balked at the resulting inconveniences, such as having to clear their own plates in the commons cafeteria. At the same time, Sauv\u00e9 also established the first daycare for Parliament Hill staff, MPs, and senators.\nShe also presided over debates on the constitution, dealing with filibusters and numerous points of order, as well as discussions over the proposed Energy Security Act, against which the loyal opposition mounted a counter-campaign that culminated in a two-week bell-ringing episode when the Conservatives' Whip refused to appear in the Commons to indicate that the opposition was ready for a vote. Despite pressure from the government that she intervene to break the deadlock, Sauv\u00e9 maintained that it was up to the parties to resolve it themselves through negotiation.\nGovernor General of Canada.\nSauv\u00e9 was the first female governor general in Canada's history, and only the second woman amongst all the Commonwealth realms\u2014both previous and contemporary to the time\u2014to assume the equivalent office, after Elmira Minita Gordon, who was in 1981 appointed Governor-General of Belize.\nAs governor general-designate.\nIt was in December 1983 announced from the Office of the Prime Minister of Canada that Trudeau had put forward Sauv\u00e9's name to Queen Elizabeth II as his recommendation on who should succeed Edward Schreyer as governor general of Canada. In the national media, the reception was generally positive, with Sauv\u00e9's elegance, refined nature, and bilingualism viewed as an asset to such a posting, despite speculation regarding her ability to remain non-partisan, as would be expected of the vicereine. However, by January 15, of the following year Sauv\u00e9 resigned as an MP, and thus as speaker, and two days later she was hospitalised; rumours circulated that it was due to cancer, but the official story was that she had contracted a respiratory virus, which was further complicated by an allergy to antibiotics.\nStill, Queen Elizabeth II, by commission under the royal sign-manual and Great Seal of Canada, appointed on January 28, 1984, Trudeau's recommendation that she appoint Sauv\u00e9 as her representative. However, the latter remained in hospital, and her illness only worsened, leading colleagues to believe that she would die, and the Canadian Press and CBC to draft preliminary obituaries. Sauv\u00e9 did recover, and was released from care on March 3, though the illness had delayed her installation ceremony, which had been scheduled to take place that month. Sauv\u00e9 remained secretive about the exact nature of the illness, and did not pay attention to rumours that she had developed Hodgkin's lymphoma, stating in interviews that it was a private matter, and that she was well enough to uphold her responsibilities.\nIn office.\nSauv\u00e9 was sworn in as governor general on May 14, 1984 in a ceremony in the Senate chamber, during which Trudeau said: \"It is right and proper that Her Majesty should finally have a woman representative here\", though stressing that the Queen had not appointed Sauv\u00e9 simply because she was a woman. Almost immediately, Sauv\u00e9 made it clear that she would use her time as governor general to promote issues surrounding youth and world peace, as well as that of national unity.\nAs governor general, Sauv\u00e9 kept up to date with Cabinet papers and met every two weeks with her successive prime ministers. She would not speak openly about her relationship with these individuals, but there was reported friction between Sauv\u00e9 and Brian Mulroney, whom she had appointed as prime minister in 1984. It was speculated Sauv\u00e9 disapproved of the way Mulroney elevated the stature of his office with more presidential trappings and aura, as exemplified by his insistence that he alone greet U.S. President Ronald Reagan upon his arrival at Quebec City for the colloquially dubbed \"Shamrock Summit\". This was taken by the media as a snub against Sauv\u00e9 who, as the head of state's direct representative, would otherwise have welcomed another head of state to Canada. \nShe did, however, greet members of the royal family, including the Queen and her husband, Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh; Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother; and the Duke and Duchess of York. Prince Edward met with Sauv\u00e9 at Rideau Hall on June 4, 1988 to present her with royal Letters Patent permitting the governor general to exercise the Queen's powers in respect of the granting of heraldic arms in Canada, leading to the eventual creation of the Canadian Heraldic Authority, of which Sauv\u00e9 was the first head. Among foreign visitors welcomed by Sauv\u00e9 were King Carl XVI Gustav of Sweden, Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands, King Hussein of Jordan, Pope John Paul II, Secretary-General of the United Nations Javier P\u00e9rez de Cu\u00e9llar, French President Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand, Chinese President Li Xiannian, Romanian President Nicolae Ceau\u015fescu, Mother Teresa, and, eventually, President Reagan. A number of these state visits were reciprocated when Sauv\u00e9 travelled to represent the Queen in Italy, the Vatican, China, Thailand, France, Uruguay, and Brazil.\nAlso in her capacity as governor general, in 1986 Sauv\u00e9 accepted, on behalf of the \"People of Canada\", the Nansen Medal and, two years later, opened the XV Olympic Winter Games in Calgary, Alberta. One of her favourite events to host was the annual Christmas party for the Ottawa Boys &amp; Girls Club and its French-language counterpart, the Patro d'Ottawa; the children came to Rideau Hall to visit with Santa Claus and attended a lunch in the Tent Room. Sauv\u00e9 personally hosted and wore a paper party hat to celebrate the special occasion.\nIronically, as with the speculations about Sauv\u00e9's standing in protocol vis-a-vis Mulroney, she was herself accused of elevating her position above its traditional place; she was criticised for her own presidentialisation of the viceregal post, with pundits at the time saying she occupied \"Republican Hall\". For instance, it was revealed that Sauv\u00e9's staff had meddled in Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan Frederick Johnson's plans to host a dinner at Government House in Regina, at which the Governor General was to be a guest. Further, municipal event organisers were told that singing of God Save the Queen, the Canadian royal anthem, was not allowed and the loyal toast to the Queen was to be replaced with a toast to Sauv\u00e9, all of which not only disregarded precedent but also grated on prairie sensitivities.\nIn her final address in office, at Christmas, 1989, some of Sauv\u00e9's words were perceived as veiled warning about the failure of the Meech Lake Accord and she was criticised for this suspected breach of neutrality. The Premier of Newfoundland at the time, Clyde Wells, said it was \"inappropriate for the Crown to be intruding in political affairs that way\" and Bill Dawson, a law professor at the University of Western Ontario, described Sauv\u00e9's use of the word \"pact\" as \"injudicious\". This was a subject on which Sauv\u00e9 and the Queen agreed, as the Queen had also publicly expressed on October 22 and 23, 1987 her personal support for the accord and received criticism from its opponents. Sauv\u00e9, though, always held that she had been speaking about Canadian unity in general and not the Meech Lake Accord in particular, or any side of the debate around it.\nLegacy.\nDuring her time as governor general, Sauv\u00e9 established in commemoration of her state visit to Brazil the Governor General Jeanne Sauv\u00e9 Fellowship, awarded each year to a Brazilian graduate student in Canadian studies. She also created two awards for students entering the field of special education and subsequently created the Sauv\u00e9 Foundation in 2003 \"to develop the leadership potential of promising youth from around the world\", which was dedicated to the cause of youth excellence in Canada and is today headed by Jean-Fran\u00e7ois. The Sauv\u00e9 Scholars Program has brought groups of up to fourteen young people with demonstrated leadership potential each year to Montreal, where they attend classes at McGill University, work on individual projects and \"enlarge their understanding of the world\". The Sauv\u00e9 Scholars, who have come from 44 countries around the world, enjoy a unique residential program at Maison Jeanne Sauv\u00e9, which constitutes a key part of their experience.\nFor sporting endeavours, Sauv\u00e9 formed the Jeanne Sauv\u00e9 Trophy, for the world cup championship in women's field hockey, and the Jeanne Sauv\u00e9 Fair Play Award, to recognise national amateur athletes who best demonstrate fair play and non-violence in sport. Further, Sauv\u00e9 encouraged a safer society in Canada by establishing the Governor General's Award for Safety in the Workplace.\nIn 1983, then President of the national organization for the sport of ringette in Canada, Ringette Canada, Betty Shields, had the trophy for the Canadian Ringette Championships named in her honour. The trophy was initiated in December 1984 and was first presented at the 1985 Canadian Ringette Championships in Dollard-des-Ormeaux, Qu\u00e9bec. While Sauv\u00e9 was alive the trophy was called the Jeanne Sauv\u00e9 Cup. Post-humously it was renamed the Jeanne Sauv\u00e9 Memorial Cup, which remains the trophy's namesake today.\nThough there was some criticism in the final evaluations of her performance as governor general, mostly for a perceived aloofness and sense of self-importance\u2014which her closing of the Rideau Hall estate to the public came to symbolise\u2014Sauv\u00e9 was also described as having been elegant, charming, and a person who could mingle well with common Canadians\u2014especially children\u2014while also maintaining a sense of the dignity of state. She was said to have enjoyed both entertaining and ceremony, two necessary parts of the role of the Queen's representative. However, she was pointed out unfavourably by Canadian monarchists for her republican attitudes, as illustrated in her stated opinion that the monarchy should be abolished.\nRetirement and death.\nAfter departing Rideau Hall for the last time as governor general in 1990, Sauv\u00e9 and her husband returned to Montreal, where she continued to work with the Sauv\u00e9 Foundation. Only two years later, however, Maurice died, and Sauv\u00e9 followed him on January 26, 1993, after a long battle with Hodgkin's lymphoma. The couple were both interred in Notre Dame des Neiges Cemetery in Montreal, and, one year following her death, Canada Post issued a postage stamp bearing an image of Sauv\u00e9.\nTitles, styles, honours, and arms.\nHonours.\nSauv\u00e9's personal awards and decorations include:\n&lt;br&gt;\n&lt;br&gt;\nArchives.\nThere is a Jeanne Sauv\u00e9 fonds at Library and Archives Canada.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74973", "revid": "45032371", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74973", "title": "Plot (narrative)", "text": "Cause-and-effect events in a narrative\nIn a literary work, film, or other narrative, the plot is the mapping of events in which each one (except the final) affects at least one other. Plot is similar in meaning to the term \"storyline\". Simple plots, such as in a traditional ballad, can be linearly sequenced, but plots can form complex interwoven structures, with each part sometimes referred to as a subplot.\nE. M. Forster described plot events as relating through the principle of cause-and-effect; the causal events of a plot can be thought of as a selective collection of events from a narrative, all linked by the connector \"and so\". According to American science fiction writer Ansen Dibell, the term \"plot\" highlights important points which have consequences within the story, in the narrative sense. The premise sets up the plot, the characters take part in events, while the setting is not only part of, but also influences, the final story.\nIn common usage (e.g., a \"film plot\"), the word \"plot\" more often refers to a narrative summary, or story synopsis. The term \"plot\" can also serve as a verb, as part of the craft of writing, referring to the writer devising and ordering story events. (A related meaning is a character's planning of future actions in the story.)\nDefinition.\nEarly 20th-century English novelist E. M. Forster described plot as the cause-and-effect relationship between events in a story. According to Forster, \"\"The king died, and then the queen died,\" is a story, while \"The king died, and then the queen died of grief,\" is a plot.\"\nTeri Shaffer Yamada, Ph.D., of CSULB, agrees that a plot does not include memorable scenes within a story that do not relate directly to other events but only \"major events that move the action in a narrative.\" For example, in the 1997 film \"Titanic\", when Rose climbs on the railing at the front of the ship and spreads her hands as if she's flying, this scene is memorable but does not directly influence other events, so it may not be considered as part of the plot. Another example of a memorable scene that is not part of the plot occurs in the 1980 film \"The Empire Strikes Back\", when Han Solo is frozen in carbonite.\nFabula and syuzhet.\nThe literary theory of Russian Formalism in the early 20th century divided a narrative into two elements: the \"fabula\" (\u0444\u0430\u0301\u0431\u0443\u043b\u0430) and the \"syuzhet\" (\u0441\u044e\u0436\u0435\u0301\u0442). A fabula is the chronology of the fictional world, whereas a syuzhet is a perspective or plot thread of those events. Formalist followers eventually translated the fabula/syuzhet to the concept of story/plot. This definition is usually used in narratology, in parallel with Forster's definition. The \"fabula\" (story) is what happened in chronological order. In contrast, the \"syuzhet\" (plot) means a unique sequence of discourse that was sorted out by the (implied) author. That is, the syuzhet can consist of picking up the fabula events in non-chronological order; for example, fabula is \u27e8a1, a2, a3, a4, a5, ..., an\u27e9, syuzhet is \u27e8a5, a1, a3\u27e9.\nThe Russian formalist, Viktor Shklovsky, viewed the syuzhet as the fabula defamiliarized. Defamiliarization or \"making strange,\" a term Shklovsky coined and popularized, upends familiar ways of presenting a story, slows down the reader's perception, and makes the story appear unfamiliar. Shklovsky cites Lawrence Sterne's Tristram Shandy as an example of a fabula that has been defamiliarized. Sterne uses temporal displacements, digressions, and causal disruptions (for example, placing the effects before their causes) to slow down the reader's ability to reassemble the (familiar) story. As a result, the syuzhet \"makes strange\" the fabula.\nExamples.\nCinderella.\nA story orders events from beginning to end in a time sequence.\nConsider the following events in the European folk tale \"Cinderella\":\nThe first event is causally related to the third event, while the second event, though descriptive, does not directly impact the outcome. As a result, according to Ansen Dibell, the plot can be described as the first event \"and so\" the last event, while the story can be described by all three events in order.\n\"The Wizard of Oz\".\nFiction-writing coach Steve Alcorn says that plot elements for the 1939 film \"The Wizard of Oz\" are easy to name, and he gives as examples:\nConcepts.\nStructure and treatment.\nDramatic structure is the philosophy by which the story is split and how the story is thought of. This can vary by ethnicity, region and time period. This can be applied to books, plays, and films. Philosophers/critics who have discussed story structure include Aristotle, Horace, Aelius Donatus, Gustav Freytag, Kenneth Thorpe Rowe, Lajos Egri, Syd Field, and others. Some story structures are so old that the originator cannot be found, such as Ta'zieh.\nOften in order to sell a script, the \"plot structure\" is made into what is called a \"treatment\". This can vary based on locality, but for Europe and European Diaspora, the \"three-act structure\" is often used. The components of this structure are the \"set-up\", the \"confrontation\" and the \"resolution\". Acts are connected by two plot points or turning points, with the first turning point connecting Act I to Act II, and the second connecting Act II to Act III. The conception of the three-act structure has been attributed to American screenwriter Syd Field who described plot structure in this tripartite way for film analysis.\nFurthermore, in order to sell a book within the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, New Zealand, and Australia, often the plot structure is split into a synopsis. Again the plot structure may vary by genre or drama structure used.\nAristotle.\nMany scholars have analyzed dramatic structure, beginning with Aristotle in his \"Poetics\" (c. 335 BC).\nIn his \"Poetics\", a theory about tragedies, the Greek philosopher Aristotle put forth the idea the play should imitate a single whole action. \"A whole is what has a beginning and middle and end\" (1450b27). He split the play into two acts: complication and denouement. He mainly used Sophocles to make his argument about the proper dramatic structure of a play.\nTwo types of scenes are of special interest: the reversal, which throws the action in a new direction, and the recognition, meaning the protagonist has an important revelation. Reversals should happen as a necessary and probable cause of what happened before, which implies that turning points need to be properly set up. He ranked the order of importance of the play to be: Chorus, Events, Diction, Character, Spectacle. And that all plays should be able to be performed from memory, long and easy to understand. He was against character-centric plots stating \u201cThe Unity of a Plot does not consist, as some suppose, in its having one man as its subject.\u201d He was against episodic plots. He held that discovery should be the high point of the play and that the action should teach a moral that is reenforced by pity, fear and suffering. The spectacle, not the characters themselves would give rise to the emotions. The stage should also be split into \u201cPrologue, Episode, Exode, and a choral portion, distinguished into Parode and Stasimon...\u201c\nUnlike later, he held that the morality was the center of the play and what made it great. Unlike popular belief, he did not come up with the three act structure popularly known.\nGustav Freytag.\nThe German playwright and novelist Gustav Freytag wrote \"Die Technik des Dramas\", a definitive study of the five-act dramatic structure, in which he laid out what has come to be known as Freytag's pyramid. Under Freytag's pyramid, the plot of a story consists of five parts:\nA drama is then divided into five parts, or acts, which some refer to as a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;dramatic arc: exposition, rising action, climax, falling action, and catastrophe. Freytag extends the five parts with three moments or crises: the exciting force, the tragic force, and the force of the final suspense. The exciting force leads to the rising action, the tragic force leads to the falling action, and the force of the final suspense leads to the catastrophe. Freytag considers the exciting force to be necessary but the tragic force and the force of the final suspense are optional. Together, they make the eight component parts of the drama.\nIn making his argument, he attempts to retcon much of the Greeks and Shakespeare by making opinions of what they meant, but did not actually say.\nHe argued for tension created through contrasting emotions, but did not actively argue for conflict. He argued that character comes first in plays. He also set up the groundwork for what would later be called the inciting incident.\nOverall, Freytag argued the center of a play is emotionality and the best way to get that emotionality is to put contrasting emotions back to back. He laid some of the foundations for centering the hero, unlike Aristotle. He is popularly attributed to have stated conflict at the center of his plays, but he argues actively against continuing conflict.\nFreytag defines the parts as:\nPlot devices.\nA \"plot device\" is a means of advancing the plot in a story. It is often used to motivate characters, create urgency, or resolve a difficulty. This can be contrasted with moving a story forward with dramatic technique; that is, by making things happen because characters take action for well-developed reasons. An example of a plot device would be when the cavalry shows up at the last moment and saves the day in a battle. In contrast, an adversarial character who has been struggling with himself and saves the day due to a change of heart would be considered dramatic technique.\nFamiliar types of plot devices include the \"deus ex machina\", the MacGuffin, the red herring, and Chekhov's gun.\nPlot outline.\nA \"plot outline\" is a prose telling of a story which can be turned into a screenplay. Sometimes it is called a \"one page\" because of its length. In comics, the roughs refer to a stage in the development where the story has been broken down very loosely in a style similar to storyboarding in film development. This stage is also referred to as storyboarding or layouts. In Japanese manga, this stage is called the \"n\u0113mu\" (\u30cd\u30fc\u30e0, pronounced like the English word \"name\"). The roughs are quick sketches arranged within a suggested page layout. The main goals of roughs are to:\nIn fiction writing, a plot outline gives a list of scenes. Scenes include events, character(s) and setting. Plot, therefore, shows the cause and effect of these things put together. The plot outline is a rough sketch of this cause and effect made by the scenes to lay out a \"solid backbone and structure\" to show why and how things happened as they did.\nPlot summary.\nA \"plot summary\" is a brief description of a piece of literature that explains what happens. In a plot summary, the author and title of the book should be referred to and it is usually no more than a paragraph long while summarizing the main points of the story.\nA-Plot.\nAn \"A-Plot\" is a cinema and television term referring to the plotline that drives the story. This does not necessarily mean it is the most important, but rather the one that forces most of the action.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74978", "revid": "44220063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74978", "title": "My Darling Clementine", "text": "1946 film by John Ford\nMy Darling Clementine is a 1946 American Western film directed by John Ford and starring Henry Fonda as Wyatt Earp during the period leading up to the gunfight at the O.K. Corral. The ensemble cast also features Victor Mature (as Doc Holliday), Linda Darnell, Walter Brennan, Tim Holt, Cathy Downs and Ward Bond.\nThe title of the movie is borrowed from the theme song \"Oh My Darling, Clementine\", sung in parts over the opening and closing credits. The screenplay is based on the biography \"\" by Stuart Lake, as were two earlier movies, both named \"Frontier Marshal\" (released in 1934 and 1939, respectively). \n\"My Darling Clementine\" is regarded by many critics as one of the greatest Western films ever made. In 1991, the film was deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry. It was among the third annual group of 25 films named to the registry.\nPlot.\nIn 1882 (a year after the actual gunfight at the O.K. Corral on October 26, 1881), Wyatt, Morgan, Virgil, and James Earp are driving cattle to California when they encounter Old Man Clanton and his sons. Clanton offers to buy their herd, but they curtly refuse to sell. When the Earps learn about the nearby boom town of Tombstone, the older brothers ride in, leaving the youngest, James, as watchman. The threesome soon learns that Tombstone is a lawless town without a marshal. Wyatt proves the only man in the town willing to face a drunken Indian shooting at the townspeople. When the brothers return to their camp, they find their cattle rustled and James murdered.\nWyatt returns to Tombstone. Seeking to avenge James's murder, he takes the open position of town marshal and encounters the hot-tempered Doc Holliday and scurrilous Clanton gang several times. During this time, Clementine Carter, Doc's former love interest from his hometown of Boston, arrives after a long search for her beau. She is given a room at the same hotel where both Wyatt and Doc Holliday reside.\nChihuahua, a hot-tempered Latina love interest of Doc's, sings in the local saloon. She runs afoul of Wyatt, trying to tip a professional gambler off to his poker hand, resulting in Wyatt's dunking her in a horse trough. Doc, who is suffering badly from tuberculosis and had fled from Clementine previously, is unhappy with her arrival; he tells her to return to Boston or he will leave Tombstone. Clementine stays, so Doc leaves for Tucson, Arizona. Wyatt, who has been taken by Clementine since her arrival, begins to awkwardly court her. Angry over Doc's hasty flight, Chihuahua starts an argument with Clementine. Wyatt walks in on their spat and breaks it up. He notices Chihuahua is wearing a silver cross that had been taken from his brother James the night he'd been killed. She claims Doc gave it to her.\nWyatt chases down Doc, with whom he has had a testy relationship. Doc forces a shoot-out, ending with Wyatt's shooting a pistol out of Doc's hand. The two return to Tombstone, where after being questioned, Chihuahua reveals the silver cross was actually given to her by Billy Clanton. During the interrogation, Billy shoots Chihuahua through a window and takes off on horseback, but is wounded by Wyatt. Wyatt directs his brother Virgil to pursue him. The chase leads to the Clanton homestead, where Billy dies of his wounds. Old Man Clanton then shoots Virgil in the back in cold blood.\nIn town, a reluctant Doc is persuaded to operate on Chihuahua. Hope swells for her successful recovery. The Clantons then arrive, toss Virgil's body on the street and announce they will be waiting for the rest of the Earps at the O.K. Corral.\nChihuahua dies and Doc decides to join the Earps, walking alongside Wyatt and Morgan to the corral at sunup. A gunfight ensues in which all of the Clantons are killed, as is Doc.\nWyatt and Morgan resign as law enforcers. Morgan heads West in a horse and buggy. Wyatt bids Clementine farewell at the school house, wistfully promising that if he ever returns he will look her up. Mounting his horse, he muses aloud, \"Ma'am, I sure like that name...Clementine,\" and rides off to join his brother.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Henry Fonda as Wyatt Earp\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nIn 1931, Stuart Lake published \"\" two years after Earp's death, and it became an instant bestseller. The book is highly inaccurate as is the adapted screenplay. The movie's title was Ford's suggestion, simply because he liked the song \"Oh My Darling, Clementine\".\nDirector John Ford said that when he was a prop boy in the early days of silent pictures, Earp would visit pals he knew from his Tombstone days on the sets. \"I used to give him a chair and a cup of coffee, and he told me about the fight at the O.K. Corral. So in \"My Darling Clementine\", we did it exactly the way it had been.\" Ford did not want to make the movie, but his contract required him to make one more movie for 20th Century Fox.\nIn their later years, Wyatt and Josephine Earp worked hard to eliminate any mention of Josephine's previous relationship with Johnny Behan or Wyatt's previous common law marriage to Matty Blaylock. They successfully kept Josephine's name out of Lake's biography of Wyatt and after he died, Josephine threatened to sue the movie producers to keep it that way. Lake corresponded with Josephine, and he claimed she attempted to influence what he wrote and hamper him in every way possible, including consulting lawyers. Josephine insisted she was striving to protect Wyatt Earp's legacy.\nWriting.\nThe final script of the movie varies considerably from historical fact to create additional dramatic conflict and character. Clementine Carter is not a historical person, and in this script, she appears to be an amalgam of Big Nose Kate and Josephine Earp. The Earps were also never cowboys, drovers, or cattle owners. Important plot devices in the film and personal details about the main characters were all liberally adapted for the movie.\nOld Man Clanton actually died before the gunfight and probably never met any of the Earps. Doc was a dentist, not a surgeon, and survived the shootout. James Earp, who was portrayed as the youngest brother and the first to die in the story, actually was the eldest brother and lived until 1926. The key women in Wyatt's and Doc's lives\u2014Wyatt's common law wife Josephine and Doc's common-law wife Big Nose Kate\u2014were not present in Lake's original story and were kept out of the movie as well. The film gives the date of the gunfight as 1882 although it actually occurred in 1881.\nUpon leaving Tombstone, the itinerant actor, Granville Thorndyke (Alan Mowbray), bids farewell to the old soldier, \"Dad\" (Francis Ford, John Ford's elder brother), with lines from Joseph Addison's poem \"The Campaign\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Great souls by instinct to each other turn,\nDemand allegiance, and in friendship burn...\nFilming.\nMuch of the film was shot in Monument Valley, a scenic desert region straddling the Arizona-Utah border used in other John Ford movies. It is 500 miles (800\u00a0km) away from the town of Tombstone in southern Arizona. After seeing a preview screening of the film, 20th Century Fox studio boss Darryl F. Zanuck thought Ford's original cut was too long and had some weak spots, so he had Lloyd Bacon shoot new footage and heavily edit the film. Zanuck had Bacon cut 30 minutes from the film.\nWhile Ford's original cut of the film has not survived, a \"pre-release\" cut dating from a few months after the preview screening was discovered in the UCLA film archives; this version preserves some additional footage as well as alternative scoring and editing. UCLA film preservationist Robert Gitt edited a version of the film that incorporates some of the earlier version. A significant change is the film's final scene: in the 1946 release, Earp kisses Clementine goodbye; in Ford's original, he shakes her hand.\nReception and legacy.\nThe film is generally regarded as one of the best Westerns made by John Ford and one of his best films overall. \nAt the time of its release, Bosley Crowther lauded the film and wrote \"The eminent director, John Ford, is a man who has a way with a Western like nobody in the picture trade. Seven years ago his classic \"Stagecoach\" snuggled very close to fine art in this genre. And now, by George, he's almost matched it with \"My Darling Clementine\"\u00a0... But even with standard Western fiction\u2014and that's what the script has enjoined\u2014Mr. Ford can evoke fine sensations and curiously-captivating moods. From the moment that Wyatt and his brothers are discovered on the wide and dusty range, trailing a herd of cattle to a far-off promised land, a tone of pictorial authority is struck\u2014and it is held. Every scene, every shot is the product of a keen and sensitive eye\u2014an eye which has deep comprehension of the beauty of rugged people and a rugged world.\" \"Variety\" wrote that \"John Ford's direction is clearly stamped on the film with its shadowy lights, softly contrasted moods and measured pace, but a tendency is discernible towards stylization for the sake of stylization. At several points, the pic comes to a dead stop to let Ford go gunning for some arty effect.\"\nDirector Sam Peckinpah considered \"My Darling Clementine\" his favorite Western, and paid homage to it in several of his Westerns, including \"Major Dundee\" (1965) and \"The Wild Bunch\" (1969). Similarly, director Hayao Miyazaki called it one of his 10 favorite movies.\nFifty years after its release, Roger Ebert reviewed the film and included it in his list of The Great Movies. He wrote it was \"one of the sweetest and most good-hearted of all Westerns\", unusual in making the romance between Earp and Clementine the heart of the film rather than the gunfight.\nIn 2004, Matt Bailey summarized its significance: \"If there is one film that deserves every word of praise ever uttered or written about it, it is John Ford's \"My Darling Clementine\". Perhaps the greatest film in a career full of great films, arguably the finest achievement in a rich and magnificent genre, and undoubtedly the best version of one of America's most enduring myths, the film is an undeniable and genuine classic.\" In the British Film Institute's 2012 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" polls, seven critics and five directors named it one of their 10 favorite films.\nIn 2012, director Michael Mann named \"My Darling Clementine\" one of his 10 favorite films, stating it was \"possibly the finest drama in the western genre\" and \"achieves near-perfection\" in its cinematography and editing. It was also President Harry Truman's favorite film.\nThe film scores a 100% on Rotten Tomatoes from 34 reviews with the consensus: \"Canny and coolly confident, \"My Darling Clementine\" is a definitive dramatization of the Wyatt Earp legend that shoots from the hip and hits its target in breezy style.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74979", "revid": "51047105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74979", "title": "My Man Godfrey", "text": "1936 American comedy-drama film directed by Gregory La Cava\nMy Man Godfrey is a 1936 American screwball comedy film directed by Gregory La Cava and starring William Powell and Carole Lombard, who had been briefly married years before appearing together in the film. The screenplay for \"My Man Godfrey\" was written by Morrie Ryskind and Eric S. Hatch, with uncredited contributions by La Cava, based on Hatch's 1935 novel, \"1101 Park Avenue\". The story concerns a socialite who hires a derelict to be her family's butler, and then falls in love with him.\nThe film was critically acclaimed, and was nominated for six Oscars in the 9th Academy Awards including best actor for leads Powell and Lombard, supporting actors Auer and Brady, director and screenplay. It has a 97% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes.\nIn 1999, the original version of \"My Man Godfrey\" was deemed \"culturally significant\" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry. The film was remade in 1957 with June Allyson and David Niven in the starring roles.\nPlot.\nDuring the Great Depression, Godfrey Smith lives with other homeless men at a New York City dump in a Hooverville by the East River. One night, spoiled socialite Cornelia Bullock offers him $5 to be her \"forgotten man\" for a scavenger hunt. Godfrey refuses and makes her retreat and fall on a pile of ashes, much to the glee of her younger sister Irene. Godfrey finds Irene kind and offers to go with her to help her beat Cornelia and satisfy his curiosity regarding their scavenger hunt.\nIn the ballroom of the Waldorf-Ritz Hotel, Irene's businessman father, Alexander Bullock, waits resignedly as his ditsy wife, Angelica, and her mooching prot\u00e9g\u00e9, Carlo, play the game. Godfrey is authenticated as a \"forgotten man\", allowing Irene to win that part of the hunt. He takes the opportunity to publicly express his contempt for the players' antics before leaving in a huff. An apologetic Irene decides to make Godfrey her prot\u00e9g\u00e9 and hires him as the new family butler.\nOn his first day as butler, Godfrey is warned by the Bullocks' longtime maid, Molly, that he is the latest in a long line of butlers who did not last long due to the female Bullocks' antics. Despite this, he is up to the challenge, though Cornelia holds a grudge against him. Irene becomes infatuated with Godfrey, and he tries unsuccessfully to discourage her. She kisses him, causing him to politely but firmly outline the boundaries of their employee-employer relationship.\nEventually, Godfrey is recognized by his longtime friend Tommy Gray at a tea party thrown by Irene. Godfrey makes up a story that he was Tommy's valet at Harvard; Tommy plays along by embellishing Godfrey's story with a nonexistent wife and five children. Upon hearing this, Irene impulsively announces her engagement to a surprised Charlie Van Rumple, but breaks down in tears and flees after being congratulated by Godfrey.\nOver lunch the next day, Tommy wonders what one of the elite \"Parkes of Boston\" is doing as a servant. Godfrey explains that when he lost the woman he loved, he considered suicide, but the undaunted attitude of the homeless men living at the dump rekindled his spirits.\nEventually, Irene breaks her engagement with Charlie. Cornelia attempts to seduce Godfrey on his day off, but when he rebuffs her, she plants her pearl necklace under Godfrey's mattress and calls the police to report it missing. However, the police do not find it. Mr. Bullock realizes his daughter has orchestrated the whole thing and informs her that the pearls are not insured.\nThe Bullocks send their daughters to Europe to help Irene get over her broken engagement to Charlie, but when they return, her feelings for Godfrey have not changed. She stages a fainting spell and swoons into Godfrey's arms, who soon realises she is faking it. Godfrey puts her in the shower and turns on the cold water. This, however, has an unexpected result. Irene says, \"Oh Godfrey, now I know you love me...You do or you wouldn't have lost your temper.\"\nGodfrey quits. Before he leaves, Mr. Bullock throws Carlo out (literally) and tells his family that his business is in dire straits and he will likely go to jail. However, Godfrey provides good news: when he realized Mr. Bullock's situation, sold short, using some of the money raised by pawning Cornelia's pearl necklace to buy up the stock that Bullock had sold. He returns the stock to Mr. Bullock, saving the family from financial ruin. Godfrey also returns the necklace to Cornelia, who humbly expresses her gratitude and remorse for her behavior.\nWith the rest of the money Godfrey got for Cornelia's necklace, he and Tommy become business partners and convert the now-filled-in dump into a fashionable nightclub called \"The Dump\", which creates jobs for the homeless men with a plan to build housing for 50 of them. A determined Irene tracks Godfrey to his office and apartment at The Dump, makes it clear that she is moving in, and, when Tommy sends in New York's mayor to marry them, Irene leads a startled Godfrey up by the hand and says \"Stand still Godfrey, it'll all be over in a minute\".\nProduction.\nThe film is based on the 1935 Eric S. Hatch novel, \"1101 Park Avenue\". Charles Rogers, head of Universal, called it \"a sure-fire laugh-getting novel\". That studio purchased the film rights and assigned Hatch to write the script with Morrie Ryskind, who received top billing for the screenplay. Rogers hired Gregory La Cava to direct, \"the best comedy director in Hollywood.\"\nCasting.\nIt was the first major film from Universal after that studio had been taken over by new management, including head of production Charles Rogers. However the studio did not have any major stars under contract apart from Buck Jones, Boris Karloff and Edward Everett Horton, and needed to borrow some from other studios.\nThe studio's original choice to play Irene, the part eventually played by Carole Lombard, was Constance Bennett, and Miriam Hopkins also was considered, but the director Gregory La Cava would only agree to Bennett if Universal borrowed William Powell from MGM. Powell, for his part, only would take the role if Carole Lombard played Irene. Powell and Lombard had divorced three years earlier, but remained good friends.\nPowell's casting was announced in January 1936. Universal borrowed Lombard from Paramount. As part of the deal, Universal loaned Paramount's Margaret Sullavan for the film \"I Love a Soldier,\" and Lombard's clothes designer, Travis Banton, accompanied her. Alice Brady joined the cast in March.\nShooting.\n\"My Man Godfrey\" was in production from April 15 to May 27, 1936, and then had retakes in early June of the year. Its budget was $575,375; Powell was paid $87,500 and Lombard $45,645. The film was one of the first under the new regime of Charles Rogers at Universal, although it had been developed under his predecessor Carl Laemmle Jr.\nLa Cava, a former animator and freelancer for most of his film career, held studio executives in contempt and was known to be a bit eccentric. When he and Powell hit a snag over a disagreement about how Godfrey should be portrayed, they settled things over a bottle of Scotch. The next morning, La Cava showed up for shooting with a headache, but Powell didn't appear. Instead, the actor sent a telegram stating: \"WE MAY HAVE FOUND GODFREY LAST NIGHT BUT WE LOST POWELL. SEE YOU TOMORROW.\"\nDue to insurance considerations a stand-in stuntman (Chick Collins) was used when Godfrey carried Irene over his shoulder up the stairs to her bedroom.\nIn a premiere special in the \"Los Angeles Times,\" Universal producer Rogers said it was key to the film's production to make \"everyone connected with the picture\" feel \"a happy-go-lucky mood,\" and \"keep them laughing... madder and merrier the better,\" \"while you're shooting the picture.\" Film crew described star Lombard as \"a good egg\" who \"never stands on ceremony... impulsive... outspoken... extremely frank,\" always \"gay,\" and particularly \"a friend to everyone\" who worked with her. They also called Powell as \"a good egg,\" and humble, who asked for no special considerations, and praised others' work.\nWhen tensions hit a high point on the set, Lombard had a habit of inserting four-letter words into her dialogue, often to the great amusement of the cast. This made shooting somewhat difficult, but clips of her cursing in her dialogue and messing up her lines can still be seen in blooper reels, along with four-letter words from Powell.\nRelease and reception.\nOriginal.\nIt was the first film released under the aegis of Charles Rogers and was given a big premiere at The Pantages Theatre in Hollywood, with comedian George Jessel as master of ceremonies. \"My Man Godfrey\" premiered on September 6, 1936, and was released in the United States on September 17. It was a runaway hit and earned huge profits for the studio.\nThe movie was one of the most acclaimed comedies of 1936. \"Variety\" called it a \"splendidly produced comedy,\" with Powell and Lombard \"pleasantly teamed\" as Lombard plays the most \"screwy\" of the various \"screwball dames\" she has ever played.\nWriting for \"The Spectator\" in 1936, Graham Greene gave the film a moderately positive review, characterizing it as \"acutely funny\" for three-quarters of its way. Particularly praising the scene of the scavenging party, Greene finds it to be \"perhaps the wittiest, as well as noisiest, sequence of the year\". Considering the end of the film, however, he notes that \"the social conscience is a little confused\" and he wishes for a more \"dignified exit\".\nModern.\nModern critics have praised it as enduring amusement, and truth, and as a \"landmark\" icon of the 1930s screwball comedy film concept, and the overall craft of filmmaking.\nIn 1999, the film was selected for the Library of Congress's National Film Registry (NFR) of motion pictures \"selected for... historical, cultural and aesthetic contributions,\" saying that \"Carole Lombard sparkles [at] one of her greatest roles,\" in this \"comedic take and sometimes caustic commentary on the Great Depression,\" adding \"William Powell portrays Godfrey with knife-edged delivery,\" in \"one of the most exemplary screwball comedies of the 1930s.\" The NFR also praises Ted Tetzlaff's black-and-white cinematography.\nIn 2023, \"Time\" magazine selected it as one of the \"100 Best Movies of the Last 10 Decades,\" placing it among \"the greatest romantic comedies\" to come out of that \"decade full of terrific ones.\"\n\"God... this film is beautiful,\" declared critic Roger Ebert, who praised the cinematography as \"a shimmering argument\" for the virtues of films produced in black-and-white, rather than color. He praised the film, and \"the actors in it... its style of production,\" even... \"the system that produced it,\" as an escape from today's \"pop culture of brainless vulgarity.\"\nPauline Kael called it an \"entertaining (and hugely successful) screwball comedy... The movie starts out with a promising satiric idea and winds up in box-office romance, but it's likable and well-paced even at its silliest. Lombard shrieks happily and Powell modulates impeccably.\" Leonard Maltin gave it four of four stars: \"Delightful romp with Lombard and crazy household hiring Powell as butler... But Pallette\u2014as harried head of household\u2014has some of the best lines.\" Leslie Halliwell gave it three of four stars: \"Archetypal Depression concept which is also one of the best of the thirties crazy sophisticated comedies... \"\nCritics have also praised the elegant set design and costumes, particularly Travis Banton's costume designs.\nAwards and honors.\n\"My Man Godfrey\" was the first movie to be nominated in all four acting categories, in the first year that supporting categories were introduced. It is also the only film in Oscar history to receive a nomination in all four acting categories and not be nominated for Best Picture. It was the only film to be nominated in these six categories and not receive any award until 2013's \"American Hustle\".\nIn 1999, the film was deemed \"culturally significant\" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry. In 2000, the film was ranked #44 on the American Film Institute's list of the 100 funniest comedies, and \"Premiere\" voted it one of \"The 50 Greatest Comedies Of All Time\" in 2006. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, it has an approval score of 97% based on 37 reviews, with an average rating of 8.5/10. The site's consensus states: \"A class satire in a class of its own, \"My Man Godfrey\"'s screwball comedy is as sharp as the social commentary is biting.\"\nPublic domain status.\nThe original film is generally thought to have entered into the public domain in 1965 when the film's copyright was not renewed after 28 years. However the underlying work, the 1935 book \"1101 Park Avenue\" \u2013 re-titled \"My Man Godfrey\" with the film's release \u2013 had its copyright renewed in 1963 and is thus still in copyright. According to Stanford University Library, and under rulings of the 1990 case \"Stewart v. Abend\", in so-called multilayered works, the rights holder of the original work can claim ownership of the film script, though not the pictures, if the original book is still in copyright. \"Films are often based on books ... that may maintain copyright. If the pre-existing work is protected, then rightly or wrongly, it has generally been determined that the derived film is also protected.\"\nHome media.\nWhile public domain videos of the film had been issued by several different distributors in the preceding years, the film had its first official video release on January 12, 1994, from MCA/Universal Home Video. In 2002, a restored print was made available on DVD by The Criterion Collection, which featured a new cover illustrated by Michael Koelsch. In 2005, 20th Century Fox Home Video released a colorized version. In September 2018, Criterion released the film on Blu-ray with new supplements.\nRemakes and adaptations.\n\"My Man Godfrey\" was twice adapted as a one-hour radio broadcast on \"Lux Radio Theatre\": on May 9, 1938, with David Niven playing the part of Tommy Gray; and on November 9, 1954, with Jeff Chandler and Julie Adams. It was also adapted to radio in a half-hour version on the October 2, 1946, episode of \"Academy Award Theater\", again starring William Powell. When the film was remade in 1957, David Niven played Godfrey opposite June Allyson, directed by Henry Koster. A stage musical version of \"My Man Godfrey\", produced by Allan Carr and written by librettists Alan Jay Lerner and Kristi Kane and composer Gerard Kenny, was intended for Broadway in 1985, but remained uncompleted at the time of Alan Jay Lerner's death in 1986.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74982", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74982", "title": "Harold Shipman", "text": "English doctor and serial killer (1946\u20132004)\nHarold Frederick Shipman (14 January 1946\u00a0\u2013 13 January 2004), known to acquaintances as Fred Shipman, was an English doctor in general practice and serial killer. He is considered to be one of the most prolific serial killers in modern history, with an estimated 250 victims over roughly 30 years. On 31 January 2000, Shipman was convicted of murdering 15 patients under his care. He was sentenced to life imprisonment with a whole life order. On 13 January 2004, one day before his 58th birthday, Shipman hanged himself in his cell at HM Prison Wakefield, West Yorkshire.\n\"The Shipman Inquiry\", a two-year-long investigation of all deaths certified by Shipman, chaired by Dame Janet Smith, examined Shipman's crimes. It revealed Shipman targeted vulnerable elderly people who trusted him as their doctor, killing them with either a fatal dose of drugs or prescribing an abnormal amount. \nAs of 2025[ [update]] Shipman, who has been nicknamed \"Dr. Death\" and the \"Angel of Death\", is the only British doctor to have been convicted of murdering patients, although other doctors have been acquitted of similar crimes or convicted of lesser charges. Shipman's case has often been compared to that of doctor John Bodkin Adams; some nurses, such as Beverley Allitt, have also been convicted of murdering patients in their care.\nEarly life and education.\nHarold Frederick Shipman was born on 14 January 1946 on the Bestwood Estate, a council estate in Nottingham, the second of three children. His father, also Harold Frederick Shipman (1914\u20131985), was a lorry driver; his mother was Vera (n\u00e9e\u00a0Brittan; 1919\u20131963). His working-class parents were devout Methodists.\nShipman was particularly close to his mother, who died of lung cancer when he was aged 17. Her death came in a manner similar to what later became Shipman's own \"modus operandi\": in the later stages of her disease, she had morphine administered at home by a doctor. Shipman witnessed his mother's pain subside, despite her terminal condition, until her death on 21 June 1963.\nOn 5 November 1966, Shipman married Primrose May Oxtoby; the couple had four children. Shipman studied medicine at Leeds School of Medicine, University of Leeds, graduating in 1970.\nCareer.\nShipman began working at Pontefract General Infirmary in Pontefract, West Riding of Yorkshire, and in 1974 took his first position as a general practitioner (GP) at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre in Todmorden. The following year, Shipman was caught forging prescriptions of pethidine for his own use. He was fined \u00a3 and briefly attended a drug rehabilitation clinic in York. He worked as a GP at Donneybrook Medical Centre in Hyde, Greater Manchester, in 1977.\nShipman continued working as a GP in Hyde throughout the 1980s and established his own surgery at 21 Market Street in 1993, becoming a respected member of the community. In 1983, he was interviewed in an edition of the Granada Television current affairs documentary \"World in Action\" on how the mentally ill should be treated in the community. A year after his conviction on charges of murder, the interview was re-broadcast on \"Tonight with Trevor McDonald\".\nDetection of murder.\nIn March 1998, Linda Reynolds, a general practitioner at the Brooke Surgery in Hyde, expressed concerns to John Pollard, the coroner for the South Manchester District, about the high death rate among Shipman's patients. In particular, she was concerned about the large number of cremation forms for elderly women that he had asked to have countersigned. The Greater Manchester Police (GMP) were unable to find sufficient evidence to bring charges and closed the investigation on 17 April. \"The Shipman Inquiry\" later blamed the GMP for assigning inexperienced officers to the case. After the investigation was closed, Shipman killed three more people. A few months later, in August, taxi driver John Shaw told the police that he suspected Shipman of murdering 21 patients. Shaw became suspicious as many of the elderly customers he took to the hospital, while seemingly in good health, died in Shipman's care.\nShipman's last victim was Kathleen Grundy, a former mayoress of Hyde who was found dead at her home on 24 June 1998. He was the last person to see her alive; he later signed her death certificate, recording the cause of death as old age. Grundy's daughter, solicitor Angela Woodruff, became concerned when fellow solicitor Brian Burgess informed her that a will had been made, apparently by her mother, with doubts about its authenticity. The will excluded Woodruff and her children, but left \u00a3386,000 to Shipman. At Burgess' urging, Woodruff went to police, who began an investigation. Grundy's body was exhumed and found to contain traces of diamorphine (heroin), often used for pain control in terminal cancer patients. Shipman claimed that Grundy had been an addict and showed them comments he had written to that effect in his computerised medical journal; however, police examination of his computer showed that the entries were written after her death.\nShipman was arrested on 7 September 1998, and was found to own a Brother typewriter of the type used to make the forged will. \"Prescription for Murder\", a 2000 book by journalists Brian Whittle and Jean Ritchie, suggested that Shipman forged the will either because he felt his life was out of control and wanted to be caught, or because he planned to retire at age 55 and leave the United Kingdom. Police investigated other deaths that Shipman had certified and investigated fifteen specimen cases. They discovered a pattern of his administering lethal doses of diamorphine, signing patients' death certificates and then falsifying medical records to indicate that they had been in poor health. In addition, an abnormally large number of the deaths occurred around the same time of day (when Shipman was on his afternoon visits) and in the doctor's presence.\nIn 2003, after Shipman had been convicted, a paper by statistician David Spiegelhalter and others found that Shipman's mortality rates had been broadly in line with national rates between 1988 and 1994, and started increasing in 1995. They suggested that statistical monitoring could have led to an alarm being raised at the end of 1996, although not before, when there had already been 67 excess deaths of Shipman's female patients aged over 65, before reaching 119 in 1998, when suspicions were first actually raised.\nTrial and imprisonment.\nShipman's trial began at Preston Crown Court on 5 October 1999. He was charged with the murders of fifteen women by lethal injections of diamorphine, all between 1995 and 1998:\nShipman's legal representatives tried unsuccessfully to have the Grundy case tried separately from the others, as a motive was shown by the alleged forgery of Grundy's will.\nOn 31 January 2000, after six days of deliberation, the jury found Shipman guilty of 15 counts of murder and one count of forgery. Mr Justice Forbes subsequently sentenced Shipman to life imprisonment on all 15 counts of murder, with a recommendation that he be subject to a whole life tariff, to be served concurrently with a sentence of four years for forging Grundy's will. On 11 February, 11 days after his conviction, Shipman was struck off the medical register by the General Medical Council (GMC). Two years later, Home Secretary David Blunkett confirmed the judge's whole life tariff, just months before British government ministers lost their power to set minimum terms for prisoners. While authorities could have brought many additional charges, they concluded that a fair hearing would be impossible given the enormous publicity surrounding the original trial. Furthermore, the 15 life sentences already imposed rendered further litigation unnecessary. Shipman became friends with fellow serial killer Peter Moore while in prison.\nShipman denied his guilt, disputing the scientific evidence against him. He never made any public statements about his actions. Shipman's wife, Primrose, maintained that he was not guilty, even after his conviction.\nShipman is the only doctor in the history of British medicine found guilty of murdering his patients. John Bodkin Adams was charged in 1957 with murdering a patient, amid rumours he had killed dozens more over a 10-year period and \"possibly provided the role model for Shipman\"; he was acquitted and no further charges were pursued. A historian, Pamela Cullen, has argued that because of Adams's acquittal, there was no impetus to examine potential flaws in the British legal system until the Shipman case.\nDeath.\nShipman hanged himself in his cell at HM Prison Wakefield on 13 January 2004, the day before his 58th birthday. The Medico Legal Centre in Sheffield performed a post-mortem examination, and an inquest was opened.\nSome of the victims' families said they felt \"cheated\", as Shipman's suicide meant they would never have the satisfaction of a confession, nor answers as to why he committed his crimes. Home Secretary David Blunkett admitted that celebration was tempting: \"You wake up and you receive a call telling you Shipman has topped himself and you think, is it too early to open a bottle? And then you discover that everybody's very upset that he's done it.\"\nShipman's death divided national newspapers, with the \"Daily Mirror\" branding him a \"cold coward\" and condemning the Prison Service for allowing his suicide to occur. However, \"The Sun\" ran a celebratory front-page headline; \"Ship Ship hooray!\" \"The Independent\" called for the inquiry into Shipman's suicide to look more widely at the state of UK prisons as well as the welfare of inmates. In \"The Guardian\", an article by General Sir David Ramsbotham, who had formerly served as Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of Prisons, suggested that whole-life sentencing be replaced by indefinite sentencing, for this would at least give prisoners the hope of eventual release and reduce the risk of their ending their own lives by suicide, as well as making their management easier for prison officials.\nShipman's motive for suicide was never established, though he reportedly told his probation officer that he was considering suicide to assure his wife's financial security after he was stripped of his National Health Service pension. Primrose Shipman received a full NHS pension that she would not have been entitled to if Shipman had lived past the age of 60. Additionally, there was evidence that Primrose, who had consistently protested Shipman's innocence despite the overwhelming evidence, had begun to suspect his guilt. Shipman refused to take part in courses which would have encouraged acknowledgement of his crimes, leading to a temporary removal of privileges, including the right to telephone his wife. During this period, according to Shipman's cellmate, he received a letter from Primrose exhorting him to \"Tell me everything, no matter what.\" A 2005 inquiry found that Shipman's suicide \"could not have been predicted or prevented\", but that procedures should nonetheless be re-examined.\nAfter Shipman's body was released to his family, it remained in Sheffield for more than a year. His widow was advised by police against burying her husband in case the grave was attacked; the body was eventually cremated at Hutcliffe Wood Crematorium, in the city, attended only by Shipman's widow and the couple's four children.\nAftermath.\nIn January 2001, Chris Gregg, a senior West Yorkshire Police detective, was selected to lead an investigation into 22 of the West Yorkshire deaths. Following this, \"The Shipman Inquiry\", submitted in July 2002, concluded that he had killed at least 218 of his patients between 1975 and 1998, during which time he practised in Todmorden (1974\u20131975) and Hyde (1977\u20131998). Janet Smith, the judge who submitted the report, said that there were further deaths about which there was so little evidence that a conclusion on whether they were unlawful killings could not be reached. Most of his victims were elderly women in good health.\nIn her sixth and final report, issued on 24 January 2005, Smith reported that she believed that Shipman had killed three patients, and she had serious suspicions about four further deaths, including that of a four-year-old girl, during the early stage of his medical career at Pontefract General Infirmary. In total, 459 people died while under his care between 1971 and 1998, but it is uncertain how many of those were murder victims, as he was often the only doctor to certify a death. Smith's estimate of Shipman's total victim count over that 27-year period was 250.\nThe GMC charged six doctors who signed cremation forms for Shipman's victims with misconduct on the grounds that they should have noticed the pattern between Shipman's home visits and his patients' deaths; they were all found not guilty. In October 2005 the GMC found two doctors who worked at Tameside General Hospital in 1994 guilty of serious professional misconduct for failing to report their concerns and for giving misleading evidence to the Shipman inquiry. \"The Shipman Inquiry\" recommended changes to the structure of the GMC.\nIn 2005, it came to light that Shipman may have stolen jewellery from his victims. In 1998, police had seized over \u00a310,000 worth of jewellery they found in his garage. In March 2005, when Primrose asked for its return, police wrote to the families of Shipman's victims asking them to identify the jewellery. Unidentified items were handed to the Assets Recovery Agency in May. The investigation ended in August. Authorities returned 66 pieces to Primrose and auctioned 33 pieces that she confirmed were not hers. Proceeds of the auction went to Tameside Victim Support. The only piece returned to a murdered patient's family was a platinum diamond ring, for which the family provided a photograph as proof of ownership.\nA memorial garden to Shipman's victims, called the Garden of Tranquillity, opened in Hyde Park, Hyde, on 30 July 2005. As of early 2009, families of over 200 of the victims of Shipman were still seeking compensation for the loss of their relatives. In September 2009, letters Shipman wrote in prison to friends were to be sold at auction, but following complaints from victims' relatives and the media, the sale was withdrawn.\nShipman effect.\nThe Shipman case, and a series of recommendations in the \"Shipman Inquiry\" report, led to changes to standard medical procedures in the UK (now referred to as the \"Shipman effect\"). Many doctors reported changes in their dispensing practices, and a reluctance to risk overprescribing pain medication may have led to under-prescribing. Death certification practices were altered as well. Perhaps the largest change was the movement from single-doctor general practices to multiple-doctor general practices. This was not a direct recommendation, but rather because the report stated that there was not enough safeguarding and monitoring of doctors' decisions.\nThe forms needed for a cremation in England and Wales have had their questions altered as a direct result of the Shipman case. For example, the person(s) organising the funeral must answer, \"Do you know or suspect that the death of the person who has died was violent or unnatural? Do you consider that there should be any further examination of the remains of the person who has died?\"\nAs of 1 December 2023, Shipman, also nicknamed \"Dr. Death\" and \"The Angel of Death\", is the only British doctor to have been convicted of murdering patients, although other doctors, such as Isyaka Mamman, have been acquitted of similar crimes or convicted of lesser charges and nurses such as Lucy Letby, Beverley Allitt, Colin Norris, Benjamin Geen and Victorino Chua have also been convicted of murdering patients in their care.\nIn media.\n\"Harold and Fred (They Make Ladies Dead)\" was a cartoon strip in a 2001 issue of \"Viz\" comic, also featuring serial killer Fred West. Some relatives of Shipman's victims voiced anger at the cartoon.\n\"\", an ITV television dramatisation of the case, was broadcast in 2002; it starred James Bolam in the title role.\nA documentary also titled \"Harold Shipman: Doctor Death\", with new witness testimony about the serial killer, was shown by ITV as part of its \"Crime &amp; Punishment\" strand on 26 April 2018. The programme was criticised as offering \"little new insight\".\nA play titled \"Beyond Belief \u2013 Scenes from the Shipman Inquiry\", written by Dennis Woolf and directed by Chris Honer, was performed at the Library Theatre, Manchester, from 20 October to 22 November 2004. The script of the play comprised edited verbatim extracts from the Shipman Inquiry, spoken by actors playing the witnesses and lawyers at the inquiry. This provided a \"stark narrative\" that focused on personal tragedies.\nA BBC drama-documentary, entitled \"Harold Shipman\" and starring Ian Brooker in the title role, was broadcast in April 2014.\nThe satirical artist Cold War Steve regularly features Shipman in his work.\n\"The Shipman Files: A Very British Crime Story\", a three-part documentary by Chris Wilson, was broadcast on BBC Two on three consecutive nights between 28 and 30 September 2020, and focussed on Shipman's victims and how he went undetected for so long.\nPodcast episode \"Catching a Killer Doctor\" from the \"Cautionary Tales with Tim Harford\" podcast series features the story of Harold Shipman and how detection could have been made much earlier with good statistical models.\nThe 2005 song \"What About Us?\" by British band the Fall makes explicit reference to the Shipman killings (\"There was a man going round all the time/He was dishing out drugs/He was a doctor/Dishing out morphine to old ladies\"), and the name Shipman is sung as backing vocals during the choruses.\nShipman was a member of the Conservative Party. He was mentioned in the 2022 Wakefield by-election when Conservative candidate Nadeem Ahmed highlighted his local connections, following Shipman's suicide in Wakefield prison, claiming that voters should \"trust Tories like they do GPs after Harold Shipman\".\nIn 2023, DeadHappy, a Leicester-based life insurance firm, was criticised for using an image of Shipman in one of its advertisements. The Advertising Standards Authority received more than 70 complaints about the advert.\nIn 2025, Shipman was referenced in the third episode of series 3 of \"The Traitors\", a reality television game show where \"Faithful\" contestants are tasked with finding and banishing the titular \"Traitors\". During the roundtable discussion, medical doctor Kasim Ahmed was accused of being a Traitor by fellow contestant Jake Brown, who claimed that it would \"make sense\" for Ahmed to \"save lives during the day\" while \"murdering by night\" within the narrative of the show. Ahmed then stated that he believed Brown was \"basically calling [him] Harold Shipman\". This moment caused Shipman to trend on social media.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74983", "revid": "49941225", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74983", "title": "Revolver (Beatles album)", "text": "1966 studio album by the Beatles\nRevolver is the seventh studio album by the English rock band the Beatles. It was released on 5 August 1966, accompanied by the double A-side single \"Eleanor Rigby\" and \"Yellow Submarine\". The album was the Beatles' final recording project before their retirement as live performers and marked the group's most overt use of studio technology to date, building on the advances of their late 1965 release \"Rubber Soul\". It has since become regarded as one of the greatest and most innovative albums in the history of popular music, with recognition centred on its range of musical styles, diverse sounds and lyrical content.\nThe Beatles recorded \"Revolver\" after taking a three-month break at the start of 1966, and during a period when London was feted as the era's cultural capital. Regarded by some commentators as the start of the group's psychedelic period, the songs reflect their interest in the drug LSD, Eastern philosophy and the avant-garde while addressing themes such as death and transcendence of material concerns. With no plans to reproduce their new material in concert, the band made liberal use of automatic double tracking, varispeed, reversed tapes, close audio miking, and instruments outside of their standard live set-up. Among its tracks are \"Tomorrow Never Knows\", incorporating heavy Indian drone and a collage of tape loops; \"Eleanor Rigby\", a song about loneliness featuring a string octet as its only musical backing; and \"Love You To\", a foray into Hindustani classical music. The sessions also produced a non-album single, \"Paperback Writer\", backed with \"Rain\".\nIn the United Kingdom, the album's 14 tracks were gradually distributed to radio stations in the weeks before its release. In North America, \"Revolver\" was reduced to 11 songs by Capitol Records, with the omitted three appearing on the June 1966 LP \"Yesterday and Today\". The release there coincided with the Beatles' final concert tour and the controversy surrounding John Lennon's remark that the band had become \"more popular than Jesus\". The album topped the \"Record Retailer\" chart in the UK for seven weeks and the US \"Billboard\" Top LPs list for six weeks. Critical reaction was highly favourable in the UK but less so in the US amid the press's unease at the band's outspokenness on contemporary issues.\n\"Revolver\" expanded the boundaries of pop music, revolutionised standard practices in studio recording, advanced principles espoused by the 1960s counterculture, and inspired the development of psychedelic rock, electronica, progressive rock and world music. The album cover, designed by Klaus Voormann, combined Aubrey Beardsley-inspired line drawing with photo collage and won the 1967 Grammy Award for Best Album Cover, Graphic Arts. Aided by the 1987 international CD release, which standardised its content to the original Parlophone version, \"Revolver\" has surpassed \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\" (1967) in many critics' estimation as the Beatles' best album. It was ranked first in the 1998 and 2000 editions of Colin Larkin's book \"All Time Top 1000 Albums\" and third in the 2003 and 2012 editions of \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's list of the \"500 Greatest Albums of All Time\". It has been certified double platinum by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) and 5\u00d7 platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). A of the album was released in 2022.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBackground.\nIn December 1965, the Beatles' \"Rubber Soul\" album was released to wide critical acclaim. According to David Howard, the limits of pop music \"had been raised into the stratosphere\" by the release, resulting in a shift in focus away from singles to creating albums of consistently high quality. The following January, the Beatles carried out overdubs on live recordings taken from their 1965 US tour, for inclusion in the concert film \"The Beatles at Shea Stadium\". The group's manager, Brian Epstein, had intended that 1966 would then follow the pattern of the previous two years, in terms of the band making a feature film and an accompanying album, followed by concert tours during the summer months. After the Beatles vetoed the proposed film project, the time allocated for filming became a further three months free of professional engagements. This was the longest period the band members had experienced outside the group collective since 1962, and it defied the convention that pop acts should be working almost continually. The group thereby had an unprecedented amount of time to prepare for a new album.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLiterally anything [could come out of the next recording sessions]. Electronic music, jokes... one thing's for sure \u2013 the next LP is going to be very different.&lt;ref name=\"Sutherland/NMEOrig\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\n\u2013 John Lennon, March 1966\nBeatles biographer Nicholas Schaffner cites 1966 as the start of the band's \"psychedelic period\", as do musicologists Russell Reising and Jim LeBlanc. Schaffner adds: \"That adjective [psychedelic] implies not only the influence of certain mind-altering chemicals, but also the freewheeling spectrum of wide-ranging colors that their new music seemed to evoke.\" Music journalist Carol Clerk describes \"Revolver\" as having been \"decisively informed by acid\", following John Lennon and George Harrison's continued use of the drug LSD since the spring of 1965.&lt;ref name=\"Clerk/Uncut\"&gt; Available at http:// (subscription required).&lt;/ref&gt; Through these experiences, the two musicians developed a fascination for Eastern philosophical concepts, particularly regarding the illusory nature of human existence. Despite his bandmates' urging, after Ringo Starr had also partaken of the drug, Paul McCartney refused to try LSD. Intent on self-improvement, McCartney drew inspiration from the intellectual stimulation he experienced among London's arts scene, particularly its thriving avant-garde community. With Barry Miles as his guide, he became immersed in the nascent British counterculture movement, which soon emerged as the underground.\nWhile arranging dates for the band's world tour, Epstein agreed to a proposal by journalist Maureen Cleave for the Beatles to be interviewed separately for a series of articles that would explore each of the band members' personality and lifestyle beyond his identity as a Beatle. The articles were published in weekly instalments in London's \"Evening Standard\" newspaper throughout March 1966, and reflected the transformation that was underway during the group's months of inactivity. Of the two principal songwriters, Cleave found Lennon to be intuitive, lazy and dissatisfied with fame and his surroundings in the Surrey countryside, while McCartney conveyed confidence and a hunger for knowledge and new creative possibilities. In his book \"Revolver: How the Beatles Reimagined Rock 'n' Roll\", Robert Rodriguez writes that, whereas Lennon had been the Beatles' dominant creative force before \"Revolver\", McCartney now attained an approximately equal position with him. In a further development, Harrison's interest in the music and culture of India, and his study of the Indian sitar, had inspired him as a composer. According to Ian Inglis, \"Revolver\" is widely viewed as \"the album on which Harrison came of age as a songwriter\".\nRecording history.\nThe Beatles had hoped to work in a more modern facility than EMI's London studios at Abbey Road and were impressed with the sound on records created at Stax Studio in Memphis. In March 1966, Epstein investigated the possibility of their recording the new album at Stax, where, according to a letter written by Harrison two months later, the group intended to work with producer Jim Stewart. The idea was abandoned after locals began descending on the Stax building, as were alternative plans to use either Atlantic Studios in New York or Motown's Hitsville USA facility in Detroit.\nRecording for the album instead began at EMI Studio 3 in London on 6 April, with George Martin again serving as producer. The first track attempted was Lennon's \"Tomorrow Never Knows\", the arrangement for which changed considerably between the initial take that day and the subsequent remake. This first version of \"Tomorrow Never Knows\", along with several other outtakes from the album sessions, was included on the 1996 compilation \"Anthology 2\". Also recorded during the \"Revolver\" sessions were \"Paperback Writer\" and \"Rain\", which were issued as the A and B-side of a non-album single in late May.\nThe band had worked on ten songs, including both sides of the upcoming single, by 1 May, when they interrupted the sessions to perform at the \"NME\"'s annual Poll-Winners Concert. At a time when \"Time\" magazine dubbed London \"the Swinging City\", belatedly recognising its ascendance as the era's cultural capital, the Beatles drew inspiration from attending concerts by visiting artists, as well as film premieres, plays and other cultural events. From February through June, these musical acts included Stevie Wonder, Roy Orbison, the Lovin' Spoonful, the Mamas &amp; the Papas, Bob Dylan (with whom they socialised extensively), Luciano Berio and Ravi Shankar. During mid-May, Lennon and McCartney attended a private listening party for the Beach Boys' \"Pet Sounds\" album, and McCartney met Italian director Michelangelo Antonioni, who filmed \"Blowup\" in London, inspired by the contemporary fashion scene.\nOn 16 May, Epstein responded to a request from Capitol Records, EMI's North American counterpart, to supply three new songs for an upcoming US release, titled \"Yesterday and Today\". Issued on 20 June, this album combined tracks that Capitol had omitted from the Beatles' previous US releases with songs that the band had originally issued on non-album singles. From the six completed recordings for \"Revolver\", Martin selected three Lennon-written songs, since the sessions had favoured his compositions thus far. Keen to limit the interruption to recording that multiple television appearances would create, the Beatles spent two days making promotional films for the \"Paperback Writer\" single. The first set of clips was filmed at EMI Studio 1 on 19 May by Michael Lindsay-Hogg, director of the popular TV show \"Ready Steady Go!\" The following day, the group shot further clips for the two songs in the grounds of Chiswick House, in west London. In the face of fans' complaints of an aloofness in their new work, however, the band conceded to making a live appearance on \"Top of the Pops\" on 16 June.\nThe camaraderie among the four Beatles was at its highest throughout this period. A disagreement between McCartney and his bandmates nevertheless resulted in McCartney walking out of the studio during the final session, for Lennon's \"She Said She Said\", on 21 June, two days before the band were due to fly to West Germany for the first leg of their world tour. The Beatles spent over 220 hours recording \"Revolver\" \u2013 a figure that excludes mixing sessions, and compares with less than 80 hours for \"Rubber Soul\". Final mixing of the album took place on 22 June. The Beatles celebrated the project's completion by attending the opening of Sibylla's, a nightclub in which Harrison had a financial stake.\nProduction techniques.\nStudio aesthetic.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Revolver\" very rapidly became the album where the Beatles would say, \"OK, that sounds great, now let's play [the recording] backwards or speeded up or slowed down.\" They tried everything backwards, just to see what things sounded like.\n \u2013 EMI recording engineer Geoff Emerick\nThe sessions for \"Revolver\" furthered the spirit of studio experimentation that was evident on \"Rubber Soul\". With the Beatles increasingly involved in the production of their music, Martin's role as producer had changed to one of a facilitator and collaborator, whereby the band now relied on him to make their ideas a reality.&lt;ref name=\"Sheffield/RS 50th\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; According to Robert Rodriguez, \"Revolver\" marked the first time the Beatles integrated studio technology into the \"conception of the recordings they made\". He views this approach as reflective of the group's waning interest in live performance before crowds of screaming fans, \"in favor of creating soundscapes without limitation\" in a studio environment. For the first time at EMI Studios, the company's four-track tape machines were placed in the studio's control room, alongside the producer and balance engineer, rather than in a dedicated machine room. The Beatles' new recording engineer on the project was nineteen-year-old Geoff Emerick, whom the critic Ian MacDonald describes as an \"English audio experimentalist\" in the tradition of Joe Meek. Emerick recalled that no preproduction or rehearsal process took place for \"Revolver\"; instead, the band used the studio to create each song from what was often just an outline of a composition. Speaking shortly before the start of the sessions, Lennon said that they had considered making the album a continuous flow of tracks, without gaps to differentiate between each song.\nThe group's willingness to experiment was also evident in their dedication to finding or inventing sounds that captured the heightened perception they experienced through hallucinogenic drugs. The album made liberal use of compression and tonal equalisation. Emerick said that the Beatles encouraged the studio staff to break from standard recording practices, adding: \"It was implanted when we started \"Revolver\" that every instrument should sound unlike itself: a piano shouldn't sound like a piano, a guitar shouldn't sound like a guitar.\"&lt;ref name=\"Irvin/Tomorrow\"&gt;Irvin, Jim. \"Into Tomorrow\". In: .&lt;/ref&gt;\nIn their search for new sounds, the band incorporated musical instruments such as the Indian tambura and tabla, and clavichord, vibraphone and tack piano into their work for the first time. The guitar sound on the album was more robust than before, through the use of new Fender amplifiers; the choice of guitars, which included Harrison using a Gibson SG as his preferred instrument; and the introduction of Fairchild 660 limiters for recording.&lt;ref name=\"Scapelliti/GW\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; With no expectations of being able to re-create their new music within the confines of their live shows, the Beatles increasingly used outside contributors while making the album. This included the band's first use of a horn section, on \"Got to Get You into My Life\", and the first time they incorporated sound effects extensively, during a party-style overdubbing session for \"Yellow Submarine\".\nInnovations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThere are sounds [on \"Revolver\"] that nobody else has done yet \u2013 I mean nobody\u00a0... ever.\n\u2013 Paul McCartney, 1966\nMark Brend writes that, with \"Revolver\", the Beatles advanced Meek's strategy of employing the recording studio as a musical instrument and \"formalized this approach into what is now an accepted option for pop music making\". A key production technique they used was automatic double tracking (ADT), which EMI technical engineer Ken Townsend invented on 6 April. This technique employed two linked tape recorders to automatically create a doubled vocal track. The standard method had been to double the vocal by singing the same piece twice onto a multitrack tape, a task Lennon particularly disliked. The Beatles were delighted with the invention, and used it extensively on \"Revolver\". ADT soon became a standard pop production technique, and led to related developments such as the artificial chorus effect.\nThe band's most experimental work during the sessions was channelled into the first song they attempted, \"Tomorrow Never Knows\". Lennon sang his vocal for the song through the twin revolving speakers inside a Leslie cabinet, which was designed for use with a Hammond organ. The effect was employed throughout the initial take of the song but only during the second half of the remake. According to Andy Babiuk, \"Tomorrow Never Knows\" marked the first time that a vocal was recorded using a microphone wired into the input of a Leslie speaker. Much of the backing track for the song consists of a series of prepared tape loops, an idea that originated with McCartney and was influenced by the work of avant-garde artists such as Karlheinz Stockhausen who regularly experimented with magnetic tape and musique concr\u00e8te techniques. The Beatles each prepared loops at home, and a selection of these sounds were then added to the musical backing of \"Tomorrow Never Knows\". The process was carried out live, with multiple tape recorders running simultaneously, and some of the longer loops extending out of the control room and down the corridor.\nThe inclusion of reversed tape sounds on \"Rain\" (specifically, a portion of Lennon's vocal part) marked the first pop release to use this technique, although the Beatles had first used it in some of the tape loops and the overdubbed guitar solo on \"Tomorrow Never Knows\". The backwards (or backmasked) guitar solo on \"I'm Only Sleeping\" was similarly unprecedented in pop music, in that Harrison deliberately composed and recorded his guitar parts with a view to how the notes would sound when the tape direction was corrected. Experimentation with backwards sounds was a key aspect of the \"Revolver\" sessions, as was the use of the Leslie speaker effect. The band's interest in the tones that resulted from varying tape speed (or varispeeding) extended to recording a basic track at a faster tempo than they intended the song to sound on disc.\nDuring the sessions, Emerick recorded McCartney's bass guitar amplifier via a loudspeaker, which Townsend had reconfigured to serve as a microphone, in order to give the bass more prominence than on previous Beatles releases. Although this particular technique was used only on the two songs selected for the May 1966 single, an enhanced bass sound was a feature of much of the album. Emerick also ensured a greater presence for Starr's bass drum, by inserting an item of clothing inside the structure, to dampen the sound, and then moving the microphone to just 3 inches from the drumhead and compressing the signal through a Fairchild limiter. MacDonald writes that although EMI Studios was technically inferior to many recording facilities in the United States, Starr's drumming on the album soon led to studios there \"being torn apart and put back together again\", as engineers sought to replicate the innovative sounds achieved by the Beatles. The preference for close-miking instruments extended to the orchestral strings used on \"Eleanor Rigby\", to achieve McCartney's request for a \"really biting\" sound, and the horns on \"Got to Get You into My Life\". This was another break from convention, and alarmed the classically trained string players.\nKevin Ryan and Brian Kehew wrote that the \"Revolver\" sessions introduced nine techniques to the recording world, including ADT, backwards recording, and close-miked drums. They quote Emerick as saying: \"I know for a fact that, from the day it came out, \"Revolver\" changed the way that everyone else made records.\"\nSongs.\nOverview.\nSteve Turner writes that \"Revolver\" encapsulates not only \"the spirit of the times\" but the network of progressive social and cultural thinkers in which the Beatles had recently become immersed in London. According to Reising and LeBlanc, along with \"Rain\", it marks the start of the band's body of work embracing psychedelia, which continued through \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\", \"Magical Mystery Tour\" and the new songs recorded in 1967 for the animated film \"Yellow Submarine\", together with their singles over those two years. The authors view Lennon and Harrison's compositions as the most overtly psychedelic and find the genre's traits evident in the album's instrumentation and soundscapes, and in its lyrical imagery. Music critic Jim DeRogatis views the LP as an early work in the psychedelic rock genre, which accompanied the emergence of counterculture ideology in the 1960s.\nThrough its individual tracks, \"Revolver\" covers a wide range of styles, including acid rock, chamber music, R&amp;B, raga rock, musique concr\u00e8te, as well as standard contemporary rock and pop. In Rodriguez's view, the influence of Indian music permeates the album. Aside from the sounds and vocal styling used on much of the recording, this influence is evident in the limited chord changes in some of the songs, suggesting an Indian-style drone. According to cultural historian Simon Philo, \"Revolver\" contained \"[the] most sustained deployment of Indian instruments, musical form and even religious philosophy\" heard in popular music up to that time. Writing for \"Slate\", Jack Hamilton calls the album's music \"avante-garde R&amp;B\", showcasing the musicians' debt to African-American music.\nIn its lyrical themes, the album marks a radical departure from the Beatles' past work, as a large majority of the songs avoid the subject of love. According to Reising and LeBlanc, the lyrics on this and the band's later psychedelic records capture the psychedelic culture's belief in the truth-revealing qualities of LSD over the illusions of bourgeois thinking; reject materialism in favour of Asian-inspired spirituality; and explore the overlap in meaning between a \"trip\" and travelling, resulting in narratives in which time and space become blurred. Where the songs do present as love songs, the authors continue, love is often conveyed as a unifying force among many, rather than between two individuals, or as a \"way of life\".\nCritic Kenneth Womack writes of the Beatles exploring \"phenomenologies of consciousness\" on \"Revolver\", and he cites as examples \"I'm Only Sleeping\"'s preoccupation with dreams and the references to death in the lyrics to \"Tomorrow Never Knows\". In Womack's estimation, the songs represent two important elements of the human life cycle that are \"philosophical opposites\". Echoing this point, music critic Tim Riley writes that, just as \"embracing life means accepting death\", the fourteen tracks \"link a disillusioned view of the modern world... with a belief in metaphysical transcendence\". Philo finds the Beatles' \"countercultural engagement\" evident on even the songs that present as standard pop. In Reising's view, all the songs on \"Revolver\" are linked, in that each line in \"Tomorrow Never Knows\", the closing track, is alluded to or explored in the lyrics to one or more of the tracks that precede it.\nSide one.\n\"Taxman\".\nHarrison wrote \"Taxman\" as a protest against the high marginal tax rates paid by top earners like the Beatles, which, under Harold Wilson's Labour government, amounted to 95 per cent of unearned income (i.e. interest on savings and investments) above the top threshold. The song's spoken count-in is out of tempo with the performance that follows, a device that Riley credits with establishing the \"new studio aesthetic of \"Revolver\"\". Harrison's vocals on the track were treated with heavy compression and ADT. In addition to playing a glissandi-inflected bass part reminiscent of Motown's James Jamerson, McCartney performed the song's guitar solo. The latter section was also edited onto the end of the original recording, ensuring that the track closed with the solo reprised over a fadeout. Rodriguez recognises \"Taxman\" as the first Beatles song written about \"topical concerns\"; he also cites its \"abrasive sneer\" as a precursor to the 1970s punk rock movement. Completed with input from Lennon, the lyrics refer by name to Wilson, who had just been re-elected as prime minister in the 1966 general election, and Edward Heath, the Conservative Leader of the Opposition.\n\"Eleanor Rigby\".\nWomack describes McCartney's \"Eleanor Rigby\" as a \"narrative about the perils of loneliness\". The story involves the title character, who is an ageing spinster, and a lonely priest named Father McKenzie who writes \"sermon[s] that no one will hear\". He presides over Rigby's funeral and acknowledges that despite his efforts, \"no one was saved\". The first McCartney composition to depart from the themes of a standard love song, its lyrics were the product of a group effort, with Harrison, Starr, Lennon and the latter's friend Pete Shotton all contributing. While Lennon and Harrison supplied harmonies beside McCartney's lead vocal, no Beatle played on the recording; instead, Martin arranged the track for a string octet, drawing inspiration from Bernard Herrmann's 1960 film score for Alfred Hitchcock's \"Psycho\". In Riley's opinion, \"the corruption of 'Taxman' and the utter finality of Eleanor's fate makes the world of \"Revolver\" more ominous than any other pair of opening songs could.\"\n\"I'm Only Sleeping\".\nPeter Doggett describes \"I'm Only Sleeping\" as \"Half acid dream, half latent Lennon laziness personified.\" As with \"Rain\", the basic track was recorded at a faster tempo before being subjected to varispeeding. The latter treatment, along with ADT, was also applied to Lennon's vocal as he sought to replicate, in MacDonald's description, a \"papery old man's voice\". For the guitar solo, Harrison recorded two separate lines: the first with a clean sound, while on the second, he played his Gibson SG through a fuzzbox. Beatles biographer Jonathan Gould views the solo as appearing to \"suspend the laws of time and motion to simulate the half-coherence of the state between wakefulness and sleep\". Musicologist Walter Everett likens the song to a \"particularly expressive text painting\".\n\"Love You To\".\n\"Love You To\" marked Harrison's first foray into Hindustani classical music as a composer, following his introduction of the sitar on \"Norwegian Wood\" in 1965. He recorded the track with only minimal contributions from Starr and McCartney, and no input from Lennon; Indian musicians from the Asian Music Circle provided instrumentation such as tabla, tambura and sitar. Peter Lavezzoli recognises the song as \"the first conscious attempt in pop to emulate a non-Western form of music in structure and instrumentation\". Aside from playing sitar on the track, Harrison's contributions included fuzztone-effected electric guitar. Everett identifies the song's change of metre as unprecedented in the Beatles' work and a characteristic that would go on to feature prominently on \"Sgt. Pepper\". Partly influenced by Harrison's use of LSD, the lyrics address the singer's desire for \"immediate sexual gratification\", according to Womack, and serve as a \"rallying call to accept our inner hedonism and release our worldly inhibitions\".\n\"Here, There and Everywhere\".\n\"Here, There and Everywhere\" is a ballad that McCartney wrote towards the end of the \"Revolver\" sessions. His inspiration for the song was the Beach Boys' \"Pet Sounds\" track \"God Only Knows\", which, in turn, Brian Wilson had been inspired to write after repeatedly listening to \"Rubber Soul\". McCartney's double-tracked vocal was treated with varispeeding, resulting in a higher pitch at playback. The song's opening lines are sung in free time before its 4/4 time signature is established; according to Everett, \"nowhere else does a Beatles introduction so well prepare a listener for the most striking and expressive tonal events that lie ahead.\" Womack characterises the song as a romantic ballad \"about living in the here and now\" and \"fully experiencing the conscious moment\". He notes that, with the preceding track, \"Love You To\", the album expresses \"corresponding examinations of the human experience of physical and romantic love\".\n\"Yellow Submarine\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe songs got more interesting, so with that the effects got more interesting. I think the drugs were kicking in a little more heavily on this album\u00a0... [Al]though we did take certain substances, we never did it to a great extent at the session. We were really hard workers.\n \u2013 Ringo Starr, 2000\nMcCartney and Lennon wrote \"Yellow Submarine\" as a children's song and for Starr's vocal spot on the album. The lyrics were written with assistance from Scottish singer Donovan and tell of life on a sea voyage accompanied by friends. Gould considers the song's childlike qualities to be \"deceptive\" and that, once in the studio, it became \"a sophisticated sonic pastiche\".\nOn 1 June, the Beatles and some of their friends enhanced the festive nautical atmosphere by adding sounds such as chains, bells, whistles, tubs of water and clinking glasses, all sourced from Studio 2's trap room. To fill the portion after the lyrics refer to a brass band playing, Martin and Emerick used a recording from EMI's library, splicing up the taped copy and rearranging the melody. Lennon shouted part of the mid-song ship's orders in an echo chamber. In the final verse, he repeats Starr's vocal lines in a manner that Gould likens to \"an old vaudevillian with the crowd in the palm of his hand\". Riley recognises the song as mixing the comedy of \"The Goon Show\" with the satire of Spike Jones. Donovan later said that \"Yellow Submarine\" represented the Beatles' predicament as prisoners of their international fame, to which they reacted by singing an uplifting, communal song.\n\"She Said She Said\".\nThe light atmosphere of \"Yellow Submarine\" is broken by what Riley terms \"the outwardly harnessed, but inwardly raging guitar\" that introduces Lennon's \"She Said She Said\". The song marks the second time that a Beatles arrangement used a shifting metre, after \"Love You To\", as the foundation of 4/4 briefly switches to 3/4. Harrison recalled that he helped Lennon finish the composition, which involved joining three separate fragments of song. Having walked out of the session, McCartney may or may not have contributed bass guitar to the recording. In addition to lead guitar and harmony vocals, Harrison possibly performed the bass guitar part.&lt;ref name=\"Howlett/Revolver\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The lyric was inspired in part by a conversation that Lennon and Harrison had with actor Peter Fonda in Los Angeles in August 1965, while all three, along with Starr and members of the Byrds, were under the influence of LSD. During the conversation, Fonda commented, \"I know what it's like to be dead\", because as a child he had technically died during an operation.\nSide two.\n\"Good Day Sunshine\".\n\"Good Day Sunshine\" was written by McCartney, whose piano playing dominates the recording. The track was one of several contemporary songs that evoked the unusually hot and sunny English summer of 1966. Music critic Richie Unterberger describes it as a song that conveys \"one of the first fine days of spring, just after you've fallen in love or started a vacation\". The verses reflect aspects of vaudeville, while McCartney also acknowledged the influence of the Lovin' Spoonful on the composition.&lt;ref name=\"Unterberger/AM\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Overdubbed by Martin, the piano solo on the track recalls the ragtime style of Scott Joplin. The song ends with group harmonies repeating the title phrase, creating an effect that Riley likens to a \"cascade\" of voices \"enter[ing] from different directions, like sun peeping through the trees\".\n\"And Your Bird Can Sing\".\n\"And Your Bird Can Sing\" was written primarily by Lennon, with McCartney saying he helped on the lyric and estimating the song as \"80\u201320\" to Lennon. Harrison and McCartney played dual lead-guitar parts on the recording, including an ascending riff that Riley terms \"magnetic\u00a0... everything sticks to it\". Riley describes the composition as a \"shaded putdown\" in the style of Dylan's \"Positively 4th Street\", whereby Lennon sings to someone who has seen \"seven wonders\" yet is unable to empathise with him and his feelings of isolation. According to Gould, the song was directed at Frank Sinatra after Lennon had read a hagiographic article on the singer, in \"Esquire\" magazine, in which Sinatra was lauded as \"the fully emancipated male\u00a0... the man who can have anything he wants\".\n\"For No One\".\n\"For No One\" was inspired by McCartney's relationship with English actress Jane Asher. Along with \"Good Day Sunshine\", which similarly dispensed with guitar parts for Harrison and Lennon, Rodriguez cites the track as an example of McCartney eschewing the group dynamic when recording his songs, a trend that would prove unpopular with his bandmates in later years. The recording features McCartney playing piano, bass and clavichord, accompanied by Starr on drums and percussion. The French horn solo was added by Alan Civil, the principal horn player for the Philharmonia Orchestra, who recalled having to \"busk\" his part, with little guidance from McCartney or Martin at the overdubbing session. While recognising McCartney's \"customary logic\" in the song's musical structure, MacDonald comments on the sense of detachment conveyed in the lyrics to this \"curiously phlegmatic account of the end of an affair\". MacDonald suggests that McCartney was attempting to employ the same \"dry cinematic eye\" that director John Schlesinger had adopted in his 1965 film \"Darling\".\n\"Doctor Robert\".\n\"Doctor Robert\" was written by Lennon, although McCartney has since stated he co-authored it. A guitar-based rock song in the style of \"And Your Bird Can Sing\", its lyrics celebrate a New York physician known for dispensing amphetamine injections to his patients. On the recording, the hard-driving performance is interrupted by two bridge sections where, over harmonium and chiming guitar chords, the group vocals suggest a choir praising the doctor for his services.\n\"I Want to Tell You\".\nHarrison said he wrote \"I Want to Tell You\" about \"the avalanche of thoughts\" that he found hard to express in words. Supporting the lyrics, his stammering guitar riff, combined with the dissonance employed in the song's melody, conveys the difficulties of achieving meaningful communication. The prominent backing vocals from Lennon and McCartney include Indian-style gamak ornamentation in McCartney's high harmony, similar to the melisma effect used in \"Love You To\". Reising and LeBlanc cite the song as an early example of how from 1966 onwards the Beatles' lyrics \"adopted an urgent tone, intent on channeling some essential knowledge, the psychological and/or philosophical epiphanies of LSD experience\" to their increasingly aware audience. According to academic Nick Bromell, \"I Want to Tell You\" and the next two tracks on \"Revolver\" are the first examples of pop music \"giving voice to the complexities of the breakthrough experience\" afforded by LSD and other psychedelic drugs.\n\"Got to Get You into My Life\".\nDescribed by Riley as the album's \"most derivative cut\", \"Got to Get You into My Life\" was influenced by the Motown Sound and written by McCartney after he had seen Stevie Wonder perform at the Scotch of St James nightclub in February. The horn players on the track included members of Georgie Fame's group, the Blue Flames. To capture the desired sound, microphones were placed in the bells of the brass instruments, and the signals were heavily limited. A month later, a tape copy of these horn parts was superimposed with a slight delay, thereby doubling the presence of the brass contributions. Rodriguez terms the completed track \"an R&amp;B-styled shouter\". Although cast in the form of a love song, McCartney described the lyric as \"an ode to pot, like someone else might write an ode to chocolate or a good claret\". The initial version of the song, as issued on \"Anthology 2\", featured acoustic backing and organ, and a harmonised refrain of \"I need your love\", which was replaced by Harrison's guitar break on the more uptempo remake.\n\"Tomorrow Never Knows\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis is easily the most amazing new thing we've ever come up with. Some people might say it sounds like a terrible mess of a sound... But the song ought to be looked on as interesting \u2013 if people listen to it with open ears. It's like the Indian stuff. You mustn't listen to Eastern music with a Western ear.\n\u2013 George Harrison, October 1966\nRodriguez describes Lennon's \"Tomorrow Never Knows\" as \"the greatest leap into the future\" of the Beatles' recording career up to this point. The recording includes reverse guitar, processed vocals, and looped tape effects, accompanying a strongly syncopated, repetitive drum-beat. Lennon adapted the lyrics from Timothy Leary's book \"The Psychedelic Experience: A Manual Based on The Tibetan Book of the Dead\", which equates the realisations brought about through LSD with the spiritually enlightened state achieved through meditation. Originally known as \"Mark I\", and then briefly \"The Void\", the eventual title came via one of Starr's malapropisms.\nLennon intended the track as an evocation of a Tibetan Buddhist ceremony. The song's harmonic structure is derived from Indian music and is based on a high-volume C drone played by Harrison on a tambura. Over the foundation of tambura, bass and drums, the five tape loops comprise various manipulated sounds: two separate sitar passages, played backwards and sped up; an orchestra sounding a B\u266d chord; McCartney's laughter, sped up to resemble a seagull's cry; and a Mellotron played on either its flute, string or brass setting. The Leslie speaker treatment applied to Lennon's vocal originated from his request that Martin make him sound like he was the Dalai Lama singing from the top of a high mountain. Reising describes \"Tomorrow Never Knows\" as the inspiration for an album that \"illuminates a path dedicated to personal freedom and mind expansion\". He views the song's message as a precursor to the more explicitly political statements the Beatles would make over the next two years, in \"All You Need Is Love\" and \"Revolution\".\nNorth American format.\n\"I'm Only Sleeping\", \"And Your Bird Can Sing\" and \"Doctor Robert\" were the tracks omitted from Capitol's version of \"Revolver\". In the case of \"I'm Only Sleeping\", the version issued on \"Yesterday and Today\" was a different mix from that included on EMI's \"Revolver\". Due to the exclusion of the three Lennon tracks, there were only two songs on the Capitol release for which he was the principal writer, compared with three by Harrison and six by McCartney. In Riley's opinion, aside from underplaying Lennon's contribution, his voice is thereby confined to a \"sudden swing to the surreal\" at the end of each LP side, which distorts the intended mood across the album.\nThe eleven-song North American LP was the band's tenth album on Capitol Records and twelfth US album in total. The release of \"Revolver\" marked the last time that Capitol issued an altered UK Beatles album for the North American market. When the Beatles re-signed with EMI in January 1967, their contract stipulated that Capitol could no longer alter the track listings of their albums.\nPackaging.\nArtwork.\nThe cover for \"Revolver\" was created by German-born bassist and artist Klaus Voormann, one of the Beatles' oldest friends from their time in Hamburg during the early 1960s. Voormann's artwork was part line drawing and part collage, using photographs mostly taken over 1964\u201365 by Robert Freeman. In his line drawings of the four Beatles (McCartney, Lennon, Harrison and Starr, clockwise from top-left), Voormann drew inspiration from the work of the nineteenth-century illustrator Aubrey Beardsley, who was the subject of a long-running exhibition at London's Victoria and Albert Museum in 1966 and highly influential on fashion and design themes of the time. Voormann placed the various photos within the tangle of hair that connects the four faces. Turner writes that the drawings show each Beatle \"in another state of consciousness\", such that the older images appear to be tumbling out from them.\nVoormann's aim was to reflect the radical departure in sound represented, particularly by \"Tomorrow Never Knows\",&lt;ref name=\"Stummer/Guardian\"&gt;Stummer, Robin (23 July 2016). https:// . \"The Observer\"\u200a/theguardian.com. Retrieved 26 June 2017.&lt;/ref&gt; and his choice of a black-and-white cover was in deliberate defiance of the preference for vivid colour. When he submitted his work to the Beatles, Epstein wept, overjoyed that Voormann had managed to capture the experimental tone of the Beatles' new music. Voormann also designed a series of four images, titled \"Wood Face\", \"Wool Face\", \"Triangle Face\" and \"Sun Face\", which appeared on the front of the Northern Songs sheet music for each of the album's songs.\nThe LP's back cover included a photograph of the Beatles, in Riley's description, \"shaded by the hip modesty of sunglasses and cigarette smoke\". The photo was part of a series taken by Robert Whitaker during the filming at Abbey Road on 19 May and demonstrated the Beatles' adoption of fashions from boutiques that had recently opened in Chelsea, rather than the Carnaby Street designers they had favoured previously. From these Chelsea boutiques, Lennon wore a long-collared paisley shirt from Granny Takes a Trip, while Harrison was dressed in a wide-lapelled velvet jacket designed by Hung on You. Turner views the selection of attire as reflective of the Beatles \"still dressing similarly yet with an individual stamp\"; he identifies the choice of sunglasses as another example of a unified yet personalised look, whereby the styles ranged from oblong-shaped lenses, for Lennon, to an oval-shaped pair worn by Starr. Gould, who describes Starr's glasses as \"ludicrously bug-eyed\", considers the cover design to be consistent with the \"break with the past\" ethos that had guided the album's creation.\nDuring the same photo shoot, Whitaker took pictures of the Beatles examining orange transparencies of his \"butcher cover\" design for \"Yesterday and Today\". The latter image proved instantly controversial in America due to its depiction of dismembered baby dolls and raw meat.\nTitle.\nThe album's title, like that of \"Rubber Soul\", is a pun, referring to both a kind of handgun and the \"revolving\" motion of a record as it plays on a turntable. Gould views the title as a \"McLuhanesque pun\", since, more so than on their previous albums, the focus of \"Revolver\" appears to rotate from one Beatle to another with each song.\nThe group had originally wanted to call the album \"Abracadabra\", until they discovered that another band had already used it. When discussing possible alternatives, during their German tour, Lennon opted for \"Four Sides to the Circle\" in response to McCartney's \"Magic Circle\", and Starr jokingly suggested \"After Geography\", a play on the title of the Rolling Stones' recently released \"Aftermath\" LP. Other suggestions included \"Bubble and Squeak\", \"Beatles on Safari\", \"Freewheelin' Beatles\" and \"Pendulum\" before the band settled on \"Revolver\". They confirmed their choice in a telegram to EMI, sent from the Tokyo Hilton on 2 July.\nRelease.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWe'll lose some fans with [the new album], but we'll also gain some. The fans we'll probably lose will be the ones who like the things about us that we never liked anyway...\n\u2013 Paul McCartney, June 1966\nIn mid-May 1966, Tony Hall of \"Record Mirror\" wrote a preview of the Beatles' new recordings in which he opined that some of them were \"the most revolutionary ever made by a pop group\". While avoiding mention of the official song titles, he highlighted Lennon's \"The Void\" for its electronic effects, along with a \"McCartney song about lonely people\" set to string orchestration, and a \"Harrison number on which he plays a long exotic solo on sitar\". In Britain, EMI gradually distributed the album's songs to radio stations throughout July \u2013 a strategy that MacDonald describes as \"building anticipation for what would clearly be a radical new phase in the group's recording career\". \"Revolver\" was released there on 5 August and on 8 August in the United States. \"Eleanor Rigby\" was issued as a double A-side single with \"Yellow Submarine\". The pairing of a ballad devoid of any instrumentation played by a Beatle and a novelty song marked a significant departure from the usual content of the band's singles.\nSchaffner likens the Beatles' 1966 recordings to the moment of transformation in the film \"The Wizard of Oz\", \"where, when Dorothy discovers herself transported from Kansas to Oz, the film dramatically changes from black-and-white to glorious technicolor\". The album appeared a year before psychedelic drugs became a phenomenon in youth culture, and it was the source of confusion for the group's more conservative fans. A female writer later complained in \"Beatles Monthly\" that 1966 represented the end of \"The Beatles we used to know before they went stark, raving mad\". In this way, \"Revolver\" marked the start of a change in the Beatles' core audience, as their young, female-dominated fanbase gave way to a following that increasingly comprised more serious-minded, male listeners.\nThe release coincided with a period of public relations challenges for the band, the combination of which led to their decision to retire from touring following the end of their North American tour, on 29 August. In the US, the album's release was a secondary event to the controversy surrounding the recent publication there of Cleave's interview with Lennon, in which he remarked that the Beatles had become \"more popular than Jesus\". This episode followed the unfavourable reaction to the \"Yesterday and Today\" butcher sleeve, from the press, radio stations and retail outlets. As a result, at press conferences during the tour, questions were typically focused on religious matters rather than the band's new music. In addition, the group were vocal in their opposition to the Vietnam War, a stand that further redefined their public image in the US. The Beatles did not attempt to perform any of the songs from \"Revolver\" during the tour.\nReporting on \"Swinging London\" for \"The Village Voice\", Richard Goldstein said that, as if in response to the antagonism being shown towards the band in the US, \"British youth has flipped completely over the new Beatle album, \"Revolver\".\"&lt;ref name=\"Goldstein/VV\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Howard Sounes writes that, amid the fine weather of the 1966 summer and England's recent win in the World Cup, \"Revolver\" was the nation's \"soundtrack album of the season\".\nCommercial performance.\nIn the UK, where \"Eleanor Rigby\" was the favoured side, the single became the best-selling song of 1966, after topping the national chart for four weeks during August and September. On \"Record Retailer\"'s LPs chart (later the UK Albums Chart), \"Revolver\" entered at number 1 and stayed there for seven weeks during its 34-week run in the top 40. On the national chart compiled by \"Melody Maker\", the album was number 1 for nine weeks. By October, at least ten of the LP's songs had been covered by other artists and reviewed by \"Melody Maker\". Among these, Cliff Bennett and the Rebel Rousers' version of \"Got to Get You into My Life\", which McCartney co-produced, was a top ten hit. McCartney's ballads \"Here, There and Everywhere\" and \"For No One\" became highly popular among mainstream recording artists. In the UK, \"Revolver\" was the second highest-selling album of 1966, behind \"The Sound of Music\".&lt;ref name=\"Mawer/1966\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In the \"NME\" readers' poll for 1966, \"Revolver\" and \"Pet Sounds\" were jointly recognised as the magazine's \"Album of the Year\".\nIn America, Capitol were wary of the religious references in \"Eleanor Rigby\", given the ongoing controversy, and instead pushed \"Yellow Submarine\". The latter peaked at number 2 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, making it, in Gould's description, \"the first 'designated' Beatles single since 1963\" not to top that chart. On the \"Billboard\" Top LPs chart, \"Revolver\" hit number 1 on 10 September, a week after the end of \"Yesterday and Today\"'s five-week run at the top. The Beatles were presented with gold discs from the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), recognising the album as a \"million seller\", during their 24 August press conference at the Capitol Tower in Hollywood. \"Revolver\" was number 1 there for six weeks and remained on the chart until mid February 1968. In March 1967, \"Revolver\" was nominated for the Grammy Award for Album of the Year. Voormann's cover design won the Grammy for Best Album Cover, Graphic Arts.\nBased on retail sales up to early October 1966, \"Revolver\" was the eighth-highest-selling album of the year in the US. Although commercially successful, it ranked only equal tenth (with \"Help!\") on the list of the Beatles' biggest-selling albums in the US, as supplied by Allen Klein in 1970. According to figures published in 2009 by former Capitol executive David Kronemyer, further to estimates he gave in \"MuseWire\" magazine, the album had sold 1,187,869 copies in the US by 31 December 1966 and 1,725,276 copies by the end of the decade.\nThe April 1987 CD release of \"Revolver\" standardised the track listing to the original UK version. \"Revolver\" returned to the UK Albums Chart the following month, peaking at number 55, while the 2009 remastered album reached number 9. In 2013, after the British Phonographic Industry altered its sales award protocol, the album was certified Platinum based on UK sales since 1994. In January 2014, the Capitol version of \"Revolver\" was issued on CD for the first time, both as part of the Beatles' \"U.S. Albums\" box set and as an individual release. As of that year, \"Revolver\" had been certified 5\u00d7 Platinum by the RIAA.\nCritical reception.\nContemporary reviews.\nIn Britain, the reception to \"Revolver\" was highly favourable. Having found \"Rubber Soul\" \"almost monotonous\" at times, \"Melody Maker\" lauded the new release, saying it was a work that would \"change the direction of pop music\". The reviewer highlighted its \"electronic effects\", McCartney's \"penchant for the classics\" and Harrison's \"stunning use of the sitar\" as diverse elements that distinguished the LP as a group effort, such that the four band members' \"individual personalities are now showing through loud and clear\". The writer concluded: \"this is a brilliant album which underlines once and for all that the Beatles have definitely broken the bounds of what we used to call pop.\" Peter Clayton, a jazz critic for \"Gramophone\" magazine, described it as \"an astonishing collection\" that defied easy categorisation since much of the LP had no precedent in the context of pop music. Clayton concluded: \"if there's anything wrong with the record at all it is that such a diet of newness might give the ordinary pop-picker indigestion.\"\nEdward Greenfield of \"The Guardian\" titled his review \"Thinking Pop\" and wrote that the three Beatles songwriters \"habitually go outside the realm of sloppy love-theme, and find inspiration instead (as serious artists always must) in specific feelings and specific experiences\". Highlighting the importance of McCartney's classical aesthetic, he recognised the band's ongoing success as \"fair vindication\" for popular taste in terms of its alignment with artistic merit. In their joint review for \"Record Mirror\", Richard Green and Peter Jones found the album \"full of musical ingenuity\" yet \"controversial\", and added: \"There are parts that will split the pop fraternity neatly down the middle.\" In her round-up of 1966 for the \"Evening Standard\", Maureen Cleave named \"Revolver\" and the single as the year's best records, although she rued that, together with Mick Jagger, the Beatles had become aloof in that, \"Unlike anybody else, they seemed to know what they wanted.\"\nDue to the controversies surrounding the Beatles during their tour, critical reaction in the US was muted relative to the band's previous releases. According to Rodriguez, in redefining the limits of pop music, \"Revolver\" emphasised the need for genuine rock criticism, a form of journalism that only became commonplace from 1967. \"KRLA Beat\"'s reviewer described \"Revolver\" as \"a musical creation of exceptional excellence\" but lamented that, amid the continued acclaim for \"Rubber Soul\", \"it is receiving only a fraction of the attention and respect due\", and some Americans were overly focusing on the band's \"political views\". Writing in the recently launched \"Crawdaddy!\", Paul Williams gave the US LP a mixed review, in which he admired \"Love You To\" and \"Eleanor Rigby\" but derided \"Tomorrow Never Knows\" and \"Yellow Submarine\". Williams lauded the album's musical range but found it lacked an integral quality, which he acknowledged was outside the group's control.\nAccording to Turner, the album's combination of novel sounds and unusual subject matter \"challenged all the conventions of pop\" and it was the upcoming generation of writers who \"got it immediately\". Ralph J. Gleason, then the jazz critic for the \"San Francisco Chronicle\", wrote it was \"the most outstanding pop album in years, possibly the best of all time\", with \"[n]ot a single disappointing track\". In his article for \"The Village Voice\", Richard Goldstein described \"Revolver\" as \"a revolutionary record\" that was \"as important to the expansion of pop as was \"Rubber Soul\"\", and one that demanded that the genre's \"boundaries... be re-negotiated\". He added: \"it seems now that we will view this album in retrospect as a key work in the development of rock and roll into an artistic pursuit\u00a0...\" Another writer identified by Turner, Jules Siegel, likened \"Revolver\" to works by John Donne, John Milton and William Shakespeare, saying that the band's lyrics would provide the basis for scholarly analysis well into the future.\nRecalling \"Revolver\"'s release in his book \"Revolution in the Head\", Ian MacDonald says that the Beatles \"initiated a second pop revolution \u2013 one which while galvanising their existing rivals and inspiring many new ones, left all of them far behind\". In a February 1967 review, \"Hit Parader\" declared: \"\"Revolver\" represents the pinnacle of pop music. No group has been as consistently creative as the Beatles, though the [Lovin'] Spoonful and Beach Boys are coming closer all the time\u00a0... Rather than analyze the music we just suggest that you listen to \"Revolver\" three or four times a day and marvel\u00a0...\" Later that year, in \"Esquire\", Robert Christgau said the album was \"twice as good and four times as startling as \"Rubber Soul\", with sound effects, Oriental drones, jazz bands, transcendentalist lyrics, all kinds of rhythmic and harmonic surprises, and a filter that made John Lennon sound like God singing through a foghorn\".\nRetrospective assessments.\nIn the 2004 edition of \"The Rolling Stone Album Guide\", Rob Sheffield wrote that \"Revolver\" found the Beatles \"at the peak of their powers, competing with one another because nobody else could touch them\"; he described it as \"the best album the Beatles ever made, which means the best album by anybody\". Writing for \"PopMatters\" that year, David Medsker said that \"Revolver\" showed the four band members \"peaking at the exact same time\", and he deemed it to be \"the best of the bunch, the letter that went unanswered\" among a series of reciprocally influential musical statements exchanged between the Beatles and the Beach Boys over 1965\u201367.&lt;ref name=\"Medsker/PM\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In a 2007 appraisal of the band's albums, Henry Yates of \"Classic Rock\" magazine paired it with \"Sgt. Pepper's\" as the two \"essential classics\" in the Beatles' canon and described it as \"Always the rock fraternity's favourite (and the blueprint for Noel Gallagher's career)\". Writing in \"Paste\", Mark Kemp says that the album \"completed [the Beatles'] transformation from the mop tops of three years earlier into bold, groundbreaking experimental rockers\", while Paul Du Noyer, in a review for \"Blender\", said that it marked the group's arrival as \"psychedelic gurus\" and was a work in which the Beatles \"revolutionized their own style and rock music itself... with the boldest innovations of the band's career\".\nStephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic describes \"Revolver\" as \"the ultimate modern pop album\". While noting the diverse musical directions adopted by Lennon, McCartney and Harrison in their respective contributions, he states: \"The biggest miracle of \"Revolver\" may be that the Beatles covered so much new stylistic ground and executed it perfectly on one record, or it may be that all of it holds together perfectly.\" In his review for \"The Daily Telegraph\", Neil McCormick says that the album shows the band at their most unified and is a work in which \"they introduce whole new vistas of sound yet still contain them within tightly structured and performed songs.\" He also attributes an acerbic quality to the album that psychedelia lacked once the genre succumbed to \"the woolly politics of flower power\". Scott Plagenhoef of \"Pitchfork\" views \"Revolver\" as a \"sonic landmark\" that, in its lyrics, \"matur[ed] pop from the stuff of teen dreams to a more serious pursuit that actively reflected and shaped the times in which its creators lived\". He considers it to be McCartney's \"maturation record\" as a songwriter in the same way that \"Rubber Soul\" had been for Lennon.\nChris Coplan of \"Consequence of Sound\" is less impressed with the album, rating it a \"B\" and \"the black sheep of the Beatles' catalog\". Although he admires the psychedelic tone, he considers that this experimentalism renders the more standard pop songs, such as \"Got to Get You into My Life\" and \"Here, There and Everywhere\", \"seemingly out of place\" within the collection. Writing for Rough Guides, Chris Ingham describes it as \"clearly brilliant\" but adds: \"There's an edge to the sound and a danger in the air... that makes listening to it an uncomfortable trip. It's easy to admire, even to be awed by, but some listeners find \"Revolver\" a little harder to love.\" In retrospect, Christgau says he prefers \"Sgt. Pepper\", \"Rubber Soul\" and \"Abbey Road\" to \"Revolver\", finding the latter \"somewhat cluttered\" but nevertheless worthy of a \"high A minus\".\nInfluence and legacy.\nDevelopment of popular music and 1960s counterculture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n The unearthly sounds that \"Revolver\" released into the world were at once the antithesis of the human and a provocative indication of the \"mysterium tremendum\"... As they took their audience through a radically defamiliarized acoustic universe, these sounds were essentially questioning sounds. They kept forcing their audience to ask: what is this I'm listening to? \n\u2013 Academic Nick Bromell, 2000\nMacDonald deems Lennon's remark about the Beatles' \"god-like status\" in March 1966 to have been \"fairly realistic\", given the reaction to \"Revolver\". He adds: \"The album's aural invention was so masterful that it seemed to Western youth that The Beatles knew \u2013 that they had the key to current events and were somehow orchestrating them through their records.\" MacDonald highlights \"the radically subversive\" message of \"Tomorrow Never Knows\" \u2013 exhorting listeners to empty their minds of all ego- and material-related thought \u2013 as the inauguration of a \"till-then \u00e9lite-preserved concept of mind-expansion into pop, simultaneously drawing attention to consciousness-enhancing drugs and the ancient religious philosophies of the Orient\". Shawn Levy writes that the album presented an alternative reality that contemporary listeners felt compelled to explore further; he describes it as \"the first true drug album, not a pop record with some druggy insinuations, but an honest-to-heaven, steeped-in-the-out-there trip from the here and now into who knew where\".\nAccording to Simon Philo, \"Revolver\" announced the arrival of the \"underground London\" sound, supplanting that of Swinging London. Barry Miles describes the album as an \"advertisement for the underground\", and recalls that it resounded on the level of experimental jazz among members of the movement, including those who soon founded the UFO Club. He says it established rock 'n' roll as an art form and identifies its \"trailblazing\" quality as the impetus for Pink Floyd's \"The Piper at the Gates of Dawn\" and for Brian Wilson to complete the Beach Boys' \"mini-symphony\", \"Good Vibrations\". Citing composer and producer Virgil Moorefield's book \"The Producer as Composer\", Jay Hodgson highlights \"Revolver\" as a \"dramatic turning point\" in recording history through its dedication to studio exploration over the \"performability\" of the songs, as this and subsequent Beatles albums reshaped listeners' preconceptions of a pop recording. In his review for \"Pitchfork\", Plagenhoef says that the album not only \"redefin[ed] what was expected from popular music\", but recast the Beatles as \"avatars for a transformative cultural movement\". MacDonald cites \"Revolver\" as a musical statement that, further to the \"Rubber Soul\" track \"The Word\" and \"Rain\", helped guide the counterculture towards the 1967 Summer of Love due to the widespread popularity of the Beatles.\n\"Revolver\" has been recognised as having inspired new subgenres of music, anticipating electronica, punk rock, baroque rock and world music, among other styles. According to \"Rolling Stone\", the album \"signaled that in popular music, anything \u2013 any theme, any musical idea \u2013 could now be realized\". Through the Beatles' example, psychedelia moved from its underground roots into the mainstream, thereby originating the longer-lasting psychedelic pop style.&lt;ref name=\"AM/PsychPop\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Russell Reising and Jim LeBlanc credit the songs on \"Revolver\" with \"set[ting] the stage for an important subgenre of psychedelic music, that of the messianic pronouncement\". As with \"Rubber Soul\", Walter Everett views the album's \"experimental timbres, rhythms, tonal structures, and poetic texts\" as the inspiration for many of the bands that formed the progressive rock genre in the early 1970s. He also considers \"Revolver\" to be \"an innovative example of electronic music\" as much as it broke new ground in pop by being \"fundamentally unlike any rock album that had preceded it\". \"Rolling Stone\" attributes the development of the Los Angeles and San Francisco music scenes, including subsequent releases by the Beach Boys, Love and the Grateful Dead, to the influence of \"Revolver\", particularly \"She Said She Said\".\nSteve Turner likens the Beatles' creative approach in 1966 to that of modern jazz musicians, and recognises their channelling of Indian and Western classical, Southern soul, and electronic musical styles into their work as unprecedented in popular music. He says that, through the band's efforts to faithfully translate their LSD-inspired vision into music, \"\"Revolver\" opened the doors to psychedelic rock (or acid rock)\", while the primitive means by which it was recorded (on four-track equipment) inspired the work that artists such as Pink Floyd, Genesis, Yes and the Electric Light Orchestra were able to achieve with advances in studio technology. Turner also highlights the pioneering sampling and tape manipulation employed on \"Tomorrow Never Knows\" as having \"a profound effect on everyone from Jimi Hendrix to Jay-Z\".\nRodriguez praises Martin and Emerick's contribution to the album, saying that their talents were as essential to its success as the Beatles'. While also highlighting the importance of the production, David Howard writes that \"Revolver\" was a \"genre-transforming album\", on which Martin and the Beatles had \"obliterated recording studio conventions\". Combined with the similarly \"visionary\" work of American producer Phil Spector, Howard continues, through \"Revolver\", the recording studio had become \"its own instrument; record production had been elevated into art.\"\nAscendancy over \"Sgt. Pepper\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThere's a case to be made that the Beatles went on to do \"Sgt. Pepper's\" because there was nowhere else to go but too far. With \"Revolver\", they had mapped out the pop universe so perfectly that all they could do next was tear it up and start again.\n\u2013 David Quantick, writing in \"Q\" magazine, 2000\nWhereas \"Sgt. Pepper\" had long been identified as the Beatles' greatest album, since the 2000s \"Revolver\" has often surpassed it in lists of the group's best work. Sheffield cites the album's 1987 CD release, with the full complement of Lennon compositions, as marking the start of a process whereby \"Revolver\" \"steadily climbed in public estimation\" to become recognised as the Beatles' finest work. Everett also attributes the \"problem\" regarding the album's standing in the US to the \"inferior track listing\" available to Americans until the CD release. In Britain, its supremacy over \"Sgt. Pepper\" was one of the cultural revisions established by the Britpop phenomenon in the 1990s. Writing on the BBC's website in August 2016, Greg Kot identified the \"More popular than Christ\" controversy and the attention subsequently afforded the release of \"Sgt. Pepper\" in 1967 as the two factors that had contributed to \"Revolver\" being relatively overlooked. Kot concluded that the ensuing decades had seen this impression reversed, since \"Revolver\" \"does everything \"Sgt Pepper\" did, except it did it first and often better. It just wasn't as well-packaged and marketed.\"\nRodriguez writes that, whereas most contemporary acts shy away from attempting a concept album in the vein of \"Sgt. Pepper\", the prototype established by \"Revolver\", whereby an album serves as an \"eclectic collection of diverse songs\", continues to influence modern popular music. He characterises \"Revolver\" as \"the Beatles' artistic high-water mark\" and says that, unlike \"Sgt. Pepper\", it was the product of a collaborative effort, with \"the group as a whole being fully vested in creating Beatle music\".\nAppearances on best-album lists and further recognition.\n\"Revolver\" has appeared high up in many lists of the best albums ever made, often in the top position. It was voted the third-best album of all time in the 1998 \"Music of the Millennium\" poll conducted by HMV and Channel 4, and in the following year's expanded survey, which polled 600,000 people across the UK. Also in 1998, it was ranked first in Colin Larkin's \"All Time Top 1000 Albums\", directly ahead of \"Sgt. Pepper\" and \"The Beatles\", and it was first again in the 2000 edition of the book. \"Q\" placed it at number 1 in its list of the \"50 Greatest British Albums Ever\" in 2000; four years later, the album topped the same magazine's list \"The Music That Changed the World\". In 2001, it topped VH1's \"100 Greatest Albums\", compiled from a poll of more than 500 journalists, music executives and artists. In 2003, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked \"Revolver\" third on its list of the \"500 Greatest Albums of All Time\", a position it retained on the magazine's revised list nine years later.\nIn 2004, \"Revolver\" appeared at number 2 in \"The Observer\"'s list of \"The 100 Greatest British Albums\", compiled by a panel of 100 contributors. In 2006, it was chosen by \"Time\" magazine as one of the 100 best albums and topped a similar list compiled by \"Hot Press\". That same year, \"Guitar World\" readers chose it as the tenth best guitar album of all time. In 2010, \"Revolver\" was named the best pop album by the official newspaper of the Holy See, \"L'Osservatore Romano\". In 2013, \"Entertainment Weekly\" placed the album at number 1 in its \"All-Time Greatest\" albums. In September 2020, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked \"Revolver\" at number 11 on its new list of the \"500 Greatest Albums of All Time\".\nIn 1999, \"Revolver\" was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame, an award bestowed by the American Recording Academy \"to honor recordings of lasting qualitative or historical significance that are at least 25 years old\". According to art and culture journalist Robin Stummer, writing in 2016, Voormann's cover is similarly recognised as \"one of the finest pop artworks\". The album has been the subject of several tribute albums, such as \"Revolver Reloaded\", a multi-artist CD included with the July 2006 issue of \"Mojo\". Beatles tribute bands have named themselves after \"Revolver\", and Reising lists Revolver Records, the heavy metal magazine \"Revolver\" and Revolver Films as other examples that appear to honour the 1966 album. In his view, \"Like few other rock and roll recordings, \"Revolver\" has assumed the status of cultural icon, approaching in its many avatars, its impact and its endurance the status of some of the definitive works of Anglo\u2013American culture such as Herman Melville's \"Moby-Dick\" and James Joyce's \"Ulysses\".\"\nReissues.\nAlong with the rest of the Beatles catalogue, the album was first issued on compact disc in 1987. In 2009, Apple and EMI released remastered versions of the Beatles albums on CD. \"Revolver\" was also included in the box sets released at the time, \"The Beatles: Stereo Box Set\" and \"The Beatles in Mono Box Set\".\nOn 28 October 2022, of \"Revolver\" was released. It includes a new stereo remix of the album by Giles Martin, with the help of de-mixing technology developed by Peter Jackson's WingNut Films, as well as the original mono mix, session recordings, demos and an EP containing new mixes of \"Paperback Writer\" and \"Rain\".\nTrack listing.\nThe following track listing is for the original release in all markets other than North America and was subsequently adopted as the standard version of the album for its international CD release in 1987. The original North American edition used this order except for omitting \"I'm Only Sleeping\", \"And Your Bird Can Sing\" and \"Doctor Robert\". All tracks written by Lennon\u2013McCartney, except where noted.\nPersonnel.\nAccording to Mark Lewisohn and Ian MacDonald, except where noted:\nThe Beatles\nAdditional musicians and production\nCharts.\nWeekly charts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74984", "revid": "48948781", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74984", "title": "Suspicion (1941 film)", "text": "1941 American film by Alfred Hitchcock\nSuspicion is a 1941 American romantic psychological thriller film noir directed by Alfred Hitchcock, and starring Cary Grant and Joan Fontaine as a married couple. It also features Sir Cedric Hardwicke, Nigel Bruce, Dame May Whitty, Isabel Jeans, Heather Angel, and Leo G. Carroll. \"Suspicion\" is based on Francis Iles's 1932 novel \"Before the Fact\".\nFor her role as Lina, Joan Fontaine won the Academy Award for Best Actress in 1941, making it the only Oscar-winning acting performance in an Alfred Hitchcock film. In the film, a romantically inexperienced woman marries a charming playboy after initially rejecting him. He turns out to be penniless, a gambler, and dishonest in the extreme. She comes to suspect that he is also a murderer, and that he is attempting to kill her.\nPlot.\nIn 1938, handsome, irresponsible playboy Johnnie Aysgarth meets bespectacled Lina McLaidlaw on a train in England and later persuades her to take a walk with him. She is defensive and suspects his motives; he insults her in a ploy to create familiarity. But later, at a window, she overhears her parents talking about her. They assume she will never marry, and hurt by this she kisses Johnnie.\nShe hopes to hear from him but he cancels their afternoon date and then vanishes. However, he returns for a hunt ball a week later and charms her into eventually eloping despite the strong disapproval of her wealthy father, General McLaidlaw. After a lavish honeymoon and returning to an extravagant house, Lina discovers that Johnnie has no job and no income, habitually lives on borrowed money, and was intending to try to sponge off her father. She talks him into getting a job, and he goes to work for his cousin, estate agent Captain Melbeck.\nGradually, Lina learns that Johnnie has continued to gamble wildly, despite promising to quit, and that to pay a gambling debt, he sold two antique chairs (family heirlooms) that her father had given her as a wedding present. Beaky, Johnnie's good-natured but naive friend, tries to reassure Lina that her husband is a lot of fun and a highly entertaining liar. She repeatedly catches Johnnie in ever more significant lies, discovering that he was fired weeks before for embezzling from Melbeck, who says he will not prosecute if the money is repaid.\nLina writes a letter to Johnnie that she is leaving him but then tears it up. After this Johnnie enters the room and shows her a telegram announcing her father's death. Johnnie is severely disappointed to discover that Lina has inherited no money, only her father's portrait. He persuades Beaky to finance a hugely speculative land development scheme. Lina is afraid this is a confidence trick or worse and futilely tries to talk Beaky out of it. Johnnie overhears and angrily warns his wife to stay out of his affairs but later he calls the whole thing off.\nWhen Beaky leaves for Paris, Johnnie accompanies him partway. Later, news reaches Lina that Beaky died in Paris. Johnnie lies to her and an investigating police inspector, saying that he (Johnnie) stayed in London. This and other details lead Lina to suspect he was responsible for Beaky's death.\nLina then begins to fear that her husband is plotting to kill her for her life insurance. He has been questioning her friend Isobel Sedbusk, a writer of mystery novels, about untraceable poisons. Johnnie brings Lina a glass of milk before bed, but she is too afraid to drink it. Needing to get away for a while, she says she will stay with her mother for a few days. Johnnie insists on driving her there. He speeds recklessly in a powerful convertible on a dangerous road beside a cliff. Lina's door unexpectedly swings open. Johnnie reaches over, his intent unclear to the terrified woman. When she shrinks from him, he stops the car.\nIn the subsequent confrontation, Johnnie asserts that he was actually intending to commit suicide after taking Lina to her mother's. At this time he states that he has decided that suicide is the coward's way out, and is resolved to face his responsibilities, even to the point of going to prison for the embezzlement. He reveals being in Liverpool at the time of Beaky's death, trying to borrow on Lina's life insurance policy to repay Melbeck. Her suspicions allayed, Lina asks him to go home and see it all through together. Johnnie initially refuses but eventually they turn the car around and drive away together.\nCast.\nUncredited\nAlfred Hitchcock's cameo is a signature occurrence in most of his films. In \"Suspicion\", he can be seen very briefly approximately 47 minutes into the film posting a letter at the village postbox.\nThe West-Ingster screenplay.\nIn November 1939, Nathanael West was hired as a screenwriter by RKO Radio Pictures, where he collaborated with Boris Ingster on a film adaptation of the novel. The two men wrote the screenplay in seven weeks, with West focusing on characterization and dialogue as Ingster worked on the narrative structure.\nWhen RKO assigned \"Before the Fact\" to Hitchcock, he already had his own, substantially different, screenplay, credited to Samson Raphaelson, Joan Harrison, and Alma Reville. (Harrison was Hitchcock's personal assistant, and Reville was Hitchcock's wife.) West and Ingster's screenplay was abandoned and never produced. The text of this screenplay can be found in the Library of America's edition of West's collected works.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\n\"Suspicion\" illustrates how a novel's plot can be so much altered in the transition to film as to reverse the author's original intention. As William L. De Andrea states in his \"Encyclopedia Mysteriosa\" (1994), \"Suspicion\"was supposed to be the study of a murder as seen through the eyes of the eventual victim. However, because Cary Grant was to be the killer and Joan Fontaine the person killed, the studio \u2014 RKO \u2014 decreed a different ending, which Hitchcock supplied and then spent the rest of his life complaining about. Hitchcock was quoted as saying that he was forced to alter the ending of the movie. He wanted an ending similar to the climax of the novel, but the studio, more concerned with Cary Grant's \"heroic\" image, insisted that it be changed. In his biography of Hitchcock, \"The Dark Side of Genius\", Donald Spoto disputes Hitchcock's claim to have been overruled on the film's ending. Spoto claims that the first RKO treatment and memos between Hitchcock and the studio show that Hitchcock emphatically desired to make a film about a woman's fantasy life.\nAs in the novel, General McLaidlaw opposes his daughter's marriage to Johnnie Aysgarth. In both versions, Johnnie freely admits that he would not mind the general's death because he expects Lina to inherit a substantial fortune, which would solve their financial problems. The book, however, is much darker, with Johnnie egging on the general to exert himself to the point where he collapses and dies. In the film, General McLaidlaw's death is only reported, and Johnnie is not involved at all. Again, Johnnie's criminal record remains incomplete.\nSeveral scenes in the film create suspense and sow doubt as to Johnnie's intentions: Beaky's death in Paris is due to an allergy to brandy, which Johnnie knew about. A waiter who barely speaks English tells the police that Beaky addressed his companion that night as \"Old Bean\", the way Beaky addressed Johnnie. At the end of the film, Johnnie is driving his wife at breakneck speed to her mother's house. This scene, which takes place after her final illness, is not in the book.\nThe biggest difference is the ending. In Iles' novel, Johnnie serves his sick wife a drink which she knows to be poisoned, and she voluntarily gulps it down. In the film, the drink may or may not be poisoned and can be seen untouched the following morning. Another ending was considered but not used, in which Lina is writing a letter to her mother stating that she fears Johnnie is going to poison her, at which point he walks in with the milk. She finishes the letter, seals and stamps an envelope, asks Johnnie to mail the letter, then drinks the milk. The final shot would have shown him leaving the house and dropping into a mailbox the letter which incriminates him. Hitchcock's recollection of this original ending\u2014in his book-length interview with Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut, published in English as \"Hitchcock/Truffaut\" in 1967\u2014is that Lina's letter tells her mother she knows that Johnnie is killing her, but that she loves him too much to care.\nA musical leitmotif is introduced in \"Suspicion\". Whenever Lina is happy with Johnnie \u2014 starting with a ball organised by General McLaidlaw \u2014 Johann Strauss's waltz \"Wiener Blut\" is played in its original, light-hearted version. At one point, when she is suspicious of her husband, a threatening, minor-key version of the waltz is employed, metamorphosing into the full and happy version after the suspense has been lifted. At another, Johnnie is whistling the waltz. At yet another, while Johnnie is serving the drink of milk, a sad version of \"Wiener Blut\" is played again. By placing a lightbulb in the milk, the filmmakers made the contents appear to glow as the glass is carried upstairs by Johnnie, further enhancing the audience's fear that it is poisoned.\nA visual threat is inserted when Lina suspects her husband of preparing to kill Beaky: On the night before, at the Aysgarths' home, they play Anagrams, and suddenly, by exchanging a letter, Lina changes \"mudder\" into \"murder\" and then \"murderer.\" Seeing the word, Lina looks at the flyer showing the cliffs Johnnie and Beaky plan to inspect for a real estate venture the next morning. The silhouettes of two men appear in the photograph. One pushes the other over the cliff, and we see Beaky falling and screaming. Lina faints.\nIf the viewer accepts Johnnie's statements in the final scene and decides that he is, for all his faults, no murderer, the film becomes a cautionary tale about the dangers of suspicion based only on assumed, incomplete, and circumstantial evidence. However, given his behaviour up to this point, it is not clear why Johnnie's assertions should be readily believed; in effect, the film leaves the viewer in a perpetual state of suspense as to what the truth is and what might happen next.\nCasting.\nOriginally, the story was intended as a B picture to star George Sanders and Anne Shirley. Then when Alfred Hitchcock became involved, the budget increased and Laurence Olivier and Frances Dee were to star. Eventually, it was decided to cast Cary Grant and Joan Fontaine. Fontaine had to be borrowed from David O. Selznick for an expensive fee; she had been dropped from RKO's contract list some years before. Grant and Fontaine had previously worked together in \"Gunga Din\".\nFilming.\nThe film was shot entirely on sound stages between February 10 and July 24, 1941.\nReception.\nBox-office.\nAccording to \"Variety\", the film made $1.8 million at the box office in 1942. \"Suspicion\" earned a profit of $440,000.\nCritical response.\nOn Rotten Tomatoes, the film has a 97% approval rating based on 33 reviews, the critical consensus stating, \"Not even notorious studio meddling can diminish the craft and tantalizing suspense of \"Suspicion\", a sly showcase for Joan Fontaine's nervy prowess and Alfred Hitchcock's flair for disquiet.\"\nIn 2016 the \"Los Angeles Times\" stated that \"Many critics pegged \u201cSuspicion\u201d as a middling effort for the burgeoning auteur\" with the ending being a point of contention, although \"Los Angeles Times\" reviewer Philip K. Scheuer stated in 1941 that the ending being \"abrupt\" resulted in it being \"effective.\"\nThe 2016 article stated that \"Even today, most aficionados place the film well into the teens when ranking Hitchcock\u2019s 50-plus films.\"\nAdaptations.\nDuring this time it was common for films to be adapted into radio plays. This film was adapted six times, from 1942 through 1949, starring the original stars and others: Once on \"Academy Award Theater\", twice on \"Lux Radio Theatre\" and three times on \"Screen Guild Theater\".\nThe televised 1988 \"American Playhouse\" remake starred Anthony Andrews and Jane Curtin.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nStreaming audio"}
{"id": "74985", "revid": "43867074", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74985", "title": "Something for Kate", "text": "Australian alternative rock band\nSomething for Kate are an Australian alternative rock band, which formed in 1994 with Paul Dempsey on lead vocals and guitar, and Clint Hyndman on drums. They were joined in 1998 by Stephanie Ashworth on bass guitar and backing vocals. The group have released seven studio albums: both \"The Official Fiction\" (2003) and \"Desert Lights\" (2006) topped the ARIA Albums Chart; while \"Beautiful Sharks\" (1999), \"Echolalia\" (2001) and \"Leave Your Soul to Science\" (2012) reached the top\u00a010. Two of their singles have reached the ARIA top\u00a020: \"Monsters\" (2001) and \"D\u00e9j\u00e0 Vu\" (2003). The band have received a total of 11 nominations for ARIA Music Awards in 1999, 2001 and 2003.\nHistory.\n1994\u20131997: Formation and early years.\nSomething for Kate were formed in 1994 in Melbourne by Julian Carroll on bass guitar, Paul Dempsey on lead guitar and lead vocals, and Clint Hyndman on drums. Dempsey and Hyndman were school friends from Padua College, Mornington Peninsula; Carroll successfully answered their advertisement in music stores. The trio played their first gig on 12 September 1994 at the Punter's Club in Melbourne, changing their band name from Fish of the Day at the suggestion of the venue's booking agent, Richard Moffat. Dempsey recalled that they performed because they \"just wanted to make an abrasive, staccato racket, like electrical machinery.\" He explained that the group's new name was inspired by his dog, Kate \u2013 he had been left a shopping note, to buy \"Something for Kate\". As for the dog, Dempsey's mother sold Kate, the family's Jack Russell, \"They told me she ran away... I think they were a bit tired of her escaping out of the back fence. My mum let it slip about a year later. She let the dog out of the bag.\"\nThe band built a varied fan base in Melbourne and recorded a demo tape that sold out of multiple pressings. In 1995, Sony Music's A&amp;R, Chris Dunn, signed them to the Murmur label, which had picked up teenage rock band Silverchair a year earlier. He said one song, \"Slow\", was particularly appealing: \"That really triggered the whole thing in me. I kept on playing this song over and over again. I just thought it was a really good song for such a young person.\"\nSomething for Kate released a seven-track extended play, \"...The Answer to Both Your Questions\", in May 1996. It was produced by Greg Atkinson and appeared both on CD and as a hand-decorated mini-LP. An \"Oz Music Project\" reviewer described it as \"a critically acclaimed debut release and started catching the ears of punters around the country.\" During August and September of that year, they undertook the Unipaloser Tour of national universities with label mates Jebediah and Bluebottle Kiss.\nIn October they followed with a single, \"Dean Martin\", also produced by Atkinson, which received frequent airplay on youth radio network, Triple J. A limited edition five-track EP, \"Intermission\", was hastily assembled from leftover recordings and released in March 1997, quickly becoming a collector's item. Jasper Lee of \"Oz Music Project\" declared that it \"shows the vast potential for [the] Melbourne band... Dempsey's voice proves that under the thick layer of the morbid rock guy, that a emotionally-brittle heart lies within.\"\nIn February 1997, the band recorded their debut album, \"Elsewhere for 8 Minutes\" (July 1997), at York St Studios, Auckland, with producer Brian Paulson, whose credits included Wilco and Slint. Carroll, who had recently married, quit the band to live on a rural property, but agreed to remain for the sessions, he was replaced on bass guitar by Toby Ralph (ex-Lobtailing). Greg Lawrence of WHAMMO website described the album as \"the glorious debut\" which \"showed, early on in this band's career, the depth of emotional range at the disposal of songwriter and singer Paul Dempsey... [it] is a crucial initial chapter in the story of this important Australian band.\"\nA single, \"Captain (Million Miles an Hour)\", appeared in May 1997. It received heavy airplay on Triple J and was listed at No.\u00a039 on their Hottest 100 for that year. The band's following quickly grew and they toured heavily, scoring gigs on numerous major festivals. Dempsey acknowledged that \"It's pretty hard when you start out. It's only now that we're starting to get some serious recognition that we can finally begin to pick &amp; choose where we want to play. But to do that, you have to be able to prove that, as a band, you can really cut it live &amp; draw the crowds.\"\n1998\u20132002: \"Beautiful Sharks\".\nAfter about a year in Something for Kate, Ralph had failed to fit in with the other two, he was replaced by Stephanie Ashworth from three-piece indie rockers, Sandpit. Sandpit had released their own debut album, \"On Second Thought\", in May 1998 but they disbanded \u2013 founding drummer Paul Sciacca had left ahead of recording sessions. Ashworth on bass guitar, keyboards and backing vocals and Brendan Webb, on lead guitar and vocals, had finished that album with their producer, Greg Wales, also on drums.\nDempsey felt that his group were going through a \"really turbulent period\" and \"completely de-constructed everything\" to rebuild after Ashworth joined. He continued, \"We've just been lucky because we've got this really natural chemistry between the three of us... We've finally got the right combination of people and we're collaborating the way a band should.\" By the time Ashworth had joined \"she and Dempsey had gone from musical acquaintances to becoming a couple.\" In June 1998 Something for Kate issued another single, \"Roll Credit\", which included label mates Jebediah's cover of their song, \"Clint\" and SFK's cover of Jebediah's \"Harpoon\". Murmur also issued a split double-7\" single/EP with the two versions of \"Harpoon\" on one disc and both versions of \"Clint\" on the other.\nDuring 1998 Dempsey set up a side project, Scared of Horses, to release a solo album \"An Empty Flight\", in November that year. He co-wrote and performed the tracks with a variety of fellow artists on lead vocals including Ashworth, Jamie Hutchings of Bluebottle Kiss, Laura MacFarlane of Ninetynine, Andria Prudente of Arrosa, Glenn Richards of Augie March and Heinz Riegler of Not from There.\nIn late 1998 the band travelled to Toronto to rehearse and record their second album, \"Beautiful Sharks\", again with Paulson as producer. Ashworth and Dempsey co-wrote half of the music for the album. It was released the following June, which reached No.\u00a010 on the ARIA Albums Chart, and was certified gold status by ARIA for shipment of 35,000 copies, in 2001. According to Australian musicologist, Ian McFarlane, \"the acclaimed [album] moved beyond the stark instrumentation of the first album into more diverse pastures (for example, the rumbling 'Electricity', the atmospheric 'Beautiful Sharks')\". Dino Scatena, an Australian journalist, opined that \"a lot of the beauty in [the album] lies in its understated quality ... so subtle, so perfect, any other songwriter would give his little pinky for a moment of such inspiration, such craftsmanship.\"\n\"Electricity\", their next single, appeared ahead of the album in March 1999 and peaked in the ARIA Singles Chart top\u00a040. It was followed by \"Hallways\" in August, which did not reach the top\u00a050. \"Beautiful Sharks\" was nominated for Best Alternative Release at the ARIA Music Awards of 1999. The band embarked on a major tour with Powderfinger and had three tracks listed in the Triple J Hottest 100, 1999: \"Electricity\" (No.\u00a044), \"Whatever You Want\" (No.\u00a070) and \"Hallways\" (No.\u00a072). They toured Japan and the United States in early 2000, where Ashworth received \u2014 and rejected \u2014 an offer to join Courtney Love's rock band, Hole.\n2001\u20132002: \"Echolalia\".\nSomething for Kate's third studio album, \"Echolalia\" (June 2001), was produced by Trina Shoemaker (Sheryl Crow, Queens of the Stone Age). They began work at Mangrove Studios \u2013 owned by INXS member Garry Gary Beers \u2013 on Sydney's north coast. The sessions in a windowless rehearsal studio stretched out over a year as Dempsey struggled with writer's block. He recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We'd go down there every day, pick up our instruments and wait for something to happen. And we spent a lot of days just sitting there, staring at each other. We'd set a standard for ourselves and I guess we were trying to meet that. Nothing was happening, we got really depressed and we hit a wall. I was spiralling down.\nExasperated, the band travelled to an island in the Gulf of Thailand, where Dempsey wrote \"Monsters\" in 20 minutes. He said the song, about overcoming self-doubt, broke the drought: \"As soon as I stopped thinking about it, as soon as I stopped being a songwriter, it came. So after that, we came home and wrote about 20 songs.\" Ashworth described Dempsey's guitar work: \"Paul was a really percussive guitarist: he's a drummer, first and foremost and he actually taught Clint to play the drums. So he comes from playing the guitar from a really percussive perspective; from a very Fugazi-type of world, creating every aspect of a song on the guitar instead of just melodies.\"\nThe album, released in June 2001, peaked at No.\u00a02 and was certified as platinum \u2013 for shipment of 70,000 copies \u2013 by the end of the year. Lawrence felt that \"In many ways, it marks quite a departure from their past two efforts, moving towards a sparser and richer sound, both in terms of instrumentation and the moods it creates. A dazzling evolution for this vital Melbourne trio.\" It was listed in the top\u00a040 in the book, \"100 Best Australian Albums\" (October 2010). The authors, John O'Donnell, Toby Creswell and Craig Mathieson, explained, \"[it is] full of ghosts; figures appear and then disappear; people turn into nothingness as they blindly repeat their daily routines, and protagonists try to find a way to move from the world they know to the world they want.\"\n\"Monsters\" was issued in April 2001 as the album's lead single, which debuted at No.\u00a015, and is the group's highest charting single. O'Donnell, Creswell and Mathieson described the track's sound, \"It begins with purpose, shadowed by a hint of trepidation, but two lines in, as the bass starts to make its point and Dempsey's voice becomes more pointed, the song starts to summon self-belief.\" Fellow Australian music journalist, Ed Nimmervoll, felt the group had \"spent more time on their songs than they'd ever spent in the past. On record the result was the rich and full sound which they haven't been able to capture up until now. Their efforts were rewarded and the band's status confirmed with the first single 'Monsters' becoming the band's first bona fide 'hit'.\" It was followed by two more singles, \"Three Dimensions\" (August) and \"Twenty Years\" (November), which reached the top\u00a050.\nThe band sold out two national tours and finished the year again supporting Powderfinger. At the ARIA Music Awards of 2001 Something for Kate were nominated in six categories \u2013 Album of the Year, Best Group, Best Alternative Release and Best Cover Art (by Ashworth) for \"Echolalia\"; and Single of the Year and Best Video (directed by Bart Borghesi) for \"Monsters\" \u2013 but they did not win a trophy. On the Triple J Hottest 100, 2001 \"Monsters\" as listed at No.\u00a02, \"Three Dimensions\" at No.\u00a013 and \"Twenty Years\" at No.\u00a037; while \"Echolalia\" was listed as the top album for the year.\n2003\u20132008: \"The Official Fiction\", \"Desert Lights\", and hiatus.\nOn 15 August 2003 Something for Kate issued their fourth studio album, \"The Official Fiction\", which is their first number-one album. It was produced by Shoemaker at Mangrove Studios, again. Lawrence opined that it \"is the perfect soundtrack to the inevitable self-indulgent melancholy I'll be suffering/enjoying for the next few days/weeks/months. The precisely structured chord progressions, creative arrangements and insightful lyrics are already weaving their magic and cultivating the warm gloom of loss.\" He noticed that \"[Dempsey's] voice is instantly recognisable and familiar as he tells the stories that have become a feature of SFK's unique lyrical content\" while \"Hyndman's drumming is far from conservative, offering oddly but deftly placed accents and a beat that fights the sugar-sweet melodies to provide a much-needed edge.\"\nThe first two singles from the album were \"D\u00e9j\u00e0 Vu\" (July 2003), which peaked at No.\u00a019, and \"Song for a Sleepwalker\" (October), which reached the top\u00a040. At the ARIA Music Awards of 2003 SFK received four nominations: Album of the Year, Best Group, Best Rock Album and Best Cover Art (by Ashworth and Dave Horner) for \"The Official Fiction\". It was certified gold by the end of that year. On the Triple J Hottest 100, 2003, \"D\u00e9j\u00e0 Vu\" was listed at No.\u00a011 and \"Song for a Sleepwalker\" at No.\u00a063; \"Official Fiction\" was listed at No.\u00a06 on the Top\u00a010 Albums of 2003. Ashworth described the group, \"We're an album band not a singles band. We write albums and then the record company picks whatever they want to be the single. That's what's really difficult. So for you, you might get a very one-sided idea of what a band's like and then you put the album on and you go: 'Oh, I didn't realize they had this side.' That's where I think singles are a real fucker. I don't like it.\"\n\"Desert Lights\", their fifth studio album (1 June 2006) also topped the charts \u2013 their second number-one album. It was certified gold status within a month of its release. They had recorded it over four months in Los Angeles with Brad Wood (Ben Lee, the Smashing Pumpkins, Liz Phair). Dempsey had started working on lyrics for it in the previous year, \"Writing this record was difficult. But at the end of it, I've never been happier.\" Stephanie McDonald of FasterLouder felt its \"sound has moved from one of raw, hard rock to something a lot more melodic with pop appeal... [the group] combines both those elements into something truly inspirational.\"\n\"Cigarettes and Suitcases\", the lead single, was released in May 2006, which reached No.\u00a023, while the follow-up single, \"Oh Kamikaze\", appeared in September and reached the top\u00a040. Rob Smith of \"The Dwarf\" felt that the first single \"is SFK at their typical alternative rock best, blending a catchy and melodious chorus with constant beats and a use of light and heavy guitar work. The second single 'Oh, Kamikaze' is a more upbeat number one might almost be able to dance to, if one could dance that is.\"\nA compilation 2\u00d7CD album, \"The Murmur Years\", was released on 18 August 2007 with one new song, \"The Futurist\". According to Nimmervoll \"Notwithstanding a couple of one-off reunion shows for their ever-loyal following Something for Kate went into hiatus while their leader concentrated on writing for a solo album.\" They issued a limited edition 16-track live album, \"Live at the Corner\", as an \"artist-controlled bootleg\", capturing the sound of the band on stage on 23 February 2008 at the Corner Hotel in Richmond.\n2012\u20132013: Reformation, \"Leave Your Soul to Science\", and second hiatus.\nIn mid-2012 Something for Kate resumed their recording career, six years after their previous studio effort. They worked on \"Leave Your Soul to Science\" (September 2012) in Dallas with John Congleton (Okkervil River, Shearwater, the New Pornographers) co-producing. Dempsey said they looked for someone to contain them during the recording process: \"We recognised an inclination or proclivity among ourselves to procrastinate and keep layering stuff up. We knew that we needed to fight that instinct and he was very much the guy to help us.\"\nThe band uploaded two songs from the album to the internet before its release (\"Survival Expert\" and \"The Fireball at the End of Everything\") and also played two live shows in Melbourne and Sydney to preview it. The album reached No.\u00a05, and provided three singles, \"Survival Expert\" (August 2012), \"Miracle Cure\" (December) and \"Star-crossed Citizens\" (May 2013).\nAs part of the band's mid-2013 Star-Crossed Cities Tour, Dempsey recorded Shotgun Karaoke video segments prior to each show, in which he performed cover versions of songs by artists, the Lemonheads, David Bowie, INXS, and Queen. The tour for ended in Hobart on 29 June 2013. By October that year Dempsey had resumed his solo career.\n2020: \"The Modern Medieval\".\nIn April 2020, Something for Kate released \"Situation Room\", their first new track in eight years. It served as the lead single for the band's seventh studio album, which at the time was also titled \"Situation Room\" and a to-be-decided release date. In July 2020, the band released the album's second single, \"Waste Our Breath\". In September 2020, the band announced both the album's title as \"The Modern Medieval\" and its third single, \"Supercomputer\". On 1 October 2020, the album's fourth single, \"Come Back Before I Come Back to My Senses\" was released. The album was released on 20 November and debuted at Number 5 on the ARIA chart 2020.\nActivism.\nIn 2004, Something for Kate joined People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) in its fight against animal cruelty. As part of their involvement, the band produced an advertisement protesting Kentucky Fried Chicken's (KFC) alleged cruelty to animals.\nDempsey is listed as a supporter of the \"Oscar's Law\" campaign against the factory farming of companion animals, together with other publicly known figures including musician Mark McEntee, comedian Mick Molloy and the Essendon Football Club.\nAwards and nominations.\nAPRA Awards.\nThe APRA Awards are presented annually from 1982 by the Australasian Performing Right Association (APRA), \"honouring composers and songwriters\". They commenced in 1982.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\n! Ref.\nARIA Music Awards.\nThe ARIA Music Awards is an annual awards ceremony that recognises excellence, innovation, and achievement across all genres of Australian music. Something for Kate have been nominated for eleven awards.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nEG Awards / Music Victoria Awards.\nThe EG Awards (known as \"Music Victoria Awards\" since 2013) are an annual awards night celebrating Victorian music. They commenced in 2006.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74993", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74993", "title": "Fourth World (comics)", "text": "Comic storyline\n\"Fourth World\" is a metaseries of connected comic book titles written and drawn by Jack Kirby and published by DC Comics from 1970 to 1973. Although they were not marketed under this title until the August\u2013September 1971 issues of \"New Gods\" and \"Forever People\", the terms \"Fourth World\" and \"Jack Kirby's Fourth World\" have gained usage in the years since.\nKirby created the Fourth World concept in the 1970s. The series is a science-fiction based mythology that revolves around ancient space deities known as the New Gods. The New Gods are similar to the gods of Earth lore.\nPublication history.\nInitial 1970s comics.\nAs the newsstand distribution system for comics began to break down, Jack Kirby foresaw a day when comics would need to find alternate venues for sale. Toward this end, Kirby envisioned a finite series that would be serialized and collected in one tome after the series had concluded. He began the \"Fourth World\" in \"Superman's Pal Jimmy Olsen\" #133 (Oct. 1970). DC Comics had planned to introduce the \"Fourth World\" titles in the November 1970 issue of their preview omnibus title, \"Showcase\". Kirby reportedly objected to this, and \"Showcase\" was cancelled. This delayed the introduction of the \"Fourth World\" titles until the following year. The three original titles constituting the \"Fourth World\" were \"The Forever People\", \"Mister Miracle\", and \"The New Gods\".\nUnhappy with Marvel Comics at the time, as he had created a plethora of characters without having copyright or creative custody of them, Kirby turned to rival publisher DC Comics, with his sketches and designs for a new group of heroes and villains. He had first showed them to Stan Lee, who liked them, but wanted to fold them into already existing titles. So Kirby decided to keep them for himself. When Carmine Infantino visited Kirby and his family for Passover, he showed him his designs and ideas. Infantino told him that he wanted to bring them to DC. Worsening conditions at Marvel and promises from DC made Kirby decide to switch company. As author Marc Flores, who writes under the pen name Ronin Ro, described:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The idea of the \"New Gods\" had come to Jack years earlier, when he was plotting 90 percent of the \"Tales of Asgard\" stories in \"Thor\". He wanted to have two planets at war and end with Ragnarok, the battle that would kill Thor's lucrative pantheon. Instead, he tried the idea in his \"Inhumans\" stories. Now he was presenting it in its original context. Though he wouldn't ever say it publicly, the \"New Gods\" books started right after the gods in \"Thor\" killed one another. The first page of \"Orion of the New Gods\" showed the same scenes from \"Thor\"\u2014a planet torn in half and armored gods holding swords and dying on a fiery battleground.\n\"The Fourth World\" dealt with the battle between good and evil as represented by the worlds of New Genesis and Apokolips. Darkseid, the evil lord of Apokolips, seeks the Anti-Life Equation which will allow him to control the thoughts of all living beings. Opposing him is Orion, his son, who was raised on New Genesis. Other characters caught in the battle included the Forever People, an extension of the kid gang concept from the 1940s with a group of adolescents adventuring without an adult supervisor; Mister Miracle, a native of New Genesis raised on Apokolips who triumphed over a torturous childhood to become the world's greatest escape artist; and Lightray, the heroic warrior of New Genesis. Their adventures would take them to Earth where the war continued.\nComics historian Les Daniels observed in 1995 that \"Kirby's mix of slang and myth, science fiction and the Bible, made for a heady brew, but the scope of his vision has endured\". In 2007, comics writer Grant Morrison commented that \"Kirby's dramas were staged across Jungian vistas of raw symbol and storm... The Fourth World saga crackles with the voltage of Jack Kirby's boundless imagination let loose onto paper\".\nThe Fourth World characters reappeared in various titles. In 1976, the New Gods were featured in the last issue of \"1st Issue Special\". \"The New Gods\" series relaunched in July 1977, and with \"1st Issue Special\" still a relatively recent publication, it picked up where the storyline of that issue left off. Although the title remained \"The New Gods\" in the indicia and retained its original numbering, launching with #12, the covers used the title \"The Return of the New Gods\". Gerry Conway wrote the series and Don Newton drew it. Mister Miracle teamed-up with Batman three times in \"The Brave and the Bold\", and the \"Mister Miracle\" series was revived in September 1977 by Steve Englehart and Marshall Rogers. Steve Gerber and Michael Golden produced three issues ending with #25 (Sept. 1978), with several storylines unresolved. Mister Miracle teamed with Superman in \"DC Comics Presents\" #12 (Aug. 1979) and the New Gods met the Justice League of America and the Justice Society of America in \"Justice League of America\" #183\u2013185 (Oct\u2013Dec 1980). \"The Great Darkness Saga\" storyline in \"Legion of Super-Heroes\" vol. 2 featured the team battling Darkseid a thousand years in the future.\nOrigin of the name.\nMark Evanier, who worked as Kirby's assistant in the 1970s and later wrote an award-winning Kirby biography, has said that there are multiple, mutually-exclusive explanations for why Kirby chose the name \"Fourth World\", adding that \"if you'd asked Jack eight times, you'd have gotten eight more\"; ultimately, Evanier concluded that none of the suggested explanations are plausible, and that it is most likely \"just a term that popped into [Kirby's] head and he liked the sound of it. Later on, he came up with several different retroactive explanations\".\n1984 reprint series.\nIn 1984, DC Comics reprinted Jack Kirby's original 11 issues of \"The New Gods\" in a six-issue limited series. The first five issues each reprinted two consecutive issues of the original series. The mini-series' final issue was originally intended to include a reprint of \"New Gods\" vol. 1 #11 and a new 24-page story which would conclude the series and end with both Darkseid and Orion dead. DC editors prevented Kirby from using his original intended ending. Kirby instead turned in a one-off story called \"On the Road to Armagetto\" which was rejected as well, due to the fact that it did not contain a definitive ending to the series. A 48-page new story called \"Even Gods Must Die\" was published instead, serving as a prologue for \"The Hunger Dogs\" graphic novel, which was greenlit to conclude the series.\n\"The Hunger Dogs\" was designed to give an ending to the story of the New Gods, while fulfilling editorial mandates that the New Gods be kept alive to ensure future use of the characters by later writers. It incorporated several pages from the unpublished \"On the Road to Armagetto\" story and brought Kirby's \"New Gods\" series to a close as the \"hunger dogs\", the citizens of Apokolips, overthrow Darkseid.\nLater revivals.\nConcurrent with DC's \"New Gods\" reprint series in 1984, Kirby worked on two \"Super Powers\" comic book limited series for DC Comics in which he continued the Fourth World characters and mythology.\nA \"Forever People\" miniseries was published in 1988. Mister Miracle was featured in \"Justice League International\" by J. M. DeMatteis and Keith Giffen and a series of his own written by DeMatteis. The Fourth World characters were prominently featured in \"Cosmic Odyssey\", which led to a third \"New Gods\" series (February 1989 \u2013 August 1991), written by Mark Evanier, which fleshed out details about the history of many New Gods, most notably introducing Darkseid's father Yuga Khan. A fourth \"New Gods\" series was launched in October 1995, and a third \"Mister Miracle\" series in April 1996. \nBoth of these were replaced in March 1997 by the \"Jack Kirby's Fourth World\" series, written and drawn by John Byrne. Walt Simonson wrote and drew an \"Orion\" solo series from June 2000 to June 2002.\nWriter Grant Morrison used some of the Fourth World mythology in various titles they worked on, including their run on \"JLA\", with Orion and Big Barda becoming members, and in the \"Seven Soldiers\" metaseries, in which the New Gods, especially Mister Miracle, played a major role. They are seen creating Aurakles, the first superhero.\nThe \"Death of the New Gods\" limited series (October 2007 \u2013 April 2008) was written and drawn by Jim Starlin. \"Final Crisis\" brought about the end of the Fourth World and the dawn of the Fifth as Darkseid was destroyed and several New Gods are resurrected.\nWith the reboot of the DC Universe following \"Flashpoint\", the deaths of the New Gods and Darkseid have been removed from canon and the characters are still active. In particular, Darkseid and his uncle Steppenwolf and their attacks on the main DC Universe and Earth 2 play a major role in the rise of the superheroes: the Earth-2 versions of Superman, Batman, and Wonder Woman die fighting Steppenwolf while the Earth-1 Justice League forms to fight Darkseid and thwart his invasion of Earth.\nA New 52 version of the Forever People debuted in the \"Infinity Man and the Forever People\" series. Serifan is now Serafina, Vykin's sister, and Beautiful Dreamer has been renamed Dreamer Beautiful.\nFifth World.\nIn December 2007, DC Executive Editor Dan DiDio was discussing the aftermath of \"Death of the New Gods\" and pointed to the creation of Fifth World; he said: \"It's the advent of the Fifth World... I think we've telegraphed so much that the New Gods are coming upon a rebirth, and the story that we're telling with them now is a continuation of the story that was established when Kirby first conceived the concept. Talk about death\u2014Kirby blew up worlds at the start of the series. The story started with, 'The Old Gods Died!' which made room for the New Gods\u2014we're picking up that thread and launching the DCU into the future\".\nThat series led into \"Final Crisis\". DiDio clarified things further, saying that \"the Fourth World is over. The battle between the forces of Darkseid and those of Highfather is over, and a new direction is in place for the characters in what will be deemed the Fifth World\". The series' writer, Grant Morrison, added: \"In Jack Kirby's Fourth World books... it's pretty clear that the New Gods have known about Earth for a long time and in \"JLA\" ten years ago, I suggested that part of their interest in us was rooted in the fact that Earth was destined to become the cradle of a new race of 'Fifth World' super-divinities\u2014an eventuality Darkseid is eager to prevent from occurring\". It was during that run on \"JLA\" that Morrison had Metron deliver a speech outlining the general principles:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;How like little children you appear to me. How small is your comprehension and yet... there is a seed in you... The Old Gods died and gave birth to the New. These New Gods, even such as I, must also pass, in our turn. Our search was long and our war continues, but we found the planetary cradle of the Gods to Come. ... you are only forerunners.\nLater, in the \"JLA\" storyline \"World War III\", Metron's dialog is more specific: \"As New Genesis is to the Fourth World, Earth shall be to the Fifth that is to come\".\nCollected editions.\nTrade paperbacks.\nThe Kirby-produced \"Fourth World\" titles were reprinted by DC in trade paperback format in the early 2000s in black-and-white rather than in color, although the \"Superman's Pal Jimmy Olsen\" preludes were reprinted in color:\nOmnibus.\nDC reprinted the entire Fourth World saga in publishing order in the four volume hardback series \"Jack Kirby's Fourth World Omnibus\" from 2007 to 2008. In addition to the remaining issues of \"Mister Miracle\", \"Forever People\", and \"New Gods\", the fourth Omnibus included the Fourth World character entries written for \"Who's Who: The Definitive Directory of the DC Universe\", the 48-page \"Even Gods Must Die!\" from the last issue of the 1984 Baxter reprint series, and \"The Hunger Dogs\" graphic novel. The series was reprinted in paperback starting in late 2011. In 2017, in honor of Kirby's 100th birthday, DC Comics released a new hardcover omnibus collecting the story in its entirety. New contents included essays from Mark Evanier and Walter Simonson, and Kirby pencils, profiles, and pinups. The collection was released on December 12 the same year. The $150 omnibus however had a mistake, omitting the splash page from \"Jimmy Olsen\" #148, reprinting a page from an earlier episode instead.\nIn September 2021, a new edition, correcting the original error, with better quality paper stock at a reduced price was published with 50 additional pages of unpublished material.\nAwards.\nJack Kirby received a Shazam Award for the original metaseries in the category \"Special Achievement by an Individual\" in 1971.\nIn 1998, \"Jack Kirby's New Gods\" by Jack Kirby, edited by Bob Kahan, won both the Harvey Award for \"Best Domestic Reprint Project\" and the Eisner Award for \"Best Archival Collection/Project\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74995", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74995", "title": "Tuvalu/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "74996", "revid": "20480869", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74996", "title": "Miramax", "text": "American film and television production and distribution company\nMiramax, LLC, formerly known as Miramax Films, is an American independent film and television production and distribution company owned by Qatari state-owned beIN Media Group and Paramount Skydance Corporation. Based in Los Angeles, California, it was founded in 1979, by brothers Harvey and Bob Weinstein.\nMiramax was a leading producer and distributor of independent films until it was acquired by The Walt Disney Company on June 30, 1993. In 2010, Disney sold Miramax to Filmyard Holdings, a joint venture of Colony NorthStar, Tutor-Saliba Corporation and Qatar Investment Authority. In March 2016, Miramax was sold to beIN Media Group, which later sold a 49% stake to Paramount Skydance Corporation (previously known as ViacomCBS and Paramount Global) on April 3, 2020.\nHistory.\nIndependent era (1979\u20131993).\nMiramax was founded as initially Miramax Films by the Weinstein brothers, Harvey and Bob along with executive Corky Burger in Buffalo, New York, in 1979, and was named by combining the first names of their parents, Miriam and Max. It was created to distribute independent films deemed commercially unfeasible by the major studios.\nThe company's first major success came when the Weinsteins teamed up with British producer Martin Lewis and acquired the U.S. rights to two concert films Lewis had produced of benefit shows for human rights organization Amnesty International. The Weinsteins worked with Lewis to distill the two films into one film for the American marketplace. The resulting film, the American version of \"The Secret Policeman's Other Ball\", was a successful release for Miramax in the summer of 1982. This release presaged a \"modus operandi\" that the company would undertake later in the 1980s of acquiring films from international filmmakers and reworking them to suit American sensibilities and audiences. In its early years, Miramax Films had to focus primarily as a catalyst for music and decided to do a licensing agreement with Thorn EMI Video to release several of Miramax's early films.\nAmong the company's other breakthrough films as distributors in the late 1980s and early 1990s were \"Pulp Fiction\", \"Scandal\", \"Sex, Lies, and Videotape\", \"Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down!\", \"The Crying Game,\" and \"Clerks\". The company also made films such as \"Flirting with Disaster\", \"Heavenly Creatures\", and \"Shakespeare in Love\".\nMiramax Films acquired and/or produced many other films that did well financially. The company became one of the leaders of the independent film boom of the 1990s. Miramax Films produced or distributed seven films with box office grosses totaling more than $100\u00a0million; its highest grossing title, \"Chicago\", earned more than $300 million worldwide.\nThe company was also successful in securing Academy Award nominations for its releases, many of which resulted in Oscar wins.\nMiramax expanded its empire when the company launched two new labels Millimeter Films in 1988 by Bob Weinstein for genre films, and arthouse label Prestige Films in 1990, run by Mark Lipsky, later replaced by Gerry Rich, and the latter was folded into Miramax Films, and the former was renamed to Dimension Films.\nDisney era (1993\u20132010).\nOn June 30, 1993, The Walt Disney Company purchased Miramax Films for $60 million and assumed all of the company's debt, which was more than $40 million. The acquisition gave Disney entry to the independent film market. Harvey and Bob Weinstein continued to operate Miramax Films until they left the company on September 30, 2005. During their tenure, the Weinstein brothers ran Miramax Films independently of other Disney subsidiaries and, as a result, had more autonomy than the other Disney-owned companies. Disney, however, had the final say on what Miramax Films could release (for example, Disney had banned Miramax Films from releasing \"Kids\", \"Dogma\" and \"Fahrenheit 9/11\"). Disney's Buena Vista Home Entertainment division released Miramax output on VHS, DVD, and Blu-ray Disc under the name Miramax Home Entertainment in some countries, including the United States; elsewhere, the overall distribution of Miramax Films' output was passed to the regional licensees of Miramax International, a distribution arm of Miramax Films that was fully autonomous from Disney's own distribution operations.\nWith a more stable budget, Miramax Films began moving beyond acquisitions and distribution and into film production. Until September 30, 2005, the company also operated the label Dimension Films, which was solely founded by Bob to specialize in teen, horror, and other genre films, and created the \"Scream\" and \"Scary Movie\" film franchises. Harvey funded larger projects from up-and-coming directors, including Robert Rodriguez, Gus Van Sant, and Quentin Tarantino. Some of the films earned Oscars. At times the studio tried to release a film almost weekly.\nIn 1997, Miramax Films joined Peter Jackson as a primary financial backer in attempting to get the \"Lord of the Rings\" films produced. Disney disliked the cost of a two-parter, requesting that it be produced as a single film. Jackson and Saul Zaentz rejected Disney's request and looked for another studio or financier. Thus, Miramax Films sold the rights for \"The Lord of the Rings\" and \"The Hobbit\" to New Line Cinema in August 1998 for about $12 million, which led \"The Lord of the Rings\" to be produced as a trilogy. Miramax Films retained a 5% stake in the films' gross and then gave 2.5% to the Weinsteins.\nThrough Miramax Films, Harvey founded \"Talk\" magazine with Tina Brown in 1998 (it shut down in 2002), albeit without the approval of then-Disney chief Michael Eisner, which upset Eisner. Also that year, 30 former employees filed suit over unpaid overtime wages.\nBy 2003, Miramax Films was less operative in the independent film market and became more of a mini-major as the company only acquired 3 films while producing \"Cold Mountain\" for $80 million. The Weinsteins claimed the company was profitable, but Walt Disney Company president Robert Iger indicated in June 2004 that they were not properly accounting for \"account standard overhead, distribution fees, bonuses that we pay Harvey and Bob. Nor are they applying current accounting rules.\"\nAfter extensive negotiations and much media and industry speculation, on March 30, 2005, Disney and the Weinsteins announced that they would not renew their contractual relationship when their existing agreements expired at the end of September 2005. The primary source of dispute was over distribution of \"Fahrenheit 9/11\" by Michael Moore. Disney's film studio consortium, Buena Vista Motion Pictures Group, assumed control of Miramax Films, which was projected to have a smaller annual production budget. The Weinsteins started a new film production company called The Weinstein Company (TWC) and took the Dimension Films label with them. The Miramax Films name remained with the film studio owned by Disney. Production at Miramax Films was taken over by Daniel Battsek, who had been head of Buena Vista International in the UK. Battsek refocused Miramax Films to produce films of high quality but low budget. Maple Pictures held the rights to distribute Miramax films in Canada from 2008 up until August 10, 2011, when Maple Pictures was acquired by Alliance Films. At the time, the company was criticized for delaying or withholding release of Asian films to which it acquired the U.S. distribution rights. Previously, in 2003, the company was criticized for trying to bar retailers from legally exporting authentic DVDs of the films.\nOn October 3, 2009, Disney announced that the staff of Miramax Films was to be reduced by 70%, and the number of releases would be reduced by half to just three films per year. The label's marketing, distribution, and administrative functions, which had operated independently, would be folded into the parent studio in Burbank. The move became effective in January 2010. On October 30, 2009, Disney announced the resignation of Daniel Battsek as President of Miramax Films, effective when the transition from the studio in New York to Burbank was completed. The company moved its operations to The Walt Disney Studios in Burbank was completed on January 28, 2010, shutting down Miramax Films' separate New York and Los Angeles offices.\nThough Disney Studio Chairman Dick Cook was a staunch supporter of Miramax Films, the brand was less of a priority for CEO Bob Iger, whose strategy was to focus on Disney's branded mass entertainment that could be exploited across Disney's theme parks, television, and consumer products. Following Disney's $4 billion acquisition of Marvel Entertainment in 2009, Cook was succeeded by Rich Ross. As a result, Miramax Films was relegated to the status of distribution label within the Walt Disney Company. Disney confirmed that it was looking into selling the Miramax label on February 9, 2010, with Iger explaining \"We determined that continuing to invest in new Miramax movies wasn't necessarily a core strategy of ours\".\nOther companies and post-Disney ownership era (2010\u20132019).\nOn December 3, 2010, Disney closed the sale of Miramax for US$663 million to Filmyard Holdings, an investment group and joint venture of Colony NorthStar, Tutor-Saliba Corporation, and Qatar Investment Authority. The sale included 700 film titles, books, development projects, and the \"Miramax\" name. Mike Lang, the former News Corporation business development executive who was selected as the CEO of Miramax, indicated that the company would focus on their existing library, though they would continue making original content.\nAfter the sale was closed, some films already developed at Miramax, including \"The Tempest\" and \"Gnomeo &amp; Juliet\", were eventually released by Disney under its Touchstone Pictures banner, and theatrical distribution of \"Don't Be Afraid of the Dark\" and \"The Debt\" were shifted to FilmDistrict and Focus Features respectively.\nOn December 16, 2013, Miramax entered into a deal with Harvey and Bob Weinstein's The Weinstein Company to develop and distribute select derivative works of films from the former studio. Sequels, television series, or stage productions of titles such as \"Rounders\" and \"Shakespeare in Love\" were among the projects said to be part of this agreement.&lt;ref name=\"Miramax Press Release 12/16/13\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nOn July 17, 2015, Qatar and Colony NorthStar put Miramax up for sale for an offer of $1 billion. Harvey and Bob Weinstein had reportedly regained interest in reacquiring the studio via TWC in September. On March 2, 2016, Miramax was sold to beIN Media Group, a spinoff of Al Jazeera Media Network (which formerly owned its namesake beIN Sports).\nOn a July 21, 2016, interview, Harvey Weinstein stated that he was still interested in combining TWC's film library with Miramax's, after the acquisition of Miramax by beIN.\nAfter Miramax's founder Harvey Weinstein was accused of sexual assault in October 2017, Miramax became one of 60 parties bidding on TWC on January 16, 2018. On April 27, Miramax and Lantern Capital emerged as the strongest contenders to acquire TWC's assets. Ultimately, it was Lantern that acquired TWC's library.\nOn June 7, 2019, beIN began the process of selling approximately 50% of Miramax in an effort to offer it for growth. Lionsgate (which distributed Miramax's titles on home video), Spyglass Media Group (owners of the Weinstein Company library, inherited via their deal with Lantern) and Viacom (Paramount's parent company who re-merged with CBS Corporation on December 4, 2019, to form ViacomCBS) were seen as the leading contenders to acquire a stake in the company. By August 19, 2019, Lionsgate and Viacom were the only contenders, as Spyglass Media Group dropped out of contention. On September 11, 2019, it was announced Lionsgate had dropped their bid, making Viacom the only bidder for the stake in Miramax. On November 8, 2019, Viacom exited the negotiations to acquire them. After merging with CBS Corporation to become ViacomCBS, the combined firm resumed talks with Miramax.\nParamount era (2019\u2013present).\nOn December 20, 2019, ViacomCBS (now known as Paramount Skydance Corporation) announced it would acquire a 49% stake in Miramax for at least $375 million, with Paramount Pictures gaining exclusive worldwide distribution rights to its film and television library. Paramount Pictures and Miramax will also co-produce new content based on titles from the library. The deal officially closed on April 3, 2020.\nOn June 24, 2020, Miramax and ViacomCBS announced their first co-production, \"The Turkish Detective\", a television series based on the \"Cetin Ikmen\" novels by Barbara Nadel.\nOn October 2, 2023, it was announced that CEO Bill Block would be leaving the company that week following the end of his contract with them, starting his own production company, BlockFilm, later that month. In January 2024, Jonathan Glickman was reported to be in talks to join Miramax as CEO, with his company Panoramic Media expected to be acquired by Miramax if talks were successful. On April 2, 2024, Glickman was officially named Miramax's new CEO effective immediately. As part of the deal, Miramax also acquired certain film and television projects from Glickman's company Panoramic Media.\nDivisions.\nMiramax Family &amp; Animation.\nMiramax Family Films was the family division of Miramax Films, founded on September 2, 1993. After the Weinstein brothers left Miramax on September 30, 2005, the label was quietly discontinued in June 2006. After The Weinstein Company was completely shut down along with its website on July 16, 2018, Miramax revived its family and animation divisions, with both being founded as separate divisions within the company on March 18, 2019.\nMichael Lachance, who had previously developed projects at DreamWorks Animation and Sony Pictures Animation, was named the division's executive vice president.\nFilmography.\nFilm series.\nHighest-Grossing Films\nFilms and TV shows distributed by Miramax Family are listed here:\nMiramax Television.\nMiramax Television is the television production division founded in 1987, assigned to producing television shows based on the existing Miramax film library and original concepts. Although Miramax produced its series as early as 1987, Miramax expanded its foray into game shows with an attempted version of \"What's My Line?\" in 1996, followed by a proper television division in 1998. In 2001, Mort Marcus became chairman of the company, only to leave in 2002 to reestablish Debmar Studios.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74997", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74997", "title": "Van der Graaf Generator (rock band)", "text": ""}
{"id": "74998", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74998", "title": "Republic of the Congo/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "75000", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75000", "title": "Syria/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "75003", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75003", "title": "Coelom", "text": "Main body cavity in many animals\nThe coelom (or celom) is the main body cavity in many animals and is positioned inside the body to surround and contain the digestive tract and other organs. In some animals, it is lined with mesothelium. In other animals, such as molluscs, it remains undifferentiated. In the past, and for practical purposes, coelom characteristics have been used to classify bilaterian animal phyla into informal groups.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"coelom\" derives from the Ancient Greek word () 'cavity'.\nStructure.\nDevelopment.\nThe coelom is the mesodermally lined cavity between the gut and the outer body wall.\nDuring the development of the embryo, coelom formation begins in the gastrulation stage. The developing digestive tube of an embryo forms as a blind pouch called the archenteron.\nIn protostomes, the coelom forms by a process known as schizocoely. The archenteron initially forms, and the mesoderm splits into two layers: the first attaches to the body wall or ectoderm, forming the parietal layer and the second surrounds the endoderm or alimentary canal forming the visceral layer. The space between the parietal layer and the visceral layer is known as the coelom or body cavity.\nIn deuterostomes, the coelom forms by enterocoely. The archenteron wall produces buds of mesoderm, and these mesodermal diverticula hollow to become the coelomic cavities. Deuterostomes are therefore known as \"enterocoelomates\". Examples of deuterostome coelomates belong to three major clades: chordates (vertebrates, tunicates, and lancelets), echinoderms (starfish, sea urchins, sea cucumbers), and hemichordates (acorn worms and graptolites).\nOrigins.\nThe evolutionary origin of the coelom is uncertain. The oldest fossil presumed to have been an animal with a body cavity was the \"Vernanimalcula\". Current hypothesis include:\nFunctions.\nA coelom can absorb shock or provide a hydrostatic skeleton. It can also support an immune system in the form of coelomocytes that may either be attached to the wall of the coelom or may float about in it freely. The coelom allows muscles to grow independently of the body wall \u2014 this feature can be seen in the digestive tract of tardigrades (water bears) which is suspended within the body in the mesentery derived from a mesoderm-lined coelom.\nCoelomic fluid.\nThe fluid inside the coelom is known as coelomic fluid. This is circulated by mesothelial cilia or by contraction of muscles in the body wall. The coelomic fluid serves several functions: it acts as a hydroskeleton; it allows free movement and growth of internal organs; it serves for transport of gases, nutrients and waste products around the body; it allows storage of sperm and eggs during maturation; and it acts as a reservoir for waste.\nClassification in zoology.\nIn the past, some zoologists grouped bilaterian animal phyla based on characteristics related to the coelom for practical purposes, knowing, and explicitly stating, that these groups were \"not\" phylogenetically related. Animals were classified in three informal groups according to the type of body cavity they possess, in a non-taxonomic, utilitarian way, as the Acoelomata, Pseudocoelomata, and Coelomata. These groups were never intended to represent related animals, or a sequence of evolutionary traits.\nHowever, although this scheme was followed by a number of college textbooks and some general classifications, it is now almost totally abandoned as a formal classification. Indeed, as late as 2010, one author of a molecular phylogeny study mistakenly called this classification scheme the \"traditional, morphology-based phylogeny\".\nCoelomate animals or Coelomata (also known as eucoelomates \u2013 \"true coelom\") have a body cavity called a coelom with a complete lining called peritoneum derived from mesoderm (one of the three primary tissue layers). The complete mesoderm lining allows organs to be attached to each other so that they can be suspended in a particular order while still being able to move freely within the cavity. Most bilateral animals, including all the vertebrates, are coelomates.\nPseudocoelomate animals have a pseudocoelom (literally \"false cavity\"), which is a fluid filled body cavity. Tissue derived from mesoderm partly lines the fluid filled body cavity of these animals. Thus, although organs are held in place loosely, they are not as well organized as in a coelomate. All pseudocoelomates are protostomes; however, not all protostomes are pseudocoelomates. An example of a pseudocoelomate is the roundworm. Pseudocoelomate animals are also referred to as blastocoelomate.\nAcoelomate animals, like flatworms, have no body cavity at all. Semi-solid mesodermal tissues between the gut and body wall hold their organs in place.\nCoelomates.\nCoeloms developed in triploblasts but were subsequently lost in several lineages. The lack of a coelom is correlated with a reduction in body size. Coelom is sometimes incorrectly used to refer to any developed digestive tract. Some organisms may not possess a coelom or may have a false coelom (pseudocoelom). Animals having coeloms are called coelomates, and those without are called acoelomates. There are also subtypes of coelom:\nCoelomate phyla.\nAccording to Brusca and Brusca, the following bilaterian phyla possess a coelom:\nPseudocoelomates.\nIn some protostomes, the embryonic blastocoele persists as a body cavity. These protostomes have a fluid filled main body cavity unlined or partially lined with tissue derived from mesoderm.\nThis fluid-filled space surrounding the internal organs serves several functions like distribution of nutrients and removal of waste or supporting the body as a hydrostatic skeleton.\nA pseudocoelomate or blastocoelomate is any invertebrate animal with a three-layered body and a pseudocoel. The coelom was apparently lost or reduced as a result of mutations in certain types of genes that affected early development. Thus, pseudocoelomates evolved from coelomates. \"Pseudocoelomate\" is no longer considered a valid taxonomic group, since it is not monophyletic. However, it is still used as a descriptive term.\nImportant characteristics:\nPseudocoelomate phyla.\nBilaterian pseudocoelomate phyla according to Brusca and Brusca,:\nAcoelomates.\nAcoelomates lack a fluid-filled body cavity between the body wall and digestive tract. This can cause some serious disadvantages. Fluid compression is negligible, while the tissue surrounding the organs of these animals will compress. Therefore, acoelomate organs are not protected from crushing forces applied to the animal's outer surface. The coelom can be used for diffusion of gases and metabolites etc. These creatures do not have this need, as the surface area to volume ratio is large enough to allow absorption of nutrients and gas exchange by diffusion alone, due to dorso-ventral flattening.\nA body cavity is also absent in placozoans, cnidarians (jellyfish and allies) and the ctenophores (comb jellies), but these animals are neither bilaterians or triploblastic.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75004", "revid": "48911350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75004", "title": "UART", "text": ""}
{"id": "75005", "revid": "50656507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75005", "title": "Emergency medical technician", "text": "Professional that provides emergency medical services\nAn emergency medical technician (often, more simply, EMT) is a medical professional that provides emergency medical services. EMTs are most commonly found serving on ambulances and in fire departments in the US and Canada, as full-time and some part-time departments require their firefighters to at least be EMT certified. \nEMTs are often employed by public ambulance services, municipal EMS agencies, governments, hospitals, and fire departments. Some EMTs are paid employees, while others (particularly those in rural areas) are volunteers. EMTs provide medical care under a set of protocols, which are typically written by a physician.\nEMTs often work alongside other EMS professionals such as paramedics, who receive additional training and are granted a greater scope of practice.\nHazard controls.\nEMTs are exposed to a variety of hazards such as lifting patients and equipment, treating those with infectious disease, handling hazardous substances, and transportation via ground or air vehicles. Employers can prevent occupational illness or injury by providing safe patient handling equipment, implementing a training program to educate EMTs on job hazards, and supplying PPE such as respirators, gloves, and isolation gowns when dealing with biological hazards.\nInfectious disease has become a major concern in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. In response, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and other agencies and organizations have issued guidance regarding workplace hazard controls for COVID-19. Some specific recommendations include modified call queries, symptom screening, universal PPE use, hand hygiene, physical distancing, and stringent disinfection protocols. Research on ambulance ventilation systems found that aerosols often recirculate throughout the compartment, creating a health hazard for EMTs when transporting sick patients capable of airborne transmission. Unidirectional airflow design can better protect workers.\nCanada.\nThere is considerable degree of inter-provincial variation in the Canadian paramedic practice. Although a national consensus (by way of the National Occupational Competency Profile) identifies certain knowledge, skills, and abilities as being most synonymous with a given level of paramedic practice, each province retains ultimate authority in legislating the actual administration and delivery of emergency medical services within its own borders. For this reason, any discussion of \"paramedic practice\" in Canada is necessarily broad, and general. Specific regulatory frameworks and questions related to paramedic practices can only definitively be answered by consulting relevant provincial legislation, although provincial paramedic associations may often offer a simpler overview of this topic when it is restricted to a province-by-province basis.\nIn Canada, the levels of paramedic practice as defined by the National Occupational Competency Profile are: emergency medical responder (EMR), primary care paramedic, advanced care paramedic, and critical care paramedic.\nRegulatory frameworks vary from province to province, and include direct government regulation (such as Ontario's method of credentialing its practitioners with the title of A-EMCA, or advanced emergency medical care assistant) to professional self-regulating bodies, such as the Alberta College of Paramedics. In Alberta, for instance, only someone registered with the Alberta College of Paramedics can call themselves a paramedic; the title is legally protected. Almost all provinces have moved to adopting the new titles, or have at least recognized the NOCP document as a benchmarking document to permit inter-provincial labour mobility of practitioners, regardless of how titles are specifically regulated within their own provincial systems. In this manner, the confusing myriad of titles and occupational descriptions can at least be discussed using a common language for comparison sake.\nEmergency medical responder.\nMost providers that work in ambulances are identified as \"paramedics\" by the public. However, in many cases, the most prevalent level of emergency pre-hospital care is that which is provided by an emergency medical responder (EMR). This is a level of practice recognized under the National Occupational Competency Profile, although unlike the next three successive levels of practice, the high number of EMRs across Canada cannot be ignored as contributing a critical role in the chain of survival, although it is a level of practice that is least comprehensive (clinically speaking), and is also generally not consistent with any medical acts beyond advanced first-aid and oxygen therapy, administration of ASA, I.M. epinephrine and glucagon, oral glucose and administration of intranasal Narcan with the exception of automated external defibrillation (which is still considered a regulated medical act in most provinces in Canada).\nPrimary care paramedic.\nPrimary care paramedics (PCP) are the entry-level of paramedic practice in Canadian provinces. The scope of practice includes performing semi-automated external defibrillation, interpretation of 4-lead ECGs, administration of symptom relief medications for a variety of emergency medical conditions (these include oxygen, epinephrine, dextrose, glucagon, salbutamol, ASA and nitroglycerine), performing trauma immobilization (including cervical immobilization), and other fundamental basic medical care. Primary care paramedics may also receive additional training in order to perform certain skills that are normally in the scope of practice of advanced care paramedics. This is regulated both provincially (by statute) and locally (by the medical director), and ordinarily entails an aspect of medical oversight by a specific body or group of physicians. This is often referred to as \"medical control\", or a role played by a base hospital. For example, in the provinces of Ontario, Quebec and Newfoundland and Labrador, many paramedic services allow primary care paramedics to perform 12-lead ECG interpretation, or initiate intravenous therapy to deliver a few additional medications.\nAdvanced care paramedic.\nAdvanced care paramedic (ACP) is a level of practitioner that is in high demand by many services across Canada. However, Quebec only utilizes this level of practice in a very limited fashion as part of a pilot program in Montreal. The ACP typically carries approximately 20 different medications, although the number and type of medications may vary substantially from region to region. ACPs perform advanced airway management including intubation, surgical airways, intravenous therapy, place external jugular IV lines, perform needle thoracotomy, perform and interpret 12-lead ECGs, perform synchronized and chemical cardioversion, transcutaneous pacing, perform obstetrical assessments, and provide pharmacological pain relief for various conditions. Several sites in Canada have adopted pre-hospital fibrinolytics and rapid sequence induction, and prehospital medical research has permitted a great number of variations in the scope of practice for ACPs. Current programs include providing ACPs with discretionary direct 24-hour access to PCI labs, bypassing the emergency department, and representing a fundamental change in both the way that patients with S-T segment elevation myocardial infarctions (STEMI) are treated, but also profoundly affecting survival rates, as well as bypassing closer hospitals to get an identified stroke patient to a stroke centre.\nCritical care paramedic.\nCritical care paramedics (CCPs) are paramedics who generally do not respond to 9-1-1 emergency calls, with the exception of helicopter \"scene\" calls. Instead they focus on transferring patients from the hospital they are currently in to other hospitals that can provide a higher level of care. CCPs often work in collaboration with registered nurses and respiratory therapists during hospital transfers. This ensures continuity of care. However, when acuity is manageable by a CCP or a registered nurse or respiratory therapist is not available, CCPs will work alone. Providing this care to the patient allows the sending hospital to avoid losing highly trained staff on hospital transfers.\nCCPs are able to provide all of the care that PCPs and ACPs provide. That being said, CCPs significantly lack practical experience with advanced skills such as IV initiation, peripheral access to cardiovascular system for fluid and drug administration, advanced airway, and many other techniques. While a PCP and ACP may run 40\u201350 medical codes per year, a CCP may run 1\u20132 in an entire career. IV/IO starts are nearly non-existent in the field and for this reason CCPs are required to attend nearly double the amount of time in classroom situations or in hospital to keep current. In addition to this, they are trained for other skills such as medication infusion pumps, mechanical ventilation, and arterial line monitoring.\nCCPs often work in fixed and rotary wing aircraft when the weather permits and staff are available, but systems such as the Toronto EMS Critical Care Transport Program work in land ambulances. ORNGE transport operates both land and aircraft in Ontario. In British Columbia, CCPs work primarily in aircraft with a dedicated critical care transport crew in Trail for long-distance transfers and a regular CCP street crew stationed in South Vancouver that often also performs medevacs when necessary.\nTraining.\nParamedic training in Canada varies regionally; for example, the length of training may be eight months in British Columbia or two to four years in Ontario, Alberta, and Quebec. The nature of training and how it is regulated, like actual paramedic practice, varies from province to province.\nIreland.\nEmergency medical technician (EMT), paramedic (P) and advanced paramedic (AP) are legally defined and protected titles in Ireland based on the standard set down by the Pre-Hospital Emergency Care Council (PHECC). Emergency medical technician is the entry-level standard of practitioner for employment within the ambulance service. Currently, EMTs are authorized to work on non-emergency ambulances only as the standard for emergency (999) calls is a minimum of a two-paramedic crew, although this minimum requirement was relaxed to and EMT - paramedic crew during the COVID-19 crisis. EMTs are a vital part of the private, voluntary and auxiliary services where a practitioner must be on board any ambulance in the process of transporting a patient to hospital.\nPhilippines.\nEmergency medical technician (EMT), paramedic (P) and advanced paramedic (AP) are legally defined and protected titles in the Philippines based on the standard set down by the Department of Health.\nSpain.\n\"T\u00e9cnico en Emergencias Sanitarias\" (TES) are trained a total of 2000hrs in 2 years with 3 months of internship in ambulances at the very end. It's the only level of EMS worker. BLS ambulances can be driven with a B license, ALS with a C1.\nALS ambulances also carry an Emergency Physician and an Emergency Nurse.\nUnited Kingdom.\n\"Emergency medical technician\" is a term that has existed for many years in the United Kingdom, but has no single defined scope. They may be known as \"emergency medical technician\" or simply, \"ambulance technician\". Most EMTs hold an Institute for Healthcare Development Ambulance Technician Certificate and are employed in private ambulance companies or in National Health Service ambulance trusts.\nAs of 2016, The IHCD Ambulance Technician Certificate was replaced with the FAQ Level 4 Diploma for Associate Ambulance Practitioners &amp; QA Level 5 Diploma in First Response Emergency and Urgent Care (RQF) This provided a defined scope of practice agreed nationally by ambulance service trusts. Their role title, however, may still be defined by their employer as \"emergency medical technician\". \nThey can work autonomously, making their own clinical decisions within their training and remit. They may also work as a clinical lead working alongside an emergency care assistant or as assistants themselves to a paramedic.\nAs the role does not have a single defined scope, the skills they have can include:\nThe term \"emergency medical technician\" is not commonly used by members of the public in the United Kingdom. Instead, it is common for all ambulance personnel to be referred to as \"paramedics\", although the paramedic title is protected under registration of the Health and Care Professions Council.\nUnited States.\nCertification.\nIn the United States, EMTs are certified according to their level of training. Individual states set their own standards of certification (or licensure, in some cases) and all EMT training must meet the minimum requirements as set by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's (NHTSA's) standards for curriculum. The National Registry of Emergency Medical Technicians (NREMT) is a nonprofit organization which offers certification exams based on NHTSA education guidelines and has been around since the 1970s. Currently, NREMT exams are used by 46 states as the sole basis for certification at one or more EMT certification levels. A NREMT exam consists of skills and patient assessments as well as a written portion.\nOn June 12, 2019, the NREMT changed the rules regarding age limits for EMTs, AEMTs, and paramedics. There is no longer an age limit for registered personnel. However, applicants must successfully complete a state-approved EMT course that meets or exceeds the NREMT standards within the past two years of applying. Those applying for the NREMT certification must also complete a state-approved EMT psychomotor exam. It is possible for the candidate to be refused access to a state-approved course due to their age within the state.\nLevels.\nNHTSA recognizes four levels of certification:\nSome states also recognize the advanced practice paramedic or critical care paramedic level as a state-specific licensure above that of paramedic. These critical care paramedics generally perform high acuity transports that require skills outside the scope of a standard paramedic (such as mechanical ventilation and management of cardiac assist devices). In addition, EMTs can seek out specialty certifications such as wilderness EMT, wilderness paramedic, tactical EMT, and flight paramedic.\nIn 2009, the NREMT posted information about a transition to a new system of levels for emergency care providers developed by NHTSA with the National EMS Scope of Practice Project. By 2014, these new levels replaced the fragmented system found around the United States. The new classification includes emergency medical responder (replacing first responder), emergency medical technician (replacing EMT-basic), advanced emergency medical technician (replacing EMT-intermediate/85), and paramedic (replacing EMT-intermediate/99 and EMT-paramedic). Education requirements in transitioning to the new levels are substantially similar.\nEmergency Medical Responder (EMR).\nEMR is the most basic level of training, and is considered the bare minimum certification for rescuers that respond to medical emergencies. EMRs are typically on-call volunteers in rural communities, or are primarily employed as firefighters or search and rescue personnel. EMRs typically arrive quickly and assess and stabilize the patient before the transporting ambulance arrives, and then assist the crew with patient care and packaging. \nEMRs provide advanced first aid-level care, CPR, semi-automatic defibrillation, basic airway management (suction/oropharyngeal airway), oxygen therapy, and administration of basic, life-saving medications such as epinephrine and naloxone.\nEmergency Medical Technician (EMT).\nEMT is the next level of EMS certification and is considered the most common entry level of training. The procedures and skills allowed at this level include bleeding control, management of burns, splinting of suspected fractures and spinal injuries, childbirth, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, semi-automatic defibrillation, oral suctioning, insertion of oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal airways, pulse oximetry, blood glucose monitoring, auscultation of lung sounds, and administration of a limited set of medications (including oxygen, epinephrine, dextrose, naloxone, albuterol, ipratropium bromide, glucagon, nitroglycerin, nitrous oxide, and acetylsalicylic acid). Some areas may add to the scope of practice, including intravenous access, insertion of supraglottic airway devices, and CPAP. Training requirements and treatment protocols vary from area to area.\nAdvanced EMT.\nAdvanced EMT is the level of training between EMT and paramedic. They can provide intermediate life support (ILS) care including obtaining intravenous or intraosseous access, basic cardiac monitoring, fluid resuscitation, capnography, and administration of some additional medications.\nParamedic.\nParamedics typically represent the highest degree of pre-hospital medical provider, providing advanced life support (ALS) care. Paramedics perform a variety of medical procedures such as endotracheal intubation, rapid sequence induction, cricothyrotomy, fluid resuscitation, drug administration, obtaining intravenous and intraosseous access, manual defibrillation, electrocardiogram interpretation, capnography, cardioversion, transcutaneous pacing, pericardiocentesis, thoracostomy, ultrasonography, and blood chemistry interpretation.\nStaffing levels.\nAn ambulance with only EMTs is considered a basic life support (BLS) unit, an ambulance utilizing AEMTs is dubbed an \"intermediate life support\" (ILS), or \"limited advanced life support\" (LALS) unit, and an ambulance with paramedics is dubbed an \"advanced life support\" (ALS) unit. Many states allow ambulance crews to contain a mix of crews levels (e.g. an EMT and a paramedic or an AEMT and a paramedic) to staff ambulances and operate at the level of the highest trained provider. There is nothing stopping supplemental crew members to be of a certain certification, though (e.g. if an ALS ambulance is required to have two paramedics, then it is acceptable to have two paramedics and an EMT). An emergency vehicle with only EMRs or a combination of both EMRs and EMTs is still dubbed a \"basic life support\" (BLS) unit. An EMR must usually be overseen by an EMT-level provider or higher to work on a transporting ambulance.\nEducation and training.\nEMT training programs for certification vary greatly from course to course, provided that each course at least meets local and national requirements. In the United States, EMRs receive at least 40\u201380 hours of classroom training and EMTs receive at least 120\u2013300 hours of classroom training. AEMTs generally have 100\u2013300 hours of additional classroom training beyond the standard EMT training. Paramedics are trained for 1,500\u20132,500 hours or more. \nIn addition to each level's didactic education, clinical rotations are typically also required. Similar in a sense to medical school clinical rotations, EMT students are required to spend a required amount of time in an ambulance and on a variety of hospital services (e.g. obstetrics, emergency medicine, surgery, intensive care unit, psychiatry) in order to complete a course and become eligible for the certification and licensure exams.\nThe number of clinical hours for both time in an ambulance and time in the hospital vary depending on local requirements, the level the student is obtaining, and the amount of time it takes the student to show competency.\nIn addition, a minimum of continuing education (CE) hours is required to maintain certification. For example, to maintain NREMT certification, EMTs must obtain at least 48 hours of additional education and either complete a 24-hour refresher course or complete an additional 24 hours of CE that cover, on an hour by hour basis, the same topics as the refresher course would. Recertification for other levels follows a similar pattern.\nEMT training programs vary greatly in calendar length (number of days or months). For example, fast track programs are available for EMTs that are completed in two weeks by holding class for 8 to 12 hours a day for at least two weeks. Other training programs are months long, or up to two years for paramedics in associate degree programs. \nEMT training programs take place at numerous locations, such as universities, community colleges, technical schools, hospitals or EMS academies. Every state in the United States has an EMS lead agency or state office of emergency medical services that regulates and accredits EMT training programs. Most of these offices have web sites to provide information to the public and individuals who are interested in becoming an EMT.\nMedical direction.\nIn the United States, an EMT's actions in the field are governed by state regulations, local regulations, and by the policies of their EMS organization. The development of these policies are guided by a physician medical director, often with the advice of a medical advisory committee composed of paramedics and other health professionals.\nIn California, for example, each county's local emergency medical service agency (LEMSA) issues a list of standard operating procedures or protocols, under the supervision of the California Emergency Medical Services Authority. These procedures often vary from county to county based on local needs, levels of training and clinical experiences. New York State has similar procedures, whereas a regional medical-advisory council (REMAC) determines protocols for one or more counties in a geographical section of the state.\nTreatments and procedures administered by paramedics fall under one of two categories, off-line medical orders (standing orders) and on-line medical orders. On-line medical orders refers to procedures that must be explicitly approved by a base hospital physician or registered nurse through voice communication (generally by phone or radio) and are generally rare or high risk procedures (e.g. vasopressor initiation). In addition, when multiple levels can perform the same procedure (e.g. AEMT-critical care and paramedics in New York), a procedure can be both an on-line and a standing order depending on the level of the provider. Since no set of protocols can cover every patient situation, many systems work with protocols as guidelines. Systems also have policies in place to handle medical direction when communication failures happen or in disaster situations. The NHTSA curriculum is the foundation Standard of Care for EMS providers in the US.\nEmployment.\nEMTs and paramedics are employed in varied settings, mainly the prehospital environment such as in EMS, fire, and police agencies. They can also be found in positions ranging from hospital and health care settings, to industrial and entertainment positions. The prehospital environment is loosely divided into non-emergency (e.g. patient transport) and emergency (9-1-1 calls) services, but many ambulance services and EMS agencies operate both non-emergency and emergency care.\nIn many places across the United States, it is not uncommon for the primary employer of EMRs, EMTs, and paramedics to be a fire department, with the fire department providing the primary emergency medical system response including \"first responder\" fire apparatus, as well as ambulances. In many other locations, emergency medical services are provided by a separate, or \"third-party\", municipal government emergency agency (e.g. Boston EMS, Austin-Travis County EMS). In still other locations, emergency medical services are provided by volunteer agencies. College and university campuses may provide emergency medical responses on their own campus using students.\nIn some states of the US, many EMS agencies are run by independent non-profit volunteer first aid squads that are their own corporations set up as separate entities from fire departments. In this environment, volunteers are hired to fill certain blocks of time to cover emergency calls. These volunteers have the same state certification as their paid counterparts.\nReferences and notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75006", "revid": "41591971", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75006", "title": "Paramedic", "text": "Healthcare professional working outside of hospitals\nA paramedic is a healthcare professional trained in the medical model, whose main role has historically been to respond to emergency calls for medical help outside of a hospital. Paramedics work as part of the emergency medical services (EMS), most often in ambulances. They also have roles in emergency medicine, primary care, transfer medicine and remote/offshore medicine. The scope of practice of a paramedic varies between countries, but generally includes autonomous decision making around the emergency care of patients.\nNot all ambulance personnel are paramedics, although the term is sometimes used informally to refer to any ambulance personnel. In some English-speaking countries, there is an official distinction between paramedics and emergency medical technicians (or emergency care assistants), in which paramedics have additional educational requirements and scope of practice.\nFunctions and duties.\nThe paramedic role is closely related to other healthcare positions, especially the emergency medical technician, with paramedics often being at a higher grade with more responsibility and autonomy following substantially greater education and training. The primary role of a paramedic is to stabilize people with life-threatening injuries and transport these patients to a higher level of care (typically an emergency department). Due to the nature of their job, paramedics work in many environments, including roadways, people's homes, and depending on their qualifications, wilderness environments, hospitals, aircraft, and with SWAT teams during police operations. Paramedics also work in non-emergency situations, such as transporting chronically ill patients to and from treatment centers and in some areas, address social determinants of health and provide in-home care to ill patients at risk of hospitalization (a practice known as community paramedicine).\nThe role of a paramedic varies widely across the world, as EMS providers operate with many different models of care. In the Anglo-American model, paramedics are autonomous decision-makers. In some countries such as the United Kingdom and South Africa, the paramedic role has developed into an autonomous health profession. In the Franco-German model, ambulance care is led by physicians. In some versions of this model, such as France, there is no direct equivalent to a paramedic. Ambulance staff have either the more advanced qualifications of a physician or less advanced training in first aid. In other versions of the Franco-German model, such as Germany, paramedics do exist. Their role is very similar to the role of paramedics in the Anglo-American model with an advanced scope of autonomy and practice, and the added element of emergency physician backup, either virtually () or on scene with a rapid response vehicle / helicopter. The role of paramedics in Germany has evolved from support to physicians in the field to the central role in pre-hospital emergency care. \nThe development of the profession has been a gradual move from simply transporting patients to hospital, to more advanced treatments in the field. In some countries, the paramedic may take on the role as part of a system to prevent hospitalization entirely and, through practitioners, are able to prescribe certain medications, or undertaking 'see and refer' visits, where the paramedic directly refers a patient to specialist services without taking them to hospital.\nOccupational hazards.\nParamedics are exposed to a variety of hazards such as lifting patients and equipment, treating those with infectious disease, handling hazardous substances, and transportation via ground or air vehicles. Employers can prevent occupational illness or injury by providing safe patient handling equipment, implementing a training program to educate paramedics on job hazards, and supplying PPE such as respirators, gloves, and isolation gowns when dealing with biological hazards.\nInfectious disease has become a major concern, in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. In response, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and other agencies and organizations have issued guidance regarding workplace hazard controls for COVID-19. Some specific recommendations include modified call queries, symptom screening, universal PPE use, hand hygiene, physical distancing, and stringent disinfection protocols. Research on ambulance ventilation systems found that aerosols often recirculate throughout the compartment, creating a health hazard for paramedics when transporting sick patients capable of airborne transmission. Unidirectional airflow design can better protect workers.\nTo further safeguard paramedics, incorporating evidence-based strategies for managing chemical exposures and environmental risks is crucial. Agencies such as OSHA, WHO and NIOSH offer comprehensive guidelines that highlight the integration of safety protocols, technological advancements, and procedural innovations to enhance paramedic safety and well-being.\nPhysical injuries.\nParamedics are widely recognized to face high risks of physical injuries in their line of work. More than 22,000 EMS providers visit the emergency room each year for work-related injuries. Some physical injuries encountered when providing healthcare services include lifting injuries, back strains, and needlestick incidences. Injuries such as sprains and strains mostly occur in the back and neck, and injuries are most prevalent while responding to 911 calls, which include patient care and transport. These injuries are prevalent but not impossible to overcome; they require preventive measures to minimize the chance of them happening. Safe lifting techniques and patient-handling equipment are major factors in reducing paramedics' physical injury risk. Workers with less than 10 years' experience are most at risk, pointing to the need for targeted prevention strategies for newer employees. By employing the proposed measures to reduce physical injuries, it will be possible to mitigate the hazards faced by paramedics, to help paramedics stay safe while rendering the most needed services. \nInfectious diseases.\nThe risk of contracting infectious diseases is common in the paramedic profession. The COVID-19 pandemic strengthens the necessity of following safety protocols. Preventive measures for healthcare workers from needlestick injuries and infectious disease is critical. Including, the immediate disposal of sharps in puncture-resistant containers and wearing appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) and strict adherence to post-exposure protocols, enhances safety. Additionally, staying updated with vaccinations, including those for flu, COVID-19, Hepatitis B. Furthermore, adhering to infection control practices, such as hand hygiene, environmental cleaning, and specialized control programs, are vital for preventing infections like MRSA, TB, and COVID-19. Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) usage in implementation and vaccination compliance are effective transmission reduction measures for infectious diseases among paramedics. Exposures to blood pathogens and body fluids through incidents, for example, needlestick injuries which jeopardizes paramedics at risk of infectious diseases such as Hepatitis B, and Hepatitis C, and HIV affecting around 6,000 EMS workers. This realization strengthens the need for science-based methods in preventing the occupational risks posed by infectious diseases with a foregrounding of the role of preventative measures geared towards protecting the health of paramedic professionals and, at the same time, the community.\nChemical exposures.\nParamedics encounter daily risks associated with handling hazardous chemicals. As a result, they must understand how to deliver care safely to remain protected in the service provision. They need to remain cautious for them to stay safe in the process of providing care. There are numerous associated risks from chemical exposures in prehospital settings. The use of PPE and standard precautions are necessary to prevent harmful exposures for paramedics. Desirable implementation of the ordered processing of hazardous material and the proper decontamination process are effective strategies in combating hazard risk. Such steps are necessary to ensure fewer cases of health hazards to paramedics.\nEnvironmental and operational hazards.\nParamedics are confronted with many challenges exhibited in the form of environmental and operational risks, primarily during transportation. These transportation-related hazards should be considered and addressed in prehospital care. Slips, trips, and falls; motor vehicle incidents; and violence or assaults have huge impact on paramedics' occupational hazards, resulting to thousands of paramedics impacted annually. Vehicle safety features need to be known by paramedics, and so must undergo exhaustive emergency driving training, which looks into curbing the provisions that are the peril of transportation. Paramedics are frequently assaulted by patients or bystanders affecting around 2,000 EMS workers annually, which further hammers the need for training on de-escalation. NIOSH and the Department of Homeland Security have conducted ambulance crash testing, resulting in the development of 10 test methods published by the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) to reduce and eliminate crash-related injuries to EMS workers. Through effective training, the threat cases are more likely to be mitigated, and the paramedics will have a better chance to provide services as required.\nProtective measures and equipment.\nOne way of ensuring paramedics work at optimal efficiency is to provide them with protective equipment and gear to mitigate the possible risks when executing their duties. PPE keeps paramedics' occupational risks low. Examples of PPEs include gloves, masks, and gown or specific clothing; they protect workers from physical, biological, and chemical hazards. The different types of PPE include respiratory, eye, face, and hand protection. Under respiratory protection, paramedics can use N95 masks to filter airborne contaminants. Chemical splashes are also a common hazard faced by paramedics, where safety goggles can be used for eye protection. Underhand protection, paramedics can employ gloves mainly to curb burns. One of the principles of PPE is that choices should be guided by specific risks associated with various emergencies, which warrant different PPE requirements.\nMental health and stress management.\nParamedic are involved in challenging professions and can be subject to different kinds of psychological stress, for instance, post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, or severe burnout. The psychological aspect is intertwined with the nature of the paramedics' work. Exposure to traumatic events such as accidents, medical emergencies, and violence are some of the factors undermining the psychological health of paramedics. Mental health issues, including depression, anxiety, and substance abuse, are some of the mental health issues paramedics are likely to get exposed to due to their nature of work as compared to the general population. Stable support systems that may include peer counselling and the availability of mental health resources become essential in building the resilience of paramedic professionals. Peer counselling programs appear to be an effective stress management strategy for paramedics. Taking part in open discussions with other peers who understand what the employee is going through determines the necessary supportive grounds that facilitate managing and processing feelings related to this work.\nHealth risks and monitoring.\nThe long-term health risks that need to be observed by the paramedics are post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), cardiovascular diseases (CVDs), and cancer risk. There are a variety of challenges paramedics encounter, including PTSD, which should provide a compelling reason to implement preventive mental health measures within this profession. Moreover, there is an extra risk for CVDs because of the heaviness of emergency response operations. There is a need to emphasize cancer risk and the importance of constant exploration and individualized prevention patterns. Besides, there is the cumulative effect of fatigue, violence, and trauma on the health of paramedics. As a result, there is a need for systematic monitoring and preventive measures in health among paramedics. It is necessary to study long-term health risks for paramedics and apply a prophylactic approach to maintaining the health state of healthcare professionals.\nRegulatory guidelines and recommendations.\nThe regulatory guidelines are fundamental in eliminating occupational risk in paramedicine; authoritative bodies like the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the World Health Organization (WHO) provide specific guidelines. For example, in United States, physical, chemical, and biological hazards are managed by operating under the guidelines and recommendations offered by National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) and OSHA, targeting the healthcare industry especially. These include properly using PPE, handling hazardous substances, and adequately managing workplace violence. Moreover, the WHO provides global views by laying international standards to protect the well-being of the staff involved in the healthcare provided, irrespective of whether it is an emergency or routine operation. Such regulatory bodies, as the ones promoting national and global safety standards, ensure that evidence-based approaches reinforce adherence to their occupational health being safeguarded.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThroughout the evolution of pre-hospitalization care, there has been an ongoing association with military conflict. One of the first indications of a formal process for managing injured people dates from the Imperial Legions of Rome, where aging Centurions, no longer able to fight, were given the task of organizing the removal of the wounded from the battlefield and providing some form of care. Such individuals, although not physicians, were probably among the world's earliest surgeons by default, being required to suture wounds and complete amputations. A similar situation existed in the Crusades, with the Knights Hospitaller of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem filling a similar function; this organisation continued, and evolved into what is now known throughout the Commonwealth of Nations as the St. John Ambulance and as the Order of Malta Ambulance Corps in the Republic of Ireland and various countries.\nEarly ambulance services.\nWhile civilian communities had organized ways to deal with prehospitalisation care and transportation of the sick and dying as far back as the bubonic plague in London between 1598 and 1665, such arrangements were typically \"ad hoc\" and temporary. In time, however, these arrangements began to formalize and become permanent. During the American Civil War, Jonathan Letterman devised a system of mobile field hospitals employing the first uses of the principles of triage. After returning home, some veterans began to attempt to apply what had they had seen on the battlefield to their own communities, and commenced the creation of volunteer life-saving squads and ambulance corps.\nThese early developments in formalized ambulance services were decided at local levels, and this led to services being provided by diverse operators such as the local hospital, police, fire brigade, or even funeral directors who often possessed the only local transport allowing a passenger to lie down. In most cases these ambulances were operated by drivers and attendants with little or no medical training, and it was some time before formal training began to appear in some units. An early example was the members of the Toronto Police Ambulance Service receiving a mandatory five days of training from St. John as early as 1889.\nPrior to World War I motorized ambulances started to be developed, but once they proved their effectiveness on the battlefield during the war the concept spread rapidly to civilian systems. In terms of advanced skills, once again the military led the way. During World War II and the Korean War battlefield medics administered painkilling narcotics by injection in emergency situations, and pharmacists' mates on warships were permitted to do even more without the guidance of a physician. The Korean War also marked the first widespread use of helicopters to evacuate the wounded from forward positions to medical units, leading to the rise of the term \"medevac\". These innovations would not find their way into the civilian sphere for nearly twenty more years.\nPre-hospital emergency medical care.\nBy the early 1960s experiments in improving medical care had begun in some civilian centres. One early experiment involved the provision of pre-hospital cardiac care by physicians in Belfast, Northern Ireland, in 1966. This was repeated in Toronto, Canada in 1968 using a single ambulance called \"Cardiac One\", which was staffed by a regular ambulance crew, along with a hospital intern to perform the advanced procedures. While both of these experiments had certain levels of success, the technology had not yet reached a sufficiently advanced level to be fully effective; for example, the Toronto portable defibrillator and heart monitor was powered by lead-acid car batteries, and weighed around .\nIn 1966, a report called \"Accidental Death and Disability: The Neglected Disease of Modern Society\"\u2014commonly known as \"\"\u2014was published in the United States. This paper presented data showing that soldiers who were seriously wounded on the battlefields during the Vietnam War had a better survival rate than people who were seriously injured in motor vehicle accidents on California's freeways. Key factors contributing to victim survival in transport to definitive care such as a hospital were identified as comprehensive trauma care, rapid transport to designated trauma facilities, and the presence of medical corpsmen who were trained to perform certain critical advanced medical procedures such as fluid replacement and airway management.\nAs a result of \"The White Paper\", the US government moved to develop minimum standards for ambulance training, ambulance equipment and vehicle design. These new standards were incorporated into Federal Highway Safety legislation and the states were advised to either adopt these standards into state laws or risk a reduction in Federal highway safety funding. The \"White Paper\" also prompted the inception of a number of emergency medical service (EMS) pilot units across the US including paramedic programs. The success of these units led to a rapid transition to make them fully operational.\nFounded in 1967, Freedom House Ambulance Service was the first civilian emergency medical service in the United States to be staffed by paramedics, most of whom were Black. \nNew York City's Saint Vincent's Hospital developed the United States' first Mobile Coronary Care Unit (MCCU) under the medical direction of William Grace, MD, and based on Frank Pantridge's MCCU project in Belfast, Northern Ireland. In 1967, Eugene Nagle, MD and Jim Hirschmann, MD helped pioneer the United States' first EKG telemetry transmission to a hospital and then in 1968, a functional paramedic program in conjunction with the City of Miami Fire Department. In 1969, the City of Columbus Fire Department joined with the Ohio State University Medical Center to develop the \"HEARTMOBILE\" paramedic program under the medical direction of James Warren, MD and Richard Lewis, MD. In 1969, the Haywood County (NC) Volunteer Rescue Squad developed a paramedic program (then called Mobile Intensive Care Technicians) under the medical direction of Ralph Feichter, MD. In 1969, the initial Los Angeles paramedic training program was instituted in conjunction with Harbor General Hospital, now Harbor\u2013UCLA Medical Center, under the medical direction of J. Michael Criley, MD and James Lewis, MD. In 1969, the Seattle \"Medic 1\" paramedic program was developed in conjunction with the Harborview Medical Center under the medical direction of Leonard Cobb, MD. The Marietta (GA) initial paramedic project was instituted in the Fall of 1970 in conjunction with Kennestone Hospital and Metro Ambulance Service, Inc. under the medical direction of Luther Fortson, MD. The Los Angeles County and City established paramedic programs following the passage of \"The Wedsworth-Townsend Act\" in 1970. Other cities and states passed their own paramedic bills, leading to the formation of services across the US. Many other countries also followed suit, and paramedic units formed around the world.\nIn the military, however, the required telemetry and miniaturization technologies were more advanced, particularly due to initiatives such as the space program. It would take several more years before these technologies drifted through to civilian applications. In North America, physicians were judged to be too expensive to be used in the pre-hospital setting, although such initiatives were implemented, and sometimes still operate, in European countries and Latin America.\nPublic notability.\nWhile doing background research at Los Angeles' UCLA Harbor Medical Center for a proposed new show about doctors, television producer Robert A. Cinader, working for Jack Webb, happened to encounter \"firemen who spoke like doctors and worked with them\". This concept developed into the television series \"Emergency!\", which ran from 1972 to 1977, portraying the exploits of this new profession called paramedics. The show gained popularity with emergency services personnel, the medical community, and the general public. When the show first aired in 1972, there were just six paramedic units operating in three pilot programs in the whole of the US, and the term paramedic was essentially unknown. By the time the program ended in 1977, there were paramedics operating in all fifty states. The show's technical advisor, James O. Page, was a pioneer of paramedicine and responsible for the UCLA paramedic program; he would go on to help establish paramedic programs throughout the US, and was the founding publisher of the \"Journal of Emergency Medical Services\" (\"JEMS\"). The \"JEMS\" magazine creation resulted from Page's previous purchase of the \"PARAMEDICS International\" magazine. Ron Stewart, the show's medical director, was instrumental in organizing emergency health services in southern California earlier in his career during the 1970s, in the paramedic program in Pittsburgh, and had a substantial role in the founding of the paramedic programs in Toronto and Nova Scotia, Canada.\nEvolution and growth.\nThroughout the 1970s and 1980s, the paramedic field continued to evolve, with a shift in emphasis from patient transport to treatment both on scene and en route to hospitals. This led to some services changing their descriptions from \"ambulance services\" to \"emergency medical services\".\nThe training, knowledge-base, and skill sets of both paramedics and emergency medical technicians (EMTs) were typically determined by local medical directors based primarily on the perceived needs of the community along with affordability. There were also large differences between localities in the amount and type of training required, and how it would be provided. This ranged from in-service training in local systems, through community colleges, and up to university level education. This emphasis on increasing qualifications has followed the progression of other health professions such as nursing, which also progressed from on the job training to university level qualifications.\nThe variations in educational approaches and standards required for paramedics has led to large differences in the required qualifications between locations\u2014both within individual countries and from country to country. Within the UK training is a three-year course equivalent to a bachelor's degree. Comparisons have been made between paramedics and nurses; with nurses now requiring degree entry (BSc) the knowledge deficit is large between the two fields. This has led to many countries passing laws to protect the title of \"paramedic\" (or its local equivalent) from use by anyone except those qualified and experienced to a defined standard. This usually means that paramedics must be registered with the appropriate body in their country; for example all paramedics in the United Kingdom must by registered with the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC) in order to call themselves a paramedic. In the United States, a similar system is operated by the National Registry of Emergency Medical Technicians (NREMT), although this is only accepted by forty of the fifty states.\nAs paramedicine has evolved, a great deal of both the curriculum and skill set has existed in a state of flux. Requirements often originated and evolved at the local level, and were based upon the preferences of physician advisers and medical directors. Recommended treatments would change regularly, often changing more like a fashion than a scientific discipline. Associated technologies also rapidly evolved and changed, with medical equipment manufacturers having to adapt equipment that worked inadequately outside of hospitals, to be able to cope with the less controlled pre-hospital environment.\nPhysicians began to take more interest in paramedics from a research perspective as well. By about 1990, the fluctuating trends began to diminish, being replaced by outcomes-based research. This research then drove further evolution of the practice of both paramedics and the emergency physicians who oversaw their work, with changes to procedures and protocols occurring only after significant research demonstrated their need and effectiveness (an example being ALS). Such changes affected everything from simple procedures such as CPR, to changes in drug protocols. As the profession grew, some paramedics went on to become not just research participants, but researchers in their own right, with their own projects and journal publications. In 2010, the American Board of Emergency Medicine created a medical subspecialty for physicians who work in emergency medical services.\nChanges in procedures also included the manner in which the work of paramedics was overseen and managed. In the early days medical control and oversight was direct and immediate, with paramedics calling into a local hospital and receiving orders for every individual procedure or drug. While this still occurs in some jurisdictions, it has become increasingly rare. Day-to-day operations largely moved from direct and immediate medical control to pre-written protocols or standing orders, with the paramedic typically seeking advice after the options in the standing orders had been exhausted.\nCanada.\nWhile the evolution of paramedicine described above is focused largely on the US, many other countries followed a similar pattern, although often with significant variations. Canada, for example, attempted a pilot paramedic training program at Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, in 1972. The program, which intended to upgrade the then mandatory 160 hours of training for ambulance attendants, was found to be too costly and premature. The program was abandoned after two years, and it was more than a decade before the legislative authority for its graduates to practice was put into place. An alternative program which provided 1,400 hours of training at the community college level prior to commencing employment was then tried, and made mandatory in 1977, with formal certification examinations being introduced in 1978. Similar programs occurred at roughly the same time in Alberta and British Columbia, with other Canadian provinces gradually following, but with their own education and certification requirements. Advanced Care Paramedics were not introduced until 1984, when Toronto trained its first group internally, before the process spread across the country. By 2010 the Ontario system involved a two-year community college based program, including both hospital and field clinical components, prior to designation as a Primary Care Paramedic, although it is starting to head towards a university degree-based program. The province of Ontario announced that by September 2021, the entry level primary care paramedic post-secondary program would be enhanced from a two-year diploma to a three-year advanced diploma in primary care paramedicine. Resultantly, advanced care paramedics in Ontario will require a minimum of four years of post-secondary education and critical care paramedics will require five years of post-secondary education.\nIsrael.\nIn Israel, paramedics are trained in either of the following ways: a three-year degree in Emergency Medicine (B.EMS), a year and three months IDF training, or MADA training. Paramedics manage and provide medical guidelines in mass casualty incidents. They operate in MED evac and ambulances. They are legalized under the 1976 Doctors Ordinance (Decree). In a 2016 study at the Ben Gurion University of the Negev it was found that 73% of trained paramedics stop working within a five-year period, and 93% stop treating within 10 years.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the United Kingdom, ambulances were originally municipal services after the end of World War II. Training was frequently conducted internally, although national levels of coordination led to more standardization of staff training. Ambulance services were merged into county-level agencies in 1974, and then into regional agencies in 2006. The regional ambulance services, most often trusts, are under the authority of the National Health Service and there is now a significant standardization of training and skills. The UK model has three levels of emergency ambulance staff. In increasing order of clinical skill these are: emergency care assistants, emergency medical technicians, and paramedics.\nToday, university qualifications are expected for paramedics, with the current entry level being a Bachelor of Science degree in Pre-Hospital Care or Paramedic Science. As the title \"paramedic\" is legally protected, they must be registered with the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC), Additional qualifications, such as a masters degree in Advanced or Paramedic Practice, are a pre-requisite for paramedic prescribing,\nwhich has been permitted since government legislation was introduced in 2018.\nParamedics work in various settings such as NHS and independent ambulance providers, air ambulances and emergency departments. Some paramedics have gone on to become paramedic practitioners, a role that practices independently in the pre-hospital environment in a capacity similar to that of a nurse practitioner. This is a fully autonomous role, and such senior paramedics are now working in hospitals, community teams such as rapid response teams, and also in increasing numbers in general practice, where their role includes acute presentations, complex chronic care and end of life management. Critical care paramedics specialise in acute emergency incidents.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, the minimum standards for paramedic training is considered vocational, but many colleges offer paramedic associate degree or bachelor's degree options. Paramedic education programs typically follow the U.S. NHTSA EMS Curriculum, DOT or National Registry of EMTs. While many regionally accredited community colleges offer paramedic programs and two-year associate degrees, a handful of universities also offer a four-year bachelor's degree component. The national standard course minimum requires didactic and clinical hours for a paramedic program of 1,500 or more hours of classroom training and 500+ clinical hours to be accredited and nationally recognized. Calendar length typically varies from 12 months to upwards of two years, excluding degree options, EMT training, work experience, and prerequisites. It is required to be a certified Emergency Medical Technician prior to starting paramedic training. Entry requirements vary, but many paramedic programs also have prerequisites such as one year required work experience as an emergency medical technician, or anatomy and physiology courses from an accredited college or university. Paramedics in some states must attend up to 50+ hours of ongoing education, plus maintain Pediatric Advanced Life Support and Advanced Cardiac Life Support. National Registry requires 70 + hours to maintain its certification or one may re-certify through completing the written computer based adaptive testing again (between 90 and 120 questions) every two years.\nParamedicine continues to grow and evolve into a formal profession in its own right, complete with its own standards and body of knowledge, and in many locations paramedics have formed their own professional bodies.\nThe early technicians with limited training, performing a small and specific set of procedures, has become a role beginning to require a foundation degree in countries such as Australia, South Africa, the UK, and increasingly in Canada and parts of the U.S. such as Oregon, where a degree is required for entry level practice.\nUkraine.\nAs a part of Emergency Medicine Reform in 2017 Ministry of Healthcare introduced two specialties \u2014 \"paramedic\" and \"emergency medical technician\".\nStructure of employment.\nParamedics are employed by a variety of different organizations, and the services they provide may occur under differing organizational structures, depending on the part of the world. A new and evolving role for paramedics involves the expansion of their practice into the provision of relatively basic primary health care and assessment services.\nSome paramedics have begun to specialize their practice, frequently in association with the environment in which they will work. Some early examples of this involved aviation medicine and the use of helicopters, and the transfer of critical care patients between facilities. While some jurisdictions still use physicians, nurses, and technicians for transporting patients, increasingly this role falls to specialized senior and experienced paramedics. Other areas of specialization include such roles as tactical paramedics working in police units, marine paramedics, hazardous materials (Hazmat) teams, Heavy Urban Search and Rescue, and paramedics on offshore oil platforms, oil and mineral exploration teams, and in the military.\nThe majority of paramedics are employed by the emergency medical service for their area, although this employer could itself be working under a number of models, including a specific autonomous public ambulance service, a fire department, a hospital based service, or a private company working under contract. In Washington, firefighters have been offered free paramedic training. There are also many paramedics who volunteer for backcountry or wilderness rescue teams, and small town rescue squads. In the specific case of an ambulance service being maintained by a fire department, paramedics and EMTs may be required to maintain firefighting and rescue skills as well as medical skills, and vice versa. In some instances, such as Los Angeles County, a fire department may provide emergency medical services, but as a rapid response or rescue unit rather than a transport ambulance.\nThe provision of municipal ambulance services and paramedics, can vary by area, even within the same country or state. For instance, in Canada, the province of British Columbia operates a province-wide service (the British Columbia Ambulance Service) whereas in Ontario, the service is provided by each municipality, either as a distinct service, linked to the fire service, or contracted out to a third party.\nScope of practice.\nCommon skills.\nWhile there are varying degrees of training and expectations around the world, a set of skills practised by paramedics in the pre-hospital setting commonly includes:\nEmergency pharmacology.\nParamedics carry and administer a wide array of emergency medications. The specific medications they are permitted to administer vary widely, based on local standards of care and protocols. For an accurate description of permitted drugs or procedures in a given location, it is necessary to contact that jurisdiction directly. A representative list of medications may commonly include:\nSkills by certification level.\nAs described above, many jurisdictions have different levels of paramedic training, leading to variations in what procedures different paramedics may perform depending upon their qualifications. Three common general divisions of paramedic training are the basic technician, general paramedic or advanced technician, and advanced paramedic. Common skills that these three certification levels may practice are summarized in the table below. The skills for the higher levels automatically also assume those listed for lower levels.\nMedicolegal authority.\nThe medicolegal framework for paramedics is highly dependent on the overall structure of emergency medical services in the territory where they are working.\nIn many localities, paramedics operate as a direct extension of a physician medical director and practice as an extension of the medical director's license. In the United States, a physician delegates authority under an individual state's Medical Practice Act. This gives a paramedic the ability to practice within limited scope of practice in law, along with state DOH guidelines and medical control oversight. The authority to practice in this manner is granted in the form of standing orders (protocols) (off-line medical control) and direct physician consultation via phone or radio (on-line medical control). Under this paradigm, paramedics effectively assume the role of out-of-hospital field agents to regional emergency physicians, with independent clinical decision.\nIn places where paramedics are recognised health care professionals registered with an appropriate body, they can conduct all procedures authorised for their profession, including the administration of prescription medication, and are personally answerable to a regulator. For example, in the United Kingdom, the Health and Care Professions Council regulates paramedics and can censure or strike a paramedic from the register.\nIn some cases paramedics may gain further qualifications to extend their status to that of a paramedic practitioner or advanced paramedic, which may allow them to administer a wider range of drugs and use a wider range of clinical skills.\nIn some areas, paramedics are only permitted to practice many advanced skills while assisting a physician who is physically present, except for immediately life-threatening emergencies.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75007", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75007", "title": "Finland/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "75008", "revid": "51043101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75008", "title": "Universal asynchronous receiver-transmitter", "text": "Computer hardware device\nA universal asynchronous receiver-transmitter (UART ) is a peripheral device for asynchronous serial communication in which the data format and transmission speeds are configurable. It sends data bits one by one, from the least to most significant, framed by start and stop bits so that precise timing is handled by the communication channel. The electric signaling levels are handled by a driver circuit external to the UART. Common signal levels are RS-232, RS-485, and raw TTL for short debugging links. Early teletypewriters used current loops.\nIt was one of the earliest computer communication devices, used to attach teletypewriters for an operator console. It was also an early hardware system for the Internet.\nA UART is usually implemented in an integrated circuit (IC) and used for serial communications over a computer or peripheral device serial port. One or more UART peripherals are commonly integrated in microcontroller chips. Specialised UARTs are used for automobiles, smart cards and SIMs.\nA related device, the universal synchronous and asynchronous receiver-transmitter (USART), also supports synchronous operation.\nIn OSI model terms, UART falls under layer 2, the data link layer.\nHistory.\nSome early telegraph schemes used variable-length pulses (as in Morse code) and rotating clockwork mechanisms to transmit alphabetic characters. The first serial communication devices (with fixed-length pulses) were rotating mechanical switches (\"commutators\"). Various character codes using 5, 6, 7, or 8 data bits became common in teleprinters and later as computer peripherals. The teletypewriter made an excellent general-purpose I/O device for a small computer.\nGordon Bell of DEC designed the first UART, occupying an entire circuit board called a \"line unit\", for the PDP series of computers beginning with the PDP-1.\nAccording to Bell, the main innovation of the UART was its use of sampling to convert the signal into the digital domain, allowing more reliable timing than previous circuits that used analog timing devices with manually adjusted potentiometers. To reduce the cost of wiring, backplane and other components, these computers also pioneered flow control using XON and XOFF characters rather than hardware wires.\nDEC condensed the line unit design into an early single-chip UART for their own use. Western Digital developed this into the first widely available single-chip UART, the WD1402A, around 1971. This was an early example of a medium-scale integrated circuit. Another popular chip was the SCN2651 from the Signetics 2650 family.\nAn example of an early 1980s UART was the National Semiconductor 8250, which was used in the original IBM PC's Asynchronous Communications Adapter card. In the 1990s, newer UARTs were developed with on-chip buffers. This allowed higher transmission speed without data loss and without requiring such frequent attention from the computer. For example, the popular National Semiconductor 16550 has a 16-byte FIFO, and spawned many variants, including the \"16C550, 16C650, 16C750, and 16C850\".\nDepending on the manufacturer, different terms are used to identify devices that perform the UART functions. Intel called their 8251 device a \"Programmable Communication Interface\" because it was actually a USART and capable of synchronous operation as well as asynchronous. It was introduced in 1979. MOS Technology 6551 was known under the name \"Asynchronous Communications Interface Adapter\" (ACIA). The term \"Serial Communications Interface\" (SCI) was first used at Motorola around 1975 to refer to their start-stop asynchronous serial interface device, which others were calling a UART. Zilog manufactured a number of Serial Communication Controllers or SCCs.\nStarting in the 2000s, most IBM PC compatible computers removed their external RS-232 COM ports and used USB ports that can send data faster. For users who still need RS-232 serial ports, external USB-to-UART bridges are now commonly used. They combine the hardware cables and a chip to do the USB and UART conversion. Cypress Semiconductor and FTDI are two of the significant commercial suppliers of these chips. Although RS-232 ports are no longer available to users on the outside of most computers, many internal processors have UARTs built into their chips to give hardware designers the ability to interface with other chips or devices that use RS-232 or RS-485 for communication.\nTransmitting and receiving serial data.\nA UART contains the following components:\nThe universal asynchronous receiver-transmitter (UART) takes bytes of data and transmits the individual bits in a sequential fashion. At the destination, a second UART re-assembles the bits into complete bytes. Each UART contains a shift register, which is the fundamental method of conversion between serial and parallel forms. Serial transmission of digital information (bits) through a single wire or other medium is less costly than parallel transmission through multiple wires.\nThe UART usually does not directly generate or receive the external signals used between different items of equipment. Separate interface devices are used to convert the logic level signals of the UART to and from the external signaling levels, which may be standardized voltage levels, current levels, or other signals.\nCommunication may be 3 modes:\nFor UART to work the following settings need to be the same on both the transmitting and receiving side:\nFor the voltage level, two UART modules work well when they both have the same voltage level, e.g 3V-3V between the two UART modules. To use two UART modules at different voltage levels, a level shifting circuit needs to be added externally.\nData framing.\nA UART frame consists of five elements:\nIn the most common settings of 8 data bits, no parity and 1 stop bit (i.e. 8N1), the protocol efficiency is 8/10 = 80%. For comparison, Ethernet's protocol efficiency when using maximum throughput frames with payload of 1500 bytes is up to 95% and up to 99% with 9000 byte jumbo frames. However due to Ethernet's protocol overhead and minimum payload size of 42 bytes, if small messages of one or a few bytes are to be sent, Ethernet's protocol efficiency drops much lower than the UART's 8N1 constant efficiency of 80%.\nThe idle, no data state is high-voltage, or powered. This is a historic legacy from telegraphy, in which the line is held high to show that the line and transmitter are not damaged.\nEach character is framed as a logic low start bit, data bits, possibly a parity bit and one or more stop bits. In most applications, the least significant data bit (the one on the left in this diagram) is transmitted first, but there are exceptions (such as the IBM 2741 printing terminal).\nReceiver.\nAll operations of the UART hardware are controlled by an internal clock signal which runs at a multiple of the data rate, typically 8 or 16 times the bit rate. The receiver tests the state of the incoming signal on each clock pulse, looking for the beginning of the start bit. If the apparent start bit lasts at least one-half of the bit time, it is valid and signals the start of a new character. If not, it is considered a spurious pulse and is ignored. After waiting a further bit time, the state of the line is again sampled and the resulting level clocked into a shift register. After the required number of bit periods for the character length (5 to 8 bits, typically) have elapsed, the contents of the shift register are made available (in parallel fashion) to the receiving system. The UART will set a flag indicating new data is available, and may also generate a processor interrupt to request that the host processor transfers the received data.\nCommunicating UARTs have no shared timing system apart from the communication signal. Typically, UARTs resynchronize their internal clocks on each change of the data line that is not considered a spurious pulse. Obtaining timing information in this manner, they reliably receive when the transmitter is sending at a slightly different speed than it should. Simplistic UARTs do not do this; instead they resynchronize on the falling edge of the start bit only, and then read the center of each expected data bit, and this system works if the broadcast data rate is accurate enough to allow the stop bits to be sampled reliably.\nIt is a standard feature for a UART to store the most recent character while receiving the next. This \"double buffering\" gives a receiving computer an entire character transmission time to fetch a received character. Many UARTs have a small first-in, first-out (FIFO) buffer memory between the receiver shift register and the host system interface. This allows the host processor even more time to handle an interrupt from the UART and prevents loss of received data at high rates.\nTransmitter.\nTransmission operation is simpler as the timing does not have to be determined from the line state, nor is it bound to any fixed timing intervals. As soon as the sending system deposits a character in the shift register (after completion of the previous character), the UART generates a start bit, shifts the required number of data bits out to the line, generates and sends the parity bit (if used), and sends the stop bits. Since full-duplex operation requires characters to be sent and received at the same time, UARTs use two different shift registers for transmitted and received characters. High performance UARTs could contain a transmit FIFO (first in first out) buffer to allow a CPU or DMA controller to deposit multiple characters in a burst into the FIFO rather than have to deposit one character at a time into the shift register. Since transmission of a single or multiple characters may take a long time relative to CPU speeds, a UART maintains a flag showing busy status so that the host system knows if there is at least one character in the transmit buffer or shift register; \"ready for next character(s)\" may also be signaled with an interrupt.\nApplication.\nTransmitting and receiving UARTs must be set for the same bit speed (Baud rate), character length, parity, and number of stop bits for proper operation. The receiving UART may detect some mismatched settings and set a \"framing error\" flag bit for the host system; in exceptional cases, the receiving UART will produce an erratic stream of mutilated characters and transfer them to the host system.\nTypical serial ports used with personal computers connected to modems use one start bit, eight data bits, no parity, and one stop bit; for this configuration, the number of ASCII characters per second equals the bit rate divided by 10.\nSome very low-cost home computers or embedded systems that lack a physical UART may instead emulate the protocol with software by sampling the state of an input port or directly manipulating an output port for data transmission. While very CPU-intensive (since the CPU timing is critical), the UART chip can thus be omitted, saving money and space. The technique is known as bit-banging.\nModels.\nA dual UART, or \"DUART\", combines two UARTs into a single chip. Similarly, a quadruple UART or \"QUART\", combines four UARTs into one package, such as the NXP 28L194. An octal UART or \"OCTART\" combines eight UARTs into one package, such as the Exar XR16L788 or the NXP SCC2698.\nUses.\nModems for personal computers that plug into a motherboard slot must also include the UART function on the card. The original 8250 UART chip shipped with the IBM personal computer had a one-character buffer for the receiver and the transmitter each, which meant that communications software performed poorly at speeds above 9600 bit/s, especially if operating under a multitasking system or if handling interrupts from disk controllers. High-speed modems used UARTs that were compatible with the original chip but which included additional FIFO buffers, giving software additional time to respond to incoming data.\nA look at the performance requirements at high bit rates shows why the 16-, 32-, 64- or 128-byte FIFO is a necessity. The Microsoft specification for a DOS system requires that interrupts not be disabled for more than 1 millisecond at a time. Some hard disk drives and video controllers violate this specification. 9600 bit/s will deliver a character approximately every millisecond, so a 1-byte FIFO should be sufficient at this rate on a DOS system which meets the maximum interrupt disable timing. Rates above this may receive a new character before the old one has been fetched, and thus the old character will be lost. This is referred to as an overrun error and results in one or more lost characters.\nA 16-byte FIFO allows up to 16 characters to be received before the computer has to service the interrupt. This increases the maximum bit rate the computer can process reliably from 9600 to 153,000 bit/s if it has a 1 millisecond interrupt dead time. A 32-byte FIFO increases the maximum rate to over 300,000 bit/s. A second benefit to having a FIFO is that the computer only has to service about 8 to 12% as many interrupts, allowing more CPU time for updating the screen, or doing other chores. Thus the computer's responses will improve as well.\nEmulation.\nSince the UART's communication protocol is simple, it can be emulated by bit banging GPIO pins in software on modern microcontrollers (e.g. Arduino or Teensy), or on programmable I/O state machines (e.g. Raspberry Pi Pico's PIO or NXP's FlexIO).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75009", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75009", "title": "Macrencephalia", "text": ""}
{"id": "75010", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75010", "title": "Macroencephaly", "text": ""}
{"id": "75011", "revid": "24230441", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75011", "title": "Karl Eduard Zachariae von Lingenthal", "text": "German jurist (1812\u20131894)\nKarl Eduard Zachariae von Lingenthal (December 24, 1812 \u2013 June 3, 1894) was a German jurist and the son of Karl Salomo Zachariae von Lingenthal.\nLife.\nHe studied philosophy, history, mathematics and linguistics, as well as jurisprudence, at Leipzig, Berlin and Heidelberg.\nHaving made Roman and Byzantine law his special study, he visited Paris in 1832 to examine Byzantine manuscripts, then went in 1834 to Saint Petersburg and Copenhagen for the same purpose, and in 1835 worked in the libraries of Brussels, London, Oxford, Dublin, Edinburgh and Cambridge.\nAfter a few months as a practising lawyer and \"privatdozent\" at Heidelberg, he went in 1837, in search of materials, to Italy and the East, visiting Athens, Constantinople and the monasteries of Mount Athos.\nHaving a taste for a country life, and none for teaching, he gave up his position as extraordinary professor at Heidelberg, and in 1845 bought an estate in the Prussian province of Saxony. Here he lived, engaged in scientific agriculture and interested in Prussian politics, until his death.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "75015", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75015", "title": "Zagazig", "text": "Zagazig (, , ) is a city in Egypt. Situated in the eastern part of the Nile delta, it is the capital of the governorate of Sharqia. It is located on the Muweis Canal and is a hub of the corn and cotton trade. The city contains the Museum of Tal Basta Antiquities, including archaeological exhibits.\nZagazig University, founded in 1975, one of the largest universities in Egypt, is also located in the city, with colleges in different fields of science and arts. The Archaeological Museum of the University of Zagazig exhibits significant finds from the nearby sites, Bubastis (Tell Basta) and Kufur Nigm. The most notable streets in Zagazig are Farouk Street, Government Street, Abu Hamad and El Kawmia Street.\nHistory.\nThe city was founded in the 19th century on the site of a village called \"Nazlat az-Zaq\u0101z\u012bq\" which was named after the Zaqzuq family. The family's name itself comes from a dialectal word \"zaqzuq\" or \"ziqziq\" which means \"a small creature\" (e.g. a fish or a mouse) and comes from a Coptic word \u03eb\u2c89\u2c95\u03eb\u2c93\u2c95 \"ant or other insect\".\nThe ruins of the ancient Egyptian city of Bubastis are located southeast of town. Bubastis was the ancient capital of the 18th nome, and is home to the feast celebrating the cat goddess Bastet.\nBubastis is the Greek version of the Egyptian language name \"Pr-Bastet\" \"House [Temple] of Bastet\". Bubastis became the capital of Egypt in the 22nd and 23rd Dynasties. There are remains of the temples built by Osorkon II and Nectanebo II. Catacombs where the sacred cats were buried are located behind the remains of an Old Kingdom chapel from the period of Pepi I Meryre.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nK\u00f6ppen-Geiger climate classification system classifies its climate as hot desert (BWh), as the rest of Egypt.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75016", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75016", "title": "United States/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "75017", "revid": "452414", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75017", "title": "Zahringen (family)", "text": ""}
{"id": "75018", "revid": "20266143", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75018", "title": "House of Z\u00e4hringen", "text": "Dynasty of Swabian nobility\nThe House of Z\u00e4hringen (, ) was a dynasty of Swabian nobility. The family's name derived from Z\u00e4hringen Castle near Freiburg im Breisgau. The Z\u00e4hringer in the 12th century used the title of Duke of Z\u00e4hringen, in compensation for having conceded the title of Duke of Swabia to the Staufer in 1098. The Z\u00e4hringer were granted the special title of Rector of Burgundy in 1127, and they continued to use both titles until the extinction of the ducal line in 1218.\nThe territories and fiefs held by the Z\u00e4hringer were known as the Duchy of Z\u00e4hringen (German: ), but it was not seen as a duchy in equal standing with the old stem duchies. The Z\u00e4hringer attempted to expand their territories in Swabia and Burgundy into a fully recognized duchy, but their expansion was halted in the 1130s due to their feud with the Welfs. Pursuing their territorial ambitions, the Z\u00e4hringer founded numerous cities and monasteries on either side of the Black Forest, as well as in the western Swiss Plateau. After the extinction of the ducal line in 1218, parts of the family's territories reverted to the crown (attained imperial immediacy), while other parts were divided between the houses of Kyburg, Urach and F\u00fcrstenberg.\nHistory.\nThe earliest-known ancestor (progenitor) of the family was one Berthold, Count in the Breisgau (d. 982), who was first mentioned in 962. In view of his name, he may have been related to the Alemannic Alaholfing dynasty.\nCount Berthold's great-grandson, who became known as Berthold II, Duke of Carinthia \u2013 posthumously referred to as Berthold I of Z\u00e4hringen (c. 1000\u20131078) \u2013 held several lordships (\"Herrschaften\") in the Breisgau, in Thurgau, Ortenau and Baar. By his mother, he was related to the rising Hohenstaufen family. Emperor Henry III had promised his vassal Berthold the Duchy of Swabia, but this was not fulfilled, as upon Henry's death, his widow Agnes of Poitou appointed Count Rudolf of Rheinfelden to the position of Duke of Swabia in 1057. In compensation, Berthold was made Duke of Carinthia and Margrave of Verona in 1061. However, this dignity was only a titular one, and Berthold subsequently lost it when, in the course of the Investiture Controversy, he joined the rising of his former rival Rudolf of Rheinfelden against German king Henry IV in 1073.\nBerthold's son Berthold II (c. 1050\u20131111), who like his father fought against Henry IV, inherited a lot of the lands of Rudolf's son Count Berthold of Rheinfelden in 1090 (though not his comital title, which stayed with the family von Wetter-Rheinfelden). Berthold II is so named both as Duke of Swabia (following Berthold of Rheinfelden, the first duke of Swabia of this name) and as head of the House of Z\u00e4hringen (following his father, who is counted as Berthold I of Z\u00e4hringen in spite of not historically having used the name Z\u00e4hringen). Berthold II did use the name Z\u00e4hringen, although he moved his main residence from Z\u00e4hringen Castle to the newly built Freiburg Castle in 1091.\nIn 1092, Berthold II was elected Duke of Swabia against Frederick I of Hohenstaufen. In 1098, he reconciled with Frederick, renounced all claims to Swabia and instead concentrated on his possessions in the Breisgau region, assuming the title of Duke of Z\u00e4hringen. He was succeeded in turn by his sons Berthold III (d. 1122) and Conrad (d. 1152).\nIn 1127, upon the assassination of his nephew Count William III, Conrad claimed the inheritance of the County of Burgundy against Count Renaud III of M\u00e2con. Renaud prevailed, although he had to cede large parts of the eastern Transjuranian lands to Conrad, who thereupon was appointed by Emperor Lothair III as a 'rector' of the Imperial Kingdom of Burgundy-Arles. This office was confirmed in 1152 and held by the Z\u00e4hringer dukes until 1218. As a result, they are sometimes referred to as 'Dukes of Burgundy', although the existing Duchy of Burgundy was not an Imperial fief but a French one. Duke Berthold IV (d. 1186), who followed his father Conrad and founded the Swiss city of Fryburg (today's Fribourg-Freiburg) in 1157, spent much of his time in Italy in the train of Emperor Frederick I Barbarossa.\nHis son and successor, Berthold V, showed his prowess by reducing the Burgundian nobles to order. This latter duke was the founder of the city of Bern in 1191, and when he died in February 1218, the ducal line of the Z\u00e4hringer became extinct. Among other titles, the Z\u00e4hringen family acted as \"Reichsvogt\" of the Z\u00fcrichgau area.\nAfter the extinction of the ducal line in 1218, much of its extensive territory in the Breisgau and modern-day Switzerland returned to the crown, except for the allodial titles, which were divided between the counts of Urach (who subsequently called themselves the counts of Freiburg) and the counts of Kyburg, both descended from the sisters of Berthold V. Less than fifty years later, the Kyburgs died out, and large portions of their domains were inherited by the House of Habsburg. Bern achieved the status of a free imperial city, whereas other cities (such as Fribourg-Freiburg) only obtained the same status later in history.\nPossessions and territories.\nBerthold I (ancestor of both the House of Z\u00e4hringen and the House of Baden) held the comital titles of Breisgau and Thurgau, as well as being reeve in Stein am Rhein (owned by the bishop of Bamberg). The county of Thurgau was lost around 1077.\nIn 1098, Berthold II, founder of the House of Z\u00e4hringen proper, received Z\u00e4hringen Castle and the jurisdiction over Z\u00fcrich (alongside the Counts of Lenzburg until 1173). Ownership of the county of Rheinfelden and of Burgdorf also dates to c. 1198.\nThe 'rectorate' of the county of Burgundy was granted in 1127 (inheritance of Otto-William, Count of Burgundy). Ownership of Burgundy was contested, and Z\u00e4hringer \"de facto\" rule was limited to the parts of Upper Burgundy east of the Jura and north of Lake Geneva. The territories south of Lake Geneva were conceded to Savoy and Provence in 1156. In compensation, Berthold IV received the investiture right for the bishops of Geneva, Sion and Lausanne, \"de facto\" realised only in the case of Lausanne.\nThe extinction of the counts of Lenzburg in 1173 strengthened the Z\u00e4hringer position south of the Rhine, but their territorial expansion was halted following their support of the Welfs in the unsuccessful feud against Conrad III of Germany during 1138\u20131152. This frustrated their ambitions to carve out a contiguous territorial duchy wedged between Swabia and Burgundy, in spite of late attempts on the part of Berthold V to increase his territorial sway (who as late as 1210 aimed at receiving the jurisdiction over St. Gallen).\nInstead of territorial expansion, the dukes of Z\u00e4hringen from the 1150s focused on attaining more immediate feudal control over the territories they already had. This included their policy of expanding settlements into fortified towns or cities and the construction of new castles, mostly in their territories north of the Rhine. Their encroachment on the rights of the comital nobility south of the Rhine seems to have been resisted, mostly passively, but in the case of the lords of Gl\u00e2ne and Thun in an open revolt in 1191.\nThe fragmentation of the Z\u00e4hringer possessions after 1218 was an important factor in the communal movements of the late medieval period in the region, including the imperial immediacy of Bern and Z\u00fcrich, and the growth of the Old Swiss Confederacy in the early 14th century.\nCities.\nAmong the cities founded or expanded by the Z\u00e4hringer dukes () are:\nOther towns owned by or under the jurisdiction (Reichsvogtei) of the Z\u00e4hringer include: Solothurn (acquired 1127), Z\u00fcrich (acquired 1173), Schaffhausen (acquired 1198) and Stein am Rhein.\nThe city of Morges on Lake Geneva is not a Z\u00e4hringer foundation (having been founded in 1286 by Louis I of Vaud) but shared the characteristic layout of the Z\u00e4hringer cities.\nGenealogy.\nHouse of Z\u00e4hringen.\nBerthold II, Duke of Carinthia, Margrave of Verona (c. 1000\u20131078, r. 1061\u20131077), is also known as \"Berthold I of Z\u00e4hringen\". Therefore, the succession of dukes of Z\u00e4hringen begins with his son as Berthold II:\nDukes of Z\u00e4hringen:\nOther notable Z\u00e4hringer:\nHouse of Baden.\nThe Veronese margravial title was used by Herman I of Baden, the eldest son of Berthold I of Z\u00e4hringen. Herman's son, Herman II, was the first to use the title of Margrave of Baden in 1112.\nNow more commonly known as the House of Baden, Herman's descendants ruled successively as margraves until the Final Recess of 1803, as electors of the Electorate of Baden until 1806, then as Grand Dukes of Baden until the end of the German monarchy in 1918. For the Heads of the House of Baden until 1918, see the list of monarchs of Baden.\nHeads of the House of Baden since 1918\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDukes of Teck.\nAdalbert I (d. 1196) was a son of Duke Conrad I of Z\u00e4hringen. Upon the death of his brother Berthold IV in 1186, he inherited the family estates around Teck Castle and, from 1187, adopted the title of Duke of Teck. His descendant Conrad II of Teck (1235\u20131292) allegedly was designated King of the Romans shortly before his assassination. The line became extinct in 1439 with the death of Louis of Teck, Patriarch of Aquileia.\nIn 1871, a ducal title with the same name was granted by King Charles I of W\u00fcrttemberg to Prince Francis of Teck (1837\u20131900), a morganatic son of Duke Alexander of W\u00fcrttemberg. Francis' daughter Mary of Teck (1867\u20131953), as the wife of King George V, became Queen of the United Kingdom and the British Dominions, and Empress of India.\nFrancis's surviving children ceased using their German titles during World War I and (aside from Queen Mary) took the name Cambridge, with his eldest son (Adolphus) being made Marquess of Cambridge and his youngest son (Alexander) being made Earl of Athlone. This branch of the family died out in the male line in 1981 and in its entirety in 1994 with the death of Francis's granddaughter, Lady Mary Abel Smith.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75019", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75019", "title": "Czech republic/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "75021", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75021", "title": "Tapio Rautavaara", "text": "Finnish singer and actor\nKaj Tapio Rautavaara (8 March 1915 \u2013 25 September 1979) was a Finnish singer (bass-baritone), athlete and film actor.\nLife.\nEarly years.\nTapio Rautavaara was born in the municipality of Pirkkala (now Nokia), a suburb of the industrial city of Tampere, as the son of Henrik Kerttula and Hilda Rautavaara. Just three weeks later, his mother moved to the Helsinki suburb of Oulunkyl\u00e4, where she had lived before. Rautavaara's father was rarely at home, and soon left the family permanently. In 1921, Tapio and his mother moved to Tampere. Rautavaara used to have conflicts with his conservative teachers due to his working-class background. Tapio earned pocket money by selling socialist papers for local workers of the Finlayson textile factory. Four years later, the family returned Oulunkyl\u00e4, where Rautavaara lived the rest of his life.\nIn the late 1920s, Rautavaara joined the local working-class sports club Oulunkyl\u00e4n T\u00e4hti (\u2033Oulunkyl\u00e4 Star\u2033) for practicing athletics. Rautavaara's formal education ended at the elementary level. By the outbreak of the Finnish Winter War in 1939, he had worked as a newspaper boy, roadworker, lumberjack and as a storeman at a co-operative mill. His national military service was with the Finnish Navy in the mid 1930s.\nWar time.\nWhen the Winter War broke out the Navy was not very active in the war and Rautavaara was allowed to continue working at the Osuustukkukauppa (OTK) mill. However, when the Continuation War broke out he was called to the army and he was assigned to the front line for the first year of the war. In the summer of 1942, Rautavaara was transferred to the war entertainment corps and worked for two years as a radio journalist in the frontier based Aunus Radio. During this time he became a known figure to the serving troops. In the summer of 1944 the Finns had to pull out from East Karelia and Rautavaara's radio career ended.\nSports career.\nRautavaara was a talented javelin thrower and archer. In 1937, he represented the Finnish Workers' Sports Federation at the Workers' Olympiads in Antwerp, finishing second in the javelin throw after his countrymen Erkki Autonen. After the World War II, Rautavaara won a European bronze medal in 1946, an Olympic gold medal in 1948, and five national titles in 1944\u201345, and 1947\u201349. He placed fifth at the 1950 European Championships. In archery Rautavaara won a team gold medal at the 1958 World Championships and a national title in 1955.\nMusic and acting career.\nAfter the war Rautavaara met Reino Helismaa, who composed and made the lyrics to \"Reissumies ja kissa\" (The Traveler and the Cat), which became Rautavaara's first hit. Composer Toivo K\u00e4rki joined this team, which produced over the next ten years many popular songs. In addition, Rautavaara composed and wrote the lyrics for many of his records. Rautavaara received gold records for the songs \"Isois\u00e4n olkihattu\" (Grandpa's Strawhat), \"Vain merimies voi tiet\u00e4\u00e4\" (Only a Sailor Could Know) and \"H\u00e4\u00e4valssi\" (The Wedding Waltz). The first song was written and composed by Rautavaara, the second one was composed by him and the lyrics were written by Heikki Saari.\nRautavaara, Helismaa and Esa Pakarinen toured Finland together at the end of the 1940s and the beginning of the 1950s. The touring stopped due to personal problems, but Rautavaara continued to record songs with Helismaa's lyrics until Helismaa's death in 1965. By the time of his death in 1979 Rautavaara had recorded about 300 songs.\nRautavaara became one of the most beloved singers in Finland. Some of his famous songs include \"Isois\u00e4n olkihattu\" (Grandfather's Straw Hat), \"Reppu ja reissumies\" (The Backpack and the Traveler), \"Korttipakka\" (The Deck of Cards), \"Lapin jenkka\" (The Lappland Schottische), \"Juokse sin\u00e4 humma\" (Run, Horse, Run), \"Kulkuri ja joutsen\" (The Tramp and the Swan), \"Tuopin j\u00e4ljet\" (Marks of the Tankard), \"Sininen uni\" (Blue Dream) and \"Anttilan kev\u00e4thuumaus\" (Anttila's Spring Fever).\nRautavaara was cast as the protagonist in numerous Finnish films, and was also supposedly a candidate for the part of Tarzan after Johnny Weissmuller had quit his career.\nLater years.\nThe peak of Rautavaara's popularity was in the 1950s, stretching into the early years of the 1960s. After that, his music was left in the shadow of rautalanka and tango music and the popularity of the television. He continued to perform regularly, however, right up until his death, even though his gigs in the 1970s were for smaller audiences, such as in department stores and topping out ceremonies.\nDeath and tributes.\nOn 25 September 1979 Tapio Rautavaara had been at the Tikkurila Swimming Center in Vantaa taking photographs for the book \"Kultaa, kunniaa, kyyneleit\u00e4\" (Finnish for \"Gold, glory, tears\") along with photographer Pentti Pekkala. After he had gone to the sauna, Rautavaara slipped and hit his head on the floor. He was taken to a nearby health center, where his injuries were not taken seriously, as staff believed him to be drunk. His head was bandaged and he was sent home. His wife and daughters laid him on a mattress on the floor of his office room at his home in Oulunkyl\u00e4 to sleep. The next night, he died as a result of a cerebral hemorrhage. His wife told their daughter that he had gone. When the daughter asked where to, her mother replied \"No, he's dead.\"\nRautavaara was buried in the Malmi Cemetery in Malmi, Helsinki.\nMemorial.\nA memorial by Veikko Myller entitled \"Kulkurin uni\" (\"A Vagabond's Dream\") to the memory of Rautavaara is located in the market square in central Oulunkyl\u00e4, the district of Helsinki, where Rautavaara lived most of his life.\nTV documentary and film.\nPeter von Bagh created a TV documentary on Rautavaara entitled \"Tapsa\" at the time of Rautavaara's death in 1979. Timo Koivusalo used Rautavaara's and Helismaa's tours as the basis for his film \"Kulkuri ja joutsen\" in 1999.\nPlay.\nIn spring 2007 the Nokia Workers' theatre presented a play entitled \"Sininen uni\" (The Blue Dream), which was based on his life.\nRautavaara's influence on later groups.\nVille Valo, the frontman of the Finnish rock band HIM, regards Rautavaara as his greatest idol in Finnish music.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75022", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75022", "title": "Expansion card", "text": "Circuit board for connecting to a computer system to add functionality\nIn computing, an expansion card (also called an expansion board, adapter card, peripheral card or accessory card) is a printed circuit board that can be inserted into an electrical connector, or expansion slot (also referred to as a bus slot) on a computer's motherboard (see also backplane) to add functionality to a computer system. Sometimes the design of the computer's case and motherboard involves placing most (or all) of these slots onto a separate, removable card. Typically such cards are referred to as a riser card in part because they project upward from the board and allow expansion cards to be placed above and parallel to the motherboard.\nExpansion cards allow the capabilities and interfaces of a computer system to be extended or supplemented in a way appropriate to the tasks it will perform. For example, a high-speed multi-channel data acquisition system would be of no use in a personal computer used for bookkeeping, but might be a key part of a system used for industrial process control. Expansion cards can often be installed or removed in the field, allowing a degree of user customization for particular purposes. Some expansion cards take the form of \"daughterboards\" that plug into connectors on a supporting system board.\nIn personal computing, notable expansion buses and expansion card standards include the S-100 bus from 1974 associated with the CP/M operating system, the 50-pin expansion slots of the original Apple II computer from 1977 (unique to Apple), IBM's Industry Standard Architecture (ISA) introduced with the IBM PC in 1981, Acorn's tube expansion bus on the BBC Micro also from 1981, IBM's patented and proprietary Micro Channel architecture (MCA) from 1987 that never won favour in the clone market, the vastly improved Peripheral Component Interconnect (PCI) that displaced ISA in 1992, and PCI Express from 2003 which abstracts the interconnect into high-speed communication \"lanes\" and relegates all other functions into software protocol.\nHistory.\nVacuum-tube based computers had modular construction, but individual functions for peripheral devices filled a cabinet, not just a printed circuit board. Processor, memory and I/O cards became feasible with the development of integrated circuits. Expansion cards make processor systems adaptable to the needs of the user by making it possible to connect various types of devices, including I/O, additional memory, and optional features (such as a floating point unit) to the central processor. Minicomputers, starting with the PDP-8, were made of multiple cards communicating through, and powered by, a passive backplane.\nThe first commercial microcomputer to feature expansion slots was the Micral N, in 1973. The first company to establish a \"de facto\" standard was Altair with the Altair 8800, developed 1974\u20131975, which later became a multi-manufacturer standard, the S-100 bus. Many of these computers were also passive backplane designs, where all elements of the computer, (processor, memory, and I/O) plugged into a card cage which passively distributed signals and power between the cards.\nProprietary bus implementations for systems such as the Apple II co-existed with multi-manufacturer standards.\nIBM PC and descendants.\nIBM introduced what would retroactively be called the Industry Standard Architecture (ISA) bus with the IBM PC in 1981. At that time, the technology was called the PC bus. The IBM XT, introduced in 1983, used the same bus (with slight exception). The 8-bit PC and XT bus was extended with the introduction of the IBM AT in 1984. This used a second connector for extending the address and data bus over the XT, but was backward compatible; 8-bit cards were still usable in the AT 16-bit slots. Industry Standard Architecture (ISA) became the designation for the IBM AT bus after other types were developed. Users of the ISA bus had to have in-depth knowledge of the hardware they were adding to properly connect the devices, since memory addresses, I/O port addresses, and DMA channels had to be configured by switches or jumpers on the card to match the settings in driver software.\nIBM's MCA bus, developed for the PS/2 in 1987, was a competitor to ISA, also their design, but fell out of favor due to the ISA's industry-wide acceptance and IBM's licensing of MCA. EISA, the 32-bit extended version of ISA championed by Compaq, was used on some PC motherboards until 1997, when Microsoft declared it a \"legacy\" subsystem in the PC 97 industry white-paper. Proprietary local buses (q.v. Compaq) and then the VESA Local Bus Standard, were late 1980s expansion buses that were tied but not exclusive to the 80386 and 80486 CPU bus. The PC/104 bus is an embedded bus that copies the ISA bus.\nIntel launched their PCI bus chipsets along with the P5-based Pentium CPUs in 1993. The PCI bus was introduced in 1991 as a replacement for ISA. The standard (now at version 3.0) is found on PC motherboards to this day. The PCI standard supports bus bridging: as many as ten daisy-chained PCI buses have been tested. CardBus, using the PCMCIA connector, is a PCI format that attaches peripherals to the Host PCI Bus via PCI to PCI Bridge. Cardbus is being supplanted by ExpressCard format.\nIntel introduced the AGP bus in 1997 as a dedicated video acceleration solution. AGP devices are logically attached to the PCI bus over a PCI-to-PCI bridge. Though termed a bus, AGP usually supports only a single card at a time (Legacy BIOS support issues). From 2005 PCI Express has been replacing both PCI and AGP. This standard, approved in 2004, implements the logical PCI protocol over a serial communication interface. PC/104(-Plus) or Mini PCI are often added for expansion on small form factor boards such as Mini-ITX.\nFor their 1000 EX and 1000 HX models, Tandy Computer designed the PLUS expansion interface, an adaptation of the XT-bus supporting cards of a smaller form factor. Because it is electrically compatible with the XT bus (a.k.a. 8-bit ISA or XT-ISA), a passive adapter can be made to connect XT cards to a PLUS expansion connector. Another feature of PLUS cards is that they are stackable. Another bus that offered stackable expansion modules was the \"sidecar\" bus used by the IBM PCjr. This may have been electrically comparable to the XT bus; it most certainly had some similarities since both essentially exposed the 8088 CPU's address and data buses, with some buffering and latching, the addition of interrupts and DMA provided by Intel add-on chips, and a few system fault detection lines (Power Good, Memory Check, I/O Channel Check). Again, PCjr sidecars are not technically expansion cards, but expansion modules, with the only difference being that the sidecar is an expansion card enclosed in a plastic box (with holes exposing the connectors).\nExternal expansion buses.\nLaptops are generally unable to accept most expansion cards intended for desktop computers. Consequently, several compact expansion standards were developed. \nThe original PC Card expansion card standard is essentially a compact version of the ISA bus. The CardBus expansion card standard is an evolution of the PC card standard to make it into a compact version of the PCI bus. The original ExpressCard standard acts like it is either a USB 2.0 peripheral or a PCI Express 1.x x1 device. ExpressCard 2.0 adds SuperSpeed USB as another type of interface the card can use. Unfortunately, CardBus and ExpressCard are vulnerable to DMA attack unless the laptop has an IOMMU that is configured to thwart these attacks.\nOne notable exception to the above is the inclusion of a single internal slot for a special reduced size version of the desktop standard. The most well known examples are Mini-PCI or Mini PCIe. Such slots were usually intended for a specific purpose such as offering \"built-in\" wireless networking or upgrading the system at production with a discrete GPU.\nOther families.\nMost other computer lines, including those from Apple Inc., Tandy, Commodore, Amiga, and Atari, Inc., offered their own expansion buses. The Amiga used Zorro II. Apple used a proprietary system with seven 50-pin-slots for Apple II peripheral cards, then later used both variations on Processor Direct Slot and NuBus for its Macintosh series until 1995, when they switched to a PCI Bus.\nGenerally speaking, most PCI expansion cards will function on any CPU platform which incorporates PCI bus hardware provided there is a software driver for that type. PCI video cards and any other cards that contain their own BIOS or other ROM are problematic, although video cards conforming to VESA Standards may be used for secondary monitors. DEC Alpha, IBM PowerPC, and NEC MIPS workstations used PCI bus connectors. Both Zorro II and NuBus were plug and play, requiring no hardware configuration by the user.\nOther computer buses were used for industrial control, instruments, and scientific systems. One specific example is HP-IB (or Hewlett Packard Interface Bus) which was ultimately standardized as IEEE-488 (aka GPIB). Some well-known historical standards include VMEbus, STD Bus, SBus (specific to Sun's SPARCStations), and numerous others.\nVideo game consoles.\nMany other video game consoles such as the Nintendo Entertainment System and the Sega Genesis included expansion buses in some form; In the case of at least the Genesis, the expansion bus was proprietary. In fact, the cartridge slots of many cartridge-based consoles (not counting the Atari 2600) would qualify as expansion buses, as they exposed both read and write capabilities of the system's internal bus. However, the expansion modules attached to these interfaces, though functionally the same as expansion cards, are not technically expansion cards, due to their physical form.\nApplications.\nThe primary purpose of an expansion card is to provide or expand on features not offered by the motherboard. For example, the original IBM PC did not have on-board graphics or hard drive capability. In that case, a graphics card and an ST-506 hard disk controller card provided graphics capability and hard drive interface respectively. Some single-board computers made no provision for expansion cards, and may only have provided IC sockets on the board for limited changes or customization. Since reliable multi-pin connectors are relatively costly, some mass-market systems such as home computers had no expansion slots and instead used a card-edge connector at the edge of the main board, putting the costly matching socket into the cost of the peripheral device.\nIn the case of expansion of on-board capability, a motherboard may provide a single serial RS232 port or Ethernet port. An expansion card can be installed to offer multiple RS232 ports or multiple and higher bandwidth Ethernet ports. In this case, the motherboard provides basic functionality but the expansion card offers additional or enhanced ports.\nPhysical construction.\nOne edge of the expansion card holds the contacts (the edge connector or pin header) that fit into the slot. They establish the electrical contact between the electronics on the card and on the motherboard. Peripheral expansion cards generally have connectors for external cables. In the PC-compatible personal computer, these connectors were located in the support bracket at the back of the cabinet. Industrial backplane systems had connectors mounted on the top edge of the card, opposite to the backplane pins.\nDepending on the form factor of the motherboard and case, around one to seven expansion cards can be added to a computer system. 19 or more expansion cards can be installed in backplane systems. When many expansion cards are added to a system, total power consumption and heat dissipation become limiting factors. Some expansion cards take up more than one slot space. For example, many graphics cards on the market as of 2010 are dual slot graphics cards, using the second slot as a place to put an active heat sink with a fan.\nSome cards are \"low-profile\" cards, meaning that they are shorter than standard cards and will fit in a lower height computer chassis such as HTPC and SFF. (There is a \"low profile PCI card\" standard that specifies a much smaller bracket and board area). The group of expansion cards that are used for external connectivity, such as network, SAN or modem cards, are commonly referred to as input/output cards (or I/O cards).\nDaughterboard.\nA daughterboard, daughtercard, mezzanine board or piggyback board is an expansion card that attaches to a system directly. Daughterboards often have plugs, sockets, pins or other attachments for other boards. Daughterboards often have only internal connections within a computer or other electronic devices, and usually access the motherboard directly rather than through a computer bus. Such boards are used to either improve various memory capacities of a computer, enable the computer to connect to certain kinds of networks that it previously could not connect to, or to allow for users to customize their computers for various purposes such as gaming. \nDaughterboards are sometimes used in computers in order to allow for expansion cards to fit parallel to the motherboard, usually to maintain a small form factor. This form are also called riser cards, or risers. Daughterboards are also sometimes used to expand the basic functionality of an electronic device, such as when a certain model has features added to it and is released as a new or separate model. Rather than redesigning the first model completely, a daughterboard may be added to a special connector on the main board. These usually fit on top of and parallel to the board, separated by spacers or standoffs, and are sometimes called mezzanine cards due to being stacked like the mezzanine of a theatre. Wavetable cards (sample-based synthesis cards) are often mounted on sound cards in this manner.\nSome mezzanine card interface standards include\nthe 400 pin FPGA Mezzanine Card (FMC);\nthe 172 pin High-Speed Mezzanine Card (HSMC);\nthe PCI Mezzanine Card (PMC);\nXMC mezzanines;\nthe Advanced Mezzanine Card;\nIndustryPacks (VITA 4), the GreenSpring Computers Mezzanine modules;\netc.\nExamples of daughterboard-style expansion cards include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75024", "revid": "99797", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75024", "title": "Scrappy-Doo", "text": "Fictional dog\nScrappy-Doo is a fictional character in the \"Scooby-Doo\" franchise. A Great Dane puppy and the nephew of the titular character, he was created by Hanna-Barbera Productions in 1979 and appeared in various incarnations of the franchise. Lennie Weinrib provided his voice for one season in 1979, and from 1980 on it was performed by Don Messick (who also voiced Scooby). In the first live-action theatrical film, video games and commercials, he was voiced by Scott Innes and portrayed by Rowan Atkinson when [Scrappy-Doo was] impersonating the proprietor of Spooky Island, Emile Mondavarious.\nHe was created in order to save the series' ratings, which by 1979 had begun to sink to the point of cancellation threats from ABC, who considered choosing between Scooby-Doo and an unnamed pilot from Ruby-Spears Enterprises which Mark Evanier had also written.\nHistory.\nHanna-Barbera.\nPrecursors.\nThough Scrappy officially debuted in the fall of 1979, there may have been hints of his existence in 1969, as he \"...bore a resemblance to Spears's and Ruby's initial idea for a feisty little dog\", which was one of the early ideas for the Scooby-Doo character himself, along with the \"big cowardly dog\" ultimately chosen.\nAfter hearing Joe Barbera's description of the character, writer Mark Evanier was significantly reminded of Henery Hawk from the \"Looney Tunes\" franchise and incorporated what he knew of said character into the script.\nDevelopment.\nScrappy's creation officially began in 1978, when Scooby-Doo's ratings were sinking to the point of cancellation threats from ABC.\nDuane Poole, a story editor for the first series in which Scrappy appeared, recalled it as a lively time, with many new ideas and some new blood being hired with the desperation to revive Scooby-Doo, which had been a cash-cow in its glory days.\nMel Blanc was the first choice to voice Scrappy, given his connection to Henery Hawk, but he demanded more money to voice the part. Frank Welker, the voice of Fred Jones, auditioned to voice Scrappy as a dual role during the character's development (one of several voice actors considered for the role) and coined the catchphrase \"Puppy Power\" during his audition. He would later change this to \"Monkey Muscle\" for the similar Donkey Kong Jr. character he would voice for TV's \"Saturday Supercade\". The next choice was Messick, who was seen as giving the best audition, but still deemed \"the wrong voice\". Afterwards, other well-known cartoon voice artists were considered or suggested: Daws Butler, Paul Winchell, Marilyn Schreffler, Howard Morris, Dick Beals and Marshall Efron. Ultimately, Lennie Weinrib was chosen.\nWarner Bros..\nLive-action \"Scooby-Doo\" movie (2002).\nScrappy was first included in an early draft of what would become \"Scooby-Doo\" (2002) in around March 2000\u2014though he did not physically appear, was only mentioned offhand by Shaggy and Scooby and was heavily implied to have been put to sleep for undisclosed reasons. James Gunn first acknowledged his involvement in April 2000. Other original ideas for the villain included the Old Man Smithers, the villain from the film's prologue. Concept art for Scrappy turning into a monster was drawn in 2001. According to the DVD commentary, choosing the villain of the film was a problematic part of the production, as the makers did not feel comfortable simply giving the role to an \"anonymous monster\" and that the ending was in \"bits and pieces\" and the \"confinements forced them to be creative\". \"There is a Scrappy because he exists in the cartoon, so we have to acknowledge him\", Gunn stated in an interview shortly before the film's release.\nUltimately, in the final film, Scrappy is revealed to be its main antagonist and had been plotting to take revenge on Mystery Inc. for abandoning him prior to the film's events. Despite previously stating that he felt that \"kids didn't care\", Gunn later admitted with some dismay that younger viewers had reacted poorly to the development, admitting he had not understood how popular Scrappy was with younger viewers. \"I still think it was funny that Scrappy was the villain\", he explained in an interview with Cinefantastique, \"but there are kids out there who were really upset.\"\nReception.\nScrappy was initially seen as a \"good idea\" by \"Saturday Morning Review\". Viewership seemed to react positively to Scrappy, as Scooby's ratings went up with Scrappy's arrival. The character continued to be a success for the next decade. Story editor Duane Poole noted that \"Scrappy solved a lot of story problems. Before you had to get Shaggy and Scooby into dangerous situations\u2014and there was no real easy way to get them there\u2014with Scrappy, he, uh, picked them up and carried them there. He just charged in. He was just such the antithesis of what Scooby and Shaggy were. The dynamic was great fun to play.\"\nJoe Ruby and Ken Spears seemed to have a less-than-positive view of the character. The co-founder of Ruby-Spears enterprises said, \"Everyone was upset\", though was unclear about whether this concerned business reasons (they had started their own company two years earlier) or personal creative reasons (considering that if Scooby had been canceled, then the last slot would have hit their show instead), starting when, in 1979, it appeared that a pilot of theirs would be renewed over Scooby's. Mark Evanier, who wrote said pilot, was hired impromptu to write Scrappy-Doo into a new pilot to renew interest in Scooby. As a result, Scooby was renewed over theirs, which was upsetting for them. \"Scrappy would charge in and solve things, so he was useful, in that way. A lot of people made derogatory comments about it at the studio and you know you don't want to be saddled with something based on, you know, network [...] but I think I liked working with it most of those cartoons,\" said Charles M. Howell, a writer who originally joined the franchise back on \"The New Scooby and Scrappy-Doo Show\" and continued to work on various iterations of the show until finally ending his tenure in the late 1980s after penning the pilot episode for \"A Pup Named Scooby-Doo\".\nTom Ruegger stated: \"It's a lot easier to love Scooby than it is to love Scrappy. But I don't have the problem with Scrappy that I have heard expressed by others. I suspect this is because I wasn't watching Scooby from the beginning, but rather, I came in and started catching up quite a while (a couple of years) after Scrappy had made his debut. Hey, they'd been messing with Scooby's cast for years! Scooby Dum. All those nasty celebrity cameo Scooby movies. I dislike those things more than I dislike Scrappy. And, for what it's worth, at least Scrappy brings some energy to the table. He actually does have a personality, even though many find it obnoxious. [...] So, since I tend to love the characters with whom I work, I can say that I learned to love Scrappy, despite all his limitations.\" Casper Kelly, one of the writers of \"The Scooby-Doo Project\" also admitted to having Scrappy as being in his first memory of Scooby, as well as enjoying when the monsters were real over the traditional fake monster format.\nIn 1999, celebrating Scooby-Doo's thirtieth anniversary, several newspapers printed articles, some of which mentioned Scrappy. In an episode of the 2011 series \"Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated\", Scrappy appeared in a brief cameo when Fred and Daphne visited a museum celebrating their exploits, to which Fred claimed \"we all promised each other that we would never speak of him\". In 2020, Casper Kelly stated that many writers did not actually hate Scrappy, implying that it was a joke and mandate.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75025", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75025", "title": "Sound Card", "text": ""}
{"id": "75027", "revid": "50768086", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75027", "title": "Game Show Network", "text": "American pay television channel\nGame Show Network (GSN) is an American basic cable channel owned by the television network division of Sony Pictures Television. The channel's programming is primarily dedicated to game shows, including reruns of acquired game shows, along with new, first-run original and revived game shows. The network has also previously aired reality competition series and televised poker.\nAs of October 2019, Game Show Network claimed that it was available to \"nearly 75 million\" American households, primarily through traditional cable and satellite services. The network and its original programming are also available on streaming and Internet television services, including Frndly TV, YouTube TV, Philo, fuboTV, Sling TV, and Plex.\nA spinoff network, Game Show Central, was launched by Sony Pictures Television Networks on March 28, 2020, as a digital ad-supported streaming channel offering Game Show Network original series and a limited selection of acquired game shows also featured on the cable channel. In February 2025, Sony began distributing Game Show Central as an over-the-air multicast network (primarily on stations owned by the E. W. Scripps Company and Inyo Broadcast Holdings), featuring a separate schedule consisting exclusively of reruns of Game Show Network's original series, incorporating programs not carried on either the streaming or cable channels.\nHistory.\n1994\u20132004: as \"Game Show Network\".\nOn May 7, 1992, Sony Pictures Entertainment joined forces with the United Video Satellite Group to launch the Game Show Channel, which was set for a 1993 launch. The announcement of the channel was made by SPE president Mel Harris.\nOn December 2, 1992, Sony Pictures Entertainment made a deal to acquire the Barry &amp; Enright game show library, and in a separate deal, struck a 10-year licensing agreement for the rights to the Mark Goodson game show library of more than 20,000 episodes including among others, \"What's My Line?\", \"Family Feud\", and \"To Tell the Truth\". Upon the deal, Sony said it would sell an equity stake in the network to Mark Goodson Productions, including the production of new original series by Jonathan Goodson Productions. Both deals were completed on December 7, 1992, eleven days before Mark Goodson's death. On June 6, 1994, Mark Goodson Productions withdrew from the venture. GSN's launch time was intended to be at 10:00\u00a0p.m. ET, but at the time, it was instead set for three hours earlier to 7:00\u00a0p.m. ET.\nGame Show Network launched at 7:00\u00a0p.m. on December 1, 1994. The first aired game show to air on GSN was \"What's My Line?\". By the launch date, the network had acquired rights to over 40,000 episodes from the libraries of several game show production companies and corporate parent Sony. The initial lineup was exclusively acquired programming such as \"Match Game\", \"Family Feud\", \"The Newlywed Game\", \"Jeopardy!\", and \"Wheel of Fortune\". Over time, Game Show Network acquired the rights to \"The Price Is Right\", \"The $10,000 Pyramid\", \"Let's Make a Deal\", \"Hollywood Squares\", \"Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?\" and other libraries, putting them on the schedule at various times throughout the network's history. The network eventually began producing original game shows such as \"Lingo\", \"Burt Luddin's Love Buffet\", \"Whammy!\", \"Inquizition\", and \"Extreme Gong\". One program to air on GSN was \"Faux Pause,\" which aired in 1998, and was co-hosted by Mary Gallagher and Sean Donnellan. \"Pause\" consisted of jokes and skits done while watching certain episodes of game shows, in a similar fashion to \"Mystery Science Theater 3000\".\nIn 2001, a massive change in both leadership and programming at the network took place when Liberty Media acquired a 50% stake. Both president Michael Fleming and vice president Jake Tauber departed, and former ABC Family/Fox Family Channel president Rich Cronin was hired to lead the network.\n2004\u201318: as \"GSN\".\nOn March 15, 2004, Game Show Network began using the abbreviation \"GSN\" and introduced the tagline \"The Network for Games.\" GSN began expanding its programming to include reality television games and various competition-based programs. GSN would also air reruns of reality competitions (for example, \"Spy TV\" and \"The Mole\"). Along with its new format, GSN would continue to produce traditional game shows, including new seasons of \"Lingo\" and a revival of \"Chain Reaction\".\nDavid Goldhill succeeded Rich Cronin as GSN president on August 1, 2007. A high definition simulcast feed of the network was launched on September 15, 2010.\nSome notable acquisitions for the network included \"Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?\" and the Steve Harvey-hosted \"Family Feud\", both of which would headline the network's prime time lineup. Notable original game shows produced during this time were \"Catch 21\" (which would be revived in 2019), \"Baggage\" (hosted by Jerry Springer), the first U.S. incarnation of \"The Chase\", \"American Bible Challenge\" (the premiere of which drew an audience of nearly two million viewers), and \"Skin Wars\". The network produced interactive program blocks, such as \"GSN Live\" and \"Playmania\".\nIn March 2011, DirecTV (which by this point had acquired Liberty Media's then-65% stake in the network) sold a 5% stake in the network back to Sony Pictures Entertainment. Although DirecTV nominally remained the majority owner, Sony begin taking control of the network, and had the right to force Sony to increase its stake in GSN to 58%. On November 8, 2012, DirecTV sold an 18% interest in GSN to Sony. GSN partnered with Vubiquity to launch \"GSN On Demand\" on August 15, 2013.\n2017\u2013present: Return to \"Game Show Network\".\nIn April 2017, David Goldhill resigned as president of the network after nearly 10 years. He was succeeded by Mark Feldman in August 2017. Later that year, the network would begin to refer to itself in promos by its full name. On October 1, 2018, the network's programming returned to focus on traditional game show formats, culminating in a rebranding that restored the network's full name.\nThe network's daily schedule would consist almost entirely of original programming, including new shows such as \"America Says\", \"Common Knowledge\", and \"People Puzzler\". In April 2020, Game Show Network premiered \"Master Minds\", a retool of a 2019 original show called \"Best Ever Trivia Show\" featuring \"Jeopardy!\" champion and host Ken Jennings, and now hosted by Brooke Burns, who hosted the GSN version of \"The Chase\".\nDirecTV's stake in Game Show Network would move to AT&amp;T when it acquired the service in 2015. On November 18, 2019, it was announced that Sony had acquired AT&amp;T's 42% stake and thus resumed full ownership of GSN. A list of 2020 Nielsen ratings published by \"Variety\" indicated that Game Show Network averaged 432,000 viewers in prime time, up 6% from the 2019 average.\nIn December 2021, Mark Feldman resigned after four years as Game Show Network president, to join the video game firm Scopely amid the gaming unit sale from Sony. He was succeeded by longtime executive John Zaccario.\nOn September 7, 2022, Dish Network and Sling TV removed Game Show Network from their lineups, after failing to reach a renewal agreement with owner Sony Pictures Television. The network returned to both services on September 27, 2022.\nProgramming.\nCurrent original programming, as of November 2025 includes \"Bingo Blitz\", \"Tic-Tac-Dough\" (hosted by Brooke Burns), and \"Beat the Bridge\". Reruns of former original shows airing on the network include \"America Says\", \"Catch 21\", \"Master Minds\", \"Switch\", \"Chain Reaction \"(both Dylan Lane-hosted incarnations), and \"Split Second\" (Higgins version).\nIn October 2025, the network announced that it was developing a new original game show titled \"100 Choices\".\nGSN's acquired slate includes \"Match Game\" (1973\u201382 version hosted by Gene Rayburn and 2016-21 revival hosted by Alec Baldwin), \"Family Feud\" (hosted by Steve Harvey), \"Family Feud Favorites\", \"Flip Side\", \"Deal or No Deal\" (NBC and CNBC versions), \"Jeopardy!\" (hosted by Ken Jennings), \"25 Words or Less\", \"Cash Cab\" (hosted by Ben Bailey), \"Who Wants to Be a Millionaire\" (original ABC primetime run hosted by Regis Philbin), \"Press Your Luck\" (ABC revival hosted by Elizabeth Banks), \"Wheel of Fortune\" (hosted by Pat Sajak and Vanna White), \"The Wall\", \"Card Sharks\" (ABC revival hosted by Joel McHale), \"The Chase\" (ABC revival hosted by Sara Haines), \"The Perfect Line\", and the 2016 version of \"The $100,000 Pyramid\".\nSyndication.\nGSN began syndicating some of its original programming to other channels in the early 2010s. On June 24, 2013, the channel entered into an agreement with Bounce TV, giving it the broadcast rights to \"The Newlywed Game\", \"Catch 21\", and \"The American Bible Challenge\". \"The American Bible Challenge\" aired in reruns on UP in fall 2013 and again in spring 2015. \"Drew Carey's Improv-A-Ganza\" aired on Laff in 2015. Reruns of \"America Says\" aired in syndication during the 2019\u201320 season. Reruns of \"People Puzzler\" began airing in syndication for the 2023\u201324 television season.\nGame Show Central.\nOn March 28, 2020, the network launched Game Show Central, a digital streaming channel broadcasting archived GSN original programming. The network is currently available on Samsung and Vizio smart television sets and Paramount Skydance-owned AVOD platform Pluto TV (which also carries rival network Buzzr). Game Show Central features both current/recent Game Show Network originals like \"America Says\" and older shows such as \"Cram\", \"Friend or Foe?\", \"Minute To Win It\", and \"Baggage\". By 2023, a limited selection of syndicated shows originally acquired for Game Show Network's schedule (including \"25 Words or Less\" and the Steve Harvey version of \"Family Feud\") were incorporated into the schedule. The service became available on The Roku Channel (with a somewhat different schedule and shows compared to the Pluto TV stream) later in 2020. The service was made available globally via Plex in late July 2020.\nOn October 10, 2023, GSN partnered with sister company Crunchyroll, LLC to launch a Crunchyroll-branded FAST channel dedicated to anime and related programming. The Crunchyroll channel initially launched on October 11, 2023, on The Roku Channel, LG Channels, and Vizio WatchFree+ platforms.\nBeginning on February 17, 2025, Game Show Central would also be offered as an over-the-air digital subchannel network, distributed in a hybrid OTA and cable/streaming model similar to that of Oxygen. At launch, it was primarily carried on stations (many of them being Ion Television affiliates) owned by the E. W. Scripps Company and Inyo Broadcast Holdings, replacing Sony-owned classic television network Get (which temporarily replaced Scripps News on their stations following that network's November 2024 conversion into a streaming-only service) on the majority of its charter affiliates. The broadcast feed maintains a separate schedule, incorporating additional archived Game Show Network originals not carried on the cable and streaming channels, including some previously featured on the streaming feed, such as \"The Newlywed Game\" (Sherri Shepherd and Carnie Wilson versions), \"Blank Slate\", \"Best Ever Trivia Show\", \"Winsanity\" and \"Lingo\" (Bill Engvall version).\nOnline gaming.\nIn the late 1990s and early 2000s, GSN's website at GSN.com offered Flash games based on GSN shows.\nIn 2007, Liberty Media acquired the Toronto-based FUN Technologies, operator of the popular online tournament casual game website WorldWinner. Following the acquisition, Liberty began to extend the GSN brand into online gaming by rebranding WorldWinner as a GSN service. GSN also launched a social gaming app on Facebook, now known as GSN Casino, featuring skill and casino games along with competitive tournaments. By October 2010, GSN Casino had over 8 million active users. GSN also developed a \"Wheel of Fortune\" app for Facebook, released in 2010.\nGSN also published GSN Casino mobile apps, featuring various slot machine and bingo games in 2013, \"GSN Casino\" was the 10th highest-grossing app for iPad on the App Store. In January 2014, GSN acquired Bitrhymes Inc., developers of the social and mobile games \"Bingo Bash\" and \"Slots Bash\", for an undisclosed amount. GSN had sued Bitrhymes in November 2013 following its prior offer to acquire the company, arguing that it had attempted to withdraw its offer and accept a different one during GSN's exclusive negotiation period.\nIn November 2014, the network announced that a show based on \"Bingo Bash\" was in development for Game Show Network's 2015 slate of original programming.\nIn October 2021, Sony sold the GSN Games subsidiary to mobile game developer Scopely in a $1 billion cash and stock deal. Sony then took a minority stake in Scopely.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75028", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75028", "title": "Voice over IP", "text": "Methods of delivering voice communications and multimedia over IP networks\nVoice over Internet Protocol (VoIP), also known as IP telephony, is a set of technologies used primarily for voice communication sessions over Internet Protocol (IP) networks, such as the Internet. VoIP enables voice calls to be transmitted as data packets, facilitating various methods of voice communication, including traditional applications like Skype, Microsoft Teams, Google Voice, and VoIP phones. Regular telephones can also be used for VoIP by connecting them to the Internet via analog telephone adapters (ATAs), which convert traditional telephone signals into digital data packets that can be transmitted over IP networks. \nThe broader terms Internet telephony, broadband telephony, and broadband phone service specifically refer to the delivery of voice and other communication services, such as fax, SMS, and voice messaging, over the Internet, in contrast to the traditional public switched telephone network (PSTN), commonly known as plain old telephone service (POTS).\nVoIP technology has evolved to integrate with mobile telephony, including Voice over LTE (VoLTE) and Voice over NR (Vo5G), enabling seamless voice communication over mobile data networks. These advancements have extended VoIP's role beyond its traditional use in Internet-based applications. It has become a key component of modern mobile infrastructure, as 4G and 5G networks rely entirely on this technology for voice transmission.\nOverview.\nThe steps and principles involved in originating VoIP telephone calls are similar to traditional digital telephony and involve signaling, channel setup, digitization of the analog voice signals, and encoding. Instead of being transmitted over a circuit-switched network, the digital information is packetized and transmission occurs as IP packets over a packet-switched network. They transport media streams using special media delivery protocols that encode audio and video with audio codecs and video codecs. Various codecs exist that optimize the media stream based on application requirements and network bandwidth; some implementations rely on narrowband and compressed speech, while others support high-fidelity stereo codecs.\nThe most widely used speech coding standards in VoIP are based on the linear predictive coding (LPC) and modified discrete cosine transform (MDCT) compression methods. Popular codecs include the MDCT-based AAC-LD (used in FaceTime), the LPC/MDCT-based Opus (used in WhatsApp), the LPC-based SILK (used in Skype), \u03bc-law, A-law versions of G.711, G.722, an open source voice codec known as iLBC, and a codec that uses only 8\u00a0kbit/s each way called G.729.\nEarly providers of voice-over-IP services used business models and offered technical solutions that mirrored the architecture of the legacy telephone network. Second-generation providers, such as Skype, built closed networks for private user bases, offering the benefit of free calls and convenience while potentially charging for access to other communication networks, such as the PSTN. This limited the freedom of users to mix-and-match third-party hardware and software. Third-generation providers, such as Google Talk, adopted the concept of federated VoIP. These solutions typically allow dynamic interconnection between users in any two domains of the Internet, when a user wishes to place a call.\nIn addition to VoIP phones, VoIP is also available on many personal computers and other Internet access devices. Calls and SMS text messages may be sent via Wi-Fi or the carrier's mobile data network. VoIP provides a framework for consolidation of all modern communications technologies using a single unified communications system.\nIntegration of VoIP in mobile networks.\nVoIP technology has been adapted for use in mobile networks, leading to the development of advanced systems designed to support voice communication over modern data infrastructures. Among these are Voice over LTE (VoLTE) and Voice over 5G (Vo5G), which enable voice communication over IP-based mobile infrastructures. In contrast to traditional VoIP services, which often function independently of global telephone numbering systems, VoLTE and Vo5G are directly connected to mobile operators' infrastructures, providing seamless connectivity to the international telephone network.\nVoLTE, introduced as part of 4G LTE networks, enables voice communication over an IP-based infrastructure initially developed for data transmission. It offers features such as high-definition voice (HD Voice) and faster call setup times compared to circuit-switched networks.\nVo5G, the 5G equivalent of VoLTE, utilizes the increased speed, reduced latency, and greater capacity of 5G networks to further enhance these capabilities. Both VoLTE and Vo5G maintain compatibility with traditional public switched telephone networks (PSTNs), allowing users to make and receive calls to and from any telephone number worldwide.\nThese technologies differ from standalone VoIP services by being fully integrated with mobile network operators. This integration ensures additional features such as emergency call support and quality-of-service guarantees, making them a central part of modern mobile telecommunication systems.\nProtocols.\nVoice over IP has been implemented with proprietary protocols and protocols based on open standards in applications such as VoIP phones, mobile applications, and web-based communications.\nA variety of functions are needed to implement VoIP communication. Some protocols perform multiple functions, while others perform only a few and must be used in concert. These functions include:\nVoIP protocols include:\nAdoption.\nConsumer market.\nMass-market VoIP services use existing broadband Internet access, by which subscribers place and receive telephone calls in much the same manner as they would via the PSTN. Full-service VoIP phone companies provide inbound and outbound service with direct inbound dialing. Many offer unlimited domestic calling and sometimes international calls for a flat monthly subscription fee. Phone calls between subscribers of the same provider are usually free when flat-fee service is not available.\nA VoIP phone is necessary to connect to a VoIP service provider. This can be implemented in several ways:\nPSTN and mobile network providers.\nIt is increasingly common for telecommunications providers to use VoIP telephony over dedicated and public IP networks as a backhaul to connect switching centers and to interconnect with other telephony network providers; this is often referred to as \"IP backhaul\".\nSmartphones may have SIP clients built into the firmware or available as an application download.\nCorporate use.\nBecause of the bandwidth efficiency and low costs that VoIP technology can provide, businesses are migrating from traditional copper-wire telephone systems to VoIP systems to reduce their monthly phone costs. In 2008, 80% of all new Private branch exchange (PBX) lines installed internationally were VoIP. For example, in the United States, the Social Security Administration is converting its field offices of 63,000 workers from traditional phone installations to a VoIP infrastructure carried over its existing data network.\nVoIP allows both voice and data communications to be run over a single network, which can significantly reduce infrastructure costs. The prices of extensions on VoIP are lower than for PBX and key systems. VoIP switches may run on commodity hardware, such as personal computers. Rather than closed architectures, these devices rely on standard interfaces. VoIP devices have simple, intuitive user interfaces, so users can often make simple system configuration changes. Dual-mode phones enable users to continue their conversations as they move between an outside cellular service and an internal Wi-Fi network, so that it is no longer necessary to carry both a desktop phone and a cell phone. Maintenance becomes simpler as there are fewer devices to oversee.\nVoIP solutions aimed at businesses have evolved into unified communications services that treat all communications\u2014phone calls, faxes, voice mail, e-mail, web conferences, and more\u2014as discrete units that can all be delivered via any means and to any handset, including cellphones. Two kinds of service providers are operating in this space: one set is focused on VoIP for medium to large enterprises, while another is targeting the small-to-medium business (SMB) market.\nSkype, which originally marketed itself as a service among friends, began to cater to businesses in 2009, providing free-of-charge connections between any users on the Skype network and connecting to and from ordinary PSTN telephones for a charge.\nDelivery mechanisms.\nIn general, the provision of VoIP telephony systems to organizational or individual users can be divided into two primary delivery methods: private or on-premises solutions, or externally hosted solutions delivered by third-party providers. On-premises delivery methods are more akin to the classic PBX deployment model for connecting an office to local PSTN networks.\nWhile many use cases still remain for private or on-premises VoIP systems, the wider market has been gradually shifting toward \"Cloud\" or \"Hosted\" VoIP solutions. Hosted systems are also generally better suited to smaller or personal use VoIP deployments, where a private system may not be viable for these scenarios.\nHosted VoIP systems.\n\"Hosted\" or \"Cloud\" VoIP solutions involve a service provider or telecommunications carrier hosting the telephone system as a software solution within their own infrastructure.\nTypically this will be one or more data centers with geographic relevance to the end-user(s) of the system. This infrastructure is external to the user of the system and is deployed and maintained by the service provider.\nEndpoints, such as VoIP telephones or softphone applications (apps running on a computer or mobile device), will connect to the VoIP service remotely. These connections typically take place over public internet links, such as local fixed WAN breakout or mobile carrier service.\nPrivate VoIP systems.\nIn the case of a private VoIP system, the primary telephony system itself is located within the private infrastructure of the end-user organization. Usually, the system will be deployed on-premises at a site within the direct control of the organization. This can provide numerous benefits in terms of QoS control (see below), cost scalability, and ensuring privacy and security of communications traffic. However, the responsibility for ensuring that the VoIP system remains performant and resilient is predominantly vested in the end-user organization. This is not the case with a Hosted VoIP solution.\nPrivate VoIP systems can be physical hardware PBX appliances, converged with other infrastructure, or they can be deployed as software applications. Generally, the latter two options will be in the form of a separate virtualized appliance. However, in some scenarios, these systems are deployed on bare metal infrastructure or IoT devices. With some solutions, such as 3CX, companies can attempt to blend the benefits of hosted and private on-premises systems by implementing their own private solution but within an external environment. Examples can include data center collocation services, public cloud, or private cloud locations.\nFor on-premises systems, local endpoints within the same location typically connect directly over the LAN. For remote and external endpoints, available connectivity options mirror those of Hosted or Cloud VoIP solutions.\nHowever, VoIP traffic to and from the on-premises systems can often also be sent over secure private links. Examples include personal VPN, site-to-site VPN, private networks such as MPLS and SD-WAN, or via private SBCs (Session Border Controllers). While exceptions and private peering options do exist, it is generally uncommon for those private connectivity methods to be provided by Hosted or Cloud VoIP providers.\nQuality of service.\nCommunication on the IP network is perceived as less reliable in contrast to the circuit-switched public telephone network because it does not provide a network-based mechanism to ensure that data packets are not lost, and are delivered in sequential order. It is a best-effort network without fundamental quality of service (QoS) guarantees. Voice, and all other data, travels in packets over IP networks with fixed maximum capacity. This system may be more prone to data loss in the presence of congestion than traditional circuit switched systems; a circuit switched system of insufficient capacity will refuse new connections while carrying the remainder without impairment, while the quality of real-time data such as telephone conversations on packet-switched networks degrades dramatically. Therefore, VoIP implementations may face problems with latency, packet loss, and jitter.\nBy default, network routers handle traffic on a first-come, first-served basis. Fixed delays cannot be controlled as they are caused by the physical distance the packets travel. They are especially problematic when satellite circuits are involved because of the long distance to a geostationary satellite and back; delays of 400\u2013600\u00a0ms are typical. Latency can be minimized by marking voice packets as being delay-sensitive with QoS methods such as DiffServ.\nNetwork routers on high volume traffic links may introduce latency that exceeds permissible thresholds for VoIP. Excessive load on a link can cause congestion and associated queueing delays and packet loss. This signals a transport protocol like TCP to reduce its transmission rate to alleviate the congestion. But VoIP usually uses UDP not TCP because recovering from congestion through retransmission usually entails too much latency. So QoS mechanisms can avoid the undesirable loss of VoIP packets by immediately transmitting them ahead of any queued bulk traffic on the same link, even when the link is congested by bulk traffic.\nVoIP endpoints usually have to wait for the completion of transmission of previous packets before new data may be sent. Although it is possible to preempt (abort) a less important packet in mid-transmission, this is not commonly done, especially on high-speed links where transmission times are short even for maximum-sized packets. An alternative to preemption on slower links, such as dialup and digital subscriber line (DSL), is to reduce the maximum transmission time by reducing the maximum transmission unit. But since every packet must contain protocol headers, this increases relative header overhead on every link traversed.\nThe receiver must resequence IP packets that arrive out of order and recover gracefully when packets arrive too late or not at all. Packet delay variation results from changes in queuing delay along a given network path due to competition from other users for the same transmission links. VoIP receivers accommodate this variation by storing incoming packets briefly in a playout buffer, deliberately increasing latency to improve the chance that each packet will be on hand when it is time for the voice engine to play it. The added delay is thus a compromise between excessive latency and excessive dropout, i.e. momentary audio interruptions.\nAlthough jitter is a random variable, it is the sum of several other random variables that are at least somewhat independent: the individual queuing delays of the routers along the Internet path in question. Motivated by the central limit theorem, jitter can be modeled as a Gaussian random variable. This suggests continually estimating the mean delay and its standard deviation and setting the playout delay so that only packets delayed more than several standard deviations above the mean will arrive too late to be useful. In practice, the variance in latency of many Internet paths is dominated by a small number (often one) of relatively slow and congested bottleneck links. Most Internet backbone links are now so fast (e.g. 10\u00a0Gbit/s) that their delays are dominated by the transmission medium (e.g. optical fiber) and the routers driving them do not have enough buffering for queuing delays to be significant.\nA number of protocols have been defined to support the reporting of quality of service (QoS) and quality of experience (QoE) for VoIP calls. These include RTP Control Protocol (RTCP) extended reports, SIP RTCP summary reports, H.460.9 Annex B (for H.323), H.248.30 and MGCP extensions.\nThe RTCP extended report VoIP metrics block specified by is generated by an VoIP phone or gateway during a live call and contains information on packet loss rate, packet discard rate (because of jitter), packet loss/discard burst metrics (burst length/density, gap length/density), network delay, end system delay, signal/noise/echo level, mean opinion scores (MOS) and R factors and configuration information related to the jitter buffer. VoIP metrics reports are exchanged between IP endpoints on an occasional basis during a call, and an end of call message sent via SIP RTCP summary report or one of the other signaling protocol extensions. VoIP metrics reports are intended to support real-time feedback related to QoS problems, the exchange of information between the endpoints for improved call quality calculation and a variety of other applications.\nDSL and ATM.\nDSL modems typically provide Ethernet connections to local equipment, but inside they may actually be Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) modems. They use ATM Adaptation Layer 5 (AAL5) to segment each Ethernet packet into a series of 53-byte ATM cells for transmission, reassembling them back into Ethernet frames at the receiving end.\nUsing a separate virtual circuit identifier (VCI) for voice over IP has the potential to reduce latency on shared connections. ATM's potential for latency reduction is greatest on slow links because worst-case latency decreases with increasing link speed. A full-size (1500 byte) Ethernet frame takes 94\u00a0ms to transmit at 128\u00a0kbit/s but only 8\u00a0ms at 1.5\u00a0Mbit/s. If this is the bottleneck link, this latency is probably small enough to ensure good VoIP performance without MTU reductions or multiple ATM VCs. The latest generations of DSL, VDSL and VDSL2, carry Ethernet without intermediate ATM/AAL5 layers, and they generally support IEEE 802.1p priority tagging so that VoIP can be queued ahead of less time-critical traffic.\nATM has substantial header overhead: 5/53 = 9.4%, roughly twice the total header overhead of a 1500 byte Ethernet frame. This \"ATM tax\" is incurred by every DSL user whether or not they take advantage of multiple virtual circuits\u00a0\u2013\u00a0and few can.\nLayer 2.\nSeveral protocols are used in the data link layer and physical layer for quality-of-service mechanisms that help VoIP applications work well even in the presence of network congestion. Some examples include:\nPerformance metrics.\nThe quality of voice transmission is characterized by several metrics that may be monitored by network elements and by the user agent hardware or software. Such metrics include network packet loss, packet jitter, packet latency (delay), post-dial delay, and echo. The metrics are determined by VoIP performance testing and monitoring.\nPSTN integration.\nA VoIP media gateway controller (aka Class 5 Softswitch) works in cooperation with a media gateway (aka IP Business Gateway) and connects the digital media stream, so as to complete the path for voice and data. Gateways include interfaces for connecting to standard PSTN networks. Ethernet interfaces are also included in the modern systems which are specially designed to link calls that are passed via VoIP.\nE.164 is a global numbering standard for both the PSTN and public land mobile network (PLMN). Most VoIP implementations support E.164 to allow calls to be routed to and from VoIP subscribers and the PSTN/PLMN. VoIP implementations can also allow other identification techniques to be used. For example, Skype allows subscribers to choose \"Skype names\" (usernames) whereas SIP implementations can use Uniform Resource Identifier (URIs) similar to email addresses. Often VoIP implementations employ methods of translating non-E.164 identifiers to E.164 numbers and vice versa, such as the Skype-In service provided by Skype and the E.164 number to URI mapping (ENUM) service in IMS and SIP.\nEcho can also be an issue for PSTN integration. Common causes of echo include impedance mismatches in analog circuitry and an acoustic path from the receive to transmit signal at the receiving end.\nNumber portability.\nLocal number portability (LNP) and mobile number portability (MNP) also impact VoIP business. Number portability is a service that allows a subscriber to select a new telephone carrier without requiring a new number to be issued. Typically, it is the responsibility of the former carrier to \"map\" the old number to the undisclosed number assigned by the new carrier. This is achieved by maintaining a database of numbers. A dialed number is initially received by the original carrier and quickly rerouted to the new carrier. Multiple porting references must be maintained even if the subscriber returns to the original carrier. The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) mandates carrier compliance with these consumer-protection stipulations. In November 2007, the FCC in the United States released an order extending number portability obligations to interconnected VoIP providers and carriers that support VoIP providers.\nA voice call originating in the VoIP environment also faces least-cost routing (LCR) challenges to reach its destination if the number is routed to a mobile phone number on a traditional mobile carrier. LCR is based on checking the destination of each telephone call as it is made, and then sending the call via the network that will cost the customer the least. This rating is subject to some debate given the complexity of call routing created by number portability. With MNP in place, LCR providers can no longer rely on using the network root prefix to determine how to route a call. Instead, they must now determine the actual network of every number before routing the call.\nTherefore, VoIP solutions also need to handle MNP when routing a voice call. In countries without a central database, like the UK, it may be necessary to query the mobile network about which home network a mobile phone number belongs to. As the popularity of VoIP increases in the enterprise markets because of LCR options, VoIP needs to provide a certain level of reliability when handling calls.\nEmergency calls.\nA telephone connected to a land line has a direct relationship between a telephone number and a physical location, which is maintained by the telephone company and available to emergency responders via the national emergency response service centers in form of emergency subscriber lists. When an emergency call is received by a center the location is automatically determined from its databases and displayed on the operator console.\nIn IP telephony, no such direct link between location and communications end point exists. Even a provider having wired infrastructure, such as a DSL provider, may know only the approximate location of the device, based on the IP address allocated to the network router and the known service address. Some ISPs do not track the automatic assignment of IP addresses to customer equipment.\nIP communication provides for device mobility. For example, a residential broadband connection may be used as a link to a virtual private network of a corporate entity, in which case the IP address being used for customer communications may belong to the enterprise, not the residential ISP. Such off-premises extensions may appear as part of an upstream IP PBX. On mobile devices, e.g., a 3G handset or USB wireless broadband adapter, the IP address has no relationship with any physical location known to the telephony service provider, since a mobile user could be anywhere in a region with network coverage, even roaming via another cellular company.\nAt the VoIP level, a phone or gateway may identify itself by its account credentials with a Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) registrar. In such cases, the Internet telephony service provider (ITSP) knows only that a particular user's equipment is active. Service providers often provide emergency response services by agreement with the user who registers a physical location and agrees that, if an emergency number is called from the IP device, emergency services are provided to that address only.\nSuch emergency services are provided by VoIP vendors in the United States by a system called Enhanced 911 (E911), based on the Wireless Communications and Public Safety Act. The VoIP E911 emergency-calling system associates a physical address with the calling party's telephone number. All VoIP providers that provide access to the public switched telephone network are required to implement E911, a service for which the subscriber may be charged. \"VoIP providers may not allow customers to opt-out of 911 service.\" The VoIP E911 system is based on a static table lookup. Unlike in cellular phones, where the location of an E911 call can be traced using assisted GPS or other methods, the VoIP E911 information is accurate only if subscribers keep their emergency address information current.\nFax support.\nSending faxes over VoIP networks is sometimes referred to as Fax over IP (FoIP). Transmission of fax documents was problematic in early VoIP implementations, as most voice digitization and compression codecs are optimized for the representation of the human voice and the proper timing of the modem signals cannot be guaranteed in a packet-based, connectionless network.\nA standards-based solution for reliably delivering fax-over-IP is the T.38 protocol. The T.38 protocol is designed to compensate for the differences between traditional packet-less communications over analog lines and packet-based transmissions which are the basis for IP communications. The fax machine may be a standard device connected to an analog telephone adapter (ATA), or it may be a software application or dedicated network device operating via an Ethernet interface. Originally, T.38 was designed to use UDP or TCP transmission methods across an IP network.\nSome newer high-end fax machines have built-in T.38 capabilities which are connected directly to a network switch or router. In T.38 each packet contains a portion of the data stream sent in the previous packet. Two successive packets have to be lost to actually lose data integrity.\nPower requirements.\nTelephones for traditional residential analog service are usually connected directly to telephone company phone lines which provide direct current to power most basic analog handsets independently of locally available electrical power. The susceptibility of phone service to power failures is a common problem even with traditional analog service where customers purchase telephone units that operate with wireless handsets to a base station, or that have other modern phone features, such as built-in voicemail or phone book features.\nVoIP phones and VoIP telephone adapters connect to routers or cable modems which typically depend on the availability of mains electricity or locally generated power. Some VoIP service providers use customer premises equipment (e.g., cable modems) with battery-backed power supplies to assure uninterrupted service for up to several hours in case of local power failures. Such battery-backed devices typically are designed for use with analog handsets. Some VoIP service providers implement services to route calls to other telephone services of the subscriber, such a cellular phone, in the event that the customer's network device is inaccessible to terminate the call.\nSecurity.\nSecure calls are possible using standardized protocols such as Secure Real-time Transport Protocol. Most of the facilities of creating a secure telephone connection over traditional phone lines, such as digitizing and digital transmission, are already in place with VoIP. It is necessary only to encrypt and authenticate the existing data stream. Automated software, such as a virtual PBX, may eliminate the need for personnel to greet and switch incoming calls.\nThe security concerns for VoIP telephone systems are similar to those of other Internet-connected devices. This means that hackers with knowledge of VoIP vulnerabilities can perform denial-of-service attacks, harvest customer data, record conversations, and compromise voicemail messages. Compromised VoIP user account or session credentials may enable an attacker to incur substantial charges from third-party services, such as long-distance or international calling.\nThe technical details of many VoIP protocols create challenges in routing VoIP traffic through firewalls and network address translators, used to interconnect to transit networks or the Internet. Private session border controllers are often employed to enable VoIP calls to and from protected networks. Other methods to traverse NAT devices involve assistive protocols such as STUN and Interactive Connectivity Establishment (ICE).\nStandards for securing VoIP are available in the Secure Real-time Transport Protocol (SRTP) and the ZRTP protocol for analog telephony adapters, as well as for some softphones. IPsec is available to secure point-to-point VoIP at the transport level by using opportunistic encryption. Though many consumer VoIP solutions do not support encryption of the signaling path or the media, securing a VoIP phone is conceptually easier to implement using VoIP than on traditional telephone circuits. A result of the lack of widespread support for encryption is that it is relatively easy to eavesdrop on VoIP calls when access to the data network is possible. Free open-source solutions, such as Wireshark, facilitate capturing VoIP conversations.\nGovernment and military organizations use various security measures to protect VoIP traffic, such as voice over secure IP (VoSIP), secure voice over IP (SVoIP), and secure voice over secure IP (SVoSIP). The distinction lies in whether encryption is applied in the telephone endpoint or in the network. Secure voice over secure IP may be implemented by encrypting the media with protocols such as SRTP and ZRTP. Secure voice over IP uses Type 1 encryption on a classified network, such as SIPRNet. Public Secure VoIP is also available with free GNU software and in many popular commercial VoIP programs via libraries, such as ZRTP.\nIn June 2021, the National Security Agency (NSA) released comprehensive documents describing the four attack planes of a communications system \u2013 the network, perimeter, session controllers and endpoints \u2013 and explaining security risks and mitigation techniques for each of them.\nCaller ID.\nVoice over IP protocols and equipment provide caller ID support that is compatible with the PSTN. Many VoIP service providers also allow callers to configure custom caller ID information.\nHearing aid compatibility.\nWireline telephones which are manufactured in, imported to, or intended to be used in the US with Voice over IP service, on or after February 28, 2020, are required to meet the hearing aid compatibility requirements set forth by the Federal Communications Commission.\nOperational cost.\nVoIP has drastically reduced the cost of communication by sharing network infrastructure between data and voice. A single broadband connection has the ability to transmit multiple telephone calls.\nRegulatory and legal issues.\nAs the popularity of VoIP grows, governments are becoming more interested in regulating VoIP in a manner similar to PSTN services.\nThroughout the developing world, particularly in countries where regulation is weak or captured by the dominant operator, restrictions on the use of VoIP are often imposed, including in Panama where VoIP is taxed, Guyana where VoIP is prohibited. In Ethiopia, where the government is nationalizing telecommunication service, it is a criminal offense to offer services using VoIP. The country has installed firewalls to prevent international calls from being made using VoIP. These measures were taken after the popularity of VoIP reduced the income generated by the state-owned telecommunications company.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission regulates telephone service, including VoIP telephony service. VoIP services operating in Canada are required to provide 9-1-1 emergency service.\nEuropean Union.\nIn the European Union, the treatment of VoIP service providers is a decision for each national telecommunications regulator, which must use competition law to define relevant national markets and then determine whether any service provider on those national markets has \"significant market power\" (and so should be subject to certain obligations). A general distinction is usually made between VoIP services that function over managed networks (via broadband connections) and VoIP services that function over unmanaged networks (essentially, the Internet).\nThe relevant EU Directive is not clearly drafted concerning obligations that can exist independently of market power (e.g., the obligation to offer access to emergency calls), and it is impossible to say definitively whether VoIP service providers of either type are bound by them.\nArab states of the GCC.\nOman.\nIn Oman, it is illegal to provide or use unauthorized VoIP services, to the extent that web sites of unlicensed VoIP providers have been blocked. Violations may be punished with fines of 50,000 Omani Rial (about 130,317 US dollars), a two-year prison sentence or both. In 2009, police raided 121 Internet cafes throughout the country and arrested 212 people for using or providing VoIP services.\nSaudi Arabia.\nIn September 2017, Saudi Arabia lifted the ban on VoIPs, in an attempt to reduce operational costs and spur digital entrepreneurship.\nUnited Arab Emirates.\nIn the United Arab Emirates (UAE), it is illegal to provide or use unauthorized VoIP services. Web sites of unlicensed VoIP providers have been blocked. Some VoIP services such as Skype were allowed. In January 2018, internet service providers in UAE blocked all VoIP apps, including Skype, but permitting only 2 government-approved VoIP apps (C\u2019ME and BOTIM). In opposition, a petition on \"Change.org\" garnered over 5000 signatures, in response to which the website was blocked in UAE.\nOn March 24, 2020, the United Arab Emirates loosened restriction on VoIP services earlier prohibited in the country, to ease communication during the COVID-19 pandemic. However, popular instant messaging applications such as WhatsApp, Skype, and FaceTime remained blocked from being used for voice and video calls, constricting residents to use paid services from the country's state-owned telecom providers.\nIndia.\nIn India, it is legal to use VoIP, but it is illegal to have VoIP gateways inside India. This effectively means that people who have PCs can use them to make a VoIP call to other computers but not to a normal phone number. Foreign-based VoIP server services are illegal to use in India.\nInternet telephony is permitted to the ISP with restrictions. The following services are permitted:\nSouth Korea.\nIn South Korea, only providers registered with the government are authorized to offer VoIP services. Unlike many VoIP providers, most of whom offer flat rates, Korean VoIP services are generally metered and charged at rates similar to terrestrial calling. Foreign VoIP providers encounter high barriers to government registration. This issue came to a head in 2006 when Internet service providers providing personal Internet services by contract to United States Forces Korea (USFK) members residing on USFK bases threatened to block off access to VoIP services used by USFK members as an economical way to keep in contact with their families in the United States, on the grounds that the service members' VoIP providers were not registered. A compromise was reached between USFK and Korean telecommunications officials in January 2007, wherein USFK service members arriving in Korea before June 1, 2007, and subscribing to the ISP services provided on base could continue to use their US-based VoIP subscription, but later arrivals are required to use a Korean-based VoIP provider, which by contract will offer pricing similar to the flat rates offered by US VoIP providers.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, the FCC requires all interconnected VoIP service providers to comply with requirements comparable to those for traditional telecommunications service providers. VoIP operators in the US are required to support local number portability; make service accessible to people with disabilities; pay regulatory fees, universal service contributions, and other mandated payments; and enable law enforcement authorities to conduct surveillance pursuant to the Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (CALEA).\nOperators of \"Interconnected\" VoIP (fully connected to the PSTN) are mandated to provide Enhanced 911 service without special request, provide for customer location updates, clearly disclose any limitations on their E-911 functionality to their consumers, obtain affirmative acknowledgements of these disclosures from all consumers, and may not allow their customers to opt-out of 911 service. VoIP operators also receive the benefit of certain US telecommunications regulations, including an entitlement to interconnection and exchange of traffic with incumbent local exchange carriers via wholesale carriers. Providers of \"nomadic\" VoIP service\u2014those who are unable to determine the location of their users\u2014are exempt from state telecommunications regulation.\nAnother legal issue that the US Congress is debating concerns changes to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. The issue in question is calls between Americans and foreigners. The NSA is not authorized to tap Americans' conversations without a warrant\u2014but the Internet, and specifically VoIP does not draw as clear a line to the location of a caller or a call's recipient as the traditional phone system does. As VoIP's low cost and flexibility convinces more and more organizations to adopt the technology, surveillance for law enforcement agencies becomes more difficult. VoIP technology has also increased federal security concerns because VoIP and similar technologies have made it more difficult for the government to determine where a target is physically located when communications are being intercepted, and that creates a whole set of new legal challenges.\nHistory.\nThe early developments of packet network designs by Paul Baran and other researchers were motivated by a desire for a higher degree of circuit redundancy and network availability in the face of infrastructure failures than was possible in the circuit-switched networks in telecommunications of the mid-twentieth century. Danny Cohen first demonstrated a form of packet voice in 1973 which was developed into Network Voice Protocol which operated across the early ARPANET.\nOn the early ARPANET, real-time voice communication was not possible with uncompressed pulse-code modulation (PCM) digital speech packets, which had a bit rate of 64kbps, much greater than the 2.4kbps bandwidth of early modems. The solution to this problem was linear predictive coding (LPC), a speech coding data compression algorithm that was first proposed by Fumitada Itakura of Nagoya University and Shuzo Saito of Nippon Telegraph and Telephone (NTT) in 1966. LPC was capable of speech compression down to 2.4kbps, leading to the first successful real-time conversation over ARPANET in 1974, between Culler-Harrison Incorporated in Goleta, California, and MIT Lincoln Laboratory in Lexington, Massachusetts. LPC has since been the most widely used speech coding method. Code-excited linear prediction (CELP), a type of LPC algorithm, was developed by Manfred R. Schroeder and Bishnu S. Atal in 1985. LPC algorithms remain an audio coding standard in modern VoIP technology.\nIn the two decades following the 1974 demo, various forms of packet telephony were developed and industry interest groups formed to support the new technologies. Following the termination of the ARPANET project, and expansion of the Internet for commercial traffic, IP telephony was tested and deemed infeasible for commercial use until the introduction of VocalChat in the early 1990s and then in Feb 1995 the official release of Internet Phone (or iPhone for short) commercial software by VocalTec, based on a patent by Lior Haramaty and Alon Cohen, and followed by other VoIP infrastructure components such as telephony gateways and switching servers. Soon after it became an established area of interest in commercial labs of the major IT concerns, notably at AT&amp;T, where Marian Croak and her team filed many patents related to the technology. By the late 1990s, the first softswitches became available, and new protocols, such as H.323, MGCP and Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) gained widespread attention. In the early 2000s, the proliferation of high-bandwidth always-on Internet connections to residential dwellings and businesses, spawned an industry of Internet telephony service providers (ITSPs). The development of open-source telephony software, such as Asterisk PBX, fueled widespread interest and entrepreneurship in voice-over-IP services, applying new Internet technology paradigms, such as cloud services to telephony.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75029", "revid": "46992329", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75029", "title": "Flat racing", "text": ""}
{"id": "75031", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75031", "title": "Local bus", "text": "In computer architecture, a local bus is a computer bus that connects directly, or almost directly, from the central processing unit (CPU) to one or more slots on the expansion bus. The significance of direct connection to the CPU is avoiding the bottleneck created by the expansion bus, thus providing fast throughput. There are several local buses built into various types of computers to increase the speed of data transfer (i.e. bandwidth). Local buses for expanded memory and video boards are the most common. VESA Local Bus and Processor Direct Slot were examples of a local bus design.\nAlthough VL-Bus was later succeeded by AGP, it is not correct to categorize AGP as a local bus. Whereas VL-Bus operated on the CPU's memory bus at the CPU's clock speed, an AGP peripheral runs at specified clock speeds that run independently of the CPU clock (usually using a divider of the CPU clock).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75033", "revid": "300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75033", "title": "Time constraints", "text": ""}
{"id": "75034", "revid": "8855946", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75034", "title": "Clean-room design", "text": "Reverse-engineering without infringing copyright\nClean-room design (also known as the Chinese wall technique) is the method of copying a design by reverse engineering and then recreating it without infringing any of the copyrights associated with the original design. Clean-room design is useful as a defense against copyright infringement because it relies on independent creation. However, because independent invention is not a defense against patents, clean-room designs typically cannot be used to circumvent patent restrictions.\nThe term implies that the design team works in an environment that is \"clean\" or demonstrably uncontaminated by any knowledge of the proprietary techniques used by the competitor.\nTypically, a clean-room design is done by having someone examine the system to be reimplemented and having this person write a specification. This specification is then reviewed by a lawyer to ensure that no copyrighted material is included. The specification is then implemented by a team with no connection to the original examiners.\nExamples.\nPhoenix Technologies sold its clean-room implementation of the IBM-compatible BIOS to various PC clone manufacturers. American Megatrends also sold its clean-room implementation of the IBM-compatible BIOS to various PC clone manufacturers.\nSeveral other PC clone companies, including Corona Data Systems, Eagle Computer, and Handwell Corporation, were litigated by IBM for copyright infringement, and were forced to re-implement their BIOS in a way which did not infringe IBM's copyrights. The legal precedent for firmware being protected by copyright, however, hadn't been established until \n\"Apple Computer, Inc. v. Franklin Computer Corp.\", 714 F.2d 1240 (3rd Circuit Court 1983). \nThe three settlements by IBM, and the legal clean-room PC BIOS designs of Compaq and Columbia Data Products, happened before Phoenix announced, in July 1984, that they were licensing their own BIOS code. Phoenix expressly emphasized the clean-room process through which their BIOS code had been written by a programmer who did not even have prior exposure to Intel microprocessors, himself having been a TMS9900 programmer beforehand. As late as the early 1990s, IBM was winning millions of dollars from settling BIOS copyright infringement lawsuits against some other PC clone manufacturers like Matsushita/Panasonic (1987) and Kyocera (1993\u20131994), although the latter suit was for infringements between 1985 and 1990.\nAnother clean-room design example is VTech's successful clones of the Apple II ROMs for the Laser 128, the only computer model, among dozens of Apple II compatibles, which survived litigation brought by Apple Computer. The \"Laser 128 story\" is in contrast to the Franklin Ace 1000, which lost in the 1983 decision, \"Apple Computer, Inc. v. Franklin Computer Corporation\". The previous PC \"clone\" examples are notable for not daring to fight IBM in court, even before the legal precedent for copyrighting firmware had been made.\nOther examples include ReactOS, an open-source operating system made from clean-room reverse-engineered components of Windows, and Coherent operating system, a clean-room re-implementation of version 7 Unix. In the early years of its existence, Coherent's developer Mark Williams Company received a visit from an AT&amp;T delegation looking to determine whether MWC was infringing on AT&amp;T Unix property. It has been released as open source.\nCase law.\nClean-room design is usually employed as best practice, but not strictly required by law. In \"NEC Corp. v Intel Corp.\" (1990), NEC sought declaratory judgment against Intel's charges that NEC's engineers simply copied the microcode of the 8086 processor in their NEC V20 clone. A US judge ruled that while the early, internal revisions of NEC's microcode were indeed a copyright violation, the later one, which actually went into NEC's product, although derived from the former, were sufficiently different from the Intel microcode it could be considered free of copyright violations. While NEC themselves did not follow a strict clean-room approach in the development of their clone's microcode, during the trial, they hired an independent contractor who was only given access to specifications but ended up writing code that had certain similarities to both NEC's and Intel's code. From this evidence, the judge concluded that similarity in certain routines was a matter of functional constraints resulting from the compatibility requirements, and thus were likely free of a creative element. Although the clean-room approach had been used as preventative measure in view of possible litigation before (e.g. in the Phoenix BIOS case), the \"NEC v. Intel\" case was the first time that the clean-room argument was accepted in a US court trial. A related aspect worth mentioning here is that NEC did have a license for Intel's patents governing the 8086 processor.\n\"Sony Computer Entertainment, Inc. v. Connectix Corp.\" was a 1999 lawsuit which established an important precedent in regard to reverse engineering. Sony sought damages for copyright infringement over Connectix's Virtual Game Station emulator, alleging that its proprietary BIOS code had been copied into Connectix's product without permission. Sony won the initial judgment, but the ruling was overturned on appeal. Sony eventually purchased the rights to Virtual Game Station to prevent its further sale and development. This established a precedent addressing the legal implications of commercial reverse engineering efforts.\nDuring production, Connectix unsuccessfully attempted a Chinese wall approach to reverse engineer the BIOS, so its engineers disassembled the object code directly. Connectix's successful appeal maintained that the direct disassembly and observation of proprietary code was necessary because there was no other way to determine its behavior. From the ruling:\nSome works are closer to the core of intended copyright protection than others. Sony's BIOS lay at a distance from the core because it contains unprotected aspects that cannot be examined without copying. The court of appeal therefore accorded it a lower degree of protection than more traditional literary works."}
{"id": "75035", "revid": "42867806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75035", "title": "IP telephony", "text": ""}
{"id": "75036", "revid": "48914397", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75036", "title": "Internet telephony", "text": ""}
{"id": "75038", "revid": "40330219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75038", "title": "Johan Nicolai Madvig", "text": "Danish classical philologist (1804-1886)\nJohan Nicolai Madvig (; 7 August 1804 \u2013 12 December 1886), was a Danish philologist and Kultus Minister.\nLife.\nMadvig was born on the Danish island of Bornholm, south of Sweden. He was educated at the classical school of Frederiksborg and the University of Copenhagen, at least partially on the cost of Marie Kofoed. In 1828 he became reader, and in 1829 professor of Latin language and literature at Copenhagen, and in 1832 was appointed university librarian. In 1848, Madvig entered parliament as a member of the \"Eider-Danish\" part\u2014those who desired the Eider to be the boundary of the country. When this party came into power Madvig became Kultus Minister in the Cabinet of Moltke II and III, but left the cabinet on 7 December 1851 as a protest against the government's unity state program. In 1852 he became director of public instruction.\nSome years later, from 1856 to 1863, Madvig was president of the Danish parliament and leader of the National Liberal Party. With these brief interruptions the greater part of his life was devoted to the study and teaching of Latin and the improvement of the classical schools, of which he was chief inspector. As a critic of classical texts he was distinguished for learning and acumen. He devoted much attention to Cicero, and revolutionized the study of his philosophical writings by an edition of \"De Finibus\" (1839). Other major contributions to classical scholarship are his \"Emendationes Livianae\" (1860; 2d ed. 1877) and the papers collected in his \"Opuscula Academica\" ('Minor Academic Works') (1838) and \"Adversaria Critica\" (3 vols., 1871\u201384). Perhaps his most widely known works are those on Latin grammar and Greek syntax, especially his Latin grammar for schools (Eng. trans. by G Woods).\nIn 1874, his vision began to fail, and Madvig was forced to give up much of his work. He continued to lecture, and in 1879 he was chosen rector of the university for the sixth time. In 1880 he resigned his professorship, but went on with his work on the Roman constitution, which was completed and published before his death. In the book, Madvig takes a strongly conservative standpoint and attacks Theodor Mommsen's views on Caesar's programme of reforms. It is a clear exposition, though rather too dogmatic and without sufficient regard for the views of other scholars. His last work was his autobiography, \"Livserindringer\" (published 1887).\nOne of his textbooks, on Latin syntax, was re-issued as recently as 2001.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75039", "revid": "13791031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75039", "title": "Yelena Shushunova", "text": "Soviet Russian gymnast (1969\u20132018)\nYelena Lvovna Shushunova (; sometimes spelled Elena Shushunova; 23 May 1969 \u2013 16 August 2018) was a Soviet Russian gymnast. Shushunova was one of five women (alongside Larisa Latynina, V\u011bra \u010c\u00e1slavsk\u00e1, Ludmilla Tourischeva and Lilia Podkopayeva) who have won all-around titles at all major competitions: Olympics, World Championships and European/Continental Championships and one of eleven women who medaled on every event at World Championships. Shushunova was renowned for pioneering complex skills as well as her explosive and dynamic tumbling and high consistency.\nJunior career.\nShushunova was born and grew up in Leningrad and began gymnastics when she was approximately six or seven years old. She began competing as a junior gymnast in 1981. In 1982, she won gold medals at the 1982 Moscow News (now known as Moscow Stars of the World) and the Junior European Championships.\nIn 1983, she won the USSR Cup, which she won every year until 1988 with the exception of 1984.\nSenior career.\nShushunova was named as a member of the Soviet national gymnastics team in 1984, but was unable to compete at the 1984 Summer Olympics as the Soviet Union boycotted the Olympics. Instead, she competed at the 1984 Friendship Games in Olomouc, Czechoslovakia, where she finished third all around and helped the USSR to a gold in the team event.\nThe following year Shushunova made her breakthrough by winning the all-around title at the European Championships. She also won three gold medals in the event finals on vault, floor exercise, and uneven bars (which she shared with East German Olympian Maxi Gnauck). At the World Championships she won five medals including the all-around title, which she shared with compatriot Oksana Omelianchik. She took first on vault, third on beam, and second on floor. In her floor exercise she tumbled a double layout, and side Arabian 1 and 3/4 salto, both rare skills for women at that time; in fact, women are no longer allowed to compete saltos which end in a roll. Here she displayed her signature skill, a straddle jump to prone support, a rare and innovative move for the 1980s.\nShushunova's dominance in women's gymnastics continued at the 1986 World Cup in Beijing. There she won the all-around, vault, uneven bars, and floor exercise titles. In this competition she displayed an increased level of difficulty on two apparatus, showing a Rulfova flic (full twisting Korbut flic) on balance beam and a tucked full in double salto dismount on the uneven bars. At the 1986 Goodwill Games she led the Soviet team to a gold medal, but then fell twice in the all-around finals to finish second to teammate Vera Kolesnikova. She rallied in the event finals to take, once again, the vault, bars, and floor golds and the beam silver.\nIn 1987, Shushunova lost the European title to Romanian Daniela Siliva\u0219 due to a fall on a double layout dismount from the uneven bars. At the European Championships she earned a bronze in the all-around and a gold on vault. She continued to show increased difficulty on all apparatus by competing a double layout dismount on the uneven bars, a layout Thomas salto on floor, and a full in dismount on beam. Later that year her team lost the World Championships team title, placing second to the Romanian team. Shushunova also lost the world title to Romanian Aurelia Dobre, finishing in second place. In the event finals she retained her vault title with her textbook Yurchenko full and Yurchenko 1.5, beating Romanian Eugenia Golea. She also earned a bronze medal on the uneven bars. Shushunova also earned silver on balance beam and tied with Daniela Silivas for gold on floor exercise.\n1988 Olympics.\nIn 1988, Shushunova competed at the Summer Olympics in Seoul. She scored three perfect scores of 10 in optional events and won the individual all-around and team event titles. She also won silver on balance beam and bronze on uneven bars. Shushunova fell on a double twisting Yurchenko on vault and failed to medal. She also failed to medal on floor exercise due to stumbling out of the landing of her opening full-in double back and falling out of her arabian 1 3/4 salto.\nLater life.\nShushunova retired from competition two months after the 1988 Olympics and later returned to her home city of Saint Petersburg, where she worked for the city's sports committee. She helped organise the gymnastics events of the 1994 Goodwill Games and 1998 European Championships, both of which were held in Saint Petersburg.\nIn 2004, she was inducted into the International Gymnastics Hall of Fame. In the following year, she was inducted into the International Jewish Sports Hall of Fame.\nEponymous skills.\nShushunova has two eponymous skills named after her in the Code of Points.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDeath.\nShushunova died from complications of pneumonia on 16 August 2018. She was 49.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
