{"id": "76640", "revid": "3125634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76640", "title": "John Ruskin", "text": "English writer and art critic (1819\u20131900)\nJohn Ruskin (8 February 1819 \u2013 20 January 1900) was an English polymath \u2013 a writer, lecturer, art historian, art critic, draughtsman and philanthropist of the Victorian era. He wrote on subjects as varied as art, architecture, political economy, education, museology, geology, botany, ornithology, literature, history, and myth.\nRuskin's writing styles and literary forms were equally varied. He wrote essays and treatises, poetry and lectures, travel guides and manuals, letters and even a fairy tale. He also made detailed sketches and paintings of rocks, plants, birds, landscapes, architectural structures and ornamentation. The elaborate style that characterised his earliest writing on art gave way in time to plainer language designed to communicate his ideas more effectively. In all of his writing, he emphasised the connections between nature, art and society.\nRuskin was hugely influential in the latter half of the 19th century and up to the First World War. After a period of relative decline, his reputation has steadily improved since the 1960s with the publication of numerous academic studies of his work. Today, his ideas and concerns are widely recognised as having anticipated interest in environmentalism, sustainability, ethical consumerism, and craft.\nRuskin first came to widespread attention with the first volume of \"Modern Painters\" (1843), an extended essay in defence of the work of J. M. W. Turner in which he argued that the principal duty of the artist is \"truth to nature\". This meant rooting art in experience and close observation. From the 1850s, he championed the Pre-Raphaelites, who were influenced by his ideas. His work increasingly focused on social and political issues. \"Unto This Last\" (1860, 1862) marked the shift in emphasis. In 1869, Ruskin became the first Slade Professor of Fine Art at the University of Oxford, where he established the Ruskin School of Drawing. In 1871, he began his monthly \"letters to the workmen and labourers of Great Britain\", published under the title \"Fors Clavigera\" (1871\u20131884). In the course of this complex and deeply personal work, he developed the principles underlying his ideal society. Its practical outcome was the founding of the Guild of St George, an organisation that endures today.\nEarly life (1819\u20131846).\nGenealogy.\nRuskin was the only child of first cousins. His father, John James Ruskin (1785\u20131864), was a sherry and wine importer, founding partner and \"de facto\" business manager of Ruskin, Telford and Domecq (see Allied Domecq). John James was born and brought up in Edinburgh, Scotland, to a mother from Glenluce and a father originally from Hertfordshire. His wife, Ruskin's mother, Margaret Cock (1781\u20131871), was the daughter of a publican in Croydon. She had joined the Ruskin household when she became companion to John James's mother, Catherine.\nJohn James had hoped to practise law, and was articled as a clerk in London. His father, John Thomas Ruskin, described as a grocer (but apparently an ambitious wholesale merchant), was an incompetent businessman. To save the family from bankruptcy, John James, whose prudence and success were in stark contrast to his father, took on all debts, settling the last of them in 1832. John James and Margaret were engaged in 1809, but opposition to the union from John Thomas, and the problem of his debts, delayed the couple's wedding. They finally married, without celebration, in 1818. John James died on 3 March 1864 and is buried in the churchyard of St John the Evangelist, Shirley, Croydon.\nChildhood and education.\nRuskin was born on 8 February 1819 at 54 Hunter Street, Brunswick Square, London (demolished 1969), south of what is now St Pancras railway station. His childhood was shaped by the contrasting influences of his father and mother, both of whom were fiercely ambitious for him. John James Ruskin helped to develop his son's Romanticism. They shared a passion for the works of Byron, Shakespeare and especially Walter Scott. They visited Scott's home, Abbotsford, in 1838, but Ruskin was disappointed by its appearance. Margaret Ruskin, an evangelical Christian, more cautious and restrained than her husband, taught young John to read the Bible from beginning to end, and then to start all over again, committing large portions to memory. Its language, imagery and parables had a profound and lasting effect on his writing. He later wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;She read alternate verses with me, watching at first, every intonation of my voice, and correcting the false ones, till she made me understand the verse, if within my reach, rightly and energetically.\u2014\u200a\nRuskin's childhood was spent from 1823 at 28 Herne Hill (demolished c.\u20091912), near the village of Camberwell in South London. He had few friends of his own age, but it was not the friendless and joyless experience he later said it was in his autobiography, \"Praeterita\" (1885\u201389). He was educated at home by his parents and private tutors, including Congregationalist preacher Edward Andrews, whose daughters, Mrs Eliza Orme and Emily Augusta Patmore were later credited with introducing Ruskin to the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood. \nFrom 1834 to 1835 he attended the school in Peckham run by the progressive evangelical Thomas Dale (1797\u20131870). Ruskin heard Dale lecture in 1836 at King's College, London, where Dale was the first Professor of English Literature. Ruskin went on to enrol and complete his studies at King's College, where he prepared for Oxford under Dale's tutelage.\nTravel.\nRuskin was greatly influenced by the extensive and privileged travels he enjoyed in his childhood. It helped to establish his taste and augmented his education. He sometimes accompanied his father on visits to business clients at their country houses, which exposed him to English landscapes, architecture and paintings. Family tours took them to the Lake District (his first long poem, \"Iteriad\", was an account of his tour in 1830) and to relatives in Perth, Scotland. As early as 1825, the family visited France and Belgium. Their continental tours became increasingly ambitious in scope: in 1833 they visited Strasbourg, Schaffhausen, Milan, Genoa and Turin, places to which Ruskin frequently returned. He developed a lifelong love of the Alps, and in 1835 visited Venice for the first time, that 'Paradise of cities' that provided the subject and symbolism of much of his later work.\nThese tours gave Ruskin the opportunity to observe and record his impressions of nature. He composed elegant, though mainly conventional poetry, some of which was published in \"Friendship's Offering\". His early notebooks and sketchbooks are full of visually sophisticated and technically accomplished drawings of maps, landscapes and buildings, remarkable for a boy of his age. He was profoundly affected by Samuel Rogers's poem \"Italy\" (1830), a copy of which was given to him as a 13th birthday present; in particular, he deeply admired the accompanying illustrations by J. M. W. Turner. Much of Ruskin's own art in the 1830s was in imitation of Turner, and of Samuel Prout, whose \"Sketches Made in Flanders and Germany\" (1833) he also admired. His artistic skills were refined under the tutelage of Charles Runciman, Copley Fielding and J. D. Harding.\nFirst publications.\nRuskin's journeys also provided inspiration for writing. His first publication was the poem \"On Skiddaw and Derwent Water\" (originally entitled \"Lines written at the Lakes in Cumberland: Derwentwater\" and published in the \"Spiritual Times\") (August 1829). In 1834, three short articles for Loudon's \"Magazine of Natural History\" were published. They show early signs of his skill as a close \"scientific\" observer of nature, especially its geology.\nFrom September 1837 to December 1838, Ruskin's \"The Poetry of Architecture\" was serialised in Loudon's \"Architectural Magazine\", under the pen name \"Kata Phusin\" (Greek for \"According to Nature\"). It was a study of cottages, villas, and other dwellings centred on a Wordsworthian argument that buildings should be sympathetic to their immediate environment and use local materials. It anticipated key themes in his later writings. In 1839, Ruskin's \"Remarks on the Present State of Meteorological Science\" was published in \"Transactions of the Meteorological Society\".\nOxford.\nIn Michaelmas 1836, Ruskin matriculated at the University of Oxford, taking up residence at Christ Church in January of the following year. Enrolled as a gentleman-commoner, he enjoyed equal status with his aristocratic peers. Ruskin was generally uninspired by Oxford and suffered bouts of illness. Perhaps the greatest advantage of his time there was in the few, close friendships he made. His tutor, the Rev Walter Lucas Brown, always encouraged him, as did a young senior tutor, Henry Liddell (later the father of Alice Liddell) and a private tutor, the Reverend Osborne Gordon. He became close to the geologist and natural theologian William Buckland. Among his fellow undergraduates, Ruskin's most important friends were Charles Thomas Newton and Henry Acland.\nHis most noteworthy success came in 1839 when, at the third attempt, he won the prestigious Newdigate Prize for poetry (Arthur Hugh Clough came second). He met William Wordsworth, who was receiving an honorary degree, at the ceremony.\nRuskin's health was poor and he never became independent from his family during his time at Oxford. His mother took lodgings on High Street, where his father joined them at weekends. He was devastated to hear that his first love, Ad\u00e8le Domecq, the second daughter of his father's business partner, had become engaged to a French nobleman. In April 1840, whilst revising for his examinations, he began to cough blood, which led to fears of consumption and a long break from Oxford travelling with his parents.\nBefore he returned to Oxford, Ruskin responded to a challenge that had been put to him by Effie Gray, whom he later married: the twelve-year-old Effie had asked him to write a fairy story. During a six-week break at Leamington Spa to undergo Dr Jephson's (1798\u20131878) celebrated salt-water cure, Ruskin wrote his only work of fiction, the fable \"The King of the Golden River\" (not published until December 1850 (but imprinted 1851), with illustrations by Richard Doyle). A work of Christian sacrificial morality and charity, it is set in the Alpine landscape Ruskin loved and knew so well. It remains the most translated of all his works. Back at Oxford, in 1842 Ruskin sat for a pass degree, and was awarded an uncommon honorary double fourth-class degree in recognition of his achievements.\n\"Modern Painters I\" (1843).\nFor much of the period from late 1840 to autumn 1842, Ruskin was abroad with his parents, mainly in Italy. His studies of Italian art were chiefly guided by George Richmond, to whom the Ruskins were introduced by Joseph Severn, a friend of Keats (whose son, Arthur Severn, later married Ruskin's cousin, Joan). He was galvanised into writing a defence of J. M. W. Turner when he read an attack on several of Turner's pictures exhibited at the Royal Academy. It recalled an attack by the critic Rev John Eagles in \"Blackwood's Magazine\" in 1836, which had prompted Ruskin to write a long essay. John James had sent the piece to Turner, who did not wish it to be published. It finally appeared in 1903.\nBefore Ruskin began \"Modern Painters\", John James Ruskin had begun collecting watercolours, including works by Samuel Prout and Turner. Both painters were among occasional guests of the Ruskins at Herne Hill, and 163 Denmark Hill (demolished 1947) to which the family moved in 1842.\nWhat became the first volume of \"Modern Painters\" (1843), published by Smith, Elder &amp; Co. under the anonymous authority of \"A Graduate of Oxford\", was Ruskin's answer to Turner's critics. Ruskin controversially argued that modern landscape painters\u2014and in particular Turner\u2014were superior to the so-called \"Old Masters\" of the post-Renaissance period. Ruskin maintained that, unlike Turner, Old Masters such as Gaspard Dughet (Gaspar Poussin), Claude, and Salvator Rosa favoured pictorial convention, and not \"truth to nature\". He explained that he meant \"moral as well as material truth\". The job of the artist is to observe the reality of nature and not to invent it in a studio\u2014to render imaginatively on canvas what he has seen and understood, free of any rules of composition. For Ruskin, modern landscapists demonstrated superior understanding of the \"truths\" of water, air, clouds, stones, and vegetation, a profound appreciation of which Ruskin demonstrated in his own prose. He described works he had seen at the National Gallery and Dulwich Picture Gallery with extraordinary verbal felicity.\nAlthough critics were slow to react and the reviews were mixed, many notable literary and artistic figures were impressed with the young man's work, including Charlotte Bront\u00eb and Elizabeth Gaskell. Suddenly Ruskin had found his m\u00e9tier, and in one leap helped redefine the genre of art criticism, mixing a discourse of polemic with aesthetics, scientific observation and ethics. It cemented Ruskin's relationship with Turner. After the artist died in 1851, Ruskin catalogued nearly 20,000 sketches that Turner gave to the British nation.\n1845 tour and \"Modern Painters II\" (1846).\nRuskin toured the continent with his parents again during 1844, visiting Chamonix and Paris, studying the geology of the Alps and the paintings of Titian, Veronese and Perugino among others at the Louvre. In 1845, at the age of 26, he undertook to travel without his parents for the first time. It provided him with an opportunity to study medieval art and architecture in France, Switzerland and especially Italy. In Lucca he saw the Tomb of Ilaria del Carretto by Jacopo della Quercia, which Ruskin considered the exemplar of Christian sculpture (he later associated it with the then object of his love, Rose La Touche). He drew inspiration from what he saw at the Campo Santo in Pisa, and in Florence. In Venice, he was particularly impressed by the works of Fra Angelico and Giotto in St Mark's Cathedral, and Tintoretto in the Scuola di San Rocco, but he was alarmed by the combined effects of decay and modernisation on the city: \"Venice is lost to me\", he wrote. It finally convinced him that architectural restoration was destruction, and that the only true and faithful action was preservation and conservation.\nDrawing on his travels, he wrote the second volume of \"Modern Painters\" (published April 1846). The volume concentrated on Renaissance and pre-Renaissance artists rather than on Turner. It was a more theoretical work than its predecessor. Ruskin explicitly linked the aesthetic and the divine, arguing that truth, beauty and religion are inextricably bound together: \"the Beautiful as a gift of God\". In defining categories of beauty and imagination, Ruskin argued that all great artists must perceive beauty and, with their imagination, communicate it creatively by means of symbolic representation. Generally, critics gave this second volume a warmer reception, although many found the attack on the aesthetic orthodoxy associated with Joshua Reynolds difficult to accept. In the summer, Ruskin was abroad again with his father, who still hoped his son might become a poet, even poet laureate, just one among many factors increasing the tension between them.\nMiddle life (1847\u20131869).\nMarriage to Effie Gray.\nDuring 1847, Ruskin became closer to Euphemia \"Effie\" Gray, the daughter of family friends. It was for her that Ruskin had written \"The King of the Golden River\". The couple were engaged in October. They married on 10 April 1848 at her home, Bowerswell, in Perth, once the residence of the Ruskin family. It was the site of the suicide of John Thomas Ruskin (Ruskin's grandfather). Owing to this association and other complications, Ruskin's parents did not attend. The European Revolutions of 1848 meant that the newlyweds' earliest travels together were restricted, but they were able to visit Normandy, where Ruskin admired the Gothic architecture.\nTheir early life together was spent at 31 Park Street, Mayfair, secured for them by Ruskin's father (later addresses included nearby 6 Charles Street, and 30 Herne Hill). Effie was too unwell to undertake the European tour of 1849, so Ruskin visited the Alps with his parents, gathering material for the third and fourth volumes of \"Modern Painters\". He was struck by the contrast between the Alpine beauty and the poverty of Alpine peasants, stirring his increasingly sensitive social conscience.\nThe marriage was unhappy, with Ruskin reportedly being cruel to Effie and distrustful of her. For unclear reasons the marriage was never consummated and was annulled six years later in 1854.\nArchitecture.\nRuskin's developing interest in architecture, and particularly in the Gothic, led to the first work to bear his name, \"The Seven Lamps of Architecture\" (1849). It contained 14 plates etched by the author. The title refers to seven moral categories that Ruskin considered vital to and inseparable from all architecture: sacrifice, truth, power, beauty, life, memory, and obedience. All would provide recurring themes in his future work. \"Seven Lamps\" promoted the virtues of a secular and Protestant form of Gothic. It was a challenge to the Catholic influence of architect A. W. N. Pugin.\n\"The Stones of Venice\".\nIn November 1849, John and Effie Ruskin visited Venice, staying at the Hotel Danieli. Their different personalities are revealed by their contrasting priorities. For Effie, Venice provided an opportunity to socialise, while Ruskin was engaged in solitary studies. In particular, he made a point of drawing the Ca' d'Oro and the Doge's Palace, or Palazzo Ducale, because he feared that they would be destroyed by the occupying Austrian troops. One of these troops, Lieutenant Charles Paulizza, became friendly with Effie, apparently with Ruskin's consent. Her brother, among others, later claimed that Ruskin was deliberately encouraging the friendship to compromise her, as an excuse to separate.\nMeanwhile, Ruskin was making the extensive sketches and notes that he used for his three-volume work \"The Stones of Venice\" (1851\u201353). Developing from a technical history of Venetian architecture from the Byzantine to the Renaissance, into a broad cultural history, \"Stones\" represented Ruskin's opinion of contemporary England. It served as a warning about the moral and spiritual health of society. Ruskin argued that Venice had degenerated slowly. Its cultural achievements had been compromised, and its society corrupted, by the decline of true Christian faith. Instead of revering the divine, Renaissance artists honoured themselves, arrogantly celebrating human sensuousness.\nThe chapter, \"The Nature of Gothic\" appeared in the second volume of \"Stones\". Praising Gothic ornament, Ruskin argued that it was an expression of the artisan's joy in free, creative work. The worker must be allowed to think and to express his own personality and ideas, ideally using his own hands, rather than machinery.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We want one man to be always thinking, and another to be always working, and we call one a gentleman, and the other an operative; whereas the workman ought often to be thinking, and the thinker often to be working, and both should be gentlemen, in the best sense. As it is, we make both ungentle, the one envying, the other despising, his brother; and the mass of society is made up of morbid thinkers and miserable workers. Now it is only by labour that thought can be made healthy, and only by thought that labour can be made happy, and the two cannot be separated with impunity.\u2014\u200a\nThis was both an aesthetic attack on, and a social critique of, the division of labour in particular, and industrial capitalism in general. This chapter had a profound effect, and was reprinted both by the Christian socialist founders of the Working Men's College and later by the Arts and Crafts pioneer and socialist William Morris.\nPre-Raphaelites.\nJohn Everett Millais, William Holman Hunt and Dante Gabriel Rossetti had established the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood in 1848. The Pre-Raphaelite commitment to 'naturalism'\u00a0\u2013 \"paint[ing] from nature only\", depicting nature in fine detail, had been influenced by Ruskin.\nRuskin became acquainted with Millais after the artists made an approach to Ruskin through their mutual friend Coventry Patmore. Initially, Ruskin had not been impressed by Millais's \"Christ in the House of His Parents\" (1849\u201350), a painting that some considered blasphemous at the time, but Ruskin wrote letters defending the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood to \"The Times\" during May 1851. Providing Millais with artistic patronage and encouragement, in the summer of 1853 the artist (and his brother) travelled to Scotland with Ruskin and Effie where, at Glen Finglas, he painted the closely observed landscape background of gneiss rock to which, as had always been intended, he later added Ruskin's portrait.\nMillais had painted a picture of Effie for \"The Order of Release, 1746\", exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1852. Suffering increasingly from physical illness and acute mental anxiety, Effie was arguing fiercely with her husband and his intense and overly protective parents, and sought solace with her own parents in Scotland. The Ruskin marriage was already undermined as she and Millais fell in love, and Effie left Ruskin, causing a public scandal.\nDuring April 1854, Effie filed her suit of nullity, on grounds of \"non-consummation\" owing to his \"incurable impotency\", a charge Ruskin later disputed. Ruskin wrote, \"I can prove my virility at once.\" The annulment was granted in July. Ruskin did not even mention it in his diary. Effie married Millais the following year. The complex reasons for the non-consummation and ultimate failure of the Ruskin marriage are a matter of enduring speculation and debate.\nRuskin continued to support Hunt and Rossetti. He also provided an annuity of \u00a3150 in 1855\u20131857 to Elizabeth Siddal, Rossetti's wife, to encourage her art (and paid for the services of Henry Acland for her medical care). Other artists influenced by the Pre-Raphaelites also received both critical and financial assistance from Ruskin, including John Brett, John William Inchbold, and Edward Burne-Jones, who became a good friend (he called him \"Brother Ned\"). His father's disapproval of such friends was a further cause of tension between them.\nDuring this period Ruskin wrote regular reviews of the annual exhibitions at the Royal Academy with the title \"Academy Notes\" (1855\u20131859, 1875). They were highly influential, capable of making or breaking reputations. The satirical magazine \"Punch\" published the lines (24 May 1856), \"I paints and paints,/hears no complaints/And sells before I'm dry,/Till savage Ruskin/He sticks his tusk in/Then nobody will buy.\"\nRuskin was an art-philanthropist: in March 1861 he gave 48 Turner drawings to the Ashmolean in Oxford, and a further 25 to the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge in May. Ruskin's own work was very distinctive, and he occasionally exhibited his watercolours: in the United States in 1857\u201358 and 1879, for example; and in England, at the Fine Art Society in 1878, and at the Royal Society of Painters in Watercolour (of which he was an honorary member) in 1879. He created many careful studies of natural forms, based on his detailed botanical, geological and architectural observations. Examples of his work include a painted, floral pilaster decoration in the central room of Wallington Hall in Northumberland, home of his friend Pauline Trevelyan. The stained glass window in the \"Little Church of St Francis\" Funtley, Fareham, Hampshire is reputed to have been designed by him. Originally placed in the \"St. Peter's Church\" Duntisbourne Abbots near Cirencester, the window depicts the Ascension and the Nativity.\nRuskin's theories also inspired some architects to adapt the Gothic style. Such buildings created what has been called a distinctive \"Ruskinian Gothic\". Through his friendship with Henry Acland, Ruskin supported attempts to establish what became the Oxford University Museum of Natural History (designed by Benjamin Woodward) \u2014 which is the closest thing to a model of this style, but still failed to satisfy Ruskin completely. The many twists and turns in the Museum's development, not least its increasing cost, and the University authorities' less than enthusiastic attitude towards it, proved increasingly frustrating for Ruskin.\nRuskin and education.\nThe Museum was part of a wider plan to improve science provision at Oxford, something the University initially resisted. Ruskin's first formal teaching role came about in the mid-1850s, when he taught drawing classes (assisted by Dante Gabriel Rossetti) at the Working Men's College, established by the Christian socialists, Frederick James Furnivall and Frederick Denison Maurice. Although Ruskin did not share the founders' politics, he strongly supported the idea that through education workers could achieve a crucially important sense of (self-)fulfilment. One result of this involvement was Ruskin's \"Elements of Drawing\" (1857). He had taught several women drawing, by means of correspondence, and his book represented both a response and a challenge to contemporary drawing manuals. The WMC was also a useful recruiting ground for assistants, on some of whom Ruskin would later come to rely, such as his future publisher, George Allen.\nFrom 1859 until 1868, Ruskin was involved with the progressive school for girls at Winnington Hall in Cheshire. A frequent visitor, letter-writer, and donor of pictures and geological specimens to the school, Ruskin approved of the mixture of sports, handicrafts, music and dancing encouraged by its principal, Miss Bell. The association led to Ruskin's sub-Socratic work, \"The Ethics of the Dust\" (1866), an imagined conversation with Winnington's girls in which he cast himself as the \"Old Lecturer\". On the surface a discourse on crystallography, it is a metaphorical exploration of social and political ideals. In the 1880s, Ruskin became involved with another educational institution, Whitelands College, a training college for teachers, where he instituted a May Queen festival that endures today. (It was also replicated in the 19th century at the Cork High School for Girls.) Ruskin also bestowed books and gemstones upon Somerville College, one of Oxford's first two women's colleges, which he visited regularly, and was similarly generous to other educational institutions for women.\n\"Modern Painters III\" and \"IV\".\nBoth volumes III and IV of \"Modern Painters\" were published in 1856. In \"MP\" III Ruskin argued that all great art is \"the expression of the spirits of great men\". Only the morally and spiritually healthy are capable of admiring the noble and the beautiful, and transforming them into great art by imaginatively penetrating their essence. \"MP\" IV presents the geology of the Alps in terms of landscape painting, and their moral and spiritual influence on those living nearby. The contrasting final chapters, \"The Mountain Glory\" and \"The Mountain Gloom\" provide an early example of Ruskin's social analysis, highlighting the poverty of the peasants living in the lower Alps.\nPublic lecturer.\nIn addition to leading more formal teaching classes, from the 1850s Ruskin became an increasingly popular public lecturer. His first public lectures were given in Edinburgh, in November 1853, on architecture and painting. His lectures at the Art Treasures Exhibition, Manchester in 1857, were collected as \"The Political Economy of Art\" and later under Keats's phrase, \"A Joy For Ever\". In these lectures, Ruskin spoke about how to acquire art, and how to use it, arguing that England had forgotten that true wealth is virtue, and that art is an index of a nation's well-being. Individuals have a responsibility to consume wisely, stimulating beneficent demand. The increasingly critical tone and political nature of Ruskin's interventions outraged his father and the \"Manchester School\" of economists, as represented by a hostile review in the \"Manchester Examiner and Times\". As the Ruskin scholar Helen Gill Viljoen noted, Ruskin was increasingly critical of his father, especially in letters written by Ruskin directly to him, many of them still unpublished.\nRuskin gave the inaugural address at the Cambridge School of Art in 1858, an institution from which the modern-day Anglia Ruskin University has grown. In \"The Two Paths\" (1859), five lectures given in London, Manchester, Bradford and Tunbridge Wells, Ruskin argued that a 'vital law' underpins art and architecture, drawing on the labour theory of value. (For other addresses and letters, Cook and Wedderburn, vol. 16, pp.\u00a0427\u201387.) The year 1859 also marked his last tour of Europe with his ageing parents, during which they visited Germany and Switzerland.\nTurner Bequest.\nRuskin had been in Venice when he heard about Turner's death in 1851. Being named an executor to Turner's will was an honour that Ruskin respectfully declined, but later took up. Ruskin's book in celebration of the sea, \"The Harbours of England\", revolving around Turner's drawings, was published in 1856. In January 1857, Ruskin's \"Notes on the Turner Gallery at Marlborough House, 1856\" was published. He persuaded the National Gallery to allow him to work on the Turner Bequest of nearly 20,000 individual artworks left to the nation by the artist. This involved Ruskin in an enormous amount of work, completed in May 1858, and involved cataloguing, framing and conserving. Four hundred watercolours were displayed in cabinets of Ruskin's own design. Recent scholarship has argued that Ruskin did not, as previously thought, collude in the destruction of Turner's erotic drawings, but his work on the Bequest did modify his attitude towards Turner. (See below, Controversies: Turner's Erotic Drawings.)\nReligious \"unconversion\".\nIn 1858, Ruskin was again travelling in Europe. The tour took him from Switzerland to Turin, where he saw Paolo Veronese's \"Presentation of the Queen of Sheba\" at the Galleria Sabauda. He would later claim (in April 1877) that the discovery of this painting, contrasting starkly with a particularly dull sermon that he had listened to at a Waldensian church in Turin, led to his \"unconversion\" from Evangelical Christianity. He had, however, doubted his Evangelical Christian faith for some time, shaken by Biblical and geological scholarship that was seen as undermining the literal truth and absolute authority of the Bible: \"those dreadful hammers!\" he wrote to Henry Acland, \"I hear the chink of them at the end of every cadence of the Bible verses.\" This \"loss of faith\" precipitated a considerable personal crisis. His confidence undermined, he believed that much of his writing to date had been founded on a bed of lies and half-truths. He later returned to Christianity.\nSocial critic and reformer: \"Unto This Last\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhenever I look or travel in England or abroad, I see that men, wherever they can reach, destroy all beauty.\nAlthough in 1877 Ruskin said that in 1860, \"I gave up my art work and wrote \"Unto This Last\"\u2026 the central work of my life\" the break was not so dramatic or final. Following his crisis of faith, and urged to political and economic work by his professed \"master\" Thomas Carlyle, to whom he acknowledged that he \"owed more than to any other living writer\", Ruskin shifted his emphasis in the late 1850s from art towards social issues. Nevertheless, he continued to lecture on and write about a wide range of subjects including art and, among many other matters, geology (in June 1863 he lectured on the Alps), art practice and judgement (\"The Cestus of Aglaia\"), botany and mythology (\"Proserpina\" and \"The Queen of the Air\"). He continued to draw and paint in watercolours, and to travel extensively across Europe with servants and friends. In 1868, his tour took him to Abbeville, and in the following year he was in Verona (studying tombs for the Arundel Society) and Venice (where he was joined by William Holman Hunt). Yet increasingly Ruskin concentrated his energies on fiercely attacking industrial capitalism, and the utilitarian theories of political economy underpinning it. He repudiated his sometimes grandiloquent style, writing now in plainer, simpler language, to communicate his message straightforwardly. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThere is no wealth but life. Life, including all its powers of love, of joy, and of admiration. That country is the richest which nourishes the greatest number of noble and happy human beings; that man is richest who, having perfected the functions of his own life to the utmost, has always the widest helpful influence, both personal, and by means of his possessions, over the lives of others.\nRuskin authored several works on political economy. Ruskin's social view broadened from concerns about the dignity of labour to consider issues of citizenship and notions of the ideal community. Just as he had questioned aesthetic orthodoxy in his earliest writings, he now dissected the orthodox political economy espoused by John Stuart Mill, based on theories of laissez-faire and competition drawn from the work of Adam Smith, David Ricardo and Thomas Malthus. In his four essays \"Unto This Last\", Ruskin rejected the division of labour as dehumanising (separating the labourer from the product of his work), and argued that the false \"science\" of political economy failed to consider the social affections that bind communities together. He articulated an extended metaphor of household and family, drawing on Plato and Xenophon to demonstrate the communal and sometimes sacrificial nature of true economics. For Ruskin, all economies and societies are ideally founded on a politics of social justice. His ideas influenced the concept of the \"social economy\", characterised by networks of charitable, co-operative and other non-governmental organisations.\nThe essays were originally published in consecutive monthly instalments of the new \"Cornhill Magazine\" between August and November 1860 (and published in a single volume in 1862). However, the \"Cornhill\"'s editor, William Makepeace Thackeray, was forced to abandon the series by the outcry of the magazine's largely conservative readership and the fears of a nervous publisher (Smith, Elder &amp; Co.). The reaction of the national press was hostile, and Ruskin was, he claimed, \"reprobated in a violent manner\". Ruskin's father also strongly disapproved. Others were enthusiastic, including Carlyle, who wrote, \"I have read your Paper with exhilaration\u2026 Such a thing flung suddenly into half a million dull British heads\u2026 will do a great deal of good\", declaring that they were \"henceforth in a minority of \"two\"\", a notion which Ruskin seconded.\nRuskin's political ideas, and \"Unto This Last\" in particular, later proved highly influential. The essays were praised and paraphrased in Gujarati by Mohandas Gandhi, a wide range of autodidacts cited their positive impact, the economist John A. Hobson and many of the founders of the British Labour party credited them as an influence.\nRuskin believed in a hierarchical social structure. He wrote \"I was, and my father was before me, a violent Tory of the old school.\" He believed in man's duty to God, and while he sought to improve the conditions of the poor, he opposed attempts to level social differences and sought to resolve social inequalities by abandoning capitalism in favour of a co-operative structure of society based on obedience and benevolent philanthropy, rooted in the agricultural economy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If there be any one point insisted on throughout my works more frequently than another, that one point is the impossibility of Equality. My continual aim has been to show the eternal superiority of some men to others, sometimes even of one man to all others; and to show also the advisability of appointing such persons or person to guide, to lead, or on occasion even to compel and subdue, their inferiors, according to their own better knowledge and wiser will.\u2014\u200a\nRuskin's explorations of nature and aesthetics in the fifth and final volume of \"Modern Painters\" focused on Giorgione, Veronese, Titian and Turner. Ruskin asserted that the components of the greatest artworks are held together, like human communities, in a quasi-organic unity. Competitive struggle is destructive. Uniting \"Modern Painters\" V and \"Unto This Last\" is Ruskin's \"Law of Help\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Government and cooperation are in all things and eternally the laws of life. Anarchy and competition, eternally, and in all things, the laws of death.\u2014\u200a\nRuskin's next work on political economy, redefining some of the basic terms of the discipline, also ended prematurely, when \"Fraser's Magazine\", under the editorship of James Anthony Froude, cut short his \"Essays on Political Economy\" (1862\u201363) (later collected as \"Munera Pulveris\" (1872)). Ruskin further explored political themes in \"Time and Tide\" (1867), his letters to Thomas Dixon, a cork-cutter in Sunderland, Tyne and Wear who had a well-established interest in literary and artistic matters. In these letters, Ruskin promoted honesty in work and exchange, just relations in employment and the need for co-operation.\nRuskin's sense of politics was not confined to theory. On his father's death in 1864, he inherited an estate worth between \u00a3120,000 and \u00a3157,000 (the exact figure is disputed). This considerable fortune, inherited from the father he described on his tombstone as \"an entirely honest merchant\", gave him the means to engage in personal philanthropy and practical schemes of social amelioration. One of his first actions was to support the housing work of Octavia Hill (originally one of his art pupils): he bought property in Marylebone to aid her philanthropic housing scheme. But Ruskin's endeavours extended to the establishment of a shop selling pure tea in any quantity desired at 29 Paddington Street, Paddington (giving employment to two former Ruskin family servants) and crossing-sweepings to keep the area around the British Museum clean and tidy. Modest as these practical schemes were, they represented a symbolic challenge to the existing state of society. Yet his greatest practical experiments would come in his later years.\nIn 1865\u201366, Ruskin became involved in the controversy surrounding Edward John Eyre's suppression of the Morant Bay rebellion. Mill formed the Jamaica Committee for the purpose of holding Governor Eyre accountable for what they perceived to be his unlawful, inhumane, and unnecessary quelling of the insurrection. In response, the Eyre Defence and Aid Fund was formed to support Eyre for having fulfilled his duty to defend order and save the white population from danger; Carlyle served as the chairman. Ruskin allied with the Defence, writing a letter which appeared in the \"Daily Telegraph\" in December 1865 (\"they are for Liberty, and I am for Lordship; they are Mob's men, and I am a King's man\"), donating \u00a3100 to the Fund, and giving a speech at Waterloo Place on Pall Mall in September 1866, also reported in the \"Telegraph\". In addition to this, Ruskin \"threw himself into\" personal work for the Defence, \"enlisting recruits, persuading waverers, combating objections.\"\nLectures in the 1860s.\nRuskin lectured widely in the 1860s, giving the Rede lecture at the University of Cambridge in 1867, for example. He spoke at the British Institution on 'Modern Art', the Working Men's Institute, Camberwell on \"Work\" and the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich on 'War.' Ruskin's widely admired lecture, \"Traffic\", on the relation between taste and morality, was delivered in April 1864 at Bradford Town Hall, to which he had been invited because of a local debate about the style of a new Exchange building. \"I do not care about this Exchange\", Ruskin told his audience, \"because \"you\" don't!\" These last three lectures were published in \"The Crown of Wild Olive\" (1866).\nThe lectures that comprised \"Sesame and Lilies\" (published 1865), delivered in December 1864 at the town halls at Rusholme and Manchester, are essentially concerned with education and ideal conduct. \"Of Kings' Treasuries\" (in support of a library fund) explored issues of reading practice, literature (books of the hour vs. books of all time), cultural value and public education. \"Of Queens' Gardens\" (supporting a school fund) focused on the role of women, asserting their rights and duties in education, according them responsibility for the household and, by extension, for providing the human compassion that must balance a social order dominated by men. This book proved to be one of Ruskin's most popular, and was regularly awarded as a Sunday School prize. Its reception over time, however, has been more mixed, and twentieth-century feminists have taken aim at \"Of Queens' Gardens\" in particular, as an attempt to \"subvert the new heresy\" of women's rights by confining women to the domestic sphere. Although indeed subscribing to the Victorian belief in \"separate spheres\" for men and women, Ruskin was however unusual in arguing for parity of esteem, a case based on his philosophy that a nation's political economy should be modelled on that of the ideal household.\nLater life (1869\u20131900).\nOxford's first Slade Professor of Fine Art.\nRuskin was unanimously appointed the first Slade Professor of Fine Art at Oxford University in August 1869, though largely through the offices of his friend, Henry Acland. He delivered his inaugural lecture on his 51st birthday in 1870, at the Sheldonian Theatre to a larger-than-expected audience. It was here that he said, \"The art of any country is the exponent of its social and political virtues\u2026 she [England] must found colonies as fast and as far as she is able, formed of her most energetic and worthiest men;\u2014seizing every piece of fruitful waste ground she can set her foot on\u2026\" It has been claimed that Cecil Rhodes cherished a long-hand copy of the lecture, believing that it supported his own view of the British Empire.\nIn 1871, John Ruskin founded his own art school at Oxford, The Ruskin School of Drawing and Fine Art. It was originally accommodated within the Ashmolean Museum but now occupies premises on High Street. Ruskin endowed the drawing mastership with \u00a35000 of his own money. He also established a large collection of drawings, watercolours and other materials (over 800 frames) that he used to illustrate his lectures. The School challenged the orthodox, mechanical methodology of the government art schools (the \"South Kensington System\").\nRuskin's lectures were often so popular that they had to be given twice\u2014once for the students, and again for the public. Most of them were eventually published (see Select Bibliography below). He lectured on a wide range of subjects at Oxford, his interpretation of \"Art\" encompassing almost every conceivable area of study, including wood and metal engraving (\"Ariadne Florentina\"), the relation of science to art (\"The Eagle's Nest\") and sculpture (\"Aratra Pentelici\"). His lectures ranged through myth, ornithology, geology, nature-study and literature. \"The teaching of Art\u2026\", Ruskin wrote, \"is the teaching of all things.\" Ruskin was never careful about offending his employer. When he criticised Michelangelo in a lecture in June 1871 it was seen as an attack on the large collection of that artist's work in the Ashmolean Museum.\nMost controversial, from the point of view of the University authorities, spectators and the national press, was the digging scheme on Ferry Hinksey Road at North Hinksey, near Oxford, instigated by Ruskin in 1874, and continuing into 1875, which involved undergraduates in a road-mending scheme. The scheme was motivated in part by a desire to teach the virtues of wholesome manual labour. Some of the diggers, who included Oscar Wilde, Alfred Milner and Ruskin's future secretary and biographer W. G. Collingwood, were profoundly influenced by the experience: notably Arnold Toynbee, Leonard A. Montefiore and Alexander Robertson MacEwen. It helped to foster a public service ethic that was later given expression in the university settlements, and was keenly celebrated by the founders of Ruskin Hall, Oxford.\nIn 1879, Ruskin resigned from Oxford, a decision forced on him partly because of his declining health and finally precipitated by the Whistler trial. He resumed his Professorship in 1883, only to resign again in 1884. He gave his reason as opposition to vivisection, but he had increasingly been in conflict with the University authorities, who refused to expand his Drawing School.\n\"Fors Clavigera\" and the Whistler libel case.\nIn January 1871, the month before Ruskin started to lecture the wealthy undergraduates at Oxford University, he began his series of 96 (monthly) \"letters to the workmen and labourers of Great Britain\" under the title \"Fors Clavigera\" (1871\u201384). (The letters were published irregularly after the 87th instalment in March 1878.) These letters were personal, dealt with every subject in his oeuvre, and were written in a variety of styles, reflecting his mood and circumstances. From 1873, Ruskin had full control over all his publications, having established George Allen as his sole publisher (see Allen &amp; Unwin).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFor Mr Whistler's own sake, no less for the protection of the purchaser, Sir Coutts Lindsay ought not to have omitted works into the gallery in which the ill-educated conceit of the artist so nearly approached the aspect of wilful imposture. I have seen, and heard, much of cockney impudence before now, but never expected to hear a coxcomb ask two hundred guineas for flinging a pot of paint in the public's face.\nIn the July 1877 letter of \"Fors Clavigera\", Ruskin launched a scathing attack on paintings by James McNeill Whistler exhibited at the Grosvenor Gallery. He found particular fault with \"Nocturne in Black and Gold: The Falling Rocket\", and accused Whistler of asking two hundred guineas for \"flinging a pot of paint in the public's face\". Whistler filed a libel suit against Ruskin, but Ruskin was ill when the case went to trial in November 1878, so the artist Edward Burne-Jones and Attorney General Sir John Holker represented him. The trial took place on 25 and 26 November, and many major figures of the art world at the time appeared at the trial. Artist Albert Moore appeared as a witness for Whistler, and artist William Powell Frith appeared for Ruskin. Frith said \"the nocturne in black in gold is not in my opinion worth two hundred guineas\". Frederic Leighton also agreed to give evidence for Whistler, but in the end could not attend as he had to go to Windsor to be knighted. Edward Burne-Jones, representing Ruskin, also asserted that \"Nocturne in Black and Gold\" was not a serious work of art. When asked to give reasons, Burne-Jones said he had never seen one painting of night that was successful, but also acknowledged that he saw marks of great labour and artistic skill in the painting. In the end, Whistler won the case, but the jury awarded damages of only a derisory farthing (the smallest coin of the realm) to the artist. Court costs were split between the two parties. Ruskin's were paid by public subscription organised by the Fine Art Society, but Whistler was bankrupt within six months, and was forced to sell his house on Tite Street in London and move to Venice. The episode tarnished Ruskin's reputation and may have accelerated his mental decline. It did nothing to mitigate Ruskin's exaggerated sense of failure in persuading his readers to share in his own keenly felt priorities.\nGuild of St George.\nRuskin founded his utopian society, the Guild of St George, in 1871 (although originally it was called St George's Fund, and then St George's Company, before becoming the Guild in 1878). Its aims and objectives were articulated in \"Fors Clavigera\". A communitarian protest against nineteenth-century industrial capitalism, it had a hierarchical structure, with Ruskin as its Master, and dedicated members called \"Companions\". Ruskin wished to show that contemporary life could still be enjoyed in the countryside, with land being farmed by traditional means, in harmony with the environment, and with the minimum of mechanical assistance. He also sought to educate and enrich the lives of industrial workers by inspiring them with beautiful objects. Toward this end, with a tithe (or personal donation) of \u00a37,000, Ruskin acquired land and a collection of art treasures.\nRuskin purchased land initially in Totley, near Sheffield, but the agricultural scheme established there by local communists met with only modest success after many difficulties. Donations of land from wealthy and dedicated Companions eventually placed land and property in the Guild's care: in the Wyre Forest, near Bewdley, Worcestershire, called Ruskin Land today; Barmouth, in Gwynedd, north-west Wales; Cloughton, in North Yorkshire; Westmill in Hertfordshire; and Sheepscombe, Gloucestershire.\nIn principle, Ruskin worked out a scheme for different grades of \"Companion\", wrote codes of practice, described styles of dress and even designed the Guild's own coins. Ruskin wished to see St George's Schools established, and published various volumes to aid its teaching (his \"Bibliotheca Pastorum\" or \"Shepherd's Library\"), but the schools themselves were never established. (In the 1880s, in a venture loosely related to the \"Bibliotheca\", he supported Francesca Alexander's publication of some of her tales of peasant life.) In reality, the Guild, which still exists today as a charitable education trust, has only ever operated on a small scale.\nRuskin also wished to see traditional rural handicrafts revived. St. George's Mill was established at Laxey, Isle of Man, producing cloth goods. The Guild also encouraged independent but allied efforts in spinning and weaving at Langdale, in other parts of the Lake District and elsewhere, producing linen and other goods exhibited by the Home Arts and Industries Association and similar organisations.\nThe Guild's most conspicuous and enduring achievement was the creation of a remarkable collection of art, minerals, books, medieval manuscripts, architectural casts, coins and other precious and beautiful objects. Housed in a cottage museum high on a hill in the Sheffield district of Walkley, it opened in 1875, and was curated by Henry and Emily Swan. Ruskin had written in \"Modern Painters\" III (1856) that, \"the greatest thing a human soul ever does in this world is to \"see\" something, and to tell what it \"saw\" in a plain way.\" Through the Museum, Ruskin aimed to bring to the eyes of the working man many of the sights and experiences otherwise reserved for those who could afford to travel across Europe. The original Museum has been digitally recreated online. In 1890, the Museum relocated to Meersbrook Park. The collection is now on display at Sheffield's Millennium Gallery.\nRose La Touche.\nRuskin had been introduced to the wealthy Irish La Touche family by Louisa, Marchioness of Waterford. Maria La Touche, a minor Irish poet and novelist, asked Ruskin to teach her daughters drawing and painting in 1858. Rose La Touche was ten. His first meeting came at a time when Ruskin's own religious faith was under strain. This always caused difficulties for the staunchly Protestant La Touche family who at various times prevented the two from meeting. A chance meeting at the Royal Academy in 1869 was one of the few occasions they came into personal contact. After a long illness, she died on 25 May 1875, at the age of 27. These events plunged Ruskin into despair and led to increasingly severe bouts of mental illness involving breakdowns and delirious visions. The first of these had occurred in 1871 at Matlock, Derbyshire, a town and a county that he knew from his boyhood travels, whose flora, fauna, and minerals helped to form and reinforce his appreciation and understanding of nature.\nRuskin turned to spiritualism. He attended s\u00e9ances at Broadlands. Ruskin's increasing need to believe in a meaningful universe and a life after death, both for himself and his loved ones, helped to revive his Christian faith in the 1870s.\nTravel guides.\nRuskin continued to travel, studying the landscapes, buildings and art of Europe. In May 1870 and June 1872 he admired Carpaccio's \"St Ursula\" in Venice, a vision of which, associated with Rose La Touche, would haunt him, described in the pages of \"Fors\". In 1874, on his tour of Italy, Ruskin visited Sicily, the furthest he ever travelled.\nRuskin embraced the emerging literary forms, the travel guide (and gallery guide), writing new works, and adapting old ones \"to give\", he said, \"what guidance I may to travellers\u2026\" \"The Stones of Venice\" was revised, edited and issued in a new \"Travellers' Edition\" in 1879. Ruskin directed his readers, the would-be traveller, to look with his cultural gaze at the landscapes, buildings and art of France and Italy: \"Mornings in Florence\" (1875\u20131877), \"The Bible of Amiens\" (1880\u20131885) (a close study of its sculpture and a wider history), \"St Mark's Rest\" (1877\u20131884) and \"A Guide to the Principal Pictures in\u2026 Venice\" (1877).\nFinal writings.\nIn the 1880s, Ruskin returned to some literature and themes that had been among his favourites since childhood. He wrote about Scott, Byron and Wordsworth in \"Fiction, Fair and Foul\" (1880) in which, as Seth Reno argues, he describes the devastating effects on the landscape caused by industrialization, a vision Reno sees as a realization of the Anthropocene. He returned to meteorological observations in his lectures, \"The Storm-Cloud of the Nineteenth-Century\" (1884), describing the apparent effects of industrialisation on weather patterns. Ruskin's \"Storm-Cloud\" has been seen as foreshadowing environmentalism and related concerns in the 20th and 21st centuries. Ruskin's prophetic writings were also tied to his emotions, and his more general (ethical) dissatisfaction with the modern world with which he now felt almost completely out of sympathy.\nHis last great work was his autobiography, \"Praeterita\" (1885\u20131889) (meaning, 'Of Past Things'), a highly personalised, selective, eloquent but incomplete account of aspects of his life, the preface of which was written in his childhood nursery at Herne Hill.\nThe period from the late 1880s was one of steady and inexorable decline. Gradually it became too difficult for him to travel to Europe. He suffered a complete mental collapse on his final tour, (which included Beauvais, Sallanches and Venice, in 1888) from which he never fully recovered. The emergence and dominance of the Aesthetic movement and Impressionism distanced Ruskin from the modern art world, his ideas on the social utility of art contrasting with the doctrine of \"l'art pour l'art\" or \"art for art's sake\" that was beginning to dominate. His later writings were increasingly seen as irrelevant, especially as he seemed to be more interested in book illustrators such as Kate Greenaway than in modern art. He also attacked aspects of Darwinian theory with increasing violence, although he knew and respected Darwin personally.\nBrantwood and final years.\nIn August 1871, Ruskin purchased, from W. J. Linton, the then somewhat dilapidated Brantwood house, on the shores of Coniston Water, in the English Lake District, paying \u00a31500 for it. Brantwood was Ruskin's main home from 1872 until his death. His estate provided a site for more of his practical schemes and experiments: he had an ice house built, and the gardens comprehensively rearranged. He oversaw the construction of a larger harbour (from where he rowed his boat, the \"Jumping Jenny\"), and he altered the house (adding a dining room, a turret to his bedroom to give him a panoramic view of the lake, and he later extended the property to accommodate his relatives). He built a reservoir and redirected the waterfall down the hills, adding a slate seat that faced the tumbling stream and craggy rocks rather than the lake, so that he could closely observe the fauna and flora of the hillside.\nAlthough Ruskin's 80th birthday was widely celebrated in 1899 (various Ruskin societies presenting him with an elaborately illuminated congratulatory address), Ruskin was scarcely aware of it. He died at Brantwood from influenza on 20 January 1900 at the age of 80. He was buried five days later in the churchyard at Coniston, according to his wishes. As he had grown weaker, suffering prolonged bouts of mental illness, he had been looked after by his second cousin, Joan(na) Severn (formerly \"companion\" to Ruskin's mother) and she and her family inherited his estate. \"Joanna's Care\" was the eloquent final chapter of Ruskin's memoir, which he dedicated to her as a fitting tribute.\nJoan Severn, together with Ruskin's secretary, W. G. Collingwood, and his eminent American friend Charles Eliot Norton, were executors to his will. E. T. Cook and Alexander Wedderburn edited the monumental 39-volume \"Library Edition\" of Ruskin's \"Works\", the last volume of which, an index, attempts to demonstrate the complex interconnectedness of Ruskin's thought. They all acted together to guard, and even control, Ruskin's public and personal reputation.\nThe centenary of Ruskin's birth was keenly celebrated in 1919, but his reputation was already in decline and sank further in the fifty years that followed. The contents of Ruskin's home were dispersed in a series of sales at auction, and Brantwood itself was bought in 1932 by the educationist and Ruskin enthusiast, collector and memorialist, John Howard Whitehouse.\nBrantwood was opened in 1934 as a memorial to Ruskin and remains open to the public today. The Guild of St George continues to thrive as an educational charity, and has an international membership. The Ruskin Society organises events throughout the year. A series of public celebrations of Ruskin's multiple legacies took place in 2000, on the centenary of his death, and events are planned throughout 2019, to mark the bicentenary of his birth.\nNote on Ruskin's personal appearance.\nIn middle age, and at his prime as a lecturer, Ruskin was described as slim, perhaps a little short, with an aquiline nose and brilliant, piercing blue eyes. Often sporting a double-breasted waistcoat, a high collar and, when necessary, a frock coat, he also wore his trademark blue neckcloth. From 1878 he cultivated an increasingly long beard, and took on the appearance of an \"Old Testament\" prophet.\nRuskin in the eyes of a student.\nThe following description of Ruskin as a lecturer was written by an eyewitness, who was a student at the time (1884):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Ruskin's] election to the second term of the Slade professorship took place in 1884, and he was announced to lecture at the Science Schools, by the park. I went off, never dreaming of difficulty about getting into any professorial lecture; but all the accesses were blocked, and finally I squeezed in between the Vice-Chancellor and his attendants as they forced a passage. All the young women in Oxford and all the girls' schools had got in before us and filled the semi-circular auditorium. Every inch was crowded, and still no lecturer; and it was not apparent how he could arrive. Presently there was a commotion in the doorway, and over the heads and shoulders of tightly packed young men, a loose bundle was handed in and down the steps, till on the floor a small figure was deposited, which stood up and shook itself out, amused and good humoured, climbed on to the dais, spread out papers and began to read in a pleasant though fluting voice. Long hair, brown with grey through it; a soft brown beard, also streaked with grey; some loose kind of black garment (possibly to be described as a frock coat) with a master's gown over it; loose baggy trousers, a thin gold chain round his neck with glass suspended, a lump of soft tie of some finely spun blue silk; and eyes much bluer than the tie: that was Ruskin as he came back to Oxford.\u2014\u200a\nAn incident where the Arts and Crafts master William Morris had aroused the anger of Dr Bright, Master of University College, Oxford, served to demonstrate Ruskin's charisma:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;William Morris had come to lecture on \"Art and plutocracy\" in the hall of University College. The title did not suggest an exhortation to join a Socialist alliance, but that was what we got. When he ended, the Master of University, Dr Bright, stood up and instead of returning thanks, protested that the hall had been lent for a lecture on art and would certainly not have been made available for preaching Socialism. He stammered a little at all times, and now, finding the ungracious words literally stick in his throat, sat down, leaving the remonstrance incomplete but clearly indicated. The situation was most unpleasant. Morris at any time was choleric and his face flamed red over his white shirt front: he probably thought he had conceded enough by assuming against his usage a conventional garb. There was a hubbub, and then from the audience Ruskin rose and instantly there was quiet. With a few courteous well chosen sentences he made everybody feel that we were an assembly of gentlemen, that Morris was not only an artist but a gentleman and an Oxford man, and had said or done nothing which gentlemen in Oxford should resent; and the whole storm subsided before that gentle authority.\u2014\u200a\nLegacy.\nInternational.\nRuskin's influence reached across the world. Tolstoy described him as \"one of the most remarkable men not only of England and of our generation, but of all countries and times\" and quoted extensively from him, rendering his ideas into Russian. Proust not only admired Ruskin but helped translate his works into French, describing him as \"for me one of the greatest writers of all times and of all countries\". Gandhi wrote of the \"magic spell\" cast on him by \"Unto This Last\" and paraphrased the work in Gujarati, calling it \"Sarvodaya\", \"The Advancement of All\". In Japan, Ryuzo Mikimoto actively collaborated in Ruskin's translation. He commissioned sculptures and sundry commemorative items, and incorporated Ruskinian rose motifs in the jewellery produced by his cultured pearl empire. He established the Ruskin Society of Tokyo and his children built a dedicated library to house his Ruskin collection.\nA number of utopian socialist Ruskin Colonies attempted to put his political ideals into practice. These communities included Ruskin, Florida, Ruskin, British Columbia and the Ruskin Commonwealth Association, a colony in Dickson County, Tennessee in existence from 1894 to 1899. One of Ruskin's students, Ralph Radcliffe Whitehead, founded the Byrdcliffe Colony in Woodstock, New York, partly inspired by his teacher's beliefs.\nRuskin's work has been translated into numerous languages including, in addition to those already mentioned (Russian, French, Japanese): German, Italian, Catalan, Spanish, Portuguese, Hungarian, Polish, Romanian, Swedish, Danish, Dutch, Czech, Chinese, Welsh, Esperanto, Gikuyu, and several Indian languages such as Kannada.\nArt, architecture and literature.\nTheorists and practitioners in a broad range of disciplines acknowledged their debt to Ruskin. Architects including Le Corbusier, Louis Sullivan, Frank Lloyd Wright and Walter Gropius incorporated his ideas in their work. Writers as diverse as Oscar Wilde, G. K. Chesterton, Hilaire Belloc, T. S. Eliot, W. B. Yeats and Ezra Pound felt Ruskin's influence. The American poet Marianne Moore was an enthusiastic Ruskin reader. Art historians and critics, among them Herbert Read, Roger Fry and Wilhelm Worringer, knew Ruskin's work well. Admirers ranged from the British-born American watercolourist and engraver John William Hill to the sculptor-designer, printmaker and utopianist Eric Gill. Explorer Edward Wilson used his works as an influence as while painting scientific and artistic sketches and watercolours of the Terra Nova Expedition. Aside from E. T. Cook, Ruskin's editor and biographer, other leading British journalists influenced by Ruskin include J. A. Spender, and the war correspondent H. W. Nevinson.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNo true disciple of mine will ever be a \"Ruskinian\"! \u2013 he will follow, not me, but the instincts of his own soul, and the guidance of its Creator.\nCraft and conservation.\nWilliam Morris and C. R. Ashbee (of the Guild of Handicraft) were keen disciples, and through them Ruskin's legacy can be traced in the Arts and Crafts movement. Ruskin's ideas on the preservation of open spaces and the conservation of historic buildings and places inspired his friends Octavia Hill and Hardwicke Rawnsley to help found the National Trust.\nSociety, education and sport.\nPioneers of town planning such as Thomas Coglan Horsfall and Patrick Geddes called Ruskin an inspiration and invoked his ideas in justification of their own social interventions; likewise the founders of the garden city movement, Ebenezer Howard and Raymond Unwin.\nEdward Carpenter's community in Millthorpe, Derbyshire was partly inspired by Ruskin, and John Kenworthy's colony at Purleigh, Essex, which was briefly a refuge for the Doukhobors, combined Ruskin's ideas and Tolstoy's.\nThe most prolific collector of Ruskiniana was John Howard Whitehouse, who saved Ruskin's home, Brantwood, and opened it as a permanent Ruskin memorial. Inspired by Ruskin's educational ideals, Whitehouse established Bembridge School, on the Isle of Wight, and ran it along Ruskinian lines. Educationists from William Jolly to Michael Ernest Sadler wrote about and appreciated Ruskin's ideas. Ruskin College, an educational establishment in Oxford originally intended for working men, was named after him by its American founders, Walter Vrooman and Charles A. Beard.\nRuskin's innovative publishing experiment, conducted by his one-time Working Men's College pupil George Allen, whose business was eventually merged to become Allen &amp; Unwin, anticipated the establishment of the Net Book Agreement.\nRuskin's Drawing Collection, a collection of 1470 works of art he gathered as learning aids for the Ruskin School of Drawing and Fine Art (which he founded at Oxford), is at the Ashmolean Museum. The Museum has promoted Ruskin's art teaching, utilising the collection for in-person and online drawing courses.\nPierre de Coubertin, the innovator of the modern Olympic Games, cited Ruskin's principles of beautification, asserting that the games should be \"Ruskinised\" to create an aesthetic identity that transcended mere championship competitions.\nPolitics and critique of political economy.\nRuskin was an inspiration for many Christian socialists, and his ideas informed the work of economists such as William Smart and J. A. Hobson, and the positivist Frederic Harrison. Ruskin was discussed in university extension classes, and in reading circles and societies formed in his name. He helped to inspire the settlement movement in Britain and the United States. Resident workers at Toynbee Hall such as the future civil servants Hubert Llewellyn Smith and William Beveridge (author of the Report \u2026 on Social Insurance and Allied Services), and the future Prime Minister Clement Attlee acknowledged their debt to Ruskin as they helped to found the British welfare state. More of the British Labour Party's earliest MPs acknowledged Ruskin's influence than mentioned Karl Marx or the Bible. In Nazi Germany, Ruskin was seen as an early British National Socialist. William Montgomery McGovern's \"From Luther to Hitler\" (1941) identified Ruskin as a thinker who made Nazism possible, and one 1930s German headmaster told his students that \"Carlyle and Ruskin were the first National Socialists.\" More recently, Ruskin's works have also influenced Phillip Blond and the Red Tory movement.\nRuskin in the 21st century.\nIn 2019, Ruskin200 was inaugurated as a year-long celebration marking the bicentenary of Ruskin's birth.\nAdmirers and scholars of Ruskin can visit the Ruskin Library at Lancaster University, Ruskin's home, Brantwood, and the Ruskin Museum, both in Coniston in the English Lake District. All three mount regular exhibitions open to the public all the year round. Barony House in Edinburgh is home to a descendant of John Ruskin. She has designed and hand painted various friezes in honour of her ancestor and it is open to the public. Ruskin's Guild of St George continues his work today, in education, the arts, crafts, and the rural economy.\nMany streets, buildings, organisations and institutions bear his name: The Priory Ruskin Academy in Grantham, Lincolnshire; John Ruskin College, South Croydon; and Anglia Ruskin University in Chelmsford and Cambridge, which traces its origins to the Cambridge School of Art, at the foundation of which Ruskin spoke in 1858. Also, the Ruskin Literary and Debating Society, (founded in 1900 in Toronto, Ontario, Canada), the oldest surviving club of its type, and still promoting the development of literary knowledge and public speaking today; and the Ruskin Art Club in Los Angeles, which still exists. In addition, there is the Ruskin Pottery, Ruskin House, Croydon and Ruskin Hall at the University of Pittsburgh.\nRuskin, Florida, United States\u2014site of one of the short-lived American Ruskin Colleges\u2014is named after John Ruskin. There is a mural by Michael Parker (artist) of Ruskin titled \"Head, Heart and Hands\" on a building across from the Ruskin Post Office.\nSince 2000, scholarly research has focused on aspects of Ruskin's legacy, including his impact on the sciences; John Lubbock and Oliver Lodge admired him. Two major academic projects have looked at Ruskin and cultural tourism (investigating, for example, Ruskin's links with Thomas Cook); the other focuses on Ruskin and the theatre. The sociologist and media theorist David Gauntlett argues that Ruskin's notions of craft can be felt today in online communities such as YouTube and throughout Web 2.0. Similarly, architectural theorist Lars Spuybroek has argued that Ruskin's understanding of the Gothic as a combination of two types of variation, rough savageness and smooth changefulness, opens up a new way of thinking leading to digital and so-called parametric design.\nNotable Ruskin enthusiasts include the writers Geoffrey Hill and Charles Tomlinson, and the politicians Patrick Cormack, Frank Judd, Frank Field and Tony Benn. In 2006, Chris Smith, Baron Smith of Finsbury, Raficq Abdulla, Jonathon Porritt and Nicholas Wright were among those to contribute to the symposium, \"There is no wealth but life: Ruskin in the 21st Century\". Jonathan Glancey at \"The Guardian\" and Andrew Hill at the \"Financial Times\" have both written about Ruskin, as has the broadcaster Melvyn Bragg. In 2015, inspired by Ruskin's philosophy of education, Marc Turtletaub founded \"Meristem\" in Fair Oaks, California. The centre educates adolescents with developmental differences using Ruskin's \"land and craft\" ideals, transitioning them so they will succeed as adults in an evolving post-industrial society.\nTheory and criticism.\nRuskin wrote over 250 works, initially art criticism and history, but expanding to cover topics ranging over science, geology, ornithology, literary criticism, the environmental effects of pollution, mythology, travel, political economy and social reform. After his death Ruskin's works were collected in the 39-volume \"Library Edition\", completed in 1912 by his friends Edward Tyas Cook and Alexander Wedderburn. The range and quantity of Ruskin's writing, and its complex, allusive and associative method of expression, cause certain difficulties. In 1898, John A. Hobson observed that in attempting to summarise Ruskin's thought, and by extracting passages from across his work, \"the spell of his eloquence is broken\". Clive Wilmer has written, further, that, \"The anthologising of short purple passages, removed from their intended contexts [\u2026 is] something which Ruskin himself detested and which has bedevilled his reputation from the start.\" Nevertheless, some aspects of Ruskin's theory and criticism require further consideration.\nArt and design criticism.\nRuskin's early work defended the reputation of J. M. W. Turner. He believed that all great art should communicate an understanding and appreciation of nature. Accordingly, inherited artistic conventions should be rejected. Only by means of direct observation can an artist, through form and colour, represent nature in art. He advised artists in \"Modern Painters\" I to: \"go to Nature in all singleness of heart\u2026 rejecting nothing, selecting nothing and scorning nothing.\" By the 1850s. Ruskin was celebrating the Pre-Raphaelites, whose members, he said, had formed \"a new and noble school\" of art that would provide a basis for a thoroughgoing reform of the art world. For Ruskin, art should communicate truth above all things. However, this could not be revealed by mere display of skill, and must be an expression of the artist's whole moral outlook. Ruskin rejected the work of Whistler because he considered it to epitomise a reductive mechanisation of art.\nRuskin's strong rejection of Classical tradition in \"The Stones of Venice\" typifies the inextricable mix of aesthetics and morality in his thought: \"Pagan in its origin, proud and unholy in its revival, paralysed in its old age\u2026 an architecture invented, as it seems, to make plagiarists of its architects, slaves of its workmen, and sybarites of its inhabitants; an architecture in which intellect is idle, invention impossible, but in which all luxury is gratified and all insolence fortified.\" Rejection of mechanisation and standardisation informed Ruskin's theories of architecture, and his emphasis on the importance of the Medieval Gothic style. He praised the Gothic for what he saw as its reverence for nature and natural forms; the free, unfettered expression of artisans constructing and decorating buildings; and for the organic relationship he perceived between worker and guild, worker and community, worker and natural environment, and between worker and God. Attempts in the 19th century to reproduce Gothic forms (such as pointed arches), attempts he had helped inspire, were not enough to make these buildings expressions of what Ruskin saw as true Gothic feeling, faith, and organicism.\nFor Ruskin, the Gothic style in architecture embodied the same moral truths he sought to promote in the visual arts. It expressed the 'meaning' of architecture\u2014as a combination of the values of strength, solidity and aspiration\u2014all written, as it were, in stone. For Ruskin, creating true Gothic architecture involved the whole community, and expressed the full range of human emotions, from the sublime effects of soaring spires to the comically ridiculous carved grotesques and gargoyles. Even its crude and \"savage\" aspects were proof of \"the liberty of every workman who struck the stone; a freedom of thought, and rank in scale of being, such as no laws, no charters, no charities can secure.\" Classical architecture, in contrast, expressed a morally vacuous and repressive standardisation. Ruskin associated Classical values with modern developments, in particular with the demoralising consequences of the Industrial Revolution, resulting in buildings such as The Crystal Palace, which he criticised. Although Ruskin wrote about architecture in many works over the course of his career, his much-anthologised essay \"The Nature of Gothic\" from the second volume of \"The Stones of Venice\" (1853) is widely considered to be one of his most important and evocative discussions of his central argument.\nRuskin's theories indirectly encouraged a revival of Gothic styles, but Ruskin himself was often dissatisfied with the results. He objected that forms of mass-produced \"faux\" Gothic did not exemplify his principles, but showed disregard for the true meaning of the style. Even the Oxford University Museum of Natural History, a building designed with Ruskin's collaboration, met with his disapproval. The O'Shea brothers, freehand stone carvers chosen to revive the creative \"freedom of thought\" of Gothic craftsmen, disappointed him by their lack of reverence for the task.\nRuskin's distaste for oppressive standardisation led to later works in which he attacked \"laissez-faire\" capitalism, which he thought was at its root. His ideas provided inspiration for the Arts and Crafts Movement, the founders of the National Trust, the National Art Collections Fund, and the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings.\nRuskin's views on art, wrote Kenneth Clark, \"cannot be made to form a logical system, and perhaps owe to this fact a part of their value.\" Ruskin's accounts of art are descriptions of a superior type that conjure images vividly in the mind's eye.\nClark neatly summarises the key features of Ruskin's writing on art and architecture:\nHistoric preservation.\nRuskin's belief in preservation of ancient buildings had a significant influence on later thinking about the distinction between conservation and restoration. His position at the beginning of his career was very radical and he believed that if no conservation had been done on a building it should be left to die. In \"The Seven Lamps of Architecture\", (1849) Ruskin wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Neither by the public, nor by those who have the care of public monuments, is the true meaning of the word \"restoration\" understood. It means the most total destruction which a building can suffer: a destruction out of which no remnants can be gathered: a destruction accompanied with false description of the thing destroyed. Do not let us deceive ourselves in this important matter; it is \"impossible\", as impossible as to raise the dead, to restore anything that has ever been great or beautiful in architecture.\u2014\u200a\nFor Ruskin, the \"age\" of a building was crucially significant as an aspect in its preservation: \"For, indeed, the greatest glory of a building is not in its stones, not in its gold. Its glory is in its Age, and in that deep sense of voicefulness, of stern watching, of mysterious sympathy, nay, even of approval or condemnation, which we feel in walls that have long been washed by the passing waves of humanity.\"\nIt has been thought that he was a strong opponent of his contemporary, Eug\u00e8ne Viollet-le-Duc, who promoted the view that \"if no conservation had been done [to] a building it should be restored\". In fact, Ruskin never criticised Viollet-le-Duc's restoration work, just the idea of restoration. Ruskin's radical position on restoration became more nuanced at the end of his life, as he wrote in his last book, \"Praeterita\", that \"he regretted that no one in England had done the work that Viollet-le-Duc had done in France\".\nCritique of political economy.\nRuskin wielded a critique of political economy of orthodox, 19th-century political economy principally on the grounds that it failed to acknowledge complexities of human desires and motivations (broadly, \"social affections\"). He began to express such ideas in \"The Stones of Venice\", and increasingly in works of the later 1850s, such as \"The Political Economy of Art\" (\"A Joy for Ever\"), but he gave them full expression in the influential and at the time of publication, very controversial essays, \"Unto This Last\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... the art of becoming \"rich,\" in the common sense, is not absolutely nor finally the art of accumulating much money for ourselves, but also of contriving that our neighbours shall have less. In accurate terms, it is \"the art of establishing the maximum inequality in our own favour.\"\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNay, but I choose my physician and my clergyman, thus indicating my sense of the quality of their work. By all means, also, choose your bricklayer; that is the proper reward of the good workman, to be \"chosen.\" The natural and right system respecting all labour is, that it should be paid at a fixed rate, but the good workman employed, and the bad workman unemployed. The false, unnatural, and destructive system is when the bad workman is allowed to offer his work at half-price, and either take the place of the good, or force him by his competition to work for an inadequate sum.\nAt the root of his theory, was Ruskin's dissatisfaction with the role and position of the worker, and especially the artisan or craftsman, in modern industrial capitalist society. Ruskin believed that the economic theories of Adam Smith, expressed in \"The Wealth of Nations\" had led, through the division of labour to the alienation of the worker not merely from the process of work itself, but from his fellow workmen and other classes, causing increasing resentment.\nRuskin argued that one remedy would be to pay work at a fixed rate of wages, because human need is consistent and a given quantity of work justly demands a certain return. The best workmen would remain in employment because of the quality of their work (a focus on quality growing out of his writings on art and architecture). The best workmen could not, in a fixed-wage economy, be undercut by an inferior worker or product.\nIn the preface to \"Unto This Last\" (1862), Ruskin recommended that the state should underwrite standards of service and production to guarantee social justice. This included the recommendation of government youth-training schools promoting employment, health, and 'gentleness and justice'; government manufactories and workshops; government schools for the employment at fixed wages of the unemployed, with idlers compelled to toil; and pensions provided for the elderly and the destitute, as a matter of right, received honourably and not in shame. Many of these ideas were later incorporated into the welfare state.\nControversies.\nTurner's erotic drawings.\nUntil 2005, biographies of both J. M. W. Turner and Ruskin had claimed that in 1858 Ruskin burned bundles of erotic paintings and drawings by Turner to protect Turner's posthumous reputation. Ruskin's friend Ralph Nicholson Wornum, who was Keeper of the National Gallery, was said to have colluded in the alleged destruction of Turner's works. In 2005, these works, which form part of the Turner Bequest held at Tate Britain, were re-appraised by Turner Curator Ian Warrell, who concluded that Ruskin and Wornum had not destroyed them.\nSexuality.\nRuskin's sexuality has been the subject of a great deal of speculation. He was married once, to Effie Gray, whom he met when she was 12 and he was 21, and Gray's family encouraged a match between the two when she had matured. The marriage was annulled after six years owing to non-consummation. Effie, in a letter to her parents, claimed that Ruskin found her \"person\" repugnant: He alleged various reasons, hatred of children, religious motives, a desire to preserve my beauty, and finally this last year he told me his true reason\u2026 that he had imagined women were quite different to what he saw I was, and that the reason he did not make me his Wife was because he was disgusted with my person the first evening 10th April [1848]. Ruskin told his lawyer during the annulment proceedings: It may be thought strange that I could abstain from a woman who to most people was so attractive. But though her face was beautiful, her person was not formed to excite passion. On the contrary, there were certain circumstances in her person which completely checked it. The cause of Ruskin's \"disgust\" has led to much conjecture. Mary Lutyens speculated that he rejected Effie because he was horrified by the sight of her pubic hair. Lutyens argued that Ruskin must have known the female form only through Greek statues and paintings of nudes which lacked pubic hair. However, Peter Fuller wrote, \"It has been said that he was frightened on the wedding night by the sight of his wife's pubic hair; more probably, he was perturbed by her menstrual blood.\" Ruskin's biographers Tim Hilton and John Batchelor also took the view that menstruation was the more likely explanation, though Batchelor also suggests that body-odour may have been the problem. There is no evidence to support any of these theories. William Ewart Gladstone said to his daughter Mary, \"should you ever hear anyone blame Millais or his wife, or Mr. Ruskin [for the breakdown of the marriage], remember that there is no fault; there was misfortune, even tragedy. All three were perfectly blameless.\" Ruskins' marriage is the subject of a book by Robert Brownell.\nRuskin's later relationship with Rose La Touche began on 3 January 1858, when she was 10 years old and he was about to turn 39. He was her private art tutor, and the two maintained an educational relationship through correspondence until she was 18. Around that time he asked her to marry him. However, Rose's parents forbade it, after learning about his first marriage. Ruskin repeated his marriage proposal when Rose became 21, and legally free to decide for herself. She was willing to marry if the union would remain unconsummated, because her doctors had told her she was unfit for marriage; but Ruskin declined to enter another such marriage for fear of its effect on his reputation.\nRuskin is not known to have had any sexually intimate relationships. During an episode of mental derangement after Rose died, he wrote a letter in which he insisted that Rose's spirit had instructed him to marry a girl who was visiting him at the time. It is also true that in letters from Ruskin to Kate Greenaway he asked her to draw her \"girlies\" (as he called her child figures) without clothing:\nWill you \u2013 (it's all for your own good \u2013 !) make her stand up and then draw her for me without a cap \u2013 and, without her shoes, \u2013 (because of the heels) and without her mittens, and without her \u2013 frock and frills? And let me see exactly how tall she is \u2013 and \u2013 how \u2013 round. It will be so good of and for you \u2013 And to and for me.\nIn a letter to his physician John Simon on 15 May 1886, Ruskin wrote:\nI like my girls from ten to sixteen\u2014allowing of 17 or 18 as long as they're not in love with anybody but me.\u2014I've got some darlings of 8\u201412\u201414\u2014just now, and my Pigwiggina here\u201412\u2014who fetches my wood and is learning to play my bells.\nRuskin's biographers disagree about the allegation of \"paedophilia\". Tim Hilton, in his two-volume biography, asserts that Ruskin \"was a paedophile\", alluding by way of explanation to a sensual description by Ruskin of a half-naked girl he saw in Italy and quoting Ruskin's own statements about his liking for young girls, while John Batchelor argues that the term is inappropriate because Ruskin's behaviour does not \"fit the profile\". Others point to a definite pattern of \"nympholeptic\" behaviour with regard to his interactions with girls at a Winnington school. However, there is no evidence that Ruskin ever engaged in any sexual activity with anyone at all. According to one interpretation, what Ruskin valued most in pre-pubescent girls was their innocence; the fact that they were not (yet) fully sexually developed. However, James L. Spates describes Ruskin's erotic life as simply \"idiosyncratic\" and concludes that he \"was physically and emotionally normal\". The age of consent in the United Kingdom was 12 for females until 1875, 13 between 1875 and 1885, and 16 from 1885 onwards.\nCommon law of business balance.\nRuskin was not a fan of buying low and selling high. In the \"Veins of Wealth\" section of \"Unto This Last\", he wrote: \"So far as I know, there is not in history record of anything so disgraceful to the human intellect as the modern idea that the commercial text, 'Buy in the cheapest market and sell in the dearest,' represents, or under any circumstances could represent, an available principle of national economy.\" Perhaps due to such passages, Ruskin is frequently identified as the originator of the \"common law of business balance\"\u2014a statement about the relationships of price and quality as they pertain to manufactured goods, and often summarised as: \"The common law of business balance prohibits paying a little and getting a lot.\" This is the core of a longer statement usually attributed to Ruskin, although Ruskin's authorship is disputed among Ruskin scholars. Fred Shapiro maintains that the statement does not appear anywhere in Ruskin's works, and George Landow is likewise sceptical of the claim of Ruskin's authorship. In a posting of the \"Ruskin Library News\", a blog associated with the Ruskin Library (a major collection of Ruskiniana located at Lancaster University), an anonymous library staff member briefly mentions the statement and its widespread use, saying that, \"This is one of many quotations ascribed to Ruskin, without there being any trace of them in his writings \u2013 although someone, somewhere, thought they sounded like Ruskin.\" In an issue of the journal \"Heat Transfer Engineering\", Kenneth Bell quotes the statement and mentions that it has been attributed to Ruskin. While Bell believes in the veracity of its content, he adds that the statement does not appear in Ruskin's published works.\nEarly in the 20th century, this statement appeared\u2014without any authorship attribution\u2014in magazine advertisements, in a business catalogue, in student publications, and, occasionally, in editorial columns. Later in the 20th century, however, magazine advertisements, student publications, business books, technical publications, scholarly journals, and business catalogues often included the statement with attribution to Ruskin.\nIn the 21st century, and based upon the statement's applicability of the issues of quality and price, the statement continues to be used and attributed to Ruskin\u2014despite the questionable nature of the attribution. \nFor many years, various Baskin-Robbins ice cream parlours prominently displayed a section of the statement in framed signs: \"There is hardly anything in the world that someone cannot make a little worse and sell a little cheaper, and the people who consider price alone are that man's lawful prey.\" The signs listed Ruskin as the author of the statement, but the signs gave no information on where or when Ruskin was supposed to have written, spoken, or published the statement. Due to the statement's widespread use as a promotional slogan, and despite questions of Ruskin's authorship, it is likely that many people who are otherwise unfamiliar with Ruskin now associate him with this statement.\nDefinitions.\nThe OED credits Ruskin with the first quotation in 152 separate entries. Some include:\nBibliography.\nThe standard, or https:// of Ruskin's \"Works\" is It is sometimes called simply \"Cook and Wedderburn\". \nWorks by Ruskin.\nNB. The column marked LE gives the volume number in which the work appears in the https:// of \"The Works of John Ruskin\", ed. E. T. Cook and Alexander Wedderburn (39 vols) (London: George Allen, 1903\u20131912).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76641", "revid": "42366806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76641", "title": "Woman of the Year", "text": "1942 film by George Stevens\nWoman of the Year is a 1942 American romantic comedy drama film directed by George Stevens and starring Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn. The film was written by Ring Lardner Jr. and Michael Kanin (with uncredited work on the rewritten ending by John Lee Mahin), and produced by Joseph L. Mankiewicz. The film's plot is about the relationship between Tess Harding\u2014an international affairs correspondent, chosen \"Woman of the Year\"\u2014and Sam Craig\u2014a sportswriter\u2014who meet, marry, and encounter problems as a result of her unflinching commitment to her work. In 1999, \"Woman of the Year\" was deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry.\nPlot.\nTess Harding and Sam Craig are journalists for the (fictional) \"New York Chronicle\". Tess, the daughter of a former ambassador, is a highly educated, well-travelled political affairs columnist who speaks several languages fluently. Sam is a knowledgeable and well-informed sports writer. Their difficulties are presented as stemming from differences of class, experience and temperament, as well as from gender.\nAfter Tess suggests on the radio that baseball be abolished for the duration of the war, Sam leaps to the sport's defense. Their editor summons them to his office: he will not stand for an intramural feud at his paper. Sam invites Tess to a baseball game at Yankee Stadium. She is unfamiliar with the rules of the sport; Sam has some difficulty explaining them. Tess invites Sam to her apartment later that night. What he thought would be a date is actually a cocktail party where the guests are discussing the world situation in foreign languages. He leaves. She sends him champagne to apologize and asks him to take her to the airport so he can kiss her goodbye. On the drive back to town, Sam hits it off with Ellen Whitcomb, Tess's aunt, who is a world-famous feminist. She advises him to \"marry the girl\".\nSam has his mind on a personable wedding, but it quickly escalates into a production. A justice of the peace in South Carolina is arranged by Gerald, Tess's ultra-competent secretary, to fit her schedule and that of her illustrious senator father. Their wedding night is disrupted by the arrival of a Yugoslavian statesman who has just escaped from the Nazis, and a stream of European disciples.\nConflicts large and small arise over Tess's priorities and Sam's place in her life, beginning with her decision to have Sam move into her apartment instead of them choosing a place together. Her business continually comes before her personal life, with Sam largely reduced to the role of an aide. Sensing her husband is unhappy, Tess floats the idea of having a child, which Sam is warm to until Tess reveals that she has already agreed to adopt a young Greek refugee named Chris, who speaks no English. Sam is very upset, but hides his anger from the child. Before the couple can discuss the issue, they are interrupted by the news that Tess has been named \"America's Outstanding Woman of the Year\".\nTess plans to leave Chris by himself while they go to the award gala, while Sam, already not keen on the gala, states his refusal to leave the boy alone. While Tess is at her gala, Sam returns the child to the orphanage; Chris is thrilled to see his friends again. Tess returns home with a following of photographers and discovers that Sam and Chris are gone. She attempts to reclaim Chris, but he refuses, preferring to stay with his friends. The next day, Tess receives a telegram from her aunt, telling the couple to come to her home in Connecticut. Sam declines to join, and opines that their marriage has neither been \"perfect or a marriage\". Tess comes home to learn that her aunt and father are finally to be married that night. The ceremony has all the reverence and grace that was lacking in the Craigs' wedding; Tess is moved to tears. She drives through the night and arrives at Sam's new Riverside apartment.\nAllowed in by a super, Tess decides to prepare Sam breakfast while he sleeps in. She is inept in the kitchen and Sam is awakened by the clatter. Tess confesses to Sam of her recent wedding experience, and proclaims her newfound inspiration to serve only as his wife. Sam asks Tess to walk back her overbearing dedication, and to assume the role of \"Tess Harding Craig\" rather than just \"Tess Harding\" or \"Mrs. Sam Craig\". She agrees. Gerald appears with a champagne bottle, announcing that Tess is expected to launch a battleship. Sam takes Gerald outside and returns with the broken bottle, announcing that he has just \"launched Gerald\".\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Spencer Tracy as Sam Craig\nProduction.\nWriting.\nThe outline for the film was developed by Garson Kanin, a close friend of Hepburn's. The character of Tess Harding was based on Dorothy Thompson, an American journalist and radio broadcaster who was highly influential. Hepburn then passed the outline to Joseph L. Mankiewicz at MGM, and said the price was $250,000 \u2013 half for her, half for the script. He liked it and agreed to produce the movie. Kanin was fighting in the war at the time, so the script was written by his brother, Michael Kanin, and mutual friend Ring Lardner Jr. Hepburn contributed significantly to the script \u2013 reading it, suggesting cuts and word changes, and generally providing helpful enthusiasm for the project. As a part of the deal, Hepburn had the option of selecting her co-star and director (Tracy and Stevens).\nCasting.\n\"Woman of the Year\" was the first of nine films Hepburn and Tracy made together. They met for the first time on the shoot. In the 1993 documentary \"Katharine Hepburn: All About Me\", Hepburn herself says she was wearing high heels at the first meeting with Tracy and producer Joseph L. Mankiewicz, and said \"I'm afraid I'm a bit tall for you, Mr. Tracy\". Mankiewicz then responded, \"Don't worry, Kate, he'll cut you down to size.\" It was during the filming of \"Woman of the Year\" that Hepburn and Tracy became romantically involved \u2013 a relationship that lasted until Tracy's death in 1967.\nReshoots.\nThe film was originally shot with a different ending, but it proved unpopular at test screenings. The decision was made to change it, and the final fifteen minutes of the film were re-written and shot. In the original ending, Sam went missing after returning the child to the orphanage, while he was supposed to write an article about an upcoming boxing match. Tess decides to take over for him and visits the gym to learn about the fight. Sam, who is in a language school trying to learn French and Spanish to \"be important\", is shocked when he sees the article. He goes to the fight, where he encounters Tess. She insists that she did the work to be a \"good wife,\" and states her dedication to Sam. He says that he does not want either extreme; he just wants her to be \"Tess Harding Craig\" (as in the released ending).\nRing Lardner Jr. describes in Archive of America Television oral history interviews (2000) that changes made to the ending of the film were against the wishes of Katharine Hepburn, and were implemented while both screenwriters were on vacation in New York. The changes were instigated by Louis B. Mayer, producer Joseph L. Mankiewicz and director George Stevens, with the actual new ending being written by John Lee Mahin (who was uncredited). In an interview, Lardner indicated that these parties all believed that Tess Harding \"had to get her comeuppance for being too strong in a man's world, so they wrote a scene where she tried to fix breakfast ... and gets everything wrong.\" Lardner and Kanin were given some room to rewrite the new ending on returning from New York, and in the same interview Lardner recalls \"some of the worst lines we rewrote, but we couldn't fix it, we couldn't change it fundamentally\".\nReception.\nOn Rotten Tomatoes \"Woman of the Year\" holds a rating of 83% from 30 reviews. The consensus states: \"In the first romantic comedy pairing of Tracy and Hepburn, the stars' chemistry is off to a working start and the film's sparkling comedy smooths out any rough patches.\" Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the a score of 74 out of 100, based on 11 critics, indicating .\nBox office.\nThe film earned $1,935,000 in the United States and Canada and $773,000 elsewhere during its initial release, making MGM a profit of $753,000.\nAwards and honors.\nAt the 15th Academy Awards, Michael Kanin and Ring Lardner Jr. won the award for Best Original Screenplay, and Katharine Hepburn was nominated for Best Actress.\nAmerican Film Institute included the film in the 2000 list AFI's 100 Years...100 Laughs (#90) and in 2002, in AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions (#74).\nA 1976 remake of the film, made for television and starring Joseph Bologna and Ren\u00e9e Taylor, was broadcast on CBS.\nIn 1981, the film was adapted into a successful Broadway musical of the same name, starring Lauren Bacall, who won a Tony Award for her work.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76642", "revid": "27822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76642", "title": "Joseph Mallord William Turner", "text": ""}
{"id": "76643", "revid": "47512895", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76643", "title": "A Woman Under the Influence", "text": "1974 film by John Cassavetes\nA Woman Under the Influence is a 1974 American drama film written and directed by John Cassavetes, and starring his wife Gena Rowlands and close friend Peter Falk. Rowlands plays a housewife whose unusual behavior leads to conflict with her blue-collar husband (Falk) and family.\nThe film was Cassavetes' seventh as director and was produced independently like many of his other films. It premiered at the 1974 New York Film Festival, before going into wide theatrical release on November 18, 1974. It received two Academy Award nominations: for Best Director and Best Actress (for Rowlands). Rowlands won a Golden Globe Award and National Board of Review Award for her performance.\nIn 1990, the Library of Congress selected the film for preservation in the United States National Film Registry for being \"culturally, historically or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nAlthough she is hesitant to do so, Mabel Longhetti, a Los Angeles housewife and mother who exhibits strange behavior, sends her three young children\u2014Tony, Angelo, and Maria\u2014to spend the night with her mother so she and her husband, Nick, can have a date night. Unfortunately, Nick, who is the foreman of a utility crew, has to cancel to fix a burst water main. Alone and drunk, Mabel goes to a bar and behaves very familiarly to a stranger named Garson Cross, who takes her home. She is almost unconscious by the time they get there, and Garson forces himself on her while she feebly attempts to fight him off.\nThe next morning, a confused Mabel briefly argues with Garson\u2014whom she confuses by calling him \"Nick\"\u2014before he leaves. Nick brings his 11-member crew to the house for breakfast after their long night, and Mabel makes everyone spaghetti. She is very polite to Nick's colleagues, but she asks several of them for their names, even though they have met before. The meal is superficially pleasant, until Nick snaps at Mabel for making one of his men feel uncomfortable by being overly warm to him, and the men use a phone call from Nick's mother as an excuse to make a hurried exit.\nMabel hosts a play date, but the father of the other children, Harold Jensen, is disturbed by her behavior and reluctant to leave his children alone with her. Nick comes home with his mother, Margaret, to find all of the children half-naked and running wild, with Jensen trying to get his children dressed. He slaps Mabel and gets into a fistfight with an angry Jensen, but Margaret breaks them up, and Jensen leaves with his children.\nAt his wits' end, Nick calls Mabel's doctor, Dr. Zepp, to evaluate her mental health. Mabel gets worked up, particularly by the presence of her mother-in-law, who calls Mabel a bad wife and an unfit mother when Nick is trying to calm her down. She becomes increasingly detached from reality, and violently resists when Dr. Zepp tries give to her a sedative injection. Convinced she has become a threat to herself and others, Dr. Zepp has Mabel involuntarily committed.\nAt work, Nick is on edge and yells at his coworkers when they ask about what happened with Mabel. Eddie, Nick's closest friend, remains quiet, but even this rubs Nick the wrong way. He yells at Eddie while Eddie is rappelling down a steep incline, and Eddie falls and gets injured. Afterward, Nick picks up his children from school early to go to the beach and allows them to sip his beer.\nSix months later, Nick plans a large surprise welcome home party to celebrate Mabel's return from the hospital. However, his mother points out that this may be overwhelming for her, and Nick has her ask all of the guests who are not family to leave. When Mabel arrives, she is quiet and apprehensive, and no one else knows what to say, either. Nick tries his best to make Mabel feel comfortable, but, when she begins to joke around, he blows up and says they are going to have a normal conversation. Mabel says she does not know how to act without the routine provided by the hospital, which included therapies and medications and shock treatments, and she asks everyone to leave. While the guests get their coats, Mabel begins to dance on the couch while humming the theme from \"Swan Lake\".\nWhen Nick approaches Mabel, she runs into the bathroom and cuts her hand with a razor. He stops her, and she runs to the living room and climbs back up on the couch. The children, confused and concerned, try to protect Mabel by pushing Nick away from her. Nick slaps Mabel, knocking her to the ground, and then tries to put the children to bed, but they escape and go back to Mabel. Seeming somewhat recovered, Mabel, still bleeding, takes the children upstairs and tucks them in while they express their love for her. She and Nick go back downstairs, where he tends to her hand and they clean up and get ready for bed.\nCast.\nFrom the American Film Institute:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Peter Falk as Nick Longhetti, Mabel's husband\nProduction.\nJohn Cassavetes was inspired to write \"A Woman Under the Influence\" when his wife Gena Rowlands expressed a desire to appear in a play about the difficulties faced by contemporary women. His completed script was so intense and emotional that she knew she would be unable to perform it eight times a week, so he decided to adapt it for the screen. When he tried to raise funding for the film, Cassavetes was told that \"No one wants to see a crazy, middle-aged dame.\" Lacking studio financing, he mortgaged his house and borrowed money from family and friends, one of whom was Peter Falk, who liked the screenplay so much that he invested $500,000 in the project.\nThe crew consisted of professionals and students from the American Film Institute, where Cassavetes was serving as the first \"filmmaker in residence\" at their Center for Advanced Film Studies. Working with a limited budget forced him to shoot scenes in a real house near Hollywood Boulevard, and Rowlands was responsible for her own hairstyling and makeup. Filming took place in 65 days over twelve weeks. Cassavetes prioritized the authenticity of the performances, and the actors would generally stay in character on set and would not plan their interactions with each other before shooting. An initial cut of the movie was 3 hours and 50 minutes long, which was then cut down to a 155 minute edit and then the final 147 minute runtime.\nRelease.\nUpon completion of the film, Cassavetes was unable to find a distributor, so he personally called theater owners and asked them to show it. He got it booked at art houses and shown on college campuses, where he and Falk would discuss it with the audience. According to Jeff Lipsky, a college student who was hired to help distribute the film: \"It was the first time in the history of motion pictures that an independent film was distributed without the use of a nationwide system of sub-distributors.\"\nThe film was screened at the San Sebasti\u00e1n Film Festival, where Rowlands was named Best Actress and Cassavetes won the Silver Shell Award for Best Director, and the New York Film Festival, where it captured the attention of such film critics as Rex Reed. When Richard Dreyfuss appeared on \"The Mike Douglas Show\" with Peter Falk, he described \"A Woman Under the Influence\" as \"the most incredible, disturbing, scary, brilliant, dark, sad, depressing movie\", and added that he \"went crazy. I went home and vomited\", which prompted curious audiences to seek out the film capable of making Dreyfuss (who is himself bipolar) ill.\nHome media.\nIn 1992, Touchstone Home Video released the film on VHS.\nOn September 21, 2004, The Criterion Collection released the film\u2014together with \"Shadows\" (1959), \"Faces\" (1968), \"The Killing of a Chinese Bookie\" (1976), and \"Opening Night\" (1977)\u2014in Region 1 as part of the eight-disc DVD box set \"John Cassavetes: Five Films\". Bonus features for the film include an audio commentary by composer and sound recordist Bo Harwood and camera operator Mike Ferris, a video conversation between Rowlands and Falk, an essay by film critic Kent Jones, and audio and written interviews with Cassavetes from 1975. On October 22, 2013, the box set was re-released on Blu-ray.\nReception and legacy.\nOn the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 86% of 36 critics' reviews of the film are positive, with an average rating of 8.2/10; the site's \"critics consensus\" reads: \"Electrified by searing performances from Gena Rowlands and Peter Falk, \"A Woman Under the Influence\" finds pioneering independent filmmaker John Cassavetes working at his artistic peak.\"\nNora Sayre of \"The New York Times\" observed: \"Miss Rowlands unleashes an extraordinary characterization. [...] The actress\u2019s style of performing sometimes shows a kinship with that of the early Kim Stanley or the recent Joanne Woodward, but the notes of desperation are emphatically her own. [...] Peter Falk gives a rousing performance [...] and the children are very well directed. But the movie didn't need to be 2 hours and 35 minutes long: there's too much small talk, which doesn't really reveal character. Still, the most frightening scenes are extremely compelling, and this is a thoughtful film that does prompt serious discussion.\"\nRoger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" gave the film four stars out of four, calling it \"terribly complicated, involved and fascinating \u2013 a revelation\", and saying: \"The characters are larger than life (although not less convincing because of that), and their loves and rages, their fights and moments of tenderness, exist at exhausting levels of emotion. [...] Cassavetes is strongest as a writer and filmmaker at creating specific characters and then sticking with them through long, painful, uncompromising scenes until we know them well enough to read them, to predict what they'll do next and even to begin to understand why.\" He later added the film to his \"Great Movies\" list, in which he called it \"perhaps the greatest of Cassavetes' films.\"\n\"Time Out London\" wrote: \"The brilliance of the film lies in its sympathetic and humorous exposure of social structure. Rowlands unfortunately overdoes the manic psychosis at times, and lapses into a melodramatic style which is unconvincing and unsympathetic; but Falk is persuasively insane as the husband; and the result is an astonishing, compulsive film, directed with a crackling energy.\" \"TV Guide\" gave the film four stars out of four, calling it \"tough-minded\", \"moving\", and \"an insightful essay on sexual politics.\"\nPauline Kael of \"The New Yorker\", however, condemned the film as a \"didactic illustration of (R.D.) Laing's version of insanity.\u201d Stanley Kauffmann of \"The New Republic\" also panned the film in his 1974 review, writing: \"To me this film is utterly without interest or merit\". John Simon, noted for his frequently caustic and disparaging reviews, called the film \"dreadful.\"\nIn the years after it's release, the film has continued to receive acclaim. \"Premi\u00e8re\" listed Rowlands' performance as one of the \"100 Greatest Movie Performances of All Time\", and critic Jim Hemphill named her performance as \"one of cinema\u2019s all-time greatest\". In \"Sight and Sound\"'s 2012 poll of the greatest films of all time, the film placed 59th in the directors' poll and 144th in the critics' poll. In 2015, the BBC named \"A Woman Under the Influence\" the 31st greatest American film ever made. In 1990, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry for being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\", one of the first fifty films to be listed.\nRestoration and preservation.\nThe world premiere screening of a restored print of the film was held at the Castro Theatre in San Francisco on April 26, 2009, as part of the San Francisco International Film Festival. Gena Rowlands attended the premiere and spoke briefly. The restoration was performed by the UCLA Film and Television Archive, with funding provided by Gucci and The Film Foundation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76645", "revid": "275202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76645", "title": "Clarabelle Cow", "text": "Disney cartoon character\nClarabelle Cow is a cartoon character created by The Walt Disney Company. As a domestic anthropomorphic cow, Clarabelle is one of Minnie Mouse's best friends. She was once depicted as the girlfriend of Horace Horsecollar, although now she is often paired with Goofy.\nAppearances.\nAnimation.\nClarabelle first appeared as a nonhumanized cow in the Mickey Mouse cartoon \"Plane Crazy\" in 1928. Humanized soon afterward, she appeared frequently in cartoons from 1930 to 1932 and less frequently afterwards, taking her final classic-era bow in 1942. As with most Disney characters, she was later given small cameos in the featurettes \"Mickey's Christmas Carol\" (1983) and \"The Prince and the Pauper\" (1990) and the 1988 feature film \"Who Framed Roger Rabbit\".\nClarabelle mostly played bit-parts in the 30+ films in which she appeared and her character was never as fully developed as Mickey, Minnie, Goofy, Donald Duck or Pluto. She and Horace Horsecollar changed from normal farmyard animals into anthropomorphized beings as necessary.\nIn modern animation, Clarabelle has returned to active use, appearing first in a few segments of \"Mickey Mouse Works\" and in a brief scene in \"Mickey's Once Upon a Christmas\". In \"House of Mouse\", she regularly turned up as a gossip columnist with the tagline \"Gossip is Always True\".\nClarabelle has also made appearances in the preschool series \"Mickey Mouse Clubhouse\" and is featured as Goofy's girlfriend (in which she owns a puppy named Bella) and in the direct-to-video movie \"\" as Pete's lieutenant and Goofy's love interest.\nShe also appears in \"Mickey and the Roadster Racers\", where she displays attraction towards both Goofy and Horace.\nClarabelle Cow was also in \"Mickey Mouse Funhouse\" where he still does baking and is and also an expert plumber. She also has different counterparts in the Adventure Worlds.\nClarabelle Cow appears in \"Mickey Mouse Clubhouse+\" where she is a proprietor of the Moo Mart. She also has some alter egos where some of them are the Mystery Mousekepal in some episodes.\nComics.\nWhen the Disney characters started to feature in comic strips and comic books, Clarabelle Cow was one of the first. Her first appearance was in the \"Mickey Mouse\" comic strip for April 2, 1930. Along with Horace Horsecollar, Clara Cluck, Goofy, Minnie, and Mickey, she appeared in comics on a regular basis in the fifties, sixties and seventies.\nFor a brief time, during the late 1960s, Clarabelle began dating Goofy. During this time, Horace's whereabouts are unknown. Clarabelle's status with Goofy was challenged by a rival named Glory-Bee. In later comics, Clarabelle and Horace were a couple again. Clarabelle also has a young cousin, Bertie the Jinx, a niece, Itsy-Betsy, and a socialite aunt named Miss Bovina, who have appeared in several issues of \"Walt Disney's Comics and Stories\".\nFrom the eighties forward, only a few stories with Clarabelle Cow were made in the United States. In Europe, especially in Italy, the production of stories continued to the present day. In Italian comics, Clarabelle (called \"Clarabella\") is very popular and she is the girlfriend of Horace Horsecollar (\"Orazio Cavezza\").\nDisney theme parks.\nFrom September 2006 to September 2008, Clarabelle Cow and Horace Horsecollar appeared together for meet-and-greets in Town Square at the Magic Kingdom in Walt Disney World. Also, they were in the Main Street Family Fun Day Parade. Clarabelle appears seasonally in \"Mickey's Boo-to-You Halloween Parade\", \"Mickey's Once Upon a Christmastime Parade\", and the \"Mickey's Most Merriest Celebration\" castle show. She and Horace both appear in the Hoedown Happening in Frontierland and as featured characters in the \"Move It! Shake It! Mousekedance It!\" street party, with Clarabelle in particular atop her own party box and with her own dialogue.\nClarabelle also appears (without Horace) at Disneyland Park. She has also appeared in several Disneyland parades and shows over the years, including The World According to Goofy, Light Magic, the Parade of the Stars, Fantasmic, A Christmas Fantasy Parade and Celebrate! A Street Party. Clarabelle and Horace come out for meet-and-greets and appear in parades and shows on a regular basis at Tokyo Disneyland as well. In 2009, Clarabelle played a leading character in the New Year's Greeting at Tokyo Disneyland and Tokyo DisneySea.\nClarabelle Cow was chosen to meet and greet for Character Fan Days at Disneyland. She is accompanied by Horace Horsecollar which is his first meet and greet at Disneyland in Anaheim.\nAt Disney California Adventure at the Disneyland Resort, in the Buena Vista Street area there is an ice cream shop named \"Clarabelle's Hand-Scooped Ice Cream\".\nShe also features with Horace in \"Mickey's Halloween Celebration\" and \"Goofy's Garden Party\" in Disneyland Paris. In Christmas 2016, Clarabelle returned to Magic Kingdom for \"Mickey's Most Merriest Celebration\".\nVideo games.\nClarabelle appeared as the DJ of the song \"Miwaku No Tango\" in the 2000 Japanese Nintendo 64 game \"Dance Dance Revolution Disney Dancing Museum\".\nClarabelle appears in \"Disney's Toontown Online\". She plays the role of giving the player furniture to decorate their estates, with the catalog players must order from is a \"Cattlelog\". Her appearance is also somewhat changed to look like an operator.\nShe also makes a minor appearance in \"Kingdom Hearts II\" in the Timeless River World using her old black and white design. She appears with the same design in \"Kingdom Hearts III\" in the minigame \"The Karnival Kid\".\nParodies.\nClarabelle appears briefly in the episode \"Who Ate Wally's Waffles?\" of the series \"Paradise PD\" at the entrance of Disney World as one of the employees of the park.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76647", "revid": "44220063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76647", "title": "Yankee Doodle Dandy", "text": "1942 film by Michael Curtiz\nYankee Doodle Dandy is a 1942 American biographical musical drama film about George M. Cohan, known as \"The Man Who Owned Broadway\". It stars James Cagney, Joan Leslie, Walter Huston, and Richard Whorf, and features Irene Manning, George Tobias, Rosemary DeCamp, Jeanne Cagney, and Vera Lewis. Joan Leslie's singing voice was partially dubbed by Sally Sweetland.\nThe film was written by Robert Buckner and Edmund Joseph, and directed by Michael Curtiz. According to the special edition DVD, significant and uncredited improvements were made to the script by the twin brothers Julius J. Epstein and Philip G. Epstein. The film was a major hit for Warner Brothers, and was nominated for eight Academy Awards, including Best Picture, winning three.\nIn 1993, \"Yankee Doodle Dandy\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\", and in 1998, the film was included on the American Film Institute's \"100 Years...100 Movies\" list, a compilation of the 100 greatest films in American cinema, ranking number 100.\nPlot.\nIn the early days of World War II, George M. Cohan comes out of retirement to star as President Roosevelt in the Rodgers and Hart musical \"I'd Rather Be Right.\" On the show's first night, he is summoned to the White House to meet the President, who presents him with a Congressional Gold Medal. Cohan is overcome and chats with Roosevelt, recalling his early days on the stage.\nThe film flashes back to Cohan's supposed July 4 birth while his father is performing on the vaudeville stage.\nCohan and his sister join the family act as soon as they learn to dance, and soon The Four Cohans are performing successfully. But George gets cocky as he grows up and is blacklisted by theatrical producers for being troublesome. He leaves the act and hawks his songs unsuccessfully to producers.\nIn partnership with Sam Harris, another struggling writer, Cohan finally interests a producer and they are on the road to success. He marries Mary, a young singer/dancer. As his star ascends, he persuades his now-struggling parents to join his act, eventually vesting some of his valuable theatrical properties in their name. When the sinking of the Lusitania pulls the U.S. into WWI, Cohan attempts to enlist in the military but at 39 is too old. Determined to play some patriotic role in the war effort, he finds himself inspired to write morale-boosting songs such as \u201cOver There,\u201d which are well-received. Cohan retires but returns to the stage several times, culminating in the role of the U.S. president.\nThe film returns to the White House, where George has just received the Congressional Gold Medal for his inspirational patriotic songs. As Cohan leaves, he tap-dances down a set of stairs. Outside, Cohan joins a military parade where the soldiers are singing \"Over There\" as Cohan listens, overcome with emotion. Not knowing Cohan is the song's composer, one of the soldiers asks if he remembers the song. Cohan joins in the singing.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCast notes:\nBackground and production.\nCagney, like Cohan, was an Irish-American who had been a song-and-dance man early in his career. His unique and seemingly odd presentation style, of half-singing and half-reciting the songs, reflected the style that Cohan himself used. His natural dance style and physique were also a good match for Cohan. Newspapers at the time reported that Cagney intended to consciously imitate Cohan's song-and-dance style, but to play the normal part of the acting in his own style. Although director Curtiz was known as a taskmaster, he also gave his actors some latitude. Cagney and other players came up with a number of \"bits of business\", as Cagney called them, meaning improvised lines or action in theater parlance.\nA number of the biographical particulars of the movie are Hollywood-ized fiction, such as omitting the fact that Cohan divorced and remarried. Cohan's two wives, Ethel and Agnes, were combined into a single character named Mary (in the film, Cohan wrote \"Mary's A Grand Old Name\" about her). It also took some liberties with the chronology of Cohan's life and the order of his parents' deaths.\nIn one scene, after Cohan suffers a flop with an atypical non-musical drama, \"Popularity\", he writes a telegram apologizing to the public. He then leaves the Western Union office to find newspaper sellers announcing the torpedoing of the \"Lusitania\". In reality, the failed play was staged in 1906 and the \"Lusitania\"'s sinking occurred in 1915.\nNevertheless, care was taken to make the sets, costumes, and dance steps match the original stage presentations. Cagney sprained an ankle twice while mastering Cohan's stiff-legged dance style. This effort was aided significantly by Jack Boyle, a former associate of Cohan's who knew the original productions well. Boyle was also in some of the dancing groups featured in the movie.\nCagney, as Cohan, is shown performing as a singing and dancing version of President Franklin D. Roosevelt. Although it was well known, Roosevelt's use of a wheelchair after a paralytic illness was not emphasized at the time. In the film, Roosevelt never leaves his chair when meeting Cohan.\nCohan himself served as a consultant during the production of the film, as well as being credited with the incidental score. Due to his failing health, his actual involvement in the film was limited. But when completed, the film was privately screened for Cohan and he commented on Cagney's performance: \"My God, what an act to follow!\"\nBecause of Cohan's health, Warner Brothers moved the scheduled gala premiere from July 4 to May 29. The original date was chosen because of the film's patriotic theme and because in the movie, Cohan is said to have been born on the Fourth of July (as he wrote in the lyrics of \"Yankee Doodle Dandy\"). However, Cohan was actually born July 3. Cohan lived for several months after the film's release.\nThe movie poster for this film was the first ever produced by noted poster designer Bill Gold.\nProduction.\nCagney had initially been opposed to a biopic of Cohan's life, having disliked Cohan since the Actors' Equity Strike in 1919 in which he sided with the producers. In 1940, Cagney and 15 other Hollywood figures were named in the grand jury testimony of John R. Leech, self-described \"chief functionary\" of the Los Angeles Communist Party who had been subpoenaed by the House Committee on Un-American Activities. \"The New York Times\" printed a front-page allegation that Cagney was a communist. Cagney refuted the accusation and Martin Dies, Jr. made a statement to the press clearing Cagney. William Cagney, one of the film's producers, reportedly told his brother \"We're going to have to make the goddamndest patriotic picture that's ever been made. I think it's the Cohan story\".\nReception.\nBox office.\nThe film nearly doubled the earnings of \"Captains of the Clouds\" (1942), Cagney's previous effort, bringing in more than $6 million in rentals to Warner Brothers. According to Warner Brothers records, it earned $4,631,000 domestically and $1,892,000 foreign. This made it the biggest box-office success in the company's history up to that time. The star earned his contractual $150,000 salary and nearly half a million dollars in profit sharing. According to \"Variety\", the film earned $4.8 million in theatrical rentals through its North American release.\nCritical response.\nContemporary reviews were highly positive. Bosley Crowther of \"The New York Times\" said film patrons would do well to see it, for \"you will find as warm and delightful a musical picture as has hit the screen in years, a corking good entertainment and as affectionate, if not as accurate, a film biography as has ever\u2014yes, ever\u2014been made ... there is so much in this picture and so many persons that deserve their meed of praise that every one connected with it can stick a feather in his hat and take our word\u2014it's dandy!\" \"Variety\" called the film \"as entertaining as any top filmusical ever made ... James Cagney does a Cohan of which the original George M. might well be proud.\" \"Harrison's Reports\" wrote: \"Excellent! Audiences should find this musical comedy, which is based on the life of George M. Cohan, one of the most sparkling and delightful musical pictures that have ever been brought to the screen. Much of its entertainment value is due to the exceptionally fine performance of James Cagney, whose impersonation of Mr. Cohan is uncanny\u2014his gestures, his talk, and his dancing, are done to perfection.\" John Mosher of \"The New Yorker\" called the film \"a complete delight, an extravaganza of tunes the country has liked for decades,\" although he considered it \"dubious\" as a biography of Cohan.\nReview aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reports that 91% of 32 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 7.9/10. The site's critics consensus reads: \"James Cagney deploys his musical gifts to galvanizing effect in \"Yankee Doodle Dandy\", a celebration of patriotic fervor as much as it is a biopic of George M. Cohan.\" On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 89 out of 100, based on 10 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\".\nAwards and honors.\nThe film won Academy Awards for Best Actor in a Leading Role (James Cagney), Best Music, Scoring of a Musical Picture (Ray Heindorf and Heinz Roemheld), and Best Sound Recording (Nathan Levinson). It was nominated for Best Actor in a Supporting Role (Walter Huston), Best Director, Best Film Editing for George Amy, Best Picture and Best Writing, Original Story. In 1993, \"Yankee Doodle Dandy\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nAmerican Film Institute recognition\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76653", "revid": "20468248", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76653", "title": "Naval architecture", "text": "Engineering discipline of marine vessels\nNaval architecture, or naval engineering, is an engineering discipline incorporating elements of mechanical, electrical, electronic, software and safety engineering as applied to the engineering design process, shipbuilding, maintenance, and operation of marine vessels and structures. Naval architecture involves basic and applied research, design, development, design evaluation (classification) and calculations during all stages of the life of a marine vehicle. Preliminary design of the vessel, its detailed design, construction, trials, operation and maintenance, launching and dry-docking are the main activities involved. Ship design calculations are also required for ships being modified (by means of conversion, rebuilding, modernization, or repair). Naval architecture also involves formulation of safety regulations and damage-control rules and the approval and certification of ship designs to meet statutory and non-statutory requirements.\nMain subjects.\nThe word \"vessel\" includes every description of watercraft, mainly ships and boats, but also including non-displacement craft, WIG craft and seaplanes, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water. The principal elements of naval architecture are detailed in the following sections.\nHydrostatics.\nHydrostatics concerns the conditions to which the vessel is subjected while at rest in water and to its ability to remain afloat. This involves computing buoyancy, displacement, and other hydrostatic properties such as trim (the measure of the longitudinal inclination of the vessel) and stability (the ability of a vessel to restore itself to an upright position after being inclined by wind, sea, or loading conditions).\nFlotation and stability.\nWhile atop a liquid surface a floating body has 6 degrees of freedom in its movements, these are categorized in either translation or rotation.\nLongitudinal stability for longitudinal inclinations, the stability depends upon the distance between the center of gravity and the longitudinal meta-center. In other words, the basis in which the ship maintains its center of gravity is its distance set equally apart from both the aft and forward section of the ship.\nWhile a body floats on a liquid surface it still encounters the force of gravity pushing down on it. In order to stay afloat and avoid sinking there is an opposed force acting against the body known as the hydrostatic pressures. The forces acting on the body must be of the same magnitude and same line of motion in order to maintain the body at equilibrium. This description of equilibrium is only present when a freely floating body is in still water, when other conditions are present the magnitude of which these forces shifts drastically creating the swaying motion of the body.\nThe buoyancy force is equal to the weight of the body, in other words, the mass of the body is equal to the mass of the water displaced by the body. This adds an upward force to the body by the amount of surface area times the area displaced in order to create an equilibrium between the surface of the body and the surface of the water.\nThe stability of a ship under most conditions is able to overcome any form or restriction or resistance encountered in rough seas; however, ships have undesirable roll characteristics when the balance of oscillations in roll is two times that of oscillations in heave, thus causing the ship to capsize.\nStructures.\nStructures involves selection of material of construction, structural analysis of global and local strength of the vessel, vibration of the structural components and structural responses of the vessel during motions in seaway. Depending on type of ship, the structure and design will vary in what material to use as well as how much of it. Some ships are made from glass reinforced plastics but the vast majority are steel with possibly some aluminium in the superstructure.\nThe complete structure of the ship is designed with panels shaped in a rectangular form consisting of steel plating supported on four edges. Combined in a large surface area the Grillages create the hull of the ship, deck, and bulkheads while still providing mutual support of the frames. Though the structure of the ship is sturdy enough to hold itself together the main force it has to overcome is longitudinal bending creating a strain against its hull, its structure must be designed so that the material is disposed as much forward and aft as possible.\nThe principal longitudinal elements are the deck, shell plating, inner bottom all of which are in the form of grillages, and additional longitudinal stretching to these. The dimensions of the ship are in order to create enough spacing between the stiffeners in prevention of buckling. Warships have used a longitudinal system of stiffening that many modern commercial vessels have adopted. This system was widely used in early merchant ships such as the SS Great Eastern, but later shifted to transversely framed structure another concept in ship hull design that proved more practical. This system was later implemented on modern vessels such as tankers because of its popularity and was then named the Isherwood System.\nThe arrangement of the Isherwood system consists of stiffening decks both side and bottom by longitudinal members, they are separated enough so they have the same distance between them as the frames and beams. This system works by spacing out the transverse members that support the longitudinal by about 3 or 4 meters, with the wide spacing this causes the traverse strength needed by displacing the amount of force the bulkheads provide.\nArrangements.\nArrangements involves concept design, layout and access, fire protection, allocation of spaces, ergonomics and capacity.\nConstruction.\nConstruction depends on the material used. When steel or aluminium is used this involves welding of the plates and profiles after rolling, marking, cutting and bending as per the structural design drawings or models, followed by erection and launching. Other joining techniques are used for other materials like fibre reinforced plastic and glass-reinforced plastic. The process of construction is thought-out cautiously while considering all factors like safety, strength of structure, hydrodynamics, and ship arrangement. Each factor considered presents a new option for materials to consider as well as ship orientation. When the strength of the structure is considered the acts of ship collision are considered in the way that the ships structure is altered. Therefore, the properties of materials are considered carefully as applied material on the struck ship has elastic properties, the energy absorbed by the ship being struck is then deflected in the opposite direction, so both ships go through the process of rebounding to prevent further damage.\nScience and craft.\nTraditionally, naval architecture has been more craft than science. The suitability of a vessel's shape was judged by looking at a half-model of a vessel or a prototype. Ungainly shapes or abrupt transitions were frowned on as being flawed. This included rigging, deck arrangements, and even fixtures. Subjective descriptors such as \"ungainly\", \"full\", and \"fine\" were used as a substitute for the more accurate terms used today. A vessel was, and still is described as having a \u2018fair\u2019 shape. The term \u2018fair\u2019 is meant to denote not only a smooth transition from fore to aft but also a shape that was \u2018right.\u2019 Determining what is \u2018right\u2019 in a particular situation in the absence of definitive supporting analysis encompasses the art of naval architecture to this day.\nModern low-cost digital computers and dedicated software, combined with extensive research to correlate full-scale, towing tank and computational data, have enabled naval architects to more accurately predict the performance of a marine vehicle. These tools are used for static stability (intact and damaged), dynamic stability, resistance, powering, hull development, structural analysis, green water modelling, and slamming analysis. Data are regularly shared in international conferences sponsored by RINA, Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers (SNAME) and others. Computational Fluid Dynamics is being applied to predict the response of a floating body in a random sea.\nThe naval architect.\nDue to the complexity associated with operating in a marine environment, naval architecture is a co-operative effort between groups of technically skilled individuals who are specialists in particular fields, often coordinated by a lead naval architect. This inherent complexity also means that the analytical tools available are much less evolved than those for designing aircraft, cars and even spacecraft. This is due primarily to the paucity of data on the environment the marine vehicle is required to work in and the complexity of the interaction of waves and wind on a marine structure.\nA naval architect is an engineer who is responsible for the design, classification, survey, construction, and/or repair of ships, boats, other marine vessels, and offshore structures, both commercial and military, including:\n* Merchant ships \u2013 oil tankers, gas tankers, cargo ships, bulk carriers, container ships\n* Passenger/vehicle ferries, cruise ships\n* Warships \u2013 frigates, destroyers, aircraft carriers, amphibious ships\n* Submarines and underwater vehicles\n* Icebreakers\n* High speed craft \u2013 hovercraft, multi-hull ships, hydrofoil craft\n* Workboats \u2013 barges, fishing boats, anchor handling tug supply vessels, platform supply vessels, tug boats, pilot vessels, rescue craft\n* Yachts, power boats, and other recreational watercraft\n* Offshore platforms and subsea developments\nSome of these vessels are amongst the largest (such as supertankers), most complex (such as aircraft carriers), and highly valued movable structures produced by mankind. They are typically the most efficient method of transporting the world's raw materials and products. Modern engineering on this scale is essentially a team activity conducted by specialists in their respective fields and disciplines. \nNaval architects integrate these activities. This demanding leadership role requires managerial qualities and the ability to bring together the often-conflicting demands of the various design constraints to produce a product which is fit for the purpose.\nIn addition to this leadership role, a naval architect also has a specialist function in ensuring that a safe, economic, environmentally sound and seaworthy design is produced. To undertake all these tasks, a naval architect must have an understanding of many branches of engineering and must be in the forefront of high technology areas. They must be able to effectively utilize the services provided by scientists, lawyers, accountants, and business people of many kinds.\nNaval architects typically work for shipyards, ship owners, design firms and consultancies, equipment manufacturers, Classification societies, regulatory bodies (Admiralty law), navies, and governments.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76655", "revid": "13867100", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76655", "title": "Fenian Brotherhood", "text": "Irish republican organisation\nThe Fenian Brotherhood () was an Irish republican organisation founded in the United States in 1858 by John O'Mahony and Michael Doheny. It was a precursor to Clan na Gael, a sister organisation to the Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB). Members were commonly known as \"Fenians\". O'Mahony, who was a Gaelic scholar, named his organisation after the Fianna, the legendary band of Irish warriors led by Fionn mac Cumhaill.\nBackground.\nThe Fenian Brotherhood trace their origins back to 1790s, in the rebellion, seeking an end to British rule in Ireland initially for self-government and then the establishment of an Irish Republic. The rebellion was suppressed, but the principles of the United Irishmen were to have a powerful influence on the course of Irish history.\nFollowing the collapse of the rebellion, the British Prime Minister William Pitt introduced a bill to abolish the Irish parliament and manufactured a Union between Ireland and Britain. Opposition from the Protestant oligarchy that controlled the parliament was countered by the widespread and open use of bribery. The Act of Union was passed and became law on 1 January 1801. The Catholics, who had been excluded from the Irish parliament, were promised emancipation under the Union. This promise was never kept and caused a protracted and bitter struggle for civil liberties. It was not until 1829 that the British government reluctantly conceded Catholic Emancipation. Though leading to general emancipation, this process simultaneously disenfranchised the small tenants, known as 'forty shilling freeholders', who were mainly Catholics.\nDaniel O'Connell, who had led the emancipation campaign, then attempted the same methods in his campaign to have the Act of Union with Britain repealed. Despite the use of petitions and public meetings that attracted vast popular support, the government thought the Union was more important than Irish public opinion.\nIn the early 1840s, the younger members of the repeal movement became impatient with O'Connell's over-cautious policies and began to question his intentions. Later they were what came to be known as the Young Ireland movement.\nDuring the famine, the social class comprising small farmers and laborers was almost wiped out by starvation, disease and emigration. The Great Famine of the 1840s caused the deaths of 1 million Irish people and another million emigrated to escape it, with a further million over following decades. That the people starved while livestock and grain continued to be exported, quite often under military escort, would leave a legacy of bitterness and resentment among the survivors. The waves of emigration also ensured that such feelings would not be confined to Ireland, but spread to England, the United States, Australia and every country where Irish emigrants gathered.\nShocked by the scenes of starvation and greatly influenced by the revolutions then sweeping Europe, the Young Irelanders moved from agitation to armed rebellion in 1848. The attempted rebellion failed after a small skirmish in Ballingary, County Tipperary, coupled with a few minor incidents elsewhere. The revolt's failure was much influenced by the general weakening of the Irish population after three years of famine, mixed with premature promptings to rise up early, resulting in inadequate military preparations in turn contributing to disunity among the rebellion's leaders.\nThe Government quickly rounded up many of the instigators. Those who could, fled across the seas and their followers dispersed. The last flicker of revolt in 1849, led by amongst others James Fintan Lalor, was equally unsuccessful.\nJohn Mitchel, the most committed advocate of revolution, had been arrested early in 1848 and transported to Australia on the expressly created charge of Treason-felony. He was to be joined by other leaders, such as William Smith O'Brien and Thomas Francis Meagher who had both been arrested after Ballingary escaped to France, as did three of the younger members, James Stephens, John O'Mahony and Michael Doheny.\nFounding.\nAfter the collapse of the '48 rebellion James Stephens and John O'Mahony went to the Continent to avoid arrest. In Paris, they supported themselves by teaching and translation work and planned the next stage of \"the fight to overthrow British rule in Ireland\". In 1856 O'Mahony went to America and in 1858 founded the Fenian Brotherhood. Stephens returned to Ireland and in Dublin on St. Patrick's Day 1858, following an organising tour through the length and breadth of the country, founded the Irish counterpart of the American Fenians, the Irish Republican Brotherhood.\nIn 1863 the Brotherhood adopted a constitution and rules for general government. The First National Congress was organised in Chicago in November 1863. It allowed the organisation to be \"reconstituted on the model of the\ninstitutions of the Republic, governing itself on the elective principle\". Motions were passed to elect a Head Centre, with a Central Council of five elected members in 1863. This was extended to a Council of ten members at the second congress, held at Metropolitan Hall in Cincinnati, Ohio in January 1865, also with a President to be elected by the Council. This established a more distinctive republican style of governance with a Central Council or Senate and a Chief of the Senate, as well as a Presidential role with limited powers; O'Mahony was made President. Subsequently, this created a divided camp, as the Senate had powers to out-vote O'Mahony on future decisions.\nFenian raids into Canada.\nIn the United States, O'Mahony's presidency over the Fenian Brotherhood was being increasingly challenged by William R. Roberts. Both Fenian factions raised money by the issue of bonds in the name of the \"Irish Republic\", which were bought by the faithful in the expectation of their being honoured when Ireland should be \"A Nation Once Again\". These bonds were to be redeemed \"six months after the recognition of the independence of Ireland\". Hundreds of thousands of Irish immigrants subscribed.\nLarge quantities of arms were purchased, and preparations were openly made by the Roberts faction for a coordinated series of raids into Canada, which the United States government took no major steps to prevent. Many in the US administration were not indisposed to the movement because of Britain's actions of what was construed as assisting the Confederacy during the American Civil War, such as CSS \"Alabama\" and blockade runners smuggling in weapons. Roberts' \"Secretary for War\" was General T. W. Sweeny, who was struck off the American army list from January 1866 to November 1866 to allow him to organise the raids. The purpose of these raids was to seize the transportation network of Canada, with the idea that this would force the British to exchange Ireland's freedom for possession of their Province of Canada. Before the invasion, the Fenians had received some intelligence from like-minded supporters within Canada but did not receive support from all Irish Catholics, as there those who saw the invasions as threatening the emerging Canadian sovereignty.\nIn April 1866, under the command of Bernard Doran Killian, a band of more than 700 members of the Fenian Brotherhood arrived at the Maine shore opposite Campobello Island with the intention of seizing it from the British. British warships from Halifax, Nova Scotia were quickly on the scene and the show of military force dispersed the Fenians. This action served to reinforce the idea of protection for New Brunswick by joining with the British North American colonies of Nova Scotia, Canada East, and Canada West in Confederation to form the Dominion of Canada.\nThe command of the expedition in Buffalo, New York, was entrusted by Roberts to Colonel John O'Neill, who crossed the Niagara River (the Niagara is the international border) at the head of at least 800 (O'Neill's figure; usually reported as up to 1,500 in Canadian sources) men on the night and morning of 31 May/1 June 1866, and briefly captured Fort Erie, defeating a Canadian force at Ridgeway. Many of these men, including O'Neill, were battle-hardened veterans of the American Civil War. In the end, the invasion had been broken by the US authorities' subsequent interruption of Fenian supply lines across the Niagara River and the arrests of Fenian reinforcements attempting to cross the river into Canada. It is unlikely that with such a small force they would have ever achieved their goal.\nOther Fenian attempts to invade occurred throughout the next week in the St. Lawrence Valley. As many of the weapons had in the meantime been confiscated by the US army, relatively few of these men actually became involved in the fighting. There even was a small Fenian raid on a storage building that successfully got back some weapons that had been seized by the US Army. Many were eventually returned anyway by sympathetic officers.\nTo get the Fenians out of the area, both in the St. Lawrence and Buffalo, the U.S. government purchased rail tickets for the Fenians to return to their homes if the individuals involved would promise not to invade any more countries from the United States. Many of the arms were returned later if the person claiming them could post bond that they were not going to be used to invade Canada again, although some were possibly used in the raids that followed.\nIn December 1867, O'Neill became president of the Roberts faction of the Fenian Brotherhood, which in the following year held a great convention in Philadelphia attended by over 400 properly accredited delegates, while 6,000 Fenian soldiers, armed and in uniform, paraded the streets. At this convention, a second invasion of Canada was conceived. The news of the Clerkenwell explosion was a strong incentive to a vigorous policy. At the time, Henri Le Caron, a mole for British Intelligence, held the position of \"Inspector-General of the Irish Republican Army\". Le Caron later asserted that he distributed fifteen thousand stands of arms and almost three million rounds of ammunition in the care of the many trusted men stationed between Ogdensburg, New York and St. Albans, Vermont, in preparation for the intended raid. It took place in April 1870 and proved a failure just as rapid and complete as the attempt of 1866. The Fenians under O'Neill's command crossed the Canadian frontier near Franklin, Vermont, but were dispersed by a single volley from Canadian volunteers. O'Neill himself was promptly arrested by the United States authorities acting under the orders of President Ulysses S. Grant.\nAfter resigning as president of the Fenian Brotherhood, John O'Neill unsuccessfully attempted an unsanctioned raid in 1871 and joined his remaining Fenian supporters with refugee veterans of the Red River Rebellion. The raiding party crossed the border into Manitoba at Pembina, Dakota Territory and took possession of the Hudson's Bay Company trading post on the Canada side. U.S. soldiers from the fort at Pembina, with permission of Canadian official Gilbert McMicken, crossed into Canada and arrested the Fenian raiders without resistance.\nThe Fenian threat prompted calls for Canadian confederation. Confederation had been in the works for years but was only implemented in 1867, the year following the first raids. In 1868, a Fenian sympathiser assassinated Irish-Canadian politician Thomas D'Arcy McGee in Ottawa, allegedly in response to his condemnation of the raids.\nFear of Fenian attack plagued the Lower Mainland of British Columbia during the 1880s, as the Fenian Brotherhood was active in both Washington and Oregon, but no raids ever materialized . At the inauguration of the mainline of the Canadian Pacific Railway in 1885, photos taken of the occasion show three large British warships sitting in the harbour just off the railhead and its docks. Their presence was explicitly because of the fear of Fenian invasion or terrorism, as were the large numbers of troops on the first train.\n1867 and after.\nDuring the latter part of 1866 Stephens endeavoured to raise funds in America for a fresh rising planned for the following year. He issued a bombastic proclamation in America announcing an imminent general rising in Ireland; but he was himself soon afterwards deposed by his confederates, among whom dissension had broken out.\nThe Fenian Rising proved to be a \"doomed rebellion\", poorly organised and with minimal public support. Most of the Irish-American officers who landed at Cork, in the expectation of commanding an army against England, were imprisoned; sporadic disturbances around the country were easily suppressed by the police, army and local militias.\nAfter the 1867 rising, IRB headquarters in Manchester opted to support neither of the dueling American factions, promoting instead a new organisation in America, Clan na Gael. The Fenian Brotherhood itself, however, continued to exist until voting to disband in 1880.\nIn 1881, the submarine \"Fenian Ram\", designed by John Philip Holland for use against the British, was launched by the Delamater Iron Company in New York.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76656", "revid": "32990417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76656", "title": "Workflow", "text": "Pattern of activity often with a result\nWorkflow is a generic term for orchestrated and repeatable patterns of activity, enabled by the systematic organization of resources into processes that transform materials, provide services, or process information. It can be depicted as a sequence of operations, the work of a person or group, the work of an organization of staff, or one or more simple or complex mechanisms.\nFrom a more abstract or higher-level perspective, workflow may be considered a view or representation of real work. The flow being described may refer to a document, service, or product that is being transferred from one step to another.\nWorkflows may be viewed as one fundamental building block to be combined with other parts of an organization's structure such as information technology, teams, projects and hierarchies.\nHistorical development.\nThe development of the concept of a workflow occurred above a series of loosely defined, overlapping eras.\nBeginnings in manufacturing.\nThe modern history of workflows can be traced to Frederick Taylor and Henry Gantt, although the term \"workflow\" was not in use as such during their lifetimes. One of the earliest instances of the term \"work flow\" was in a railway engineering journal from 1921.\nTaylor and Gantt launched the study of the deliberate, rational organization of work, primarily in the context of manufacturing. This gave rise to time and motion studies. Related concepts include job shops and queuing systems (Markov chains).\nThe 1948 book \"Cheaper by the Dozen\" introduced the emerging concepts to the context of family life.\nMaturation and growth.\nThe invention of the typewriter and the copier helped spread the study of the rational organization of labor from the manufacturing shop floor to the office. Filing systems and other sophisticated systems for managing physical information flows evolved. Several events likely contributed to the development of formalized information workflows. First, the field of optimization theory matured and developed mathematical optimization techniques. For example, Soviet mathematician and economist Leonid Kantorovich developed the seeds of linear programming in 1939 through efforts to solve a plywood manufacturer's production optimization issues. Second, World War II and the Apollo program drove process improvement forward with their demands for the rational organization of work.\nQuality era.\nIn the post-war era, the work of W. Edwards Deming and Joseph M. Juran led to a focus on quality, first in Japanese companies, and more globally from the 1980s: there were various movements ranging from total quality management to Six Sigma, and then more qualitative notions of business process re-engineering. This led to more efforts to improve workflows, in knowledge economy sectors as well as in manufacturing. Variable demands on workflows were recognised when the theory of critical paths and moving bottlenecks was considered.\nWorkflow management.\nBasu and Kumar note that the term \"workflow management\" has been used to refer to tasks associated with the flow of information through the value chain rather than the flow of material goods: they characterise the definition, analysis and management of information as \"workflow management\". They note that workflow can be managed within a single organisation, where distinct roles are allocated to individual resources, and also across multiple organisations or distributed locations, where attention needs to be paid to the interactions between activities which are located at the organizational or locational boundaries. The transmission of information from one organization to another is a critical issue in this inter-organizational context and raises the importance of tasks they describe as \"validation\", \"verification\" and \"data usage analysis\".\nWorkflow management systems.\nA workflow management system (WfMS) is a software system for setting up, performing, and monitoring a defined sequence of processes and tasks, with the broad goals of increasing productivity, reducing costs, becoming more agile, and improving information exchange within an organization. These systems may be process-centric or data-centric, and they may represent the workflow as graphical maps. A workflow management system may also include an extensible interface so that external software applications can be integrated and provide support for wide area workflows that provide faster response times and improved productivity.\nRelated concepts.\nThe concept of workflow is closely related to several fields in operations research and other areas that study the nature of work, either quantitatively or qualitatively, such as artificial intelligence (in particular, the sub-discipline of AI planning) and ethnography. The term \"workflow\" is more commonly used in particular industries, such as in printing or professional domains such as clinical laboratories, where it may have particular specialized meanings.\nExamples.\nThe following examples illustrate the variety of workflows seen in various contexts:\nWorkflow improvement theories.\nSeveral workflow improvement theories have been proposed and implemented in the modern workplace. These include:\nEvaluation of resources, both physical and human, is essential to evaluate hand-off points and potential to create smoother transitions between tasks.\nComponents.\nA workflow can usually be described using formal or informal flow diagramming techniques, showing directed flows between processing steps. Single processing steps or components of a workflow can basically be defined by three parameters:\nComponents can only be plugged together if the output of one previous (set of) component(s) is equal to the mandatory input requirements of the following component(s). Thus, the essential description of a component actually comprises only input and output that are described fully in terms of data types and their meaning (semantics). The algorithms' or rules' descriptions need only be included when there are several alternative ways to transform one type of input into one type of output \u2013 possibly with different accuracy, speed, etc.\nWhen the components are non-local services that are invoked remotely via a computer network, such as Web services, additional descriptors (such as QoS and availability) also must be considered.\nApplications.\nMany software systems exist to support workflows in particular domains. Such systems manage tasks such as automatic routing, partially automated processing, and integration between different functional software applications and hardware systems that contribute to the value-addition process underlying the workflow. There are also software suppliers using the technology process driven messaging service based upon three elements:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76657", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76657", "title": "Work Breakdown Structure", "text": ""}
{"id": "76659", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76659", "title": "John Adams--composer", "text": ""}
{"id": "76661", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76661", "title": "Botswana/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "76662", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76662", "title": "Botswana/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "76663", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76663", "title": "Botswana/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "76664", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76664", "title": "Botswana/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "76665", "revid": "486612", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76665", "title": "Government of Botswana", "text": "The Government of Botswana often abbreviated as GOB, is the union government created by the constitution of Botswana having the executive, parliament, and the judiciary. The Seat of the Government is located in Gaborone, Botswana. The government is led by the president.\nExecutive.\nThis section defines the executive branch including the President, Vice President, and Cabinet.\nThe President.\nThe President is the chief executive of the state. The President is elected president by members of the National Assembly. These members state on the ballot who they would support for President if elected, and after election to the National Assembly vote for whomever they indicated they would elect as President. The President has the following requirements: (a) is a citizen of Botswana by birth or descent; (b) has attained the age of 30 years; and (c) is qualified to be elected as a Member of the National Assembly. The President's term is limited up to 10 years, or however long the President holds office in the National Assembly.\nThe executive power of Botswana resides solely in the President. The President is also the commander of the armed forces. The president also has the power to pardon a person convicted of a crime.\nThe Vice President.\nThe Vice President is chosen by the President from among the members of the National Assembly. The Vice President takes over for the President when the President is unable to fulfil his duties either because of illness, death, or other reasons.The Vice President is second-in-command to the President and carries out the missions of the President.The current vice-president is Ndaba Gaolathe.\nThe Cabinet.\nThis Cabinet is composed of the President, the Vice President and no more than six ministers who are appointed by the President from the National Assembly. The Ministers in the Cabinet are responsible for advising the President with respect to the policy of the government.\nParliament.\nThis section describes both the National Assembly as well as the Ntlo ya Dikgosi, which together create the Parliament of Botswana.\nNational Assembly.\nThe Parliament consists of the President and National Assembly. The president is a voting member of the National Assembly. There are an additional 57 elected members of the National Assembly. There is also a speaker of the Assembly who is elected by the members of the Assembly, but does not necessarily have to be a member of the assembly themselves. There is also a deputy speaker elected by the Assembly.\nIn order for a person to be eligible to be a member of the Assembly they must: be a citizen of Botswana, be 18 years old, be registered to vote, and be able to speak and read in English. There are many conditions that disqualify a member from eligibility, most of these dealing with allegiance to other countries.\nBotswana is divided into the number of constituencies that they have members of parliament so that each district sends one member to the Assembly. People in Botswana are eligible to vote if they are: 18, a citizen, and have resided in Botswana for 12 consecutive months.\nNtlo ya Dikgosi.\nIn addition to a parliament, Botswana also has a Ntlo ya Dikgosi. The Ntlo ya Dikgosi acts as an advisory body to the Parliament of Botswana. This body consists of 33-35 members. In order to be eligible to be a member one must be 21 years old and a citizen. There are similar disqualifying conditions for this body as there are for the National Assembly. Members are appointed for 5-year terms. No member may participate in party politics, and many members are tribal chiefs. This body possesses no legislative power, including approval or veto power; rather they advise the Parliament on bills and measures. A power the body does have is to summon members of the government to appear before it.\nLocal government.\nLocal government is administered by nine district councils and five town councils. District commissioners have executive authority and are appointed by the central government and assisted by elected and nominated district councillors and district development committees. There has been ongoing debate about the political, social, and economic marginalization of the San (Bushmen). The government's policies for remote area dwellers continue to spark controversy and may be revised in response to domestic and donor concerns.\nJudicature.\nThis section describes the varying parts of the judiciary in Botswana including the High Court, the Court of Appeal, and the Judicial Service Commission.\nHigh Court.\nThe High Court of Botswana acts as the supreme legal source, in which the court possesses unlimited original jurisdiction to hear any cases. The court has a Chief Judge as well as a number of other judges, in which the number is determined by the Parliament. The Chief Justice is appointed by the President, as are all of the other Justices, but these can be advised to the President by the Parliament. In order to be qualified to be a judge on this court one must have either been a judge, been an attorney, been a law professor with a law degree, or been a Chief Magistrate. Appointments to this court are until the person reaches the age of 70. The only other reason a judge would leave the high court is if the Parliament decides the person is no longer able to properly perform their duties.\nThe High Court has authority to interpret the constitution. If there is disagreement on any interpretation, that disagreement is settled by the High Court.\nBotswana has had ten chief justices:\nCourt of Appeal.\nThe Court of Appeal has the right to hear any case in Botswana in which one party has appealed the decision found. This court consists of a President of the Court of Appeal, a number of other judges, and the entirety of the High Court. Like the High Court, the President is appointed by the President as are the other judges, with the advice of Parliament. In order to be qualified a person must have been either a judge, attorney, or law professor. As is with the High Court a person is appointed until the age of 70, barring Parliament does not find them incapable during their tenure.\nJudicial Service Commission.\nThe Judicial Service Commission is created to help advise the President on judicial nominations. It consists of the Chief Justice, the President of the Court of Appeals, the Attorney-General, the Chairman of the Public Service Commission, a member of the Law Society nominated by the Law Society, and a person of integrity and experience who is not a legal practitioner appointed by the President.\nPolitics of Botswana.\nPolitics of Botswana takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic republic, whereby the President of Botswana is both head of state and head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Parliament of Botswana. In part because the party system has been dominated by the Botswana Democratic Party (BDP), which never lost power since the country gained independence, until 2024, the Economist Intelligence Unit has rated Botswana as a \"flawed democracy.\"\nForeign relations.\nInternational organizations.\nACP, AfDB, C, ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICCt, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, NAM, OAU, OPCW, SACU, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCO, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO, WT.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76670", "revid": "48242331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76670", "title": "Government of Brunei", "text": "National government\nThe Government of Brunei is the union government created by the constitution of Brunei where by the Sultan of Brunei is both head of state and head of government (Prime Minister of Brunei). Executive power is exercised by the government. Brunei has a legislative council with 36 appointed members, that only has consultative tasks. Under Brunei's 1959 constitution, Hassanal Bolkiah is the head of state with full executive authority, including emergency powers since 1962. The Sultan's role is enshrined in the national philosophy known as \"Melayu Islam Beraja\" (MIB), or Malay Islamic Monarchy. The country has been under hypothetical martial law since a rebellion occurred in the early 1960s and was put down by British troops from Singapore. The Seat of the Government is located in Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei.\nMinisters and departments.\nThe Deputy Menteri Besar (Chief Minister) assists the chief executive officer, who is known as the Menteri Besar. The state secretary, the attorney general, and the state financial officer are the three senior critical officials. The state financial officer is in charge of the treasury, the attorney general is in charge of the Criminal Prosecution Department, and the state secretary oversees all administrative matters with the assistance of an assistant state secretary. The heads of the state departments oversee the other departments, and they are required to confer with the state secretary prior to carrying out any projects or proposals. This holds true for the district as well.\nEach state department has a branch in a district, and these branches report to the head of the department in charge at the department headquarters. The relevant district officers will function in this capacity in districts without such branches. The penghulus, ketua kampongs and assistant district officers themselves report to the District Officers.\nJudicial branch.\nBrunei has a dual legal system. The first is the system inherited from the British, similar to the ones found in India, Malaysia and Singapore. It is based on the English common law, but with codification of a significant part of it. The common law legal system covers most of Brunei's laws.\nThe structure of the common law courts in Brunei starts with the magistracy. There are currently less than 10 magistrates for the country, all of whom are locals. A rung above the magistracy is the intermediate courts. This was set up to be a training ground for the local. There are currently two intermediate court judges, both are locals.\nThe High Court of the Supreme Court currently consist of three judges, two of whom are locals. The Chief Justice is a High Court of Hong Kong judge.\nThere is no jury system in Brunei; a judge or magistrate sits alone to hear a case except for capital punishment cases where two High Court judges will sit.\nThe Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court consists of three Judges, all of whom are currently retired British judges. The Court of Appeal sits twice a year for about a month each time.\nAppeals to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in the United Kingdom in criminal cases are no longer available, whilst still retaining a very limited right of appeal to the J.C.P.C. in civil cases.\nThe other system of justice in Brunei is the shariah courts. It deals mainly in Muslim divorce and matters ancillary to a Muslim divorce in its civil jurisdiction and in the offences of \"khalwat\" (close proximity) and \"zina\" (adultery) amongst Muslims.\nThe shariah court structure is similar to the common law court structure except that it has no intermediate court and that the Court of Appeal is the final court of appeal.\nAll magistrates and judges in both the common law courts and the shariah courts are appointed by the Government. All local magistrates and judges were appointed from the civil service with none thus far being appointed from private practice.\nTerritorial disputes.\nThe sovereignty of the Territory of Limbang has been an ongoing issue between Brunei and Malaysia. It was reported in 2009 that a solution \"was achieved between the two governments, when Brunei dropped all claims to Limbang, thus recognising it as a Malaysian territory\". These reports, however, were dismissed by Brunei's former second minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade on 18 March 2009, who clarified that the claim on Limbang was never discussed [with Malaysia]. What was discussed between both countries was the demarcation of land boundaries on the whole. \nBrunei is one of many nations that lay claim to the disputed Spratly Islands, several small islands situated between Brunei and Labuan, Malaysia which include Kuraman Island. They are contested between Brunei and Malaysia, but are internationally recognised as part of the latter."}
{"id": "76671", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76671", "title": "Bulgaria/Tourism", "text": ""}
{"id": "76672", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76672", "title": "Bulgaria/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "76673", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76673", "title": "Bulgaria/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "76674", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76674", "title": "Bulgaria/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "76675", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76675", "title": "Bulgaria/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "76676", "revid": "12978", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76676", "title": "Edward White Benson", "text": "Archbishop of Canterbury (1829\u20131896)\nEdward White Benson (14 July 1829 \u2013 11 October 1896) was archbishop of Canterbury from 1883 until his death. Before this, he was the first Bishop of Truro, serving from 1877 to 1883, and began construction of Truro Cathedral.\nHe was previously a schoolmaster and was the first Master of Wellington College from 1859 to 1872.\nLife.\nEdward White Benson was born at Lombard Street in Highgate, Birmingham, on 14 July 1829, the eldest of eight children of Edward White Benson (26 August 1802 \u2013 7 February 1843), a chemical manufacturer, and Harriet Baker (13 June 1805 \u2013 29 May 1850). He was baptised in St Martin in the Bull Ring, Birmingham, on 31 March 1830. The family moved to Wychbold when his father became manager of the British Alkali Works at Stoke Prior, Worcestershire.\nFrom 1840, he was educated at King Edward's School, Birmingham and then Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA (8th in the Classical tripos) in 1852. At King Edward's, under James Prince Lee, Benson \"manifested a deeply religious tone of mind and was fond of sermons\".\nCambridge Ghost Society.\nThe Cambridge Association for Spiritual Inquiry, known informally as the Cambridge Ghost Society or the Ghostlie Guild, was founded by Benson and Brooke Foss Westcott in 1851 at Trinity College. Westcott worked as its secretary until 1860. The society collected and investigated reports of ghosts. Other notable members included Alfred Barry and Henry Sidgwick. It has been described as a predecessor of the Society for Psychical Research. According to the \"Notebooks of Henry James\", his source for the novella \"The Turn of the Screw\" was the Archbishop of Canterbury (i.e. Benson) at Addington Palace on 10 January 1895.\nSchoolmaster at Rugby and Wellington.\nBenson began his career as a schoolmaster at Rugby School in 1852, and was ordained deacon in 1853 and priest in 1857. In 1859 Benson was chosen by Prince Albert as the first Master of Wellington College, Berkshire, which had recently been built as the nation's memorial to the Duke of Wellington. Benson was largely responsible for establishing Wellington as a leading public school, closely modelled upon Rugby School.\nLincoln and Truro.\nFrom 1872 to 1877, he was Chancellor of Lincoln Cathedral. In 1874, he set up Lincoln Theological College.\nHe was appointed the first Bishop of Truro, where he served from 1877 to 1882. He was consecrated bishop by Archibald Campbell Tait, Archbishop of Canterbury, on St Mark's day, 25 April 1877 at St Paul's Cathedral.\nThe Diocese of Truro was established in December 1876. Construction of Truro Cathedral began in 1880 to a design by the Gothic Revival architect John Loughborough Pearson. From 24 October 1880 until 1887 a temporary wooden building on an adjacent site served as the cathedral. As archbishop, Benson consecrated the cathedral on 3 November 1887.\nHe founded Truro High School for Girls in 1880.\nArchbishop of Canterbury, 1883\u20131896.\nIn 1883 he was appointed Archbishop of Canterbury.\nFive years later Benson avoided Edward King, Bishop of Lincoln, being prosecuted before a lay tribunal under the Public Worship Regulation Act 1874 for six ritual offences by hearing the case in his own archiepiscopal court (inactive since 1699). In his judgement (often called \"the Lincoln Judgement\"), he found against the bishop on two points, with a proviso as to a third that when performing the manual acts during the prayer of consecration in the Holy Communion service, the priest must stand in a way that is visible to the people.\nBenson tried to amalgamate the two Convocations and the new houses of laity into a single assembly. In 1896 it was established that they could 'unofficially' meet together.365\nIn September of the same year, the papal bull \"Apostolicae curae\", which denied the validity of Anglican orders, was published and Benson had started a reply. He preached his last sermon at St Patrick's Cathedral, Armagh on 27 September: there is a memorial to him in the north aisle there. He was taken ill while attending Sunday service in St Deiniol's Church, Hawarden, Wales, on 11 October 1896, during a visit to the former Prime Minister, William Ewart Gladstone. His death was attributed to heart failure. Three days later his body was put on the train at Sandycroft station to be returned to London.\nHe was buried at Canterbury Cathedral, in a magnificent tomb located at the western end of the nave. The tomb is emblazoned with the epitaph Benson had chosen: \"Miserere mei Deus Per crucem et passionem tuam libera me Christe\" (\"Have mercy on me O Christ our God, Through Thy Cross and Passion, deliver thou me\").\nHis work concerning Saint Cyprian, \"Cyprian: his life, his times, his work\", was published posthumously, in the year after his death.\nLegacy.\nBenson is best remembered for devising the Festival of Nine Lessons and Carols, an order first used in Truro Cathedral on Christmas Eve, 1880. Considerably revised by Eric Milner-White for King's College, Cambridge, this service is now broadcast every Christmas around the world.\nBenson was the founder of the Church of England Purity Society, an organisation which later merged with the White Cross Army. Alfred Ryder served as a trustee of the organisation.\nBenson told Henry James a simple, rather inexpert story he had heard about the ghosts of evil servants who tried to lure young children to their deaths. James recorded the idea in his \"Notebooks\" and eventually used it as the starting-point for his classic ghost story, \"The Turn of the Screw\".\nThe hymn \"God Is Working His Purpose Out\" was written by Arthur C. Ainger as a tribute to Benson as both were Masters at Eton and Rugby respectively.\nIn 1914, a boarding house at Wellington College was named in his honour. Benson House carries the emblem of a blue Tudor Rose, and is situated in its own corner of the college grounds.\nPersonal life.\nBenson married his second cousin Mary (Minnie) Sidgwick, the sister of philosopher Henry, when she was 18, having proposed to her when she was 12 and he was 24. The couple had six children. Benson also supervised the education of his younger sister Ada Benson who was left an orphan in 1852.\nTheir fifth child was the novelist Edward Frederic Benson, best remembered for his \"Mapp and Lucia\" novels. Another son was Arthur Christopher Benson, the author of the lyrics to Elgar's \"Land of Hope and Glory\" and master of Magdalene College, Cambridge. Their sixth and youngest child, Robert Hugh Benson, became a priest in the Church of England before converting to Catholicism and writing many popular novels. Their daughter, Margaret Benson, was an artist, author and Egyptologist. None of the children married; and some appeared to suffer from mental illnesses, possibly bipolar disorder.\nAfter the archbishop's death, his widow set up household with Lucy Tait, daughter of the previous archbishop of Canterbury, Archibald Campbell Tait. A biography of Mary Benson, using her numerous letters, was published in 2011. It characterised her husband as living \"a life of relentless success\".\nEdward Benson's aunt, his father's maternal half-sister, was the botanical illustrator Mary Ann Jackson.\nAncestry.\nThe Benson family was of Scandinavian origin with the name of Bjornsen. The Bensons \"emerge into history\" as an English family in 1348 when John Benson held a \"toft\" from the Abbey at Swinton-by-Masham in Yorkshire.1\u20132\nArthur Christopher Benson, the archbishop's son, wrote a genealogy of his family. He found that \"Old\" Christopher Benson (born 1703) was the \"real founder of the fortunes\" of the Benson family having acquired a \"good deal\" of land. He also \"established a large business.\"7\u20138\nArchbishop Edward White Benson's grandfather was Captain White Benson, of the 6th Regiment of Foot. The archbishop's seal and the Captain's coat of arms show their branch of the Benson family arms were blazoned: Argent, a quatrefoil between two trefoils slipped in bend sable, between four bendlets gules.\nThe archbishop's father was Edward White Benson (born in York in 1802, died at Birmingham Heath in 1843). He was a Fellow of the Royal Botanical Society of Edinburgh and the author of books on education and religion. He was also an inventor whose inventions made \"considerable fortunes\" for others, but not for him.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76678", "revid": "95756", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76678", "title": "Maoris", "text": ""}
{"id": "76679", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76679", "title": "Burkina Faso/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "76680", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76680", "title": "Burkina Faso/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "76681", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76681", "title": "Burkina Faso/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "76682", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76682", "title": "Burkina Faso/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "76683", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76683", "title": "Myanmar/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "76684", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76684", "title": "Myanmar/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "76685", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76685", "title": "Myanmar/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "76686", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76686", "title": "Myanmar/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "76687", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76687", "title": "Myanmar/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "76688", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76688", "title": "Burundi/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "76689", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76689", "title": "Burundi/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "76690", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76690", "title": "Burundi/Communications", "text": ""}
