{"id": "75804", "revid": "38758555", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75804", "title": "Jamestown, Virginia", "text": "Town and fort established in the Virginia Colony\nThe Jamestown settlement in the Colony of Virginia was the first permanent English settlement in the Americas. It was located on the northeast bank of the James River, about southwest of present-day Williamsburg. It was established by the London Company as \"James Fort\" on May 4, 1607 O.S. (May 14, 1607 N.S.), and considered permanent, after a brief abandonment in 1610. It followed failed attempts, including the Roanoke Colony, established in 1585. Despite the dispatch of more supplies, only 60 of the original 214 settlers survived the 1609\u20131610 Starving Time. In mid-1610, the survivors abandoned Jamestown, though they returned after meeting a resupply convoy in the James River.\nJamestown served as the colonial capital from 1616 until 1699. In August 1619, the first recorded slaves from Africa to British North America arrived at present-day Old Point Comfort, near the Jamestown colony, on a British privateer ship flying a Dutch flag. The approximately 20 Africans from present-day Angola had been removed by the British crew from a Portuguese slave ship. They most likely worked in the tobacco fields, under a system of race-based indentured servitude. The modern conception of slavery in the British colonies was formalized in 1640, and fully entrenched in Virginia by 1660.\nIn 1676, Jamestown was deliberately burned during Bacon's Rebellion, though it was rebuilt. In 1699, the colonial capital was moved to present-day Williamsburg, Virginia. In the 18th century, Jamestown ceased to exist as a settlement and remains as an archaeological site, Jamestown Rediscovery, which houses museums and historical sites, including the Jamestown Settlement and the American Revolution Museum in Yorktown. Jamestown is one of three locations composing the Historic Triangle of Colonial Virginia, along with Williamsburg and Yorktown. Historic Jamestowne is the archaeological site on Jamestown Island and is a cooperative effort by Jamestown National Historic Site and Preservation Virginia. Jamestown Settlement, a living history interpretive site, is operated by the Jamestown Yorktown Foundation, a state agency of the Commonwealth of Virginia.\nSettlement.\nSpain, Portugal, and France moved quickly to establish a presence in the New World, while other European countries moved more slowly. The English did not attempt to found colonies until many decades after the explorations of John Cabot, and early efforts were failures\u2014most notably the Roanoke Colony, which vanished about 1590.\n1607\u20131609: Arrival and beginning.\nIn 1606, English colonists set sail with a charter from the London Company to establish a colony in the New World. The fleet consisted of the ships \"Susan Constant\", \"Discovery\", and \"Godspeed\", all under the leadership of Captain Christopher Newport. They made a particularly long voyage of four months, including a stop in the Canary Islands, in Spain, and subsequently Puerto Rico, and finally departed for the American mainland on April 10, 1607.\nThe expedition made landfall on April 26, 1607, at a place which they named Cape Henry. Under orders to select a more secure location, they set about exploring what is now Hampton Roads and an outlet to the Chesapeake Bay which they named the James River in honor of King James I of England. Captain Edward Maria Wingfield was elected president of the governing council on April 25, 1607. On May 14, he selected a piece of land on a large peninsula some inland from the Atlantic Ocean as a prime location for a fortified settlement. The river channel was a defensible strategic point due to a curve in the river, and it was close to the land, making it navigable and offering enough land for piers or wharves to be built in the future. Perhaps the most favorable fact about the location was that it was uninhabited because the leaders of the nearby indigenous nations considered the site too poor and remote for agriculture. The island was swampy and isolated, and it offered limited space, was plagued by mosquitoes, and afforded only brackish tidal river water unsuitable for drinking.\nThe Jamestown settlers arrived in Virginia during a severe drought, according to a research study conducted by the Jamestown Archaeological Assessment (JAA) team in the 1990s. The JAA analyzed information from a study conducted in 1985 by David Stahle and others, who obtained drawings of 800-year-old bald cypress trees along the Nottoway and Blackwater rivers. The lifespan of these trees is up to 1,000 years, and their rings offer a good indication of an area's annual amount of rainfall. The borings revealed that the worst drought in 700 years occurred between 1606 and 1612. This severe drought affected the Jamestown colonists and Powhatan tribe's ability to produce food and obtain a safe supply of water.\nThe settlers also arrived too late in the year to get crops planted. Many in the group were either gentlemen or their manservants, both equally unaccustomed to the hard labor demanded by the harsh task of carving out a viable colony. One of these was Robert Hunt, a former vicar of Reculver, England, who celebrated the first known Anglican Eucharist in the territory of the future United States on June 21, 1607.\nTwo-thirds of the settlers died before ships arrived in 1608 with supplies and German and Polish craftsmen, who helped to establish the first manufactories in the colony. As a result, glassware became the foremost American products to be exported to Europe at the time. Clapboard had already been sent back to England beginning with the first returning ship.\nThe delivery of supplies in 1608 on the first and second supply missions of Captain Newport had also added to the number of hungry settlers. It seemed certain at that time that the colony at Jamestown would meet the same fate as earlier English attempts to settle in North America, specifically the Roanoke Colony (Lost Colony) and the Popham Colony, unless there was a major relief effort. The Germans who arrived with the second supply and a few others defected to the Powhatans, with weapons and equipment. The Germans even planned to join a rumored Spanish attack on the colony and urged the Powhatans to join it. The Spanish were driven off by the timely arrival in July 1609 of Captain Samuel Argall in \"Mary and John\", a larger ship than the Spanish reconnaissance ship \"La Asunci\u00f3n de Cristo\". Argall's voyage also prevented the Spanish from gaining knowledge of the weakness of the colony. Don Pedro de Z\u00fa\u00f1iga, the Spanish ambassador to England, was desperately seeking this information (in addition to spies) in order to get Philip III of Spain to authorize an attack on the colony.\nThe investors of the Virginia Company of London expected to reap rewards from their speculative investments. With the second supply, they expressed their frustrations and made demands upon the leaders of Jamestown in written form. They specifically demanded that the colonists send commodities sufficient to pay the cost of the voyage, a lump of gold, assurance that they had found the South Sea, and one member of the lost Roanoke Colony. It fell to the third president of the council, Captain John Smith, to deliver a bold and much-needed wake-up call in response to the investors in London, demanding practical laborers and craftsmen who could help make the colony more self-sufficient.\n1609\u20131610: Starving Time and third supply.\nAfter Smith was forced to return to England because of an explosion which gave him deep burn wounds during a trading expedition, the colony was led by George Percy, who proved incompetent in negotiating with the native tribes. There are indications that those in London comprehended and embraced Smith's message. The third supply mission of 1609 was by far the largest and best equipped. They also had a new purpose-built flagship, \"Sea Venture\", constructed and placed in the most experienced of hands, Christopher Newport.\nOn June 2, 1609, \"Sea Venture\" set sail from Plymouth, England, as the flagship of a seven-ship fleet (towing two additional pinnaces) destined for Jamestown as part of the third supply mission, carrying 214 settlers. On July 24, the fleet ran into a strong storm, likely a hurricane, and the ships were separated. Although some of the ships did make it to Jamestown, the leaders and most of the supplies had been aboard \"Sea Venture\", which fought the storm for three days before the Admiral of the company, Sir George Somers, deliberately drove it onto the reefs of Bermuda to prevent its foundering. This allowed all aboard to be landed safely. The survivors (including Lieutenant-General Sir Thomas Gates, Captain Christopher Newport, Silvester Jourdain, Stephen Hopkins\u2014later of \"Mayflower\"\u2014and secretary William Strachey) were stranded on Bermuda for approximately nine months. During that time, they built two new ships, the pinnaces \"Deliverance\" and \"Patience\". The original plan was to build only one vessel, \"Deliverance\", but it soon became evident that it would not be large enough to carry the settlers and all of the food (salted pork) that was being sourced on the islands.\nWhile the third supply was stranded in Bermuda, the colony at Jamestown was in even worse shape. The settlers faced rampant starvation for want of additional provisions. During this time, lack of food drove people to eat snakes and even boil the leather from shoes for sustenance. Only 60 of the original 214 settlers at Jamestown survived. There is historical and scientific evidence that the settlers at Jamestown had turned to cannibalism during the starving time.\nThe ships from Bermuda arrived in Jamestown on May 23, 1610. Many of the surviving colonists were near death, and Jamestown was judged to be unviable. Everyone was boarded onto \"Deliverance\" and \"Patience\", which set sail for England. However, on June 10, 1610, the timely arrival of another relief fleet, bearing Governor Thomas West, 3rd Baron De La Warr (who would eventually give his name to the colony of Delaware), which met the two ships as they descended the James River, granted Jamestown a reprieve. The colonists called this \"The Day of Providence\". The fleet brought supplies and additional settlers. All the settlers returned to the colony, though there was still a critical shortage of food.\nRelations between the colonists and the Powhatans quickly deteriorated after De La Warr's arrival, eventually leading to conflict. The Anglo-Powhatan War lasted until Samuel Argall captured Wahunsenacawh's daughter Matoaka, better known by her nickname Pocahontas, after which the chief accepted a treaty of peace.\n1610\u20131624: Rising fortunes.\nDue to the aristocratic backgrounds of many of the colonists, a historic drought and the communal nature of their workload, progress through the first few years was inconsistent. By 1613, six years after Jamestown's founding, the organizers and shareholders of the Virginia Company were desperate to increase the efficiency and profitability of the struggling colony. Without stockholder consent the Governor, Sir Thomas Dale, assigned plots to its \"ancient planters\" and smaller plots to the settlement's later arrivals. Measurable economic progress was made, and the settlers began expanding their planting to land belonging to local native tribes. That this turnaround coincided with the end of a drought that had begun the year before the English settlers' arrival probably indicates multiple factors were involved besides the colonists' ineptitude.\nAmong the colonists who survived the Starving Time was John Rolfe, who carried with him a cache of untested tobacco seeds from Bermuda, which had grown wild there after being planted by shipwrecked Spaniards years before. In 1614, Rolfe began to successfully harvest tobacco. Prosperous and wealthy, he married Pocahontas, bringing several years of peace between the English and natives. However, at the end of a public relations trip to England, Pocahontas became sick and died on March 21, 1617. The following year, her father also died. Powhatan's brother, a fierce warrior named Opechancanough, became head of the Powhatan Confederacy. As the English continued to appropriate more land for tobacco farming, relations with the natives worsened.\nBecause of the high cost of the trans-Atlantic voyage at this time, many English settlers came to Jamestown as indentured servants: in exchange for the passage, room, board, and the promise of land or money, these immigrants would agree to work for three to seven years. Immigrants from continental Europe, mainly Germans, were usually redemptioners\u2014they purchased some portion of their voyage on credit and, upon arrival, borrowed or entered into a work contract to pay the remainder of their voyage costs.\nIn 1619, the first representative assembly in America, the General Assembly, convened in the Jamestown Church, \"to establish one equal and uniform government over all Virginia\" which would provide \"just laws for the happy guiding and governing of the people there inhabiting.\" Initially, only men of English origin were permitted to vote. On June 30, 1619, in what was the first recorded strike in Colonial America, the Polish artisans protested and refused to work if not allowed to vote. On July 21, 1619, the court granted the Poles equal voting rights. Afterwards, the labor strike was ended, and the artisans resumed their work. Individual land ownership was also instituted, and the colony was divided into four large \"boroughs\" or \"incorporations\" called \"citties\" by the colonists. Jamestown was located in James Cittie.\nOf the first documented African slaves to arrive in English North America, on the frigate \"White Lion\" in August 1619, were an African man and woman, later named Antoney and Isabella. Listed in the 1624 census in Virginia, they became the first African family recorded in Jamestown. Their baby, named William Tucker, became the first documented African child baptized in British North America. Another of the early enslaved Africans to be purchased at the settlement was Angela, who worked for Captain William Peirce.\nAfter several years of strained coexistence, Chief Opechancanough and his Powhatan Confederacy attempted to eliminate the English colony once and for all. On the morning of March 22, 1622, they attacked outlying plantations and communities up and down the James River in what became known as the Indian massacre of 1622. More than 300 settlers were killed in the attack, about a third of the colony's English-speaking population. Dale's development at Henricus, which was to feature a college to educate the natives, and Wolstenholme Towne at Martin's Hundred, were both essentially wiped out. Jamestown was spared only through a timely warning by a Virginia Indian employee. There was not enough time to spread the word to the outposts.\nOf the 6,000 people who came to the settlement between 1608 and 1624, only 3,400 survived.\n1624\u20131699: Later years.\nIn 1624, King James revoked the Virginia Company's charter, and Virginia became a royal colony. Despite the setbacks, the colony continued to grow. Ten years later, in 1634, by order of King Charles I, the colony was divided into the original eight shires of Virginia, in a fashion similar to that practiced in England. Jamestown was located in James City Shire, soon renamed the \"County of James City\", better known in modern times as James City County, Virginia, the nation's oldest county.\nAnother large-scale \"Indian attack\" occurred in 1644. In 1646 Opechancanough was captured, and while he was in custody an English guard shot him in the back\u2014against orders\u2014and killed him. Subsequently, the Powhatan Confederacy began to decline. Opechancanough's successor signed the first peace treaties between the Powhatan Indians and the English. The treaties required the Powhatan to pay yearly tribute payment to the English and confined them to reservations.\nA generation later, during Bacon's Rebellion in 1676, Jamestown was burned and eventually rebuilt. During its recovery, the Virginia legislature met first at Governor William Berkeley's nearby Green Spring Plantation, and later at Middle Plantation, which had been started in 1632 as a fortified community inland on the Virginia Peninsula, about distant. When the statehouse burned again in 1698, this time accidentally, the legislature again temporarily relocated to Middle Plantation and was able to meet in the new facilities of the College of William &amp; Mary, which had been established after receiving a royal charter in 1693. Rather than rebuilding at Jamestown again, the capital of the colony was moved permanently to Middle Plantation in 1699. The town was renamed Williamsburg, to honor the reigning monarch, King William III. A capitol building and \"Governor's Palace\" were erected there in the following years.\nAftermath and preservation.\nAfter the move of the capital to Williamsburg, Jamestown declined. Those who lived in the general area attended services at Jamestown's church until the 1750s, when it was abandoned. By the mid-18th century, the land was heavily cultivated, primarily by the Travis and Ambler families. In 1831, David Bullock purchased Jamestown from the Travis and Ambler families.\nAmerican Civil War.\nDuring the American Civil War, in 1861 Confederate William Allen, who owned the Jamestown Island, occupied Jamestown with troops he raised at his own expense with the intention of blockading the James River and Richmond from the Union Navy. He was joined by Lieutenant Catesby ap Roger Jones, who directed the building of batteries and conducted ordnance and armor tests for the first Confederate ironclad warship, CSS \"Virginia\", which was under construction at the Gosport Naval Shipyard in Portsmouth in late 1861 and early 1862. Jamestown had a peak force of 1,200 men.\nDuring the Peninsula campaign, which began later that spring, Union forces under General George B. McClellan moved up the peninsula from Fort Monroe in an attempt to capture the Confederate capital of Richmond. The Union forces captured Yorktown in April 1862, and the Battle of Williamsburg was fought the following month. With these developments, Jamestown and the lower James River were abandoned by the Confederates. Some of the forces from Jamestown and the crew of \"Virginia\" relocated to Drewry's Bluff, a fortified and strategic position high above the river about below Richmond. There they successfully blocked the Union Navy from reaching the Confederate capital.\nOnce in Federal hands, Jamestown became a meeting place for runaway slaves, who burned the Ambler house, an 18th-century plantation house, which along with the old church was one of the few remaining signs of old Jamestown. When Allen sent men to assess the damage in late 1862, they were killed by the former slaves. Following the Confederate surrender at Appomattox Courthouse, the oath of allegiance was administered to former Confederate soldiers at Jamestown.\nPreservation and early archaeology.\nIn the years after the Civil War, Jamestown became quiet and peaceful once again. In 1892, Jamestown was purchased by Edward Barney. The following year, Barney donated 22\u00bd acres of land, including the ruined church tower, to the Association for the Preservation of Virginia Antiquities, now known as Preservation Virginia. By this time, erosion from the river had eaten away the island's western shore. Visitors began to conclude that the site of James Fort lay completely underwater. With federal assistance, a sea wall was constructed in 1900 to protect the area from further erosion. The archaeological remains of the original 1607 fort, which had been protected by the sea wall, were not discovered until 1996.\nIn 1932, George Craghead Gregory of Richmond was credited with discovering the foundation of the first brick statehouse (capitol) building, circa 1646, at Jamestown on the land owned by Preservation Virginia. Around 1936, Gregory, who was active with the Virginia Historical Society, founded the Jamestowne Society for descendants of stockholders in the Virginia Company of London and the descendants of those who owned land or who had domiciles in Jamestown or on Jamestown Island prior to 1700.\nColonial National Monument was authorized and established by the U.S. Congress in 1930. In 1934, the National Park Service obtained the remaining portion of Jamestown Island which had been under private ownership by the Vermillion family. The National Park Service partnered with Preservation Virginia to preserve the area and present it to visitors in an educational manner. On June 5, 1936, the national monument was re-designated a national historical park and became known as Colonial National Historical Park.\nBeginning in 1936, J.C. Harrington worked on the NPS's excavations at Jamestown. In 1954, John L. Cotter took charge of field projects at Jamestown, conducted with the site's 350th anniversary (1957) in mind. Cotter worked with Edward B. Jelks and Harrington to survey the area's colonial sites. In 1957 Cotter and J. Paul Hudson co-authored http://. Cotter contributed, along with Jelks, Georg Neumann, and Johnny Hack, to the 1958 report \"Archaeological Excavations at Jamestown\".\nIn the present time, as part of the Colonial National Historical Park, the Jamestown Island area is home to two heritage tourism sites related to the original fort and town. Nearby, the Jamestown-Scotland Ferry service provides a link across the navigable portion of the James River for vehicles and affords passengers a view of Jamestown Island from the river.\nHistoric Jamestowne.\nIn 1996, Historic Jamestowne gained renewed importance when the Jamestown Rediscovery project began excavations in search of the original James Fort site, originally in preparation for the quadricentennial of Jamestown's founding. The primary goal of the archaeological campaign was to locate archaeological remains of \"the first years of settlement at Jamestown, especially of the earliest fortified town; [and the] subsequent growth and development of the town\".\nVisitors to Historic Jamestowne can view the site of the original 1607 James Fort, the 17th-century church tower and the site of the 17th-century town, as well as tour an archaeological museum called the Archaearium and view many of the close to two million artifacts found by Jamestown Rediscovery. They also may participate in living history ranger tours and archaeological tours given by the Jamestown Rediscovery staff. Visitors can also often observe archaeologists from the Jamestown Rediscovery Project at work, as archaeological work at the site continues. As of 2014[ [update]], the archaeological work and studies are ongoing. In addition to their newsletter and website, new discoveries are frequently reported in the local newspaper, the \"Virginia Gazette\" based in nearby Williamsburg, and by other news media, often worldwide.\nJamestown Settlement.\nJamestown Settlement is a living-history park and museum located from the original location of the colony and adjacent to Jamestown Island. Initially created for the celebration of the 350th anniversary in 1957, Jamestown Settlement is operated by the Jamestown-Yorktown Foundation, and largely sponsored by the Commonwealth of Virginia. The museum complex features a reconstruction of a Powhatan village, the James Fort as it was c.\u20091610\u20131614, and seagoing replicas of the three ships that brought the first settlers, \"Susan Constant\", \"Godspeed\", \"Discovery\".\nCommemorations.\nWith the national independence of the United States established by the end of the 18th century, Jamestown came to be looked at as a starting point. Its founding in 1607 has been regularly commemorated, with the most notable events being held every fifty years.\n200th anniversary.\nThe bicentennial of Jamestown on May 13\u201314, 1807, was called the Grand National Jubilee. Over 3,000 people attended the event, many arriving on vessels which anchored in the river off the island. May 13 was the opening day of the festival, which began with a procession which marched to the graveyard of the old church, where the attending bishop delivered the prayer. The procession then moved to the Travis mansion, where the celebrants dined and danced in the mansion that evening. Also during the festivities, students of the College of William &amp; Mary gave orations. An old barn on the island was used as a temporary theater, where a company of players from Norfolk performed. Attending were many dignitaries, politicians, and historians. The celebration concluded on May 14 with a dinner and toast at the Raleigh Tavern in Williamsburg.\n250th anniversary (1857).\nIn 1857, the Jamestown society organized a celebration marking the 250th anniversary of Jamestown's founding. According to the Richmond \"Enquirer\", the site for the celebration was on on the spot where some of the colonists' houses were originally built. However, it is also speculated that the celebration was moved further east on the island closer to the Travis grave site, in order to avoid damaging Major William Allen's corn fields.\nThe attendance was estimated at between 6,000 and 8,000 people. Sixteen large steam ships anchored offshore in the James River and were gaily decorated with streamers. Former US President John Tyler of nearby Sherwood Forest Plantation gave a 2\u00bd hour speech, and there were military displays, a grand ball and fireworks.\n300th anniversary (1907): Jamestown Exposition.\nThe 100th anniversary of the Surrender at Yorktown in 1781 had generated a new interest in the historical significance of the colonial sites of the Peninsula. Williamsburg, a sleepy but populated town of shops and homes, was still celebrating Civil War events. However, as the new century dawned, thoughts turned to the upcoming 300th anniversary of the founding of Jamestown. The Association for the Preservation of Virginia Antiquities (now known as Preservation Virginia) started the movement in 1900 by calling for a celebration honoring the establishment of the first permanent English colony in the New World at Jamestown to be held on the 300th anniversary in 1907.\nAs a celebration was planned, virtually no one thought that the actual isolated and long-abandoned original site of Jamestown would be suitable for a major event because Jamestown Island had no facilities for large crowds. The original fort housing the Jamestown settlers was believed to have been long ago swallowed by the James River. The general area in James City County near Jamestown was also considered unsuitable, as it was not very accessible in the day of rail travel before automobiles were common.\nAs the tricentennial of the 1607 Founding of the Jamestown neared, around 1904, despite an assumption in some quarters that Richmond would be a logical location, leaders in Norfolk began a campaign to have a celebration held there. The decision was made to locate the international exposition on a mile-long frontage at Sewell's Point near the mouth of Hampton Roads. This was about downstream from Jamestown in a rural section of Norfolk County. It was a site which could become accessible by both long-distance passenger railroads and local streetcar service, with considerable frontage on the harbor of Hampton Roads. This latter feature proved ideal for the naval delegations which came from points all around the world.\nThe Jamestown Exposition of 1907 was one of the many world's fairs and expositions that were popular in the early part of the 20th century. Held from April 26, 1907, to December 1, 1907, attendees included US President Theodore Roosevelt, Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany, the Prince of Sweden, Mark Twain, Henry H. Rogers, and dozens of other dignitaries and famous persons. A major naval review featuring the United States' Great White Fleet was a key feature. U.S. Military officials and leaders were impressed by the location, and the Exposition site later formed the first portion of the large U.S. Naval Station Norfolk in 1918 during World War I.\n350th anniversary (1957): Jamestown Festival.\nWith America's increased access to automobiles, and with improved roads and transportation, it was feasible for the 350th anniversary celebration to be held at Jamestown itself in 1957. Although erosion had cut off the land bridge between Jamestown Island and the mainland, the isthmus was restored and new access provided by the completion of the National Park Service's Colonial Parkway which led to Williamsburg and Yorktown, the other two portions of Colonial Virginia's Historic Triangle. There were also improvements of state highways. The north landing for the popular Jamestown Ferry and a portion of State Route 31 were relocated.\nMajor projects were developed by non-profit, state and federal agencies. Jamestown Festival Park was established by the Commonwealth of Virginia adjacent to the entrance to Jamestown Island. Full-sized replicas of the three ships that brought the colonists, \"Susan Constant\", \"Godspeed\", and \"Discovery\" were constructed at a shipyard in Portsmouth, Virginia and placed on display at a new dock at Jamestown, where the largest, \"Susan Constant\", could be boarded by visitors. On Jamestown Island, the reconstructed Jamestown Glasshouse, the Memorial Cross and the visitors center were completed and dedicated. A loop road was built around the island.\nSpecial events included army and navy reviews, air force fly-overs, ship and aircraft christenings and even an outdoor drama at Cape Henry, site of the first landing of the settlers. This celebration continued from April 1 to November 30 with over a million participants, including dignitaries and politicians such as the British ambassador and U.S. vice president Richard Nixon. The highlight for many of the nearly 25,000 at the Festival Park on October 16, 1957, was the visit and speech of Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom and her consort, Prince Philip. Queen Elizabeth II loaned a copy of Magna Carta for the exhibition. It was her first visit to the United States since ascending the throne.\nThe 1957 Jamestown Festival was so successful that tourists still kept coming long after the official event was completed. Jamestown became a permanent attraction of the Historic Triangle, and has been visited by families, school groups, tours, and thousands of other people continuously ever since.\n400th anniversary: Jamestown 2007.\nEarly in the 21st century, new accommodations, transportation facilities and attractions were planned in preparation for the quadricentennial of the founding of Jamestown. Numerous events were promoted under the banner of America's 400th Anniversary and promoted by the Jamestown 2007 Commission. The commemoration included 18 months of statewide, national and international festivities and events, which began in April 2006 with a tour of the new replica \"Godspeed\".\nIn January 2007, the Virginia General Assembly held a session at Jamestown. On May 4, 2007, Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom and Prince Philip attended a ceremony commemorating the 400th anniversary of the settlement's arrivals, reprising the honor they paid in 1957.\nIn addition to the Virginia State Quarter, Jamestown was also the subject of two United States commemorative coins celebrating the 400th anniversary of its settlement. A silver dollar and a gold five dollar coin were issued in 2007.\n2019 commemoration.\nIn 2019 Jamestown, in cooperation with Williamsburg, held a commemoration that marked the 400th anniversary of three landmark events in American history: the first meeting of the General Assembly, the arrival of the first Africans to English North America, and the first Thanksgiving.\nReferences.\nInformational notes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttributions\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "75805", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75805", "title": "Kilogram per cubic meter", "text": ""}
{"id": "75806", "revid": "47965501", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75806", "title": "List of Danes", "text": "This is a list of notable Danish people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75807", "revid": "15484855", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75807", "title": "Contradiction", "text": ""}
{"id": "75808", "revid": "45599036", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75808", "title": "Krypton (comics)", "text": "Fictional planet, native world of Superman\nKrypton is a fictional planet appearing in American comic books published by DC Comics, most commonly appearing or mentioned in stories starring the superhero Superman as the world from which he came. The planet was created by Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster, and was named after the chemical element krypton. It was first mentioned in \"Action Comics\" #1 (June 1938) and made its first appearance in \"Superman\" #1 (June 1939). Krypton is destroyed immediately after Superman, as the baby Kal-El, is sent from the planet in a spacecraft by his parents, although the exact details of its destruction have varied over publication history.\nThe planet is portrayed as having been far more technologically advanced than Earth, and having orbited a red sun. Kryptonians were the dominant species on Krypton, and its inhabitants included Kara Zor-El, Krypto, Beppo, Kara Zor-L (in her case, an alternate-universe version designated \"Krypton-Two\"), and the supervillain General Zod.\nKrypton appears in several television series such as \"Adventures of Superman\", ', ', \"Smallville\", \"Supergirl\", and \"Krypton\". It also appears in the films \"Superman\" (1978) and \"Man of Steel\" (2013).\nOverview.\nKrypton is usually portrayed in comics as the home of a fantastically advanced civilization, which is destroyed when the planet explodes. As originally depicted, all the civilizations and races of Krypton were killed in the explosion, with one exception: the baby Kal-El who was placed in an escape rocket by his father, Jor-El, and sent to the planet Earth, where he grew up to become Superman.\nIn some versions of the story, additional survivors were later discovered, such as Supergirl, her parents (kept alive in the \"Survival Zone\", a similar parallel \"dimension\" to the Phantom Zone), the criminal inhabitants of the Phantom Zone, Dev-Em, the residents of the bottled city of Kandor, the real parents of both Superman and Supergirl, and their pets Krypto the Superdog, and Beppo the Super-Monkey. Kandor, the first capital of Krypton, is miniaturized by Brainiac, but is recovered by Superman and housed in the Fortress of Solitude for safekeeping. Soon afterward, Kryptonopolis becomes the second capital of Krypton.\nFrom the late 1980s through the early 2000s, the number of survivors was reduced to Superman himself in the comic book stories (the Eradicator was added in 1989 as a non-sentient device, and shown to be self-aware in 1991), but more recent accounts have restored Supergirl, Krypto, and Kandor and introduced another newly discovered survivor, Karsta Wor-Ul.\nKryptonian civilization's reported level of technological advancement has also varied. Some works, such as Kevin J. Anderson's novel \"The Last Days of Krypton\", describe it as a few centuries ahead of Earth, while others, such as the \"Superman\" film series and \"Man of Steel\", describe it as thousands or even hundreds of thousands of years more advanced.\nVersions of Krypton.\nKrypton in the Golden Age of Comic Books.\nHistory.\nIn its first appearance, Krypton was only depicted at the moment of its destruction. Beginning in the \"Superman\" comic strip, Krypton was shown to have been a planet similar to Earth, only older by eons and possessed of all the progress that implied. It is suggested that Krypton exploded due mainly to old age and the massive use of electricity Kryptonians used for their technology.\nThe debut of the \"Superman\" newspaper comic strip in 1939 delved into further details about Krypton, introducing the idea that all Kryptonians possessed a level of heightened physical abilities, including super-strength and super-speed. In the early comics' version of Krypton, Superman's parents were named Jor-L and Lora, though their names were changed to the more familiar Jor-El and Lara by the end of the 1940s.\nThe Golden Age Krypton would be revised into another form almost as soon as it was defined, and very few stories were initially written about it. After the introduction of DC's multiverse in the 1960s, this version of Krypton was declared to be the Krypton of the Earth-Two universe; the native dimension of DC's Golden Age characters and its Superman.\nAfter the emergence of Earth-Two as a differentiated alternate universe within the DC Multiverse, Power Girl (Kara Zor-El) was introduced as Krypton-Two's alternate Supergirl in 1976. Kal-El and Kara Zor-El were the only known survivors of Krypton-Two, unlike the Silver Age analogue. Earth-Two's universe lacked its own Brainiac, so its Kandor was never abducted from Krypton Two before its destruction, nor did Kal-El have his own version of Krypton as an infant and toddler on this world.\nIn the Golden Age, Superman was initially unaware of his true origins; in \"Superman\" #61, Superman discovered the existence of Krypton for the first time and learned of his Kryptonian heritage. He later encountered other survivors prior to Kara's arrival in the form of three criminals, U-Ban, Kizo, and Mala, who were exiled by Superman's father before Krypton's destruction.\nKrypton in transition.\nOver the course of the 1940s and 1950s, various alterations and additions to the makeup of Krypton were made in the comics. Among them was an explanation of why the natives of Krypton perished if they had possessed superpowers on their native world. Thus, it was explained by the early 1950s that Kryptonians were powerless on their own planet and would gain superpowers only within a lower gravity environment. This matched the correct theories being published that humans who traveled to the moon would be able to lift greater masses and leap greater distances than on Earth due to the lesser gravity. In the early 1960s, added to this was the need to be exposed to the rays of a yellow sun (versus Krypton's red sun, Rao, which was older and cooler, or put out less energy) to gain superpowers, with the yellow sun aspect soon gaining the much greater emphasis. Other changes to the concept of Krypton and its culture were introduced, many of which were stylistic.\nKrypton in the Silver Age of Comic Books.\nBy the late 1950s, Krypton played an increasing role in various \"Superman\" stories, with greater detail provided about Krypton's makeup. Superman's Kryptonian heritage was a frequent factor in Silver Age \"Superman\" comic storylines, as he was fully aware of his origins from an early age. Superman would use this knowledge for such tasks as constructing advanced Kryptonian technology or observing some of Krypton's traditions.\nHistory.\nKryptonians made use of their advanced science to create a world where scientific inventions and research influenced much of daily life. Robots and computers were used for many tasks on Krypton, even for determining what career paths young Kryptonians would take as they grew up. Scientific and technological research were highly valued on Krypton, with the ruling body of Krypton named the \"Science Council\".\nSeveral stories featured characters traveling back in time to visit Krypton before its destruction; one example is the 1960 story \"Superman's Return to Krypton\", in which Superman is swept back in time to Krypton some years before its destruction. Powerless, he spends some time on the planet, where he meets his future parents-to-be and falls in love with a Kryptonian actress named Lyla Lerrol. A \"Superman\" \"imaginary story\" entitled \"What If Krypton Had Not Exploded?\" (reprinted in the trade paperback \"The Greatest Superman Stories Ever Told\") gave more insight into Krypton's society. This era also established that the Guardians of the Universe, the administrators of the Green Lantern Corps, were aware of Krypton's pending destruction and assigned Green Lantern Tomar-Re to avert it, but he was unsuccessful due to being blinded by a solar flare.\nIn 1980, a three-issue miniseries titled \"World of Krypton\" was published, providing a great amount of detail into Krypton's history just before its destruction, along with the life story of Jor-El himself. A three-issue miniseries entitled \"The Krypton Chronicles\", published in 1981, tells of Superman researching his roots when, as Clark Kent, he was assigned to write an article about Superman's family by an assignment editor impressed with the television miniseries \"Roots\". To do so, he and Supergirl travel to Kandor, where they learn the history of the El family. In 1985, writer Alan Moore gave a somewhat darker glimpse into the world of Krypton in his story \"For the Man Who Has Everything\" (in \"Superman Annual\" #11), the premise being an elaborate dream of Superman's in which Krypton had not exploded and he had grown to adulthood there. Background details are culled from other Krypton stories. This same story was retold in the animated series \"Justice League Unlimited\" in an episode by the same name and several elements were used in the \"Supergirl\" series episode \"For the Girl Who Has Everything\". The story was also an inspiration for \"Krypton\" episode \"Mercy\".\nFlora and fauna.\nKrypton has a vast number of flora and fauna, both wild and domesticated. Some of them look very similar to Earth's animals, due to parallel evolution, e.g., birds, felids, canids, simians, etc., as seen in Krypto and Beppo; while others look very different, due to divergent evolution, e.g., fish/snake/eel-like hybrid creatures called \"fish-snakes\", goat-like creatures called \"\"Zuurt\", bovine-like creatures called \"Rondor\"\", rhinoceros/ceratopsian-like hybrid creatures called \"Thought-Beasts\", dragon-like creatures called \"H'Raka\", pterodactyl-like creatures called \"War-Kites\", gigantic, one-horned snake-like creatures called \"\"Drang\", and jellyfish-like invertebrate creatures called \"Shoggoth\".\nMoons.\nOne of Krypton's moons, Wegthor, was accidentally destroyed by the Kryptonian scientist Jax-Ur, who was experimenting with a nuclear missile that was diverted from its intended destination. The disaster killed 500 inhabitants of the moon, resulting in Jax-Ur being the first criminal banished eternally to the Phantom Zone. This disaster also prompted the Science Council of Krypton to ban space flight completely.\nSurvivors.\nA Silver Age Superman was not alone in the survival of Krypton's destruction, being joined by his cousin Supergirl, the Phantom Zone criminals, Krypto the Superdog, Beppo the Super-Monkey, a juvenile delinquent named Dev-Em, the entire population of the city of Kandor, Supergirl's biological parents, and even Superman's biological parents (in hibernation on a space ship - \"Superboy\" #158 (July 1969)), although it was discovered that they died from lethal radiation. When the planet exploded, one entire city of Krypton, Argo City, survived the cataclysm.\nArgo City drifted through space on an asteroid-sized fragment of Krypton, which had been transformed into kryptonite by the explosion. The super-advanced technology of its Kryptonian inhabitants allowed them to construct a life-sustaining dome and a lead shield that protected their city from the kryptonite radiation of the asteroid. The protective shield was destroyed in a meteor storm, exposing the inhabitants to the deadly radiation.\nThe sole survivor of Argo City, Kara Zor-El, was sent to Earth by her scientist father to live with her cousin Kal-El, who had become known as Superman. Kara adjusted to her new life on Earth and became known as Supergirl. It was later discovered that Supergirl's parents had survived in the Survival Zone, a parallel dimension similar to the Phantom Zone, from which she released them. When the bottle city of Kandor was finally enlarged on a new planet that was similar to Krypton, Supergirl's parents joined its inhabitants to live there.\nDaxamites.\nThe people now known as the Daxamites were originally Kryptonians who left their homeworld to explore the universe. In post-\"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" continuity, the Eradicator, an artificial lifeform programmed to preserve all Kryptonian culture, altered the birthing matrices (\"artificial wombs\") that the explorers took with them so that all newborns would be fatally vulnerable to lead and other materials such as greenhouse gases and certain rocks. Thus, if they persisted in their anti-Kryptonian wanderlust, they would all die from it. One Daxamite, Mon-El, was poisoned by lead and preserved in the Phantom Zone until Brainiac 5 found a cure in the 30th century, whereafter Mon-El became a member of the Legion of Super-Heroes.\nVathlo Island.\nVathlo Island is a fictional location on Krypton, notable as an early attempt to explain in-universe the seeming non-presence of black people throughout the universe. Other scholars have called Vathlo Island out more broadly as a stand-in for different non-white diaspora communities, such as Hispanic and Latino Americans.\nIn issue #234 of \"Superman\" (February 1971), the first apparently dark-skinned Kryptonian was featured, and described as being employed at \"Vathlo Station\", but the origin of this previously unseen Kryptonian ethnicity otherwise went uncommented on.\nHalf a year later, in \"Superman\" #239 (June 1971), a panel drawn by artist Sal Amendola described a \"Vathlo Island\" in the \"Old World\" hemisphere of Krypton as being populated by a \"highly developed black race\".\nDC generally lagged behind its competitor Marvel Comics, and Superman comics generally more so than other DC titles, in depicting characters of color, and there were few previous appearances of black characters in the series, mostly stereotypical \"natives\". It is unknown who exactly was responsible for introducing these first nonwhite races to Krypton's demographic makeup, but Mark Waid has speculated that it was E. Nelson Bridwell, editorial assistant on the Superman books at the time. The commentary on the Vathlorians being \"highly developed\" (as if it were peculiar and noteworthy that people with dark skin might be developed) is generally seen by modern commentators as well-intended but \"cringeworthy\".\nOther commentators have noted that the creation of Vathlo Island inspired a whole host of other questions, such as 'If there are black Kryptonians, why are they so seldom seen, and why do they appear to live only on one island?' \"Gizmodo\" noted that a Krypton structured this way seems \"segregated as hell\", while Gene Demby observed that this was an example of \"segregation in everything\". DC Comics writer Mark Waid called this an \"error of omission\" coming from DC's desire to represent people of darker skin as living on Krypton, but implementing this in a way with unintended implications. However, other writers have pointed out that DC would go on to re-use this as a rationale to explain the non-presence of black skinned characters in other contexts, as with Tyroc.\nVathlo was rarely if ever referenced beyond these few issues, although a black Kryptonian named \"Iph-Ro of Vathlo\" appeared in the more recent \"\" #111. An offhand reference to the island was made in Alan Moore's story \"For the Man Who Has Everything\", where \"racial trouble with the Vathlo Island immigrants\" are mentioned in a dream-world Krypton that had avoided destruction. It is believed, based on the appearances of black Kryptonians in recent Superman issues, that the Vathlonians eventually were integrated into Krypton proper, although there has been no canonical statement about this from DC Comics.\nIn \"\" #4, it is established that Vathlo Islanders settled in Kandor prior to the destruction of Krypton.\nIn \"Final Crisis\" #7 a black version of Superman is shown to reside on the alternate universe of Earth-23. This Superman, whose given name is Kalel but adopts the human alias of Calvin Ellis, is shown to originate from Vathlo Island of his reality's Krypton.\nWhile the island itself did not appear and was not referenced in the television series \"Smallville\", African-looking/dark-skinned Kryptonians have been featured. One was a disciple of Zod, who goes by the name Nam-Ek (portrayed by Leonard Roberts). Another was named Basqat (played by Adrian Holmes).\nDark-skinned Kryptonians have also appeared in the SyFy television series \"Krypton\", including Lyta-Zod, one of the series' main characters, and General Zod himself. In this version, Vathlo Island is not mentioned.\nCharacters in Eric Jerome Dickey's novel \"The Son of Mr. Suleman\" discuss Vathlo Island and react with derision to the idea that there was segregation on Krypton.\n\"Crisis on Infinite Earths\".\nAfter the 1985 miniseries \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\", the Silver Age version of Krypton was replaced by a newer version. The Silver Age Krypton made a rare post-\"Crisis\" appearance in \"The Sandman\" #48, during a flashback sequence.\nKrypton in the Modern Age of Comic Books.\n\"The Man of Steel\".\nFollowing \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\", which rebooted the history of the DC Universe and retroactively eliminated the existence of the Golden and Silver Age versions of Krypton, writer/artist John Byrne was given the task of recreating the entire \"Superman\" mythos. This rewrite was started in the 1986 \"Man of Steel\" miniseries, which addressed Krypton in both its opening and closing chapters.\nKrypton itself was the main subject of the late 1980s \"The World of Krypton\" miniseries (not to be confused with the 1979 miniseries of the same name). This miniseries was written by Byrne and illustrated by Mike Mignola, and filled in much of Krypton's new history.\nHistory.\nThe new Krypton was approximately one-and-a-half times larger than Earth and orbited a red sun called Rao fifty light-years from the Solar System. Krypton's primordial era produced some of the most dangerous organisms in the universe. It was for this reason that 250,000 years ago, Krypton was chosen as the place to create Doomsday through forced evolution. Until its destruction, many dangerous animals, including ferrophage moles, still existed on Krypton. Kryptonians had to use their advanced technology to survive.\nOver 200,000 years ago, Krypton had developed scientific advancements far beyond those of present-day Earth, and had discovered a way to conquer disease and aging by perfecting cloning; vast banks of clones, kept in stasis, held multiple copies of each living Kryptonian so that replacement parts were always available in the event of injury. All Kryptonians were now effectively immortal, \"with all the strength and vigor of youth maintained\", and for millennia they enjoyed an idyllic, sensual existence in an Arcadian paradise.\n100,000 years later Kryptonian society was tipping toward decadence and eventually political strife resulted from the debate about the use of clones (three by each Kryptonian; one child, one teen and one adult, perfectly preserved in stasis in large clone banks) to repair any hurt and avoiding death, if they were sentient beings and should have rights to be awakened to live as any other Kryptonian, sparked in addition by the presence of an alien missionary known as the Cleric, who carried \"the Eradicator\". Eventually this disagreement led to open violent conflict. A woman named Nyra, seeking what she considered a suitable mate for her son, Kan-Z, had one of her younger clones removed from stasis. The clone gained full sentience and was presented to society as a normal woman. When Kan-Z discovered that his fianc\u00e9e was in fact his mother's clone, he killed the clone, then publicly killed his mother and also attempted his own suicide before being stopped. Kan-Z also publicly broadcast the entirety of his discovered findings as to what his mother had done across the entire planet. This key incident ignited the Clone Wars which lasted for 1,000 years, during which Kryptonian science was turned to warfare and several superweapons were developed and used. Among them was the device known as the Destroyer.\nAlthough the Eradicator's effects (altering the DNA of all Kryptonian lifeforms so that they would instantly die upon leaving the planet) were felt immediately, the Destroyer's effects were more significant: by the time the Kryptonian government admitted defeat and abolished the clone banks, the pro-clone rights terrorist faction Black Zero had started the Destroyer (activated by Kan-Z himself), a device which functioned as a giant atomic energy gun, projecting nuclear energy into the core of Krypton and triggering an explosive chain reaction. The destruction (by Van-L, an ancestor of Jor-El) of the Destroyer eliminated the post-\"Crisis\" city of Kandor in a fiery nuclear explosion, but it was believed at the time that the device had been stopped before it could achieve planetary destruction. Centuries later, Jor-El discovered that the reaction had only been slowed to a nearly imperceptible rate and it would eventually destroy the planet as intended.\nDestruction.\nThough it survived the war, Krypton was scarred deeply by it. The planet was burned and blasted to a desert, and a sterile society\u2014emotionally unlike its predecessor\u2014emerged. The population lived isolated from one another in widely separated technological citadels, shunning all physical and personal contact, to the point that even family members would only interact with each other via communication devices. Procreation became a matter of selecting compatible genetic material to be placed within an artificial womb called a \"birthing matrix\"; the parents almost never met in person and never touched one another. The planetary government was deeply isolationist and forbade space exploration and communication with other worlds.\nThe young scientist Jor-El was born into this world. By his adult years, a mysterious \"Green Plague\" was killing Kryptonians by the thousands, and upon researching the matter, Jor-El discovered that its cause was growing radiation produced by Krypton's increasingly unstable core. This process was going to cause the planet to explode.\nUnable to convince his associates to abandon tradition and consider escape, and reasoning that modern Kryptonian society had grown cold, unfeeling and sterile, Jor-El removed the Eradicator's planetary binding genes from his unborn son Kal-El's genetic pattern, took Kal-El's birthing matrix and attached a prototype interstellar propulsion system to the vessel. Just as the planet began to shake apart and massive, exploding streams of green energy erupted through the surface of Krypton, Jor-El launched the matrix towards Earth, where it would open and give birth to the infant upon landing (the post-\"Crisis\" Superman therefore was considered to be technically \"born\" on Earth). Jor-El was not only determined that his son would survive the death of his birthworld, but that he would grow up on a world that vibrantly embraced living, as his forebears once did.\nIn Superman Vol. 2 #18, it is revealed that Krypton still exists as a gas giant consisting of much of the remaining mass of the exploded planet, which will reform into a solid planet millions of years into the future.\nThe Last Son of Krypton.\nA central theme of this version of the Superman mythos was that the character was to remain the last surviving remnant of Krypton. Thus, Silver Age elements such as Supergirl, Krypto, Beppo, and Kandor had never existed in this version (though post-\"Crisis\" versions of these elements were eventually reintroduced).\nThe supervillain Doomsday was revealed in the 1990s as a being genetically engineered by Bertron, an alien scientist, on an ancient Krypton. Doomsday left the planet after killing Bertron and Krypton's natives found the remains of Bertron's lab, thus obtaining the knowledge of cloning.\nIn the newer continuity, Superman also became aware of his alien heritage only sometime after his debut as a superhero - initially assuming himself to be a human mutated in some manner and launched as part of an Earth space program - when a holographic program encoded into the craft which brought him to Earth uploaded the information into his brain (although Lex Luthor had earlier discovered his alien heritage when his attempts to create a clone of Superman were complicated by the unexpected x-factor of Superman's alien DNA).\nRevisiting Krypton.\nIn \"Action Comics\" #600 (May 1988), Krypton was close enough to Earth that the radiation from its explosion (traveling only at light speed) was able to reach Earth.\nIn a 1988 storyline, Superman traveled to the former site of Krypton to discover that the planet was slowly reforming from the vast sphere of debris remaining. It would take millions of years before the planet would be solid again. This sphere of debris had been turned to kryptonite by the planet's destruction, and the radiation caused Superman to have a hallucination in which the entire population of Krypton came to Earth and colonized the already inhabited planet, prompting Jor-El to initiate a Terran-based resistance movement, pitting him against his estranged wife Lara and now-grown son Kal-El, at which point the hallucination ended.\nIn \"Superman: The Man of Steel Annual\" #3, \"Unforgiven\" - an Elseworlds tale - Jor-El convinces the Science Council to relocate selected Kryptonians to Earth.\nIn a 1999 \"Starman\" storyline, Jack Knight became lost in time and space, and landed on Krypton several years before its destruction, meeting Jor-El as a young man. The story implies that it was this early meeting with a Terran that led Jor-El to study other worlds and eventually choose Earth as the target for his son's spacecraft; at the story's end, Jack gives Jor-El a device with the coordinates and images of Earth.\nIn a 2001\u20132002 storyline, an artificial version of the Pre-\"Crisis\" Krypton was created in the Phantom Zone by Brainiac 13, a descendant of the original Brainiac who had traveled back in time to the present. This version of Krypton was based on Jor-El's favorite Kryptonian historical period.\n\"Superman: Birthright\".\nIn the 2004 miniseries \"\", a new retelling of Superman's origin and early years, Mark Waid located Krypton in the Andromeda Galaxy 2.5 million light-years away, and adopted elements from several previous versions of the planet. Although usually depicted as a red giant or red supergiant, in this story Rao is mentioned by Jor-El to be a red dwarf.\nIn previous comic versions, it was assumed the \"S\" shield on Superman's costume simply stood for \"Superman\"; in \"Birthright\", Waid presented it as a Kryptonian symbol of hope; he borrowed and modified a concept from \"Superman: The Movie\", wherein the \"S\" was the symbol of the House of El, Superman's ancestral family.\nPost-\"Birthright\" revisions.\nBeginning with \"Infinite Crisis\", writer Geoff Johns began laying subtle hints to a new origin for Superman. , a storyline co-written by Geoff Johns and \"Superman\" film director Richard Donner, further delves into this version of Krypton which reintroduces General Zod and the Phantom Zone criminals into mainstream continuity as well as the crystalline technology known as \"Sunstones\". With art by Adam Kubert, the design of Kryptonian society is distinct yet again from \"Birthright\", incorporating elements of both pre-\"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" continuity and Donner's work on the first two Christopher Reeve films, in particular the notion of Krypton's Council threatening Jor-El with harsh punishment if he were to make public his predictions of their planet's imminent doom. This variation of Krypton's past was again seen in flashbacks during Johns' \"Brainiac\" and \"New Krypton\" story arcs. The very different depictions of Kryptonian clothing in the Golden and Silver Age comics, in the Christopher Reeve films, and in John Byrne's \"The Man of Steel\" all appeared in Johns' ' (which superseded \"The Man of Steel\" and ').\nMulti-ethnic versions of Kryptonians that resemble Africans, Indigenous Australians, Pacific Islanders, Indigenous Americans, and Asians have also made appearances in the stories. Previously, \"black\" Kryptonians were mainly confined within the Kryptonian continent of Vathlo Island, but a 2011 storyline depicted Kryptonians resembling black and Asian humans who were more integrated into Kryptonian society than they were in the Silver and pre-Modern Age DC Universe.\n\"The New 52\".\nFollowing Grant Morrison's run on \"Action Comics\" during \"The New 52\", Krypton is again a scientific and cultural utopia, and Kryptonians themselves are highly intelligent, even from infancy; Morrison describes Krypton as \"the planet of your dreams. A scientific utopia. I wanted to explore Krypton as the world of super people. What would happen if they worked it all out, if they lived for 500 years with amazing technology?\" Cody Walker elaborates on this, saying that \"Kal-El is the next step in evolution physically, but he comes from a planet that is the next stage in evolution as well. If his strength makes him the Man of Steel, then the ideologies that rule his planet make Superman the Man of Tomorrow\". In \"Action Comics\" #14 (January 2013 cover date, published November 7, 2012) astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson appears as a character in the story. He determines that Krypton orbited the red dwarf LHS 2520 in the constellation Corvus 27.1 light-years from Earth. Tyson assisted DC Comics in selecting a real-life star that would be an appropriate parent star to Krypton. He picked Corvus, which is Latin for \"crow\", because Superman's high school mascot is a crow. In a 2012 round-table discussion, Tyson stated that he chose to use real science when finding Krypton's location. He explained that many artists may only use bits and pieces of science, allowing for greater latitude in their creativity, but he wanted to show that using real science, particularly astrophysics, allows for just as much creativity.\nIn other media.\nRadio.\nThe first non-comics version of Krypton was presented in the debut storyline of the 1940s \"Superman\" radio series. In the radio show, Krypton was part of the Solar System, a Counter-Earth sharing Earth's orbit but on the opposite side of the Sun, hidden from view of the Earth (\"Krypton\" derives from the Greek word for \"hidden\"). Some comics of the early 1950s suggested a similar theory, but in general the comics have depicted Krypton as being in a far-away star system.\nFilm.\n\"Superman\".\nIn the first feature-length \"Superman\" film in 1978, a vastly less idyllic image of Krypton was presented. Whereas in the comics Krypton was colorful and bright, the film depicted the planet with stark bluish-white terrain of jagged frozen plateaus under heavy, dark skies. The planet was threatened by their sun turning into a supernova. Jor-El unsuccessfully attempted to persuade the council of elders to immediately evacuate the planet.\nKryptonians themselves were portrayed as coolly cerebral and morally enlightened, clad in stark white bodysuits emblazoned with each family's house symbol. The architecture featured halls of white crystal under crystalline arches. The crystalline motif was employed not only in the architecture, but in the landscape and technology as well, suggesting that the entire planet had been adapted and altered by Kryptonian influence. In 1948, Krypton was ultimately destroyed when its red sun began to collapse; the planet was pulled into the sun and steadily crushed, then exploded in the ensuing supernova. When Krypton was destroyed, fragments from the planet were launched into space, resulting in the creation of a harmful radioactive substance known as kryptonite.\nBoth Jor-El and Lara preserved some part of their \"essence\" (in the form of virtual copies of themselves) in the starship that took three years to bring their child to Earth. On Clark Kent's eighteenth birthday, a glowing crystal revealed itself in the ship and compelled Clark to take it north. He eventually reached the Arctic, where the crystal constructed the massive crystalline Fortress of Solitude. Inside, an artificially intelligent hologram of Jor-El appeared to him and initiated twelve years of Kryptonian education. These virtual versions of Jor-El and Lara remained as constructs within the Fortress throughout the series.\nSuperman's symbol was given a Kryptonian origin in the film. Male Kryptonians were shown wearing unique symbols on the chests of their robes, similar to a family crest; Jor-El and Kal-El wore the familiar S-shield, which Lois Lane later assumed to be the letter \"S\" from the familiar Latin alphabet, and thus dubs him \"Superman\".\n\"Superman Returns\".\nThe 2006 film \"Superman Returns\" presents a version of Krypton almost identical to \"Superman\". In the beginning of the film, scientists discover remains of Krypton, and Superman leaves Earth for five years to look for it. His ship is seen leaving the dead planet. The planet is destroyed when the red supergiant Rao becomes a supernova.\n\"Superman Returns\" extends the crystalline Kryptonian technology from \"Superman\" which allowed young Clark Kent to \"grow\" the Fortress of Solitude. Kryptonian crystals are able to grow huge land masses and incorporate the properties of the surrounding environment; a sliver taken from one of the crystals used to test the theory causes Lex Luthor's basement to be filled with a huge crystal structure. Growing land in this manner causes widespread power failure. Lex Luthor later combines one of the crystals with kryptonite and shoots it into the ocean, creating a new land mass he calls \"New Krypton\". Superman uses his heat vision to get under the crust of the island and throws it into space, including the other crystals that Luthor wanted to use to set up a real estate scam, despite the warning that many people would die from the massive tsunamis and earthquakes that the crystals would create.\nThe novelization by Marv Wolfman states that one of Superman's ancestors helped civilize Krypton long ago.\nDC Extended Universe.\nThe \"DC Extended Universe\"'s Krypton is introduced in the 2013 film \"Man of Steel\" and adds strong dystopian elements to Krypton and its fate. A prequel novel adds additional details. The planet is portrayed as having an Earth-like terrain composed of mountains, canyons and oceans. The planet is 8.7 billion years old and approximately 27.1 light years from Earth. Its parent star Rao is depicted as a 13 billion year old red dwarf sun. The planet's close proximity to the sun also keeps Krypton in constant daylight. Its gravity is much higher than that of Earth, and its atmospheric composition is unsuitable for humans. Krypton is also home to unique species of creatures, such as the bovine-like \"\"Rondors\", the dragon-like \"H'Raka\"\", and the pterodactyl-like \"War-Kites\". It is also shown to have a natural satellite. Kryptonian society is oligarchal and divided into houses, such as the House of El. Citizens wear the crests of their house over their chests, which hold meanings, such as the crest of House of El meaning \"hope\". The planet is unified under one government, ruled by an aristocratic \"Science Council\".\nKryptonian civilization is at least 100,000 years old and many millennia more advanced than human civilization on Earth, and had begun exploring the Milky Way Galaxy, with at least one ship reaching as far as Earth. After their colonies collapse, Kryptonians abandon these projects in favor of isolationism and artificial population control, engineering newborns for pre-determined roles in society. By the early 1980s, the planet's resources were strained, and the stability of the planet was threatened by careless mining of the planet's core. In addition, centuries of artificial, class-based reproduction had caused most Kryptonians to become docile and arrogant. As Jor-El attempts to warn the Science Council of their folly, General Zod stages a coup, which in turn sets off a massive civil war across the planet. In hopes of preserving the Kryptonian race, Jor-El steals the genetic Codex of the planet (a list holding the DNA pattern of everyone yet to be born on Krypton) and infuses it into the cells of Kal-El, the first natural-born child on Krypton in centuries and sends his son to Earth. Zod kills Jor-El and is arrested by the authorities. He and his followers are banished to the Phantom Zone shortly before Krypton is destroyed. The planets destruction frees Zod and his men from the Phantom Zone, and after learning of Earth's existence, they plan to terraform it into a new Krypton. This is thwarted by an adult Kal-El (who's now Clark Kent/Superman), who kills Zod and destroys his terraforming machines.\nIn the 2016 film \"\", Lex Luthor Jr. who in a deal with a Senator gained access to the crashed Scout Ship, managed to enter the ship using the fingerprints of General Zod. Using Zod's Command Key, he managed to access the Ship's mainframe. Luthor eventually overrides General Zod's authority over the ship, and learns how to use the Genesis Chamber. The Ship warned against what it would create, but Lex ordered it to proceed. Over the course of a couple of days, Zod's body began metamorphosing into a \"Kryptonian Deformity\", a crime among the Kryptonian Science Council.\n\"Teen Titans Go! To the Movies\".\nKrypton appears in \"Teen Titans Go! To the Movies\". In the film, the Teen Titans travel to the planet and harmonize its crystals with music, preventing its destruction and preventing Kal-El from arriving on Earth and becoming Superman, although they later undo this and allow Krypton to be destroyed to ensure Superman's existence.\n\"Superman: Unbound\".\nBrainiac's abduction of Kandor, despite the resistance posed by Krypton's military, is shown in \"\". Brainiac is infamous for destroying the planets he takes cities from, but he left Krypton intact. Jor-El correctly theorized that this was because Brainiac detected that the planet would soon explode anyway and decided not to bother wasting a missile on their sun. Jor-El and his brother Zor-El then sent their children to Earth on rockets while studying how to defeat Brainiac and convince their government of the danger to Krypton. At least some of the populace of Argo City also outlive their planet, but rather than preserving their city with an energy shield, they are abducted by Brainiac before the planet's destruction in response to Zor-El studying how to defeat the villain.\n\"DC League of Super-Pets\".\nIn \"DC League of Super-Pets\", the destruction of Krypton is depicted as the opening scene where Jor-El and Lara prepare to send Kal-El to Earth, but in this depiction, Kal-El's pet dog, Krypto, jumps into his carrier to accompany him. Jor-El reluctantly agrees to send him off in hopes that his son will have a lifelong friend to be there for him.\nNovelizations.\n\"Last Son of Krypton\".\nThe 1978 novel \"\" by Elliot S. Maggin contains descriptions of Krypton, mainly referencing the Silver Age version; it describes the planet as a \"failed star\" with massive surface gravity and hostile conditions, which forced extreme adaptation and rapid evolution in the descendants of humanoid space travelers. This led to an extremely strong, dense, and durable Kryptonian species with unusual physical properties. Maggin describes the rise of a civilization which uses geothermal heat as its primary power source, developing science and technology, but finding it difficult to escape the massive world's gravity. Eventually its internal nuclear reactions led to Krypton's explosion.\n\"The Last Days of Krypton\".\nNovelist Kevin J. Anderson presents approximately the last Earth year before Krypton's destruction in the 2007 novel \"The Last Days of Krypton\". Jor-El, Lara, Zod, and Zor-El are the primary point-of-view characters. Following Brainiac's abduction of Kandor, Zod attempts to seize power, eventually leading to a civil war. Here Jor-El manages to avert several disasters threatening Krypton before an attempt to destroy the Phantom Zone by several reactionary council members who Zod had previously imprisoned there destabilizes Krypton's core and destroys the planet. In addition to Kal-El's rocket and the forcefield surrounding Argo City, a third avenue for escaping the planet is represented by hordes of engineers who do believe Jor-El's warning and attempt to build several space arks to escape the planet. Ultimately, they are unable to complete the ships fast enough. In the novel, Kryptonopolis is built over the ruins of Xan City.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75809", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75809", "title": "Krypton (Planet)", "text": ""}
{"id": "75810", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75810", "title": "Double entendre", "text": "Wording that is devised to be understood in two ways\nA double entendre (plural double entendres) is a figure of speech or a particular way of wording that is devised to have a double meaning, one of which is typically obvious, and the other often conveys a message that would be too socially unacceptable, or offensive to state directly.\nA double entendre may exploit puns or word play to convey the second meaning. Double entendres generally rely on multiple meanings of words, or different interpretations of the same primary meaning. They often exploit ambiguity and may be used to introduce it deliberately in a text. Sometimes a homophone can be used as a pun. When three or more meanings have been constructed, this is known as a \"triple entendre\", etc.\nEtymology.\nAccording to the Merriam-Webster Unabridged Dictionary and the Oxford English Dictionary, the expression comes from the rare and obsolete French expression, which literally meant \"double meaning\" and was used in the senses of \"double understanding\" or \"ambiguity\" but acquired its current suggestive twist in English after being first used in 1673 by John Dryden. The phrase has not been used in French for centuries and would be ungrammatical in modern French. No exact equivalent exists in French, whose similar expressions (\"mot/expression \u00e0\") \"double entente\" and (\"mot/expression \u00e0\") \"double sens\" do not have the suggestiveness of the English expression.\nStructure.\nA person who is unfamiliar with the hidden or alternative meaning of a sentence may fail to detect its innuendos, aside from observing that others find it humorous for no apparent reason. Innuendo is often used in sitcoms and other comedy where some in the audience may enjoy the humour while being oblivious to its secondary meaning.\nA triple entendre is a phrase that can be understood in any of three ways, such as in the back cover of the 1981 Rush album \"Moving Pictures\" which shows a moving company carrying paintings out of a building while people are shown being emotionally moved and a film crew makes a \"moving picture\" of the whole scene.\nUsage.\nLiterature.\nIn Homer's \"The Odyssey\", when Odysseus is captured by the Cyclops Polyphemus, he tells the Cyclops that his name is Oudeis (\u03bf\u03c5\u03b4\u03b5\u03b9\u03c2 = No-one). When Odysseus attacks the Cyclops later that night and stabs him in the eye, the Cyclops runs out of his cave, yelling to the other Cyclopes that \"No-one has hurt me!\", which leads the other Cyclopes to take no action under the assumption that Polyphemus blinded himself by accident, allowing Odysseus and his men to escape.\nSome of the earliest double entendres are found in the 10th-century Exeter Book, or \"Codex exoniensis\", at Exeter Cathedral in England. In addition to the various poems and stories found in the book, there are also numerous riddles. Answers to the riddles were not included in the book, but have been found by scholars over the years. Some of these employ double entendres, such as Riddle 25:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am a wondrous creature: to women a thing of joyful expectation, to close-lying companions serviceable. I harm no city-dweller excepting my slayer alone. My stem is erect and tall\u2013\u2013I stand up in bed\u2013\u2013and whiskery somewhere down below. Sometimes a countryman's quite comely daughter will venture, bumptious girl, to get a grip on me. She assaults my red self and seizes my head and clenches me in a cramped place. She will soon feel the effect of her encounter with me, this curl-locked woman who squeezes me. Her eye will be wet.\nThis suggests the answer \"a penis\" but also has the innocent answer \"an onion\".\nExamples of sexual innuendo and double-entendre occur in Geoffrey Chaucer's \"The Canterbury Tales\" (14th century), in which the Wife of Bath's Tale is laden with double entendres. These include her use of the word \"queynte\" (modern spelling \"quaint\") to describe domestic duties while also alluding to genitalia (\"queynte\" being at the time an alternative form of \"cunt\", a term for the vulva).\nThe title of Sir Thomas More's 1516 fictional work \"Utopia\" is a double entendre because of the pun between two Greek-derived words that would have identical pronunciation. Spelled as it is, or especially spelled as \"Outopia\", the title means \"no place\"; meanwhile spelled as \"Eutopia\", with the same English pronunciation, it would mean \"good place\".\nStage performances.\nShakespeare frequently used double entendres in his plays. Sir Toby Belch in \"Twelfth Night\" says of Sir Andrew's hair, that \"it hangs like flax on a distaff; and I hope to see a housewife take thee between her legs and spin it off\"; the Nurse in \"Romeo and Juliet\" says that her husband had told Juliet when she was learning to walk that \"Yea, dost thou fall upon thy face? Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit\"; or is told the time by Mercutio: \"for the bawdy hand of the dial is now upon the prick of noon\"; and in \"Hamlet\", Hamlet publicly torments Ophelia with a series of sexual puns, including \"country matters\" (similar to \"cunt\"). The title of Shakespeare's play \"Much Ado About Nothing\" is a pun on the Elizabethan use of \"no-thing\" as slang for vagina.\nIn the UK, starting in the 19th century, Victorian morality disallowed sexual innuendo in the theatre as being unpleasant, particularly for the ladies in the audience. In music hall songs, on the other hand, this kind of innuendo remained very popular. Marie Lloyd's song \"She Sits Among the Cabbages and Peas\" is an example of this. In the early 20th century restrictions were placed on lewdness in performances, including some prosecutions. It was the job of the Lord Chamberlain to examine the scripts of all plays for indecency. Nevertheless, some comedians still continued to get away with it. Max Miller had two books of jokes, a white book and a blue book, and would ask his audience which book they wanted to hear stories from. If they chose the blue book, he could blame the audience for the lewdness to follow (in the UK, \"blue\" colloquially refers to sexual content, as in \"blue jokes\", \"blue movies\" etc.).\nRadio and television.\nIn the United States, innuendo and double entendre were only lightly used in radio media until the 1980s when the Howard Stern Show began to push the envelope of what was acceptable on the radio through use of double entendre and ironies. This garnered so much attention it spawned an entire genre of radio called \"shock jock radio\" where DJs will push the limits of what is an \"acceptable\" double entendre to use over-the-air as the Federal Communications Commission has been known to hand out large fines for the use of double entendre on radio if they deem it to be in violation of their standards.\nIn Britain, innuendo humour began to transfer to radio and cinema in the late 1950s. Particularly significant in this respect were the \"Carry On\" series of films and the BBC radio series \"Round the Horne\"; although some of \"Round the Horne\" appeared to be nonsense language, the protagonists were sometimes having \"rude\" conversations in Polari (gay slang). \"Round the Horne\" depended heavily on innuendo and double entendre, the show's name itself being a triple entendre, a play on the name of its central actor Kenneth Horne and those around him, the sailor's expression \"going round the horn\" (i.e. Cape Horn), and the fact that \"horn\" is slang for an erection. Spike Milligan, writer of \"The Goon Show\", remarked that a lot of \"blue\" (i.e. sexual) innuendo came from servicemen's jokes, which most of the cast understood (they all had been soldiers) and many of the audience understood, but which passed over the heads of most of the Senior BBC producers and directors, most of whom were \"Officer class\".\nIn 1968, the office of the Lord Chamberlain ceased to have responsibility for censoring live entertainment, after the Theatres Act 1968. By the 1970s, innuendo had become widely used across much of the British broadcast media, including sitcoms and radio comedy, such as \"I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue\". For example, in the 1970s TV comedy series \"Are You Being Served?\", Mrs. Slocombe frequently referred to her pet cat as her \"pussy\", apparently unaware of how easily her statement could be misinterpreted, such as \"It's a wonder I'm here at all, you know. My pussy got soakin' wet. I had to dry it out in front of the fire before I left\". Someone unfamiliar with sexual slang might find this statement funny simply because of the references to her sodden cat, whereas others would find further humour in the innuendo (\"pussy\" being sexual slang for vulva).\nModern comedies, such as the US version of \"The Office\", often do not hide the addition of sexual innuendos into the script; for example, main character Michael Scott often deploys the phrase \"that's what she said\" after another character's innocent statement, to turn it retroactively into a sexual pun.\nOn The Scott Mills Show on BBC Radio 1, listeners are asked to send in clips from radio and TV with double meanings in a humorous context, a feature known as \"Innuendo Bingo\". Presenters and special guests fill their mouths with water and listen to the clips, and the last person to spit the water out with laughter wins the game.\nMovies.\nDouble entendres are popular in modern movies, as a way to conceal adult humour in a work aimed at general audiences. The James Bond films are rife with such humour. For example, in \"Tomorrow Never Dies\" (1997), when Bond is disturbed by the telephone while in bed with a Danish girl, he explains to Moneypenny that he is busy \"brushing up on a little Danish\". Moneypenny responds by pointing out that Bond was known as \"a cunning linguist\", a play on the word \"cunnilingus\". In the final scene of \"Moonraker\", while Bond is taking Dr Holly Goodhead \"round the world one more time\", Q says to Sir Frederick Gray, \"I think he's attempting re-entry, sir\". In \"The World Is Not Enough\" (1999), while in bed with Dr Christmas Jones, Bond tells her \"I thought Christmas only comes once a year\". Other obvious examples include Pussy Galore in \"Goldfinger\" and Holly Goodhead in \"Moonraker\". The double entendres of the Bond films were parodied in the \"Austin Powers\" series.\nBawdy double entendres, such as (from the movie \"Sextette\") \"I'm the kinda girl who works for Paramount by day, and Fox all night\", and (from the movie \"Myra Breckinridge\") \"I feel like a million tonight \u2013 but only one at a time\", are typical of the comedy writing of Mae West, for her early-career vaudeville performances as well as for her later plays and movies.\nMusic.\nThere is a long tradition of double entendre songs in American blues music of the 1920s and 1930s, called hokum.\nDouble entendres are very common in the titles and lyrics of pop songs, such as \"If I Said You Had a Beautiful Body Would You Hold It Against Me\" by The Bellamy Brothers. By one interpretation, the person being talked to is asked if they would be offended; by the other interpretation, they are asked if they would press their body against the person doing the talking.\nSinger and songwriter Bob Dylan, in his somewhat controversial song \"Rainy Day Women No. 12 &amp; 35\", repeats the line \"Everybody must get stoned\". In context, the phrase refers to the punishment of execution by stoning, but on another level it means to \"get stoned\", a common slang term for being high on cannabis. In their song \"Big Balls\" on the album \"Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap\", AC/DC the chorus \"we've got big balls\" can be read as referring to either formal dances or testicles. During the 1940s, Benny Bell recorded several \"party records\" that contained double entendre including \"Everybody Wants My Fanny\".\nSocial interaction.\nDouble entendres can arise in the replies to inquiries. The clich\u00e9d phrase \"Said the actress to the bishop\", as well as \"that's what she said\", can be used to remark on a sentence said by another which was not intended as a double entendre but nevertheless could be interpreted with a double meaning, one of them sexual.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75812", "revid": "2695478", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75812", "title": "Cartomancy", "text": "Type of divination using cards\nCartomancy is fortune-telling or divination using a deck of cards. Forms of cartomancy appeared soon after playing cards were introduced into Europe in the 14th century. Practitioners of cartomancy are generally known as \"cartomancers\", \"card readers\", or simply \"readers\".\nCartomancy using standard playing cards was the most popular form of providing fortune-telling card readings in the 18th, 19th, and 20th centuries. The standard 52-card deck is often augmented with jokers or even with the blank card found in many packaged decks. In France, the 32-card piquet stripped deck is most typically used in cartomantic readings, although the 52 card deck can also be used. (A piquet deck can be a 52-card deck with all of the 2s through the 6s removed. This leaves all of the 7s through the 10s, the face cards, and the aces.)\nIn English-speaking countries, the most common form of cartomancy is generally tarot card reading. Tarot cards are almost exclusively used for this purpose in these places.\nIt is popular among Romani people.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75813", "revid": "747639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75813", "title": "Crisis on Infinite Earths", "text": "Limited DC comic crossover series\nCrisis on Infinite Earths is a 1985 to 1986 American comic book crossover series published by DC Comics. Written by Marv Wolfman and pencilled by George P\u00e9rez, it was first released as a 12-issue limited series from April 1985 to March 1986. As the main piece of a crossover event, some plot elements were featured in tie-in issues of other publications. Since its initial publication, the series has been reprinted in various formats and editions.\nThe idea for the series stemmed from Wolfman's desire to abandon the DC Multiverse depicted in the company's comics\u2014which he thought was unfriendly to readers\u2014and create a single, unified DC Universe (DCU). The foundation of \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" developed through a character called the Monitor, introduced in Wolfman's \"The New Teen Titans\" in July 1982 before the series itself started.\nAt the start of \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\", the Anti-Monitor (the Monitor's evil counterpart) is unleashed on the DC Multiverse and begins to destroy the various Earths that it comprises. The Monitor tries to recruit heroes from around the Multiverse but is murdered, while Brainiac collaborates with the villains to conquer the remaining Earths. Eventually, both the heroes and villains are united by the Spectre; the series concludes with Kal-L, Superboy-Prime and Alexander Luthor Jr. defeating the Anti-Monitor and the creation of a single Earth in place of the Multiverse. \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" is noted for its high death count; hundreds of characters died, including DC icons Kara Zor-El (the original Supergirl) and Barry Allen (the Flash of the Silver Age). The story's events resulted in the entire DCU being rebooted, dividing the fictional universe's timeline into \"pre-Crisis\" and \"post-Crisis\" eras.\nThe series was a bestseller for DC. The story is credited with popularizing the idea of a large-scale crossover in comics. It was followed by \"\" (1994), \"Infinite Crisis\" (2005\u20132006) and \"Final Crisis\" (2008\u20132009). \"Dark Crisis on Infinite Earths\" (2022) also served as a sequel to \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\".\nPublication history.\nBackground.\nDC Comics is an American comic book publisher best known for its superhero stories featuring characters including Batman, Superman, and Wonder Woman. The company debuted in February 1935 with \"New Fun: The Big Comic Magazine\". Most of DC's comic books (as well as some published under its imprints Vertigo and Young Animal) take place within a shared universe called the DC Universe (DCU) allowing plot elements, characters, and settings to cross over with each other. The concept of the DCU has provided DC's writers some challenges in maintaining continuity, due to conflicting events within different comics that need to reflect the shared nature of the universe. \"Flash of Two Worlds\" from \"The Flash\" #123 (September 1961), which featured Barry Allen (the Silver Age Flash) teaming up with Jay Garrick (the Golden Age Flash) was the first DC comic to suggest that the DCU was a part of a multiverse.\nThe DC Multiverse concept was expanded in later years with the DCU having infinite Earths; for example, the Golden Age versions of DC heroes resided on Earth-Two, while DC's Silver Age heroes were from Earth-One. Since \"Crisis on Earth-One!\" (1963), DC has used the word \"Crisis\" to describe important crossovers within the DC Multiverse. Over the years, various writers took liberties creating additional parallel Earths as plot devices and to house characters DC had acquired from other companies, making the DC Multiverse a \"convoluted mess\". DC's comic book sales were also far below those of their competitor Marvel Comics. According to \"ComicsAlliance\" journalist Chris Sims, \"the [DC] multiverse . . . felt old-fashioned. . . . Marvel, on the other hand, felt contemporary and when you stack them up against each other, there's one difference that sticks out above anything else: Marvel feels unified.\"\nWriter Marv Wolfman became popular among DC's readers for his work on \"The New Teen Titans\". George P\u00e9rez, who illustrated \"The New Teen Titans\", also began to rise to prominence in this era. In 1984, P\u00e9rez entered into an exclusive contract with DC, which was later extended one year. Although \"The New Teen Titans\" was a major success for DC, the company's comic book sales were still below Marvel's. Wolfman began to attribute this to the DC Multiverse, feeling \"The Flash of Two Worlds\" had created a \"nightmare\": it was not reader-friendly for new readers to be able to keep track of and writers struggled with the continuity errors it caused. In \"The New Teen Titans\" #21 (July 1982), Wolfman introduced a new character: the shadowy, potentially villainous Monitor; this laid the foundation for \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\".\nDevelopment.\nIn 1981, Wolfman was editing \"Green Lantern\". He got a letter from a fan asking why a character did not recognize Green Lantern in a recent issue despite the two having had worked together in an issue three years earlier. Soon afterward, Wolfman pitched \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" as \"The History of the DC Universe\", seeing it as a way to simplify the DCU and attract new readers. \"The History of the DC Universe\"'s title was changed to \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" because its premise, involving the destruction of entire worlds, sounded more like a crisis.\nWolfman said when he pitched the series to DC, he realized it was going to be a completely new beginning for the DCU. \"I knew up front, and they did too, how big this was going to be,\" he said. \"But, no-one knew how well it would sell, or whether it would sell at all. It was a risk DC was willing to take, because my thoughts were that DC needed a lot of help at that time, and they did too.\" Wolfman also said he saw it as an attempt to improve DC's reputation for storytelling which many readers at the time saw as old-fashioned.\nThe crossover was fleshed out and coordinated at a meeting attended by president Jenette Kahn, Paul Levitz, vice president and executive editor Dick Giordano and DC's editors. In 1982, DC hired a researcher to go through their library and read every comic the company had published, a task that took two years. The series was delayed to 1983 due to the time for research, and again to 1985 when it was still not ready for 1983 and to coincide with DC's fiftieth anniversary. As an event like \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" had never happened before, those working on it met for around two hours a week, which was uncommon at the time.\nThe groundwork for the series was laid the year before it was published. One of the greatest challenges for Wolfman and Giordano was coming up with a story. Wolfman cited making use of every DC character and creating a plot that was fun to read and as filled with surprises as difficulties, as the series needed to sell well; if it did not, it could have caused a disaster for DC. Plotting became easier once a beginning and an ending had been determined and when P\u00e9rez became involved. \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" was DC's first mainstream maxiseries, which was still a relatively new concept.\nEarly in planning for \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\", a list was made of characters that were part of the DCU; characters from other universes, such as those that formerly belonged to Charlton Comics, also were used. According to Wolfman, one of the purposes of \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" was to showcase all the characters DC had. The series is infamous for its high death count. Hundreds of characters died; among the most noted was Barry Allen's. Wolfman has said he did not want to kill Allen, but DC ordered him to because it perceived the character as dull. Therefore, he conceived Allen's death\u2014in which he runs through time before vanishing\u2014as a way to make the character seem more interesting and hopefully spare him. Wolfman wanted to make the series unforgettable; he said that many writers had expressed interest in simplifying DC's continuity and he wanted to be the one to do so.\nP\u00e9rez says he was not the intended artist for \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\", but was excited when he learned about it, seeing it as an opportunity for \"revenge\" against Marvel, which he blamed for blocking the \"JLA/Avengers\" crossover he had been working on. He enjoyed working with Wolfman again, and took a leave of absence from \"The New Teen Titans\" to draw the series. DC initially did not know P\u00e9rez would want to work on it. According to P\u00e9rez, he was motivated by the fact that DC did not know if the series was going to be a success. He also wanted \"to draw everybody I could get my hands on\" and called illustrating the series some of the most fun he ever had. P\u00e9rez was excited because not only did he get to draw the Teen Titans again, but also obscure characters he was not familiar with, saying he could possibly have never gotten another chance. Wolfman has said one panel in \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" shows the Marvel Universe being destroyed. When Giordano (the series' initial inker) had difficulty meeting deadlines while continuing as DC vice president and executive editor, editorial coordinator Pat Bastienne reassigned the inking to Jerry Ordway despite Giordano's objections.\nPublication.\nThe idea for \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" was first noted in the December 1981 issue of \"The Comics Journal\", which mentioned a twelve-part maxiseries scheduled for 1982. The series was announced in Giordano's \"Meanwhile...\" column DC ran in its titles cover dated June 1984. Giordano warned readers that \"odd occurrences\" would begin to happen throughout DC's comics. He also clarified it would commemorate DC's fiftieth anniversary and would provide the company \"wonderful stepping-stones\" for new characters and comics. The series was marketed with the tagline \"Worlds will live, worlds will die and nothing will ever be the same\".\nThe series began in January 1985 and lasted for twelve issues, ending in December 1985 (issues cover dated April 1985 through March 1986). The close spacing of \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" and Marvel's similar crossover \"Secret Wars\" caused some fans to create conspiracy theories about idea theft. According to writer Steve Gerber, the series \"got virtually no promotion\u00a0... How many handouts did you see? How many posters did you see in people's windows? How much information was really distributed to the press and how much was gotten just by individual reporters going to Marv Wolfman and [\"Crisis\" artist] George P\u00e9rez?\"\nTie-ins.\nElements to set up \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" were put in DC's comics years before the crossover took place; an example of this was the Monitor's appearance in \"The New Teen Titans\". In a January 3, 1983 memo, Giordano, Wolfman, and Len Wein instructed editors and writers to use the Monitor twice in the coming year but not to show him: \"Because this series involves the entire DC Universe we do ask that each Editor and writer cooperate with the project by using a character called The Monitor in their books twice during the next year\". This served to set up the series. When Wolfman and Giordano reiterated this in a 1984 meeting, some editors were not pleased; one was so miffed he did not speak for the rest of the meeting.\nTie-ins for \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" were published in DC's ongoing series. Unlike the 1991 Marvel crossover storyline \"The Infinity Gauntlet\", where Marvel only published tie-ins in titles that needed a boost in sales, the vast majority of DC's comics featured events that directly tied to the crossover. The following comic book issues were labeled as part of the crossover; their covers contained a banner that read \"Special \"Crisis\" Cross-Over\", along with the logo for DC's fiftieth anniversary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSynopsis.\nThe conflicting stories of the DCU are explained as a Multiverse, containing many parallel universes and alternate versions of the characters, with the primary DC continuity referred to as Earth-One. They were created after renegade scientist Krona built a machine and used it to look back into the beginning of time. A cosmic being from the beginning known as the Monitor catalogues these realities, but he has an evil counterpart, the Anti-Monitor, who comes from an antimatter universe. After Pariah causes an accident with antimatter in his universe, the Anti-Monitor is released and begins destroying many of the realities with a wave of antimatter, planning on becoming sole ruler of all realities. On Earth-Three, Alexander Luthor and Lois Lane teleport their son Alexander Luthor Jr. to another reality as Earth-Three is consumed by the antimatter wave. To combat this, the Monitor recruits heroes and villains from across time and space to set up five towers, to help merge the multiverse back into one to make it stronger.\nThe Monitor dispatches a team of heroes across time and space to defend mysterious machines that could be the key to saving the remaining universes. Meanwhile, it is revealed that the Flash was transported to the future, and Pariah, constantly witnessing the destruction of worlds, arrives on the doomed Earth-1.\nBarry Allen of Earth-One encounters the antimatter wave before being captured by the Anti-Monitor. On Earth 1, various heroes attempt to save people from the approaching antimatter wave. During WWII, the Monitor's towers appear during a battle in which Sgt. Rock, Haunted Tank, and the Losers are fighting together against Nazis.\nThe Monitor gives powers to Kimiyo Hoshi, turning her into Doctor Light. He is murdered by Harbinger, who is possessed by one of the Anti-Monitor's shadow demons. However, the Monitor knew this would happen and his death releases enough energy to project two of the last five parallel Earths into a protective limbo that nullifies the wave. The Anti-Monitor recruits Psycho-Pirate to his cause, infusing him with part of his power to manipulate the heroes of Earth-4, Earth-S and Earth-X against the rest; this fails when all five Earths enter the limbo universe.\nHarbinger then recruits heroes from the remaining Earths to lead an assault on the Anti-Monitor in the antimatter universe, using the powers of Alexander Luthor Jr., the last survivor of Earth-Three, to open a portal between the limbo and antimatter universes. Pariah tracks down the Anti-Monitor at his fortress, and the heroes destroy a converter, powered by stellar energy, used to destroy the last five Earths; the injured Anti-Monitor retreats and Supergirl dies from his attacks after a distraction from Hoshi. The Anti-Monitor creates a new body for himself and tries to use an antimatter cannon to penetrate the limbo universe and destroy the five partially merged Earths. The Flash dies stopping this attempt by using his speed to channel energy.\nDuring a lull in the war, the villains unite under Brainiac. He kills Earth-Two's Alexei Luthor while recruiting the Earth-One Lex Luthor to conquer the remaining Earths. A furious Anti-Monitor absorbs the energy of millions of worlds and vows to travel back through time to prevent the creation of the multiverse. The Spectre unites the heroes and villains by warning them about the Anti-Monitor's plan; the heroes travel back in time to stop the Anti-Monitor, while the villains travel back in time to the planet Oa to prevent Krona from creating the technology necessary for the Anti-Monitor's plan to succeed.\nThe villains fail, and Krona continues his experiment. The Anti-Monitor waits for Alexander Luthor Jr. to reopen the portal between the positive and antimatter universes, capturing the heroes, but a magically empowered Spectre creates an energy overload which shatters space and time. The five Earths merge into a single shared universe, and the superheroes return to the present; only those present at the dawn of time remember the original realities.\nA cosmically empowered Anti-Monitor attacks again, transporting the new Earth to the antimatter universe and summoning a horde of shadow demons who kill Dove, Lori Lemaris, Green Arrow of Earth-Two, Prince Ra-Man, Clayface, Bug-Eyed Bandit, Kole, Huntress, Robin, Sunburst, and Ten-Eyed Man. He falls in a carefully-planned counterattack, culminating in a battle with Superboy of Earth-Prime, Kal-L, and Alexander Luthor Jr., with help from Darkseid. In this final battle, the Anti-Monitor, reduced to a flaming head, crashes into a star and is killed by Kal-L. Before the star explodes, Alex sends Kal-L, Earth-Two Lois Lane, Earth-Prime Superboy and himself to a pocket \"paradise\" dimension while Wonder Woman of Earth-Two is taken to Mount Olympus by Zeus. This leaves the heroes of the remaining Earth, none of whom remember the original past, to sort out the aftermath of this crisis. Only Psycho-Pirate, who is locked up in Arkham Asylum, remembers the multiverse.\nAlternate versions.\nTales from the Dark Multiverse.\nAfter the Anti-Monitor's defeat, it was the Justice League who were forever trapped fighting in Ragnarok. The Justice Society/All-Star Squadron came in to rescue the team but were outmatched by Surtur. Alan Scott then sacrificed himself by becoming the pawn of Surtur known as the Dread Lantern, leading Surtur to other worlds in exchange for his promise that he will always spare Earth.\nReception.\nDespite relatively limited marketing and DC being unsure if the series would be successful, \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" was a bestseller.\nIGN's Hilary Goldstein summarized the series as \"a crucial turning point for DC Comics\" and credited it with saving the company. Goldstein called Wolfman's idea to simplify the DCU bold and unprecedented, noting the story's exceptional size and saying the story was \"unbelievable\", if somewhat aged. He also praised P\u00e9rez's detailed artwork, saying no other artist could have possibly illustrated it as well as he did and gave the book a \"must have\" rating. Fellow \"IGN\" writer Jesse Schedeen named \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" one of the best DC crossovers, agreeing it was unprecedented and dramatic.\nMarc Buxton of \"Comic Book Resources\" named \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" the greatest comic book crossover ever, saying that no crossover has been bigger or as ambitious: \"where some events seem hesitant to actually leave a mark on their respective universes, \"Crisis\" did it with aplomb\". He praised the series for exploring the entire DCU and felt it was a fitting event for DC's fiftieth anniversary. \"Nerdist News\" noted that many of the series' central events\u2014such as the deaths of Supergirl and Barry Allen\u2014have become iconic moments in DC's history.\nNot all reviewers have been as positive. Chris Sims wrote the series was messy and built awkwardly, describing it as \"a textbook definition of style over substance\". Sims said it was far from the best work of Wolfman and P\u00e9rez; however, he still thought it was groundbreaking, saying, \"It's the first time in comics history that EVERYTHING was in danger\".\nMerchandise.\nA novelization of \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" was written by Wolfman and published by iBooks in 2005, with cover art by P\u00e9rez and Alex Ross. The book follows the events of the original series; most of the story is presented from Barry Allen's point of view, while parts where he is not present are told from a third-person perspective. It also added some details, including internal monologue and updates to make the story more modern, such as characters having cell phones. In 2008, WizKids issued a toy pack centered around the Anti-Monitor as a part of its DC HeroClix toy line. The pack came with a large Anti-Monitor figure with LED-lit eyes, several smaller figures, and a map. An exclusive variant, based on the Sinestro Corps, was available at San Diego Comic-Con and Gen Con Indy conventions that year.\nDC Collectibles (then called DC Direct) released three series of action figures between 2005 and 2006. Based on the George P\u00e9rez artwork, the figures had a base with the logo of the series and certain figures included an accessory. The first series included Earth 2 Robin, Harbinger, Monitor, Psycho-Pirate, and Supergirl. Later series included the Anti-Monitor, Earth 2 Superman, Flash, Battle Armor Lex Luthor, Brainiac, Earth 1 Batman, Doctor Light, Earth Prime Superboy, Earth 2 Huntress, and one of the Weaponers of Qward.\nLegacy.\nThough it was not the first large-scale comic book crossover, \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" is generally credited with popularizing the idea. Comics historian Matthew K. Manning wrote that \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" paved way for all future crossovers of similar scale, and Andrew J. Friedenthal said \"\"Crisis\" showed the two major superhero comic book publishers (DC Comics and Marvel Comics) how they could utilize the continuity established by decades' worth of stories to weave together a cohesive, metatextual tapestry that both appealed to long-time readers and brought in massive amounts of money\". The series' success inspired DC to begin a tradition of \"summer crossovers\"; some of these include \"Invasion!\" (1988\u20131989), \"Armageddon 2001\" (1991), \"!\" (1994), and \"Identity Crisis\" (2004), and some mention the events of \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\". The second part of one of DC's later crossovers, \"Convergence\" (2015), heavily references the series and sees DC's superheroes travel back to its era. The writers of \"Convergence\" all had fun writing stories set during \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\", calling the series an exciting time for DC.\nThe series had an immediate effect on DC, dividing the company's history into two eras: \"Pre-Crisis\" and \"Post-Crisis\". Wolfman and P\u00e9rez teamed again to produce the \"History of the DC Universe\" limited series to summarize the DCU's new history. In the post-Crisis history, during the \"Crisis\" many heroes fought the Anti-Monitor's army. He attempted to collapse the positive universe's past and future into a single point in time to destroy it, leaving only the antimatter universe.\nMany of DC's characters had their histories rebooted. Wonder Woman's comic was relaunched entirely by P\u00e9rez, Wein, and Greg Potter. Superman was first re-envisioned in the limited series \"The Man of Steel\" by John Byrne; his comic was retitled \"The Adventures of Superman\" to make way for a new \"Superman\" series. Batman was minimally affected by the reboot, and his comic was not relaunched. However, he was still given , courtesy of Frank Miller. In addition, Wally West replaced Barry Allen as the Flash, the Justice League's roster was changed, and characters DC acquired from other companies, such as Fawcett Publications and Charlton Comics, were integrated into the DCU. The practice of re-envisioning characters in the new DCU lasted well into 1989, with properties such as Green Lantern, Hawkman, Black Orchid, and the Suicide Squad all being rebooted. The revamp raised sales 22% in the first year, and DC beat Marvel in direct market sales for the first time in August and September 1987. \"The Man of Steel\" #1 was the bestselling comic book issue of 1986.\n\"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" has been referenced several times in the various television series that comprise the Arrowverse, starting with the first episode of \"The Flash\" which aired in October 2014. It features a newspaper from 2024 that reads \"Flash Missing, Vanishes in Crisis\". Grant Gustin, who plays the Flash on the show, has said he thinks the goal of the series is to reach \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\": \"Obviously we'd have to go, I think 10 years to reach that, so there's a possibility for sure. It'll be fun to get there.\" The concept of a multiverse has been explored several times throughout the history of the franchise. Talking in 2014, Geoff Johns, when discussing the difference between the DC Extended Universe and the Marvel Cinematic Universe, said \"We look at it as the multiverse. We have our TV universe and our film universe, but they all co-exist. For us, creatively, it's about allowing everyone to make the best possible product, to tell the best story, to do the best world. Everyone has a vision and you really want to let the visions shine through ... It's just a different approach.\" The storyline inspired the 2019 Arrowverse crossover, also titled \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\", with the original date seen in the pilot episode of \"The Flash\" having been moved up by five years as a side effect of time travel.\nAdaptations.\nThe comic book series was adapted as a novel by the original writer, Marv Wolfman. This novelization was then performed as an audio drama marketed as a \"Movie in Your Mind\" by publisher GraphicAudio.\nThe story serves as inspiration for \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\", an Arrowverse crossover event consisting of an episode each of \"Arrow\", \"The Flash\", \"Supergirl\", \"Legends of Tomorrow\" and \"Batwoman\".\nAn animated film adaptation, \"\", was released in three parts during 2024, beginning with \"Part One\" on January 9.\nIn \"Scooby-Doo! and Krypto, Too!\" while being chased by Solomon Grundy, Scooby-Doo and Shaggy climb on Flash's Cosmic Treadmill which briefly travels them, along with Solomon Grundy, through many alternate timelines, with one of those being inspired by the \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" storyline.\nSequels.\n\"\" is a follow-up to \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\", and \"Identity Crisis\" also adheres to the continuity changes of \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" and \"Zero Hour: Crisis in Time!\".\n\"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" is the first installment in what became known as the \"Crisis\" trilogy. The second part of the trilogy, the seven-part \"Infinite Crisis\", was written by Geoff Johns and illustrated by Phil Jimenez, P\u00e9rez, Ivan Reis, and Jerry Ordway. It was published from October 2005 to June 2006, with a number of tie-in issues. In the series, Kal-L, Alexander Luthor, and Superboy-Prime escape from the pocket dimension they were left in at the end of the original series; Luthor, having gone insane, attempts to recreate the multiverse using the Anti-Monitor's remains as a generator. Meanwhile, Superboy-Prime, having become disillusioned with the surviving Earth, engages in a destructive rampage after confronting the modern Superboy, Connor Kent. The battle culminates in the two Superboys colliding with Luthor's multiverse generator, restoring the Earth (with slight alterations to continuity) and recreating the lost multiverse.\nThe conclusion to the trilogy, \"Final Crisis\", began in May 2008 and ended in January 2009. The series was written by Grant Morrison, with art by J. G. Jones, Carlos Pacheco, Marco Rudy, and Doug Mahnke. In \"Final Crisis\", Darkseid arrives on Earth and begins a conquest to overthrow reality, as part of a plan by Libra to conquer the Multiverse. The Justice League and Green Lantern Corps join forces in a desperate attempt to stop the upcoming onslaught.\nIn 2022, a new DC Comics Crisis event occurred, named \"Dark Crisis On Infinite Earths\" which began in June 2022 and ended in December 2022. This series was written by Joshua Williamson and art by Daniel Sampere and Alejandro Sanchez. Following the death of the Justice League in issue #75 Pariah has tasked Deathstroke and the Secret Society of Supervillains to start a Crisis Event, and using the crisis energy which would form, restart and bring back the infinite earths lost in the original Crisis. Nightwing and the Titans work to protect the world from the Secret Society, while Hal Jordan investigates the deaths of the Justice League.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75814", "revid": "30292728", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75814", "title": "Jamestown Settlement", "text": "Jamestown Settlement is a living history museum operated by the Commonwealth of Virginia, created in 1957 as Jamestown Festival Park for the 350th anniversary celebration. Today it includes a recreation of the original James Fort (c. 1607 to 1614), a Powhatan Native American town, indoor and outdoor displays, and replicas of the original settlers' ships: the \"Susan Constant\", \"Godspeed\", and \"Discovery\".\nThe museum complex is located adjacent to Historic Jamestowne, on Jamestown Island, which is run in partnership by the National Park Service and the Jamestown Rediscovery Foundation, a private nonprofit branch of Preservation Virginia dedicated to the archaeological mission. Historic Jamestowne is established in the original James Fort and Jamestown Colony, the first successful English settlement on the mainland of North America, founded on May 14, 1607. Colonial Williamsburg and The American Revolution Museum in Yorktown, additional living history sites, follow the next centennial of Virginian and American history up to the American Civil War. The Colonial Parkway connects all of these sites. The Jamestown-Yorktown Foundation is a Virginia state agency that administers the education aspects of the Jamestown Settlement as well as the Yorktown battlefield and the Revolution.\nBackground.\nLate in the 18th century, Jamestown became the focus of renewed historical interest and efforts at preservation. In 1893, a portion of the island was donated to Preservation Virginia for that purpose, including the ruined church tower. In the early 1900s, a seawall was constructed with the intention of preserving the site around the original \"James Fort\", even though the actual location of the original 1607 fort was thought to be underwater and lost to erosion. In 1907, the Jamestown Exposition was held to mark the 300th anniversary of the founding of Jamestown, but the celebration was held at Sewell's Point in Norfolk, Virginia on the harbor of Hampton Roads, due to transportation and other considerations. The area came back into national prominence with the creation of the Colonial National Historical Park in 1940 and the uncovering of the old fort in 1996 by archaeologists of the Jamestown Rediscovery project.\nJamestown Festival Park.\nA return to Jamestown itself was considered feasible by 1957, in time for the 350th anniversary of the founding of the London Company settlement at Jamestown. Attractions were developed by the National Park Service and the Commonwealth of Virginia which included the reconstructed Glasshouse, the Memorial Cross, and the visitors center. The National Park Service's Colonial Parkway was also completed in April 1957 linking the Historic Triangle of Jamestown, Williamsburg, and Yorktown, including the construction of a land bridge to Jamestown Island.\nThe 1957 celebrations continued from April 1 to November 30 with more than one million participants, including dignitaries and politicians such as the British ambassador and U.S. vice president Richard Nixon. Full-sized replicas were constructed of the three ships that brought the colonists: the \"Susan Constant\", \"Godspeed\", and \"Discovery\". They were built at a shipyard in Portsmouth, Virginia and relocated to nearby Glass House Point for the festival. There were nearly 25,000 visitors at the Festival Park on October 16, 1957, and the highlight for many was the visit and speech of Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip. Queen Elizabeth lent a copy of Magna Carta for the exhibition. Other events in 1957 included army and navy reviews, air force flyovers, ship and aircraft christenings, and an outdoor drama at Cape Henry, the site of the first landing of the settlers in April 1607.\n400th anniversary.\nJamestown Settlement facilities and programs were greatly expanded early in the 21st century as part of the Jamestown 2007 quadricentennial celebration. A special exhibition named \"The World of 1607\" was created to showcase 17th century Virginia and featured rare artifacts that were on loan from international collections and major museums. Additionally, new permanent exhibits were added while existing materials were refreshed, and a new introductory film was added. Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth II and the Duke of Edinburgh were invited and attended the Jamestown Settlement on May 14, 2007 as part of a two-day royal visit to Virginia. Their itinerary included visits to the state capital in Richmond, Virginia, Colonial Williamsburg, and Historic Jamestown. Approximately 1,200 invited guests, educational groups, and members of the community were in attendance. The celebration of Jamestown was held in Jamestown, Virginia.\nAttractions.\nGalleries.\nThe Jamestown Settlement galleries provide the setting for a varied collection of objects relating to the nation\u2019s beginnings in 17th-century Virginia. The Jamestown-Yorktown Foundation collection has been developed to support the museum\u2019s storyline and includes objects representative of the Powhatan Indian, European, and African cultures that converged in 1600s Virginia. More than 500 artifacts are exhibited at any one time in the galleries.\nLiving History.\nIn Living History, visitors can \"journey to the past\" in re-creations of a Powhatan Indian town and the 1610-14 colonial fort. The park also allows visitors to board replicas of the three ships that sailed from England to Virginia in 1607. In the outdoor areas, costumed historical interpreters describe and demonstrate daily life in early 17th-century Jamestown. As a preserved site of the British military garrison, Jamestown meticulously reconstructs daily life through restored structures such as warehouses, chapels, sentry posts, and guardhouses. Visitors engage with historical interpretation through immersive re-enactments: guides in period attire demonstrate soldiers\u2019 routines in tents, field kitchens, and infirmaries, while the fortress's fully staffed garrison periodically conducts military demonstrations mirroring 17th-century drills.\nThe project team integrates olfactory-driven historical immersion:In the smokehouse, bacon is cured using traditional slow-smoking methods over hickory wood, recreating the acrid yet savory scents that defined colonial-era food preservation.The cider cellar leverages natural fermentation conditions to produce apple cider, its layered aromas of fermented apples and oak-aged tannins evoking the terroir of early Anglo-American agricultural practices.\nEvents.\nRegular events are held to link with the colonial-related themes of the area - such as military re-enactments, historic trades fairs, lectures, or anniversaries. The next major event is the 410th Anniversary of the founding of the settlement, scheduled for mid-May 2017, entitled \"Jamestown Day\". Similarly, \"Pocahontas Imagined\" will commemorate the 400th Anniversary of the death of Pocahontas in July 2017. Further, the American Indian Intertribal Powwow will be held there in October 2017.\nSurrounds.\nOn nearby Jamestown Island itself, the National Park Service and Preservation Virginia, operate Historic Jamestowne where a vast amount of artifacts have been recovered by the Jamestown Rediscovery project with ongoing archaeological work, including ongoing excavations, reconstructions, and renovations (e.g., Jamestown Church). It is also next to the Jamestown Glasshouse.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75818", "revid": "23646674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75818", "title": "Orl\u00e9ans", "text": "Prefecture and commune in France\nOrl\u00e9ans (; ) is a city in north-central France, about 120 kilometres (74 miles) southwest of Paris. It is the prefecture of the department of Loiret and of the region of Centre-Val de Loire.\nOrl\u00e9ans is located on the river Loire nestled in the heart of the Loire Valley, a region classified as a World Heritage Site where the river curves south towards the Massif Central. In 2020, the city had 117,026 inhabitants within its municipal boundaries. Orl\u00e9ans is the center of Orl\u00e9ans M\u00e9tropole that has a population of 290,346. The larger metropolitan area has a population of 454,208, the 20th largest in France.\nThe city owes its development from antiquity to the commercial exchanges resulting from the river. An important river trade port, it was the headquarters of the community of merchants frequenting the Loire. It was the capital of the Kingdom of France during the Merovingian period and played an important role in the Hundred Years' War, particularly known for the role of Joan of Arc during the siege of Orl\u00e9ans. Every first week of May since 1432, the city pays homage to the \"Maid of Orl\u00e9ans\" during the Johannic Holidays which has been listed in the inventory of intangible cultural heritage in France. One of Europe's oldest universities was created in 1306 by Pope Clement V and re-founded in 1966 as the University of Orl\u00e9ans, hosting more than 20,000 students in 2019.\nThe \u00cele d'Orl\u00e9ans in Quebec, Canada, takes its name from Orl\u00e9ans, as do Orl\u00e9ans, Ontario, Orleans, Massachusetts and the city of New Orleans, Louisiana.\nGeography.\nOrl\u00e9ans is located in the northern bend of the Loire, which crosses from east to west. Orl\u00e9ans belongs to the vall\u00e9e de la Loire sector between Sully-sur-Loire and Chalonnes-sur-Loire, which was in 2000 inscribed by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site. The capital of Orl\u00e9anais, 120 kilometres southwest of Paris, is bordered to the north by the Beauce region, more specifically the Orl\u00e9ans Forest (French: \"for\u00eat d'Orl\u00e9ans\") and Orl\u00e9ans-la-Source neighbourhood, and the Sologne region to the south.\nFive bridges in the city cross the Loire: Pont de l'Europe, Pont du Mar\u00e9chal Joffre (also called Pont Neuf), Pont George-V (also called Pont Royal, carrying the commune tramway), Pont Ren\u00e9-Thinat and Pont de Vierzon (rail bridge).\nTo the north of the Loire (\"rive droite\") is to be found a small hill ( at the pont Georges-V, at the Place du Martroi) which gently rises to at la Croix Fleury, at the limits of Fleury-les-Aubrais. Conversely, the south (on the \"rive gauche\") has a gentle depression to about above sea level (at Saint-Marceau) between the Loire and the Loiret, designated a \"zone inondable\" (flood-risk zone).\nAt the end of the 1960s, the Orl\u00e9ans-la-Source neighbourhood was created, to the south of the original commune and separated from it by the Val d'Orl\u00e9ans and the river Loiret (whose source is in the Parc Floral de la Source). This quarter's altitude varies from about .\nClimate.\nOrl\u00e9ans experiences an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Cfb\"), similar to much of central France. July and August, the warmest months, have an average temperature of and a high of , while January, the coldest month, has an average temperature of and an average low temperature of , although February has a lower average low than January at . The record high temperature is recorded in July, while the record low temperature of was recorded in January.\nPrecipitation is evenly distributed year-round, with Orl\u00e9ans receiving of precipitation annually. However, some months are slightly wetter than others, with the driest month receiving of rain and the wettest receiving of precipitation on average. Precipitation days vary more, with less of them in the summer months than in the other seasons. Humidity is high year-round but decreases slightly in summer. July and August only have their humidity at 72% but December has 90% humidity on average. Orl\u00e9ans receives 1,822.6 hours of sunshine annually, with summer being the sunniest season and winter being the least sunny season. July, receiving 232.0 hours of sunshine on average, is the sunniest month, and December, receiving 60.9 hours of sunshine on average, has the least amount of sunshine.\nThe Loire and navigation.\nIn Orl\u00e9ans, the Loire is separated by a submerged dike known as the \"dhuis\" into the \"Grande Loire\" to the north, no longer navigable, and the \"Petite Loire\" to the south. This dike is just one part of a vast system of construction that previously allowed the Loire to remain navigable to this point.\nThe Loire was formerly an important navigation and trading route, and is at the heart of the city's foundation in the second century BC as a center of trade or emporium. More recently, during the 17th century, the river enabled Orleans to become a major hub for refining sugar, which was imported from the Caribbean via Nantes, and whose commerce boosted other aspects of the local economy, such as sweets, chocolate manufacturing, and paper for wrapping. In the 18th century, Orleans also acquired a reputation for producing vinegar, from local vineyards as well as wine traveling up the Loire.\nWith the increase in size of ocean-going ships, large ships can now navigate the estuary only up to about Nantes.\nBoats on the river were traditionally flat-bottomed boats, with large but foldable masts so the sails could gather wind from above the river banks, but the masts could be lowered in order to allow the boats to pass under bridges. These vessels are known as \"gabarre\", \"futreau\"\",\" and so on, and may be viewed by tourists near pont Royal.\nThe river's irregular flow strongly limits traffic on it, in particular at its ascent, though this can be overcome by boats being given a tow.\nAn \"Inexplosible\"-type paddle steamer owned by the mairie was put in place in August 2007, facing Place de la Loire and containing a bar.\nEvery two years, the Festival de Loire recalls the role played by the river in the commune's history.\nOn the river's north bank, near the town centre, is the Canal d'Orl\u00e9ans, which connects to the Canal du Loing and the Canal de Briare at Buges near Montargis. The canal is no longer used along its whole length. Its route within Orl\u00e9ans runs parallel to the river, separated from it by a wall or \"muret\", with a promenade along the top. Its last pound was transformed into an outdoor swimming pool in the 1960s, then filled in. It was reopened in 2007 for the \"f\u00eates de Loire.\" There are plans to revive use of the canal for recreation and install a pleasure-boat port there.\n\"See also Cenabum, Aureliana Civitas.\"\nHistory.\nPrehistory and Roman Empire.\nCenabum was a Gaul stronghold, one of the principal towns of the tribe of the Carnutes where the Druids held their annual assembly. The Carnutes were massacred and the city was destroyed by Julius Caesar in 52 BC. In the late 3rd century AD, Roman Emperor Aurelian rebuilt the city and renamed it civitas Aurelianorum (\"city of Aurelian\") after himself. The name later evolved into Orl\u00e9ans.\nIn 442 Flavius Aetius, the Roman commander in Gaul, requested Goar, head of the Iranian tribe of Alans in the region to come to Orleans and control the rebellious natives and the Visigoths. Accompanying the Vandals, the Alans crossed the Loire in 408. One of their groups, under Goar, joined the Roman forces of Flavius Aetius to fight Attila when he invaded Gaul in 451, taking part in the Battle of Ch\u00e2lons under their king Sangiban. Goar established his capital in Orl\u00e9ans. His successors later took possession of the estates in the region between Orl\u00e9ans and Paris. Installed in Orl\u00e9ans and along the Loire, they were unruly (killing the town's senators when they felt they had been paid too slowly or too little) and resented by the local inhabitants. Many inhabitants around the present city have names bearing witness to the Alan presence \u2013 Allaines. Also many places in the region bear names of Alan origin.\nEarly Middle Ages.\nIn the Merovingian era, the city was capital of the Kingdom of Orl\u00e9ans following Clovis I's division of the kingdom, then under the Capetians it became the capital of a county then duchy held in appanage by the house of Valois-Orl\u00e9ans. The Valois-Orl\u00e9ans family later acceded to the throne of France via Louis XII, then Francis I. In 1108, Louis VI of France became one of the few French monarchs to be crowned outside of Reims when he was crowned in Orl\u00e9ans cathedral by Daimbert, Archbishop of Sens.\nHigh Middle Ages.\nThe city was always a strategic point on the Loire, for it was sited at the river's most northerly point, and thus its closest point to Paris. There were few bridges over the dangerous river Loire, but Orl\u00e9ans had one of them, and so became \u2013 with Rouen and Paris \u2013 one of medieval France's three richest cities.\nOn the south bank the \"ch\u00e2telet des Tourelles\" protected access to the bridge. This was the site of the battle on 8 May 1429 which allowed Joan of Arc to enter and lift the siege of the Plantagenets during the Hundred Years' War, with the help of the royal generals Dunois and Florent d'Illiers. The city's inhabitants have continued to remain faithful and grateful to her to this day, calling her \"la pucelle d'Orl\u00e9ans\" (the maid of Orl\u00e9ans), offering her a middle-class house in the city, and contributing to her ransom when she was taken prisoner.\n1453 to 1699.\nOnce the Hundred Years' War was over, the city recovered its former prosperity. The bridge brought in tolls and taxes, as did the merchants passing through the city. King Louis XI also greatly contributed to its prosperity, revitalising agriculture in the surrounding area (particularly the exceptionally fertile land around Beauce) and relaunching saffron farming at Pithiviers. Later, during the Renaissance, the city benefited from its becoming fashionable for rich ch\u00e2telains to travel along the Loire valley (a fashion begun by the king himself, whose royal domains included the nearby ch\u00e2teaus at Chambord, Amboise, Blois, and Chenonceau).\nThe University of Orl\u00e9ans also contributed to the city's prestige. Specializing in law, it was highly regarded throughout Europe. John Calvin was received and accommodated there (and wrote part of his reforming theses during his stay), and in return Henry VIII of England (who had drawn on Calvin's work in his separation from Rome) offered to fund a scholarship at the university. Many other Protestants were sheltered by the city. Jean-Baptiste Poquelin, better known by his pseudonym Moli\u00e8re, also studied law at the University, but was expelled for attending a carnival contrary to university rules.\nFrom 13 December 1560 to 31 January 1561, the French States-General after the death of Francis II of France, the eldest son of Catherine de M\u00e9dicis and Henry II. He died in the H\u00f4tel Groslot in Orl\u00e9ans, with his queen Mary at his side.\nThe cathedral was rebuilt several times. The present structure had its first stone laid by Henry IV, and work on it took a century. It thus is a mix of late Renaissance and early Louis XIV styles, and one of the last cathedrals to be built in France.\n1700\u20131900.\nWhen France colonised America, the territory it conquered was immense, including the whole Mississippi River (whose first European name was the River Colbert), from its mouth to its source at the borders of Canada. Its capital was named \"la Nouvelle-Orl\u00e9ans\" in honour of Louis XV's regent, the duke of Orl\u00e9ans, and was settled with French inhabitants against the threat from British troops to the north-east.\nThe Dukes of Orl\u00e9ans hardly ever visited their city since, as brothers or cousins of the king, they took such a major role in court life that they could hardly ever leave. The duchy of Orl\u00e9ans was the largest of the French duchies, starting at Arpajon, continuing to Chartres, Vend\u00f4me, Blois, Vierzon, and Montargis. The duke's son bore the title \"duke of Chartres\". Inheritances from great families and marriage alliances allowed them to accumulate huge wealth, and one of them, Philippe \u00c9galit\u00e9, is sometimes said to have been the richest man in the world at the time. His son, King Louis-Philippe I, inherited the Penthi\u00e8vre and Cond\u00e9 family fortunes.\n1852 saw the creation of the \"Compagnies ferroviaires Paris-Orl\u00e9ans\" and its famous gare d'Orsay in Paris. In the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, the city again became strategically important thanks to its geographical position, and was occupied by the Prussians on 13 October that year. The \"arm\u00e9e de la Loire\" was formed under the orders of General d'Aurelle de Paladines and based itself not far from Orl\u00e9ans at Beauce.\n1900 to present.\nDuring the Second World War, the German army made the \"Orl\u00e9ans Fleury-les-Aubrais\" railway station one of their central logistical rail hubs. The Pont Georges V was renamed \"pont des Tourelles\". A transit camp for deportees was built at Beaune-la-Rolande. During the war, the American Air Force heavily bombed the city and the train station, causing much damage. The city was one of the first to be rebuilt after the war: the reconstruction plan and city improvement initiated by Jean K\u00e9risel and Jean Royer was adopted as early as 1943, and work began as early as the start of 1945. This reconstruction in part identically reproduced what had been lost, such as Royale and its arcades, but also used innovative prefabrication techniques, such as \u00eelot 4 under the direction of the architect Pol Abraham.\nThe big city of former times is today an average-sized city of 250,000 inhabitants. It is still using its strategically central position less than an hour from the French capital to attract businesses interested in reducing transport costs.\nHeraldry.\nAccording to Victor Adolphe Malte-Brun in \"La France Illustr\u00e9e\", 1882, Orl\u00e9ans's arms are \"gules, three caillous in \"c\u0153urs de lys\" argent, and on a chief azure, three fleurs de lys Or.\" Charle Grandmaison, in the \"Dictionnaire H\u00e9raldique\" of 1861, states that it is \"Or, with three hearts in gules\", without the chief of France. Faulty designs sometimes describe it as \"gules, three fleurs de lys argent, and on a chief azure three fleurs de lys Or.\"\nThe \"c\u0153urs de lys\", or heart of a lily, is not a true lily, which would have 6 tepals, but a stylized or symbolic lily. Certain authors solve the problem by calling this symbol a \"tiercefeuille\", defined as a stemless clover leaf, with one leaf at the top and two below, thus making this coat of arms \"gules, with three reversed tiercefeuilles in argent, etc\".\nMotto.\n\"Hoc vernant lilia corde\" (granted by Louis XII, then duke of Orl\u00e9ans), meaning \"It is by this heart that lilies flourish\" or \"This heart makes lilies flourish\", referring to the fleur de lys, symbol of the French royal family.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTransport.\nPublic transport.\nTAO manages buses and tram lines in Orl\u00e9ans. The first tram line was inaugurated November 20, 2000 and the second line on June 30, 2012. The network contains 29.3\u00a0km of rail. The annual ridership was 18.46 million in 2022.\nRoads and highway.\nOrl\u00e9ans is an autoroute intersection: the A10 (linking Paris to Bordeaux) links to the commune outskirts, and A71 (whose bridge over the Loire is outside the commune limits) begins here, heading for the Mediterranean via Clermont-Ferrand (where it becomes the A75).\nRailway.\nOrl\u00e9ans is served by two main railway stations: the central Gare d'Orl\u00e9ans and the Gare des Aubrais-Orl\u00e9ans, in the northern suburbs. Most long-distance trains call only at the Les Aubrais-Orl\u00e9ans station, which offers connections to Paris, Lille, Tours, Brive-la-Gaillarde, Nevers, and several regional destinations.\nPeople.\nOrl\u00e9ans is the birthplace of:\nCulture.\nMuseums.\nMuseums in Orl\u00e9ans:\nParks.\nParks in Orl\u00e9ans:\nSport.\nOrl\u00e9ans has a basketball team: Orl\u00e9ans Loiret Basket which is in the French first division. The club won the \"Coupe de France\" of basketball, its first major trophy, in the season 2009 \u2013 2010.\nOrl\u00e9ans also has a football club, the US Orl\u00e9ans, which plays in Championnat National.\nThere is also a semi-professional rugby team, RC Orl\u00e9ans.\nThe city also has very well known clubs in karate, fencing and judo.\nIn 2012, Orl\u00e9ans hosted a stage finish of Paris\u2013Nice.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nOrl\u00e9ans is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75819", "revid": "995540", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75819", "title": "Hasbros Game of Life", "text": ""}
{"id": "75820", "revid": "50714303", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75820", "title": "Cork (material)", "text": "Tree bark tissue harvested for commercial use\nCork is an impermeable buoyant material. It is the phellem layer of bark tissue which is harvested for commercial use primarily from \"Quercus suber\" (the cork oak), which is native to southwest Europe and northwest Africa. Cork is composed of suberin, a hydrophobic substance. Because of its impermeable, buoyant, elastic, and fire retardant properties, it is used in a variety of products, the most common of which is wine stoppers.\nThe montado landscape of Portugal produces approximately half of the cork harvested annually worldwide, with Corticeira Amorim being the leading company in the industry. Cork was examined microscopically by Robert Hooke, which led to his discovery and naming of the cell.\nCork composition varies depending on geographic origin, climate and soil conditions, genetic origin, tree dimensions, age (virgin or reproduction), and growth conditions. However, in general, cork is made up of suberin (average of about 40%), lignin (22%), polysaccharides (cellulose and hemicellulose) (18%), extractables (15%) and others.\nHistory.\nCork is a natural material used by humans for over 5,000 years. It is a material whose applications have been known since antiquity, especially in floating devices and as stoppers for beverages, mainly wine, whose market, from the early twentieth century, had a massive expansion, particularly due to the development of several cork-based agglomerates.\nIn China, Egypt, Babylon, and Persia from about 3000 BC, cork was already used for sealing containers, fishing equipment, and domestic applications. In ancient Greece (1600 to 1100 years BC) cork was used in footwear, to manufacture a type of sandals attached to the foot by straps, generally leather and with a sole in cork or leather.\nIn the second century AD, a Greek physician, Dioscorides, noted several medical applications of cork, mainly for hair loss treatment. Nowadays, the majority of people know cork for its use as stoppers in wine bottles. The innovation of using cork as stopper can be traced back to the late 17th century, attributed to Dom Pierre P\u00e9rignon. Cork stoppers were adopted in 1729 by Ruinart and in 1973 by Mo\u00ebt et Chandon.\nStructure.\nCork presents a characteristic cellular structure in which the cells have usually a pentagonal or hexagonal shape. The cellular wall consists of a thin, lignin-rich middle lamella (internal primary wall), a thick secondary wall made up from alternating suberin and wax lamella, and a thin tertiary wall of polysaccharides. Some studies suggest that the secondary wall is lignified, and therefore, may not consist exclusively of suberin and waxes. The cells of cork are filled with a gas mixture similar to air, making them behave as authentic \"pads,\" which contributes to the capability of cork to recover after compression.\nSources.\nThere are about 2,200,000 hectares of cork oak \"(Quercus suber)\" forest in the Mediterranean basin, the native area of the species. The most extensively managed habitats are in Portugal (34%) and in Spain (27%).\nAnnual production is about 300,000 tons; 49.6% from Portugal, 30.5% from Spain, 5.8% from Morocco, 4.9% from Algeria, 3.5% from Tunisia, 3.1% from Italy, and 2.6% from France.\nOnce the trees are about 25 years old the cork is traditionally stripped from the trunks every nine years, with the first two harvests generally producing lower quality cork (\"male cork\" or \"virgin cork\"). The trees live for about 300 years.\nThe cork industry is generally regarded as environmentally friendly. Cork production is generally considered sustainable because the cork tree is not cut down to obtain cork; only the bark is stripped to harvest the cork. The tree continues to live and grow. The sustainability of production and the easy recycling of cork products and by-products are two of its most distinctive aspects. Cork oak forests also prevent desertification and are a particular habitat in the Iberian Peninsula and the refuge of various endangered species.\nCarbon footprint studies conducted by Corticeira Amorim, Oeneo Bouchage of France and the Cork Supply Group of Portugal concluded that cork is the most environmentally friendly wine stopper in comparison to other alternatives. The Corticeira Amorim's study, in particular (\"Analysis of the life cycle of Cork, Aluminum and Plastic Wine Closures\"), was developed by PricewaterhouseCoopers, according to ISO 14040. Results concluded that, concerning the emission of greenhouse gases, each plastic stopper released 10 times more CO2, whilst an aluminium screw cap releases 26 times more CO2 than does a cork stopper. For example, to produce 1,000 cork stoppers 1.5\u00a0kg CO2 are emitted, but to produce the same amount of plastic stoppers 14\u00a0kg of CO2 are emitted and for the same amount of aluminium screw caps 37\u00a0kg CO2 are emitted.\nThe Chinese cork oak is native to East Asia and is cultivated in a limited extent in China; the cork produced is considered inferior to \"Q. suber\" and are used to produce agglomerated cork products.\nThe so-called \"cork trees\" \"(Phellodendron)\" are unrelated to the cork oak, they have corky bark but not thick enough for cork production.\nHarvesting.\nCork is extracted only from early May to late August, when the cork can be separated from the tree without causing permanent damage. When the tree reaches 25\u201330 years of age and about 24 in (60\u00a0cm) in circumference, the cork can be removed for the first time. However, this first harvest almost always produces poor quality or \"virgin\" cork (Portuguese ; Spanish or ).\nThe workers who specialize in removing the cork are known as \"extractors\". An extractor uses a very sharp axe to make two types of cuts on the tree: one horizontal cut around the plant, called a \"crown\" or \"necklace\", at a height of about two to three times the circumference of the tree, and several vertical cuts called \"rulers\" or \"openings\". This is the most delicate phase of the work because, even though cutting the cork requires significant force, the extractor must not damage the underlying phellogen or the tree will be harmed.\nTo free the cork from the tree, the extractor pushes the handle of the axe into the rulers. A good extractor needs to use a firm but precise touch in order to free a large amount of cork without damaging the product or tree.\nThese freed portions of the cork are called \"planks\". The planks are usually carried off by hand since cork forests are rarely accessible to vehicles. The cork is stacked in piles in the forest or in yards at a factory and traditionally left to dry, after which it can be loaded onto a truck and shipped to a processor.\nBark from initial harvests can be used to make flooring, shoes, insulation and other industrial products. Subsequent extractions usually occur at intervals of nine years, though it can take up to thirteen for the cork to reach an acceptable size. If the product is of high quality it is known as \"gentle\" cork (Portuguese , but also only if it is the second time; Spanish , also restricted to the second time), and, ideally, is used to make stoppers for wine and champagne bottles.\nProperties and uses.\nCork's elasticity combined with its near-impermeability makes it suitable as a material for bottle stoppers, especially for wine bottles. Cork stoppers represent about 60% of all cork based production. Cork has an almost zero Poisson's ratio, which means the radius of a cork does not change significantly when squeezed or pulled.\nCork is an excellent gasket material. Some carburetor float bowl gaskets are made of cork, for example.\nCork is also an essential element in the production of badminton shuttlecocks.\nCork's bubble-form structure and natural fire retardancy make it suitable for acoustic and thermal insulation in house walls, floors, ceilings, and facades. The by-product of more lucrative stopper production, corkboard, is gaining popularity as a non-allergenic, easy-to-handle and safe alternative to petrochemical-based insulation products.\nCork is also used to make vinyl record slipmats, due to its ability to not attract dust. They also dampen static and vibrations.\nSheets of cork, also often the by-product of stopper production, are used to make bulletin boards as well as floor and wall tiles.\nCork's low density makes it a suitable material for fishing floats and buoys, as well as handles for fishing rods (as an alternative to neoprene).\nGranules of cork can also be mixed into concrete. The composites made by mixing cork granules and cement have lower thermal conductivity, lower density, and good energy absorption. Some of the property ranges of the composites are density (400\u20131500\u00a0kg/m3), compressive strength (1\u201326 MPa), and flexural strength (0.5\u20134.0\u00a0MPa).\nUse in wine bottling.\nAs late as the mid-17th century, French vintners did not use cork stoppers, using instead oil-soaked rags stuffed into the necks of bottles.\nWine corks can be made of either a single piece of cork, or composed of particles, as in champagne corks; corks made of granular particles are called \"agglomerated corks\".\nNatural cork closures are used for about 80% of the 20 billion bottles of wine produced each year. After a decline in use as wine-stoppers due to the increase in the use of synthetic alternatives, cork wine-stoppers are making a comeback and currently represent approximately 60% of wine-stoppers in 2016.\nBecause of the cellular structure of cork, it is easily compressed upon insertion into a bottle and will expand to form a tight seal. The interior diameter of the neck of glass bottles tends to be inconsistent, making this ability to seal through variable contraction and expansion an important attribute. However, unavoidable natural flaws, channels, and cracks in the bark make the cork itself highly inconsistent. In a 2005 closure study, 45% of corks showed gas leakage during pressure testing both from the sides of the cork as well as through the cork body itself.\nSince the mid-1990s, a number of wine brands have switched to alternative wine closures such as plastic stoppers, screw caps, or other closures. During 1972 more than half of the Australian bottled wine went bad due to corking. A great deal of anger and suspicion was directed at Portuguese and Spanish cork suppliers who were suspected of deliberately supplying bad cork to non-EEC wine makers to help prevent cheap imports. Cheaper wine makers developed the aluminium \"Stelvin\" cap with a polypropylene stopper wad. More expensive wines and carbonated varieties continued to use cork, although much closer attention was paid to the quality. Even so, some high premium makers prefer the Stelvin as it is a guarantee that the wine will be good even after many decades of ageing. Some consumers may have conceptions about screw caps being representative of lower quality wines, due to their cheaper price; however, in Australia, for example, much of the non-sparkling wine production now uses these Stelvin caps as a cork alternative, although some have recently switched back to cork citing issues using screw caps.\nThe alternatives to cork have both advantages and disadvantages. For example, screwtops are generally considered to offer a trichloroanisole (TCA) free seal, but they also reduce the oxygen transfer rate between the bottle and the atmosphere to almost zero, which can lead to a reduction in the quality of the wine. TCA is the main documented cause of cork taint in wine. However, some in the wine industry say natural cork stoppers are important because they allow oxygen to interact with wine for proper aging, and are best suited for wines purchased with the intent to age.\nStoppers which resemble natural cork very closely can be made by isolating the suberin component of the cork from the undesirable lignin, mixing it with the same substance used for contact lenses and an adhesive, and molding it into a standardized product, free of TCA or other undesirable substances. Composite corks with real cork veneers are used in cheaper wines. Celebrated Australian wine writer and critic James Halliday has written that since a cork placed inside the neck of a wine bottle is 350-year-old technology, it is logical to explore other more modern and precise methods of keeping wine safe.\nThe study \"Analysis of the life cycle of Cork, Aluminum and Plastic Wine Closures,\" conducted by PricewaterhouseCoopers and commissioned by a major cork manufacturer, Amorim, concluded that cork is the most environmentally responsible stopper, in a one-year life cycle analysis comparison with plastic stoppers and aluminum screw caps.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75822", "revid": "12424786", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75822", "title": "Oa (comics)", "text": ""}
{"id": "75824", "revid": "40138691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75824", "title": "Kevin Smith (New Zealand actor)", "text": "New Zealand actor and musician (1963\u20132002)\nKevin Tod Smith (16 March 1963 \u2013 15 February 2002) was a New Zealand actor and musician, best known for starring as the Greek God of war, Ares, in the TV series ' and in its two spin-offs \u2013 ' and \"Young Hercules\".\nEarly life.\nKevin Smith was born in Auckland in 1963. His mother was of Tongan and German ancestry and his father (of English descent) hailed from New Zealand. Smith's family moved to the South Island town of Timaru when he was eleven. He attended Timaru Boys' High School from 1976 to 1979. He was involved in the drama club at his high school.\nSmith played in rock and roll bands during high school, working out each morning at the gym and watching television in the afternoon. He painted and played rugby and hoped to become a member of New Zealand's world-famous rugby team, the All Blacks.\nAt the age of 17, Smith moved to Christchurch, where he lived in a flat above a fruit shop, worked at various jobs, and considered joining the police to help children, before enrolling in Canterbury University at the age of 20. In 1986, he married his high school sweetheart, Suzanne (Sue), with whom he had three sons: Oscar, Tyrone, and Willard.\nCareer.\nSmith played in several lo-fi experimental bands in New Zealand and released a few albums with Say Yes to Apes and Hyphen-Ears in the mid-1980s.\nAfter suffering a concussion while playing university rugby union in 1987, Smith was forced to sit on the sidelines for almost three weeks. His wife saw a casting call advertisement for the touring musical tribute to Elvis Presley, \"Are You Lonesome Tonight\", and signed up Kevin for an audition. He got the role of bodyguard JoJoe and was the lead understudy. Later that year, Smith joined Christchurch's Court Theatre and performed on stage for the next three years in a variety of roles including Don Pedro in Shakespeare's \"Much Ado About Nothing\" and Stanley Kowalski in Tennessee Williams' \"A Streetcar Named Desire\".\nIn 1989, Smith co-founded a Christchurch theatresports group, Scared Scriptless, performing live comedy. Later that year he got the role of charming \"bad boy\" Demian Vermeer on the New Zealand primetime soap opera \"Gloss\", and moved to Auckland to work on the series' final season.\nIn 1993, Smith played Lawrence Hayes in \"Desperate Remedies\". He then appeared as Paul Cosic in the last two seasons of the primetime drama \"Marlin Bay\". For this role, he won the 1995 New Zealand Film and Television Award for Best Supporting Actor.\nHe screen-tested for the lead role in Paramount's big budget action-film \"The Phantom\", but the role ultimately went to Billy Zane instead. His fellow \" cast member, low-budget-movie actor and Pacific Renaissance Pictures partner Bruce Campbell, was also one of the contenders for the role of the legendary superhero.\nAlso in 1995, Smith appeared on \" as Hercules' half-brother, Iphicles. Later he joined the cast of \"Xena: Warrior Princess\", as Ares, a role he would later play on \"Hercules\" and \"Young Hercules\" as well. As the dark and dangerously seductive Greek god of war, Smith gained legions of fans. During this time Kevin performed as Ares on \"Hercules: The Legendary Journeys\", \"Xena: Warrior Princess\" and \"Young Hercules\" simultaneously.\nWhile starring on \"Xena\", \"Hercules\" and \"Young Hercules\", Smith also appeared in other TV shows and films, notably as a Vietnam veteran in the feature film \"Channelling Baby\" and as detective John Lawless in three TV movies: \"Lawless\" (1999), \"Lawless 2: Dead Evidence\" (2000), and \"Lawless 3: Beyond Justice\" (2001). In the mockumentary \"Love Mussel\" (2001) he played himself covering the story of a small town in New Zealand following the discovery that a local shellfish, the geoduck, has similar effects to Viagra.\nSmith also continued to act in the theatre. During his career, he also appeared on several cassettes of alternative music, alongside other musicians, under the band names \"The Picnic Boys\" and \"Say Yes to Apes\" which was later renamed \"Hyphen-Smythe\". He was one of the lead singers of the celebrity band \"The Wide Lapels\", a band famous for its campy performances of the worst songs of the 1970s.\nDeath.\nEarly in 2002, Smith (who was preparing for his first Hollywood role in the Bruce Willis action film \"Tears of the Sun\") went to China to shoot the US-Chinese martial arts film \"\".\nOn 6 February 2002, Smith completed his work on the set in Shijiazhuang, 270\u00a0km southwest of Beijing. After celebrating with staff from Beijing Film Studio, and while waiting for a ride back to the hotel, he decided to walk around the China Central Television film studio grounds, and climbed a prop tower on the set of another film. He lost his footing and fell three stories, suffering severe head injuries. Smith was rushed by staff to a local hospital, then transferred to Beijing. He lapsed into a coma and was kept on life support for ten days until life support was discontinued. He died on 15 February without regaining consciousness.\nSmith was buried after a private funeral on 28 February 2002. The launch of the Kevin Smith Trust for Smith's children was announced later that day at a memorial service attended by old friends, New Zealand's acting community, and over a thousand mourners at the Aotea Centre, Auckland.\nA television documentary celebrating Smith's life and career, \"Remembering Kev: A Tribute to Kevin Smith\", aired on TV2 on the first anniversary of his death.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75827", "revid": "45364314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75827", "title": "Thing (comics)", "text": "Marvel Comics superhero\nThe Thing (Benjamin Jacob \"Ben\" Grimm) is a fictional superhero character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. He is a founding member of the Fantastic Four. The Thing was created by writer-editor Stan Lee and artist Jack Kirby, and he first appeared in \"Fantastic Four\" #1 (cover-dated Nov. 1961). Known for his trademark rocky appearance, he has superhuman strength, a sense of humor, and the battle cry and catchphrase \"It's clobberin' time!\". The Thing's personality and background is heavily modeled by Kirby's own background. A key feature throughout his character arc has him struggling to accept his newfound powers, which often culminates in his returning to his human form before going back to his mutated form. Eventually the Thing came to accept his mutated form and even found love with and married blind sculptor, Alicia Masters, and they adopted two alien children.\nThe Thing notably appeared in other media, including live-action films, with Michael Bailey Smith and Carl Ciarfalio playing the character in his human and mutated forms respectively in the unreleased film \"The Fantastic Four\", Michael Chiklis in the 2005 \"Fantastic Four\" film and its 2007 sequel ', Jamie Bell in the 2015 reboot, and Ebon Moss-Bachrach in the Marvel Cinematic Universe film ' (2025), who will reprise the role in ' (2026) and ' (2027).\nPublication history.\nCreated by writer-editor Stan Lee and artist Jack Kirby, the character first appeared in \"The Fantastic Four\" #1 (Nov. 1961). Although Thing's speech patterns are loosely based on Jimmy Durante, Kirby modeled the character after himself.\nIn addition to appearing in the Fantastic Four, the Thing has been the star of \"Marvel Two-in-One\", \"Strange Tales\" (with his fellow Fantastic Four member the Human Torch), and two incarnations of his own eponymous series, as well as numerous miniseries and one-shots.\n\"Strange Tales\".\nThe Thing joined his Fantastic Four partner and frequent rival the Human Torch in \"Strange Tales\" #124 (1964), which previously featured solo adventures of the Human Torch and backup Doctor Strange stories. The change was intended to liven the comic through the always humorous chemistry between the Torch and the Thing. They were replaced in #135 (1965) with the \"modern-day\" version of Nick Fury, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D., who had already been appearing in \"Sgt. Fury and his Howling Commandos\".\n\"Marvel Two-in-One\" (1974\u20131983).\nAfter a 1973 try-out in two issues of \"Marvel Feature\", the Thing starred in the long-running series \"Marvel Two-in-One\". In each issue, Ben Grimm would team up with another character from the Marvel Universe, often an obscure or colorful character. The series helped to introduce characters from Marvel's lineup, by way of teaming up with the more recognizable Thing. In 1992, Marvel reprinted four \"Two-in-One\" stories (#50, 51, 77 and 80) as a miniseries under the title \"The Adventures of the Thing\". The series was cancelled after 100 issues and seven \"Annual\"s to make way for a solo series.\n\"The Thing\" (1983\u20131986).\nThe cancellation of \"Marvel Two-in-One\" led to the Thing's first completely solo series, which ran for 36 issues. \"The Thing\" was originally written by John Byrne and later, Mike Carlin. The series also featured art by Ron Wilson and later by Paul Neary. It elaborated on Ben Grimm's poor childhood on Yancy Street in its early issues, and chronicled the Thing's later foray into the world of professional wrestling. It also featured a major storyline offshoot from Marvel's \"Secret Wars\" event, in which the Thing elects to remain on the Beyonder's Battleworld after discovering that the planet enables him to return to human form at will. A full third of the series' stories take place on Battleworld.\n2002\u2013present.\nIn 2002, Marvel released \"The Thing: Freakshow\", a four-issue miniseries written by Geoff Johns and illustrated by Scott Kolins, in which the Thing travels across the United States by train, inadvertently stumbling upon a deformed gypsy boy he once ridiculed as a teenager, who is now the super-strong main attraction of a troupe of traveling circus freaks. He later discovers a town full of alien Kree and Skrull warriors fighting over a Watcher infant.\nIn 2003, Marvel released a four-issue miniseries written by Evan Dorkin and illustrated by Dean Haspiel, \"The Thing: Night Falls on Yancy Street\". The story was more character-driven than the stories that usually feature the Thing. Tom Spurgeon found its outlook on relationships \"depressing\".\nAfter the success of the 2005 \"Fantastic Four\" feature film and events in the comics series that resulted in Grimm becoming a millionaire, the Thing was once again given his own series in 2005, \"The Thing\", written by Dan Slott and penciled by Andrea Di Vito and Kieron Dwyer. It was canceled with issue #8 in 2006.\nThe Thing was a member of the New Avengers, when that team debuted in their self-titled second series in 2010. He appeared as a regular character throughout the 2010\u20132013 \"New Avengers\" series, from issue #1 (Aug. 2010) through its final issue #34 (Jan. 2013).\nThe Thing had another solo series in 2021, written by Walter Mosley and illustrated by Tom Reilly, which lasted for six issues. A new limited series, \"Clobberin' Time\", was launched in 2023, written and illustrated by Steve Skroce. The series sees Thing teaming up with various heroes.\nFictional character biography.\nBackground.\nBorn on Yancy Street in New York City's Lower East Side, to a Jewish family, Benjamin Jacob \"Ben\" Grimm has an early life of poverty and hardship, shaping him into a tough, streetwise scrapper. His older brother Daniel, whom Ben idolizes, is killed in a street gang fight when Ben is eight years old. This portion of his own life is modeled on that of Jack Kirby, who grew up on tough Delancey Street, whose brother died when he was young, whose father was named Benjamin, and who was named Jacob at birth. Following the death of his parents, Ben is raised by his Uncle Jake (who married a much younger wife, Petunia, who becomes a frequent reference used by the character until her death). He comes to lead the Yancy Street gang at one point.\nExcelling in football as a high school student, Ben receives a full scholarship to Empire State University, where he first meets his eventual lifelong friend in a teenaged genius named Reed Richards, as well as future enemy Victor von Doom. Despite their being from radically different backgrounds, science student Richards describes to Grimm his dream of building a space rocket to explore the regions of space around Mars; Grimm jokingly agrees to fly that rocket when the day comes.\nThe details of his life story have been modified over the decades. Prior to the stories published in the 1970s, Grimm, after earning multiple advanced degrees in engineering, serves in the United States Marine Corps as a test pilot during World War II. These exploits are chronicled to a limited extent in \"Captain Savage and his Leatherneck Raiders\" #7. While in the military, Nick Fury sends him, Logan, and Carol Danvers to Vladivostok on a secret surveillance mission. Following this, he becomes an astronaut for NASA, taking part in attempts to reach the Moon, occurring at a time before any crewed spaceship had escaped Earth's gravity.\nReligion.\nIn keeping with an early taboo in the comic superhero world against revealing a character's religion, the fact that Grimm is Jewish was not explicitly revealed until four decades after his creation, in the story \"Remembrance of Things Past\" in \"Fantastic Four\" vol. 3, #56 (Aug. 2002). In this story, Grimm returns to his old neighborhood to find Mr. Sheckerberg, a pawn shop owner he knew as a child. Flashbacks during this story reveal Grimm's Jewish heritage. He recites the Shema, an important and oft-recited Jewish prayer (which, translated to English, begins \"Hear, O Israel\") over the dying Sheckerberg, who eventually recovers. In a later story, Grimm celebrates his Bar Mitzvah, as it has been 13 years, the age a Jewish boy celebrates his Bar Mitzvah, since he began his \"second life\" as the Thing. To celebrate the ceremony, he organizes a poker tournament and invites every available superhero.\nIn the 2004 \"Fantastic Four\" story \"Hereafter Part 1: A Glimpse of God\", the Thing is killed by an energy weapon wielded by Reed Richards, but is resurrected by God.\nOut of universe, Jack Kirby featured the Thing on his family's 1976 Hanukkah card.\nThe Thing.\nSome years later, Reed Richards, now a successful scientist, once again makes contact with Grimm. Richards has built his spaceship, and reminds Grimm of his promise to fly it. After the government denies him permission to fly the spaceship himself, Richards plots a clandestine flight piloted by Grimm and accompanied by his future wife Susan Storm, who had helped provide funding for the rocket, and her younger brother Johnny Storm, who helped the group gain access to the launch system. Although reluctant to fly the rocket, Ben is persuaded to do so by Sue, for whom he has a soft spot. During this unauthorized ride into the upper atmosphere of Earth and the Van Allen Belts, they are pelted by a cosmic ray storm and exposed to radiation against which the ship's shields offer no protection. Upon crashing down to Earth, each of the four learn that they have developed fantastic superhuman abilities. Grimm's skin is transformed into a thick, lumpy orange hide, which gradually evolves into his now-familiar craggy covering of large rocky plates. Richards proposes the quartet band together to use their new abilities for the betterment of humanity, and Grimm, in a moment of self-pity, adopts the super-heroic sobriquet, \"the Thing\". The team clashes with the Mole Man in their first appearance.\nTrapped in his monstrous form, Grimm is an unhappy yet reliable member of the team. He trusts in his friend Reed Richards to one day develop a cure for his condition. However, when he encounters blind sculptor Alicia Masters, Grimm develops an unconscious resistance to being transformed back to his human form. Subconsciously fearing that Masters prefers him to remain in the monstrous form of the Thing, Grimm's body rejects various attempts by Richards to restore his human form, lest he lose Masters' love. Grimm has remained a stalwart member of the Fantastic Four for years. The Thing first fought the Hulk early in his career, with many such further clashes over the years. Not long after that, he is first reverted to his human form, but is then restored to his Thing form to battle Doctor Doom.\nGrimm has been temporarily replaced on the team twice. First, after Grimm temporarily lost his powers and reverted to human form, Reed Richards hired Luke Cage (then using the code name \"Power Man\") to take his place until Richards had completed a Thing-suit for Ben (however, Ben unexpectedly reverted into the actual Thing again later on).\nYears later, after Grimm chose to remain on Battleworld in the aftermath of the \"Secret Wars\" due to his apparent control over his transformation between his human and mutated states, he asked the She-Hulk to fill in for him. Mister Fantastic did leave him with the device needed to return to Earth when it comes time. The Thing's time on Battleworld lasted until Ben eventually decides to return home after defeating Ultron and slaying his manifested dark side Grimm the Sorcerer. Once he left, the planet had no more reason to exist and so it broke apart.\nOn returning to Earth, he learns that Alicia had become romantically involved with his teammate Johnny Storm during his absence (it is eventually revealed that this Alicia was the Skrull impostor Lyja). An angry Grimm wallows in self-pity for a time, later on accompanying the West Coast Avengers, and actually joining the team for a while. Eventually, he returns to his surrogate family as leader of the Fantastic Four when Mr. Fantastic and the Invisible Woman leave the team to raise their son Franklin, at which point Ben invites Crystal and Ms. Marvel II (Sharon Ventura) to fill their slots. Soon after Sharon and Ben are irradiated with cosmic rays, Sharon becomes the She-Thing, lumpy much like Ben was in his first few appearances, while Ben mutates into a new rockier, more powerful form.\nAfter being further mutated into the more monstrous rocky form, Ben is briefly changed back to his human form, and returned leadership of the Fantastic Four to Reed Richards. Grimm once more returned to his traditional orange rocky form out of love for Ms. Marvel. He remains a steadfast member of the Fantastic Four.\nIn the 21st century.\nIn a \"Fantastic Four\" comic published in 2005, Ben learns that he is entitled to a large sum of money, his share of the Fantastic Four fortune, which Reed Richards had never touched, as he had the shares of the other teammates (who were family members) to pay off various debts of the group.\nThe Thing uses his newfound wealth to build a community center in his old neighborhood on Yancy Street, the \"Grimm Youth Center\". Thinking the center is named after the Thing himself, the Yancy Street Gang plans to graffiti the building exterior, but discovers the building was actually named after Daniel Grimm, Ben's deceased older brother and former leader of the gang. The relationship between the Yancy Streeters and the Thing is then effectively reconciled, or at least changed to a more good-natured, playful rivalry (as exemplified by the comic ending, with the Yancy Streeters spray-painting the sleeping Thing).\nSome personality traits of the cantankerously lovable, occasionally cigar-smoking, Jewish native of the Lower East Side are popularly recognized as having been inspired by those of co-creator Jack Kirby, who in interviews has said he intended Grimm to be an alter ego of himself.\nCivil War/The Initiative.\nInitially in the 2006 storyline \"Civil War\", Ben is a reluctant member of the pro-registration side of the controversy over the Superhuman Registration Act (SHRA), until he witnesses a battle on Yancy Street in which Captain America's forces try to rescue captured allies held by Iron Man's forces. The Fantastic Four's foes the Mad Thinker and the Puppet Master try to escalate the battle, using a mind-controlled Yancy Streeter to deliver a bomb. The young man dies and the Thing verbally blasts both sides for not caring about the civilians caught in the conflict. He announces that, while he thinks the registration is wrong, he is also not going to fight the government and is thus leaving the country for France. While in France, he meets \"Les H\u00e9ros de Paris\" (\"The Heroes of Paris\").\nBen returns to New York as both sides of the SHRA battle in the city. Indifferent to choosing sides, Ben focuses on protecting civilians from harm.\nIn \"Fantastic Four\" #543 (March 2007), Ben celebrates the Fantastic Four's 11th anniversary along with the Human Torch, and latecomers Reed and Sue. The aftermath of the Civil War is still being felt in this issue, as Ben and Johnny (and even Franklin Richards) consider the future of the team and Reed and Sue's marriage. When Reed and Sue arrive near the issue's end, they announce that they are taking a break from the team and have found two replacement members: the Black Panther, and Storm of the X-Men. The title of the story in this issue is a quote from Ben, \"Come on, Suzie, don't leave us hangin'.\"\nBen Grimm served as one of the pallbearers at the memorial service for Captain America, along with Tony Stark, Ms. Marvel, Rick Jones, T'Challa and Sam Wilson.\nBen has been identified as Number 53 of the 142 registered superheroes who appear on the cover of the comic book \"\" #1.\n\"World War Hulk\".\nBen once again tries to take on the Hulk within the events of the 2007 storyline \"World War Hulk\" to buy Reed Richards the time he needs to complete his plans for the Hulk. Ben gives his best shots, but the Hulk takes his punches without slowing down. The Hulk proceeds to knock out Ben by punching both sides of his head simultaneously. He is later seen captive in Madison Square Garden, which the Hulk has turned into a gladiatorial arena, with an obedience disk fitted on him.\nReleased from his imprisonment, Ben, Spider-Man, and Luke Cage attack the Warbound, with Ben fighting Korg. Their battle is brought to an abrupt end when Hiroim repairs the damage to Manhattan Island, drawing energy from Ben and Korg to do so.\nSecret Invasion.\nIn the \"Secret Invasion: Fantastic Four\" miniseries, the Skrull Lyja, posing as Sue, sends the Baxter Building, with Ben, Johnny, Franklin, and Valeria Richards inside, into the Negative Zone. Not long after their arrival, Ben has to protect Franklin and Valeria from an impending onslaught of giant insects. With the aid of the Tinkerer, who Ben broke out of the Negative Zone Prison, they, with the exception of Lyja who stayed behind, were able to return to the regular Marvel Universe just after the invasion was over.\nHeroic Age.\nFollowing the Siege of Asgard, Luke Cage asks Ben to serve on his New Avengers team. Although Ben states that his loyalty will always be to the Fantastic Four, Cage confirms that he is not asking Ben to resign from his original team, merely suggesting that Ben split his time between the two teams, as Wolverine divides his time between the X-Men and the Avengers.\n\"Fear Itself\".\nDuring the 2011 \"Fear Itself\" storyline, Ben lifts one of the seven fallen hammers of the Serpent and becomes Angrir: Breaker of Souls. In this form, he then destroys Yancy Street and Avengers Tower, and battles Spider-Man, Mister Fantastic and Invisible Woman, before confronting Thor, who seriously wounds him. Franklin then uses his powers to restore Ben to his normal self, free from the Serpent's possession.\n\"Original Sin\".\nIn the 2014 \"Original Sin\" storyline, after learning from the eye of the murdered Uatu that Johnny Storm unintentionally sabotaged an experiment that could have allowed Grimm to become human again, Ben is found having apparently murdered the Puppet Master; the crime was committed in a sealed room that even Reed Richards could barely penetrate, with Alicia Masters as the only witness. Although Ben claims innocence, his depression over recent events prompts him to accept incarceration in the Raft. Although power-dampeners in the Raft restrict his strength to a more manageable level, he is attacked by various other thick-skinned superhumans \u2014 including the Armadillo and Ironclad \u2014 on orders of the current 'boss' of the prison, Sharon Ventura, the She-Thing. Eventually, Ben forms an alliance with the Sandman and manages to escape the prison with the aid of a plan coordinated by the She-Hulk and Ant-Man, allowing him to rejoin Sue and Johnny to investigate Reed's recent abduction, revealing that the dead Puppet Master came from the alternate Earth Franklin had created.\nPost-Secret Wars.\nAs the Fantastic Four disbanded in the aftermath of the \"Secret Wars\" storyline, the Thing is working with the Guardians of the Galaxy, and the Human Torch is acting as an ambassador with the Inhumans and becoming part of the Uncanny Avengers.\nDuring the 2017 \"Secret Empire\" storyline, the Thing appears as a member of the Underground, which is a resistance movement against Hydra ever since they took over the United States, until the real Captain America returns, ending Hydra's empires and defeating his Hydra counterpart.\nFantastic Four Return.\nTo help the Thing cope with Mister Fantastic and the Invisible Woman's disappearance, the Human Torch takes him on a journey through the Multiverse, using the Multisect to find them. They have not been able to find Mister Fantastic and the Invisible Woman, as they return to Earth-616 empty-handed. The Thing and the Human Torch were reunited with Mister Fantastic and the Invisible Woman to help alongside other superheroes who were part of the Fantastic Four (including X-Men member Iceman) fight the Griever at the End of All Things after Mister Fantastic persuaded the Griever to let him summon the Thing and the Human Torch. As the Thing and his teammates finally return to 616, while the Future Foundation stays behind to keep learning about the Multiverse, the Thing reveals to them that he and Alicia proposed their wedding and are about to get married soon. Although the Baxter Building is now owned by a new superhero team, Fantastix, the Thing allows his teammates to use his hometown in Yancy Street as their current operation base.\nRelationships.\nThe Thing is generally well liked by other heroes within the Marvel Universe. Grimm's relationship with his teammates has been a close but occasionally edgy one given his temper. He and Johnny Storm (the Human Torch) often argue and clash but they do respect each other.\nGrimm's first love interest is the blind Alicia Masters, and he is intensely protective of her. When Johnny starts a relationship of his own with Alicia and they become engaged, Grimm is upset. However, he has to concede that, unlike himself and his stone-covered body, Johnny can \"be a man\". He agrees to act as best man at their wedding. The relationship between Alicia and Johnny ends with the revelation that the Alicia that Johnny fell in love with is actually Lyja, a member of the shape-changing alien race known as the Skrulls. The real Alicia, who was kept in suspended animation, is rescued by the Fantastic Four and reunited with the Thing.\nBen begins dating a teacher named Debbie Green. Ben soon asks Debbie to marry him, which she accepts. He later leaves her at the altar when he realizes the dangers of the wives of superheroes.\nBen and Alicia, on the other hand, do get married, despite an attack by Galactus. Later, in the aftermath of conflict between the Kree, the Skrulls and the Cotati, Ben and Alicia adopt two orphans, Kree boy Jo-Venn and Skrull girl N'Kala.\nGrimm is best friends with Reed Richards, whom he addresses with the nickname \"Stretch\", due to Richards' natural height and his ability to stretch his body. However, Grimm also holds Reed responsible for his condition, since Richards had dismissed the potential danger of the cosmic rays that gave them their powers, although Grimm had taken them very seriously. At times of real frustration towards Reed, Grimm refers to him simply as \"Richards\".\nGrimm is the godfather of Reed and Sue's son Franklin, who affectionately calls him \"Unca Ben\".\nPowers and abilities.\nThe Thing's primary superhuman power is his great physical strength. Over the years, as a result of further mutation and rigorous training on machines designed by Reed Richards, his strength has increased dramatically.\nHe is capable of surviving impacts of great force without sustaining injury, as his body is covered with an orange, flexible, rock-like hide. He is also able to withstand gunfire from high-caliber weapons as well as armor-piercing rounds. It is possible to breach his exterior, and he does bleed as a result. One such instance involved Wolverine's adamantium claws scarring The Thing's face.\nThe Thing's highly advanced musculature generates fewer fatigue toxins during physical activity, granting him superhuman levels of stamina. When in his Thing form, he has only four fingers on each hand and four toes on each foot. The loss of one digit of each hand and foot, aside from the increase in volume of the remainder, does not affect his manual dexterity. That said, he has been shown doing things like holding a pencil and using it to dial a phone (even with rotary dials), or to push buttons on a keypad, to use devices that would ordinarily be too small for him.\nAlthough he very rarely does so, the Thing is capable of performing super-human leaps several stories high.\nAside from his physical attributes, the Thing's senses can withstand higher levels of sensory stimulation than an ordinary human, with the exception of his sense of touch. His lungs are possessed of greater efficiency and volume than those of an ordinary human. As a result, the Thing is capable of holding his breath for much longer periods of time.\nThe Thing is an exceptionally skilled pilot, due to his time spent as a test pilot in the United States Marine Corps and as a founding member of the Fantastic Four. He is also a formidable and relentless hand-to-hand combatant. His fighting style incorporates elements of boxing, wrestling, judo, jujitsu, and street-fighting techniques, as well as hand-to-hand combat training from the military.\nOn occasion, when Ben Grimm regained his human form and lost his Thing powers, he used a suit of powered battle armor designed by Reed Richards that simulated the strength and durability of his mutated body, albeit to a weaker degree. Wearing the suit, which was designed to physically resemble his rocky form, Ben continued to participate in the Fantastic Four's adventures. The first exo-skeletal Thing suit was destroyed after Galactus restored Ben's natural powers and form. A second suit was built (presumably by Richards) and used sporadically when Ben had been returned to his human form again.\nReed has failed many times to restore Ben permanently to human form. When Doom reverses Sharon Ventura's similar cosmic-ray transformation, he uses both science and magic. Ben is almost immortal when in his Thing form, as he only ages when he is human. After Franklin and Valeria create a formula that allows Ben to become human for one week each year, Reed and Nathaniel traveled over 3,000 years into the future to see Ben still alive after all that time.\nOther versions.\nAge of Apocalypse.\nIn the Age of Apocalypse, Ben Grimm never becomes the Thing, and instead is a Human High Council Agent, fighting Apocalypse's forces, alongside Clint Barton (Hawkeye), Donald Blake (Thor), Carol Danvers (Ms. Marvel), Gateway, Gwen Stacy, Tony Stark (Iron Man), Susan Storm (Invisible Woman), and Victor von Doom (Doctor Doom). In his place, Bruce Banner becomes a Grey Hulk-like monster called the Thing. In \"What If?: X-Men Age of Apocalypse\" #1 (2007), Ben is a member of the Defenders, the Age of Apocalypse version of the Avengers/Ultimates.\nAge of Ultron.\nIn the \"Age of Ultron\" reality, the Thing along with Human Torch and Mister Fantastic are shown to seemingly perish by attacks from multiple Ultron drones.\nCounter Earth.\nOn Counter Earth, counterparts of the Fantastic Four hijack an experimental spaceship to be the first humans in space. Man-Beast negates the effects of the cosmic radiation for all of them except Reed Richards who succumbs to the effects a decade later. Ben Grimm's counterpart is shown to be unaffected by the cosmic radiation and is currently assisting Richards by gathering data held by the High Evolutionary.\nEarth-A.\nIn this universe, Ben and Reed Richards are the only occupants of the experimental spacecraft that exposes them to cosmic rays. Ben is called \"Mr. Fantastic\" and has stretching and flame powers instead.\nEarth-818.\nOn Earth-818, which was conquered by Multiversal Masters of Evil member Black Skull, a version of Ben Grimm called Infinity Thing appears as a member of the resistance against Black Skull that is led by Ant-Man (this Earth's version of Tony Stark). He is described as an astronaut who went into outer space and came back with a multicolored rock-skinned body. Following Black Skull's defeat, Ant-Man joins Robbie Reyes and his Deathlok companion in their quest to liberate the enslaved Earths from the Multiversal Masters of Evil as he leaves Infinity Thing and Wonder Man to rebuild Earth-818.\nFollowing Ghost Rider's sacrifice to stop the flow of the ancient Multiverse's energies from the other side, Infinity Thing and Wonder Man are shown to be members of the Multiversal Avengers.\n\"Fantastic Four: The End\".\nIn this six-issue miniseries, the entire Solar System is being colonized by humanity, with humanity undergoing a Golden Age because of the use of technology developed by Reed Richards in an effort to create a utopia. The Thing is married to Alicia Masters, has three super-powered children, and resides on Mars with the Inhumans. He is now capable of shifting between his human form and 'Thing' form at will.\n\"Heroes Reborn\" (1996).\nIn the 1996 \"Heroes Reborn\" universe, Ben and Johnny share a more dangerous adversarial relationship, knowing each other even before the ill-fated spaceflight.\n\"Heroes Reborn\" (2021).\nIn the 2021 \"Heroes Reborn\" universe, Benjamin Grimm and Reed Richards never traveled to outer space and are just normal humans.\n\"House of M\".\nIn the \"House of M\" limited series, Ben is the pilot in Reed Richards' voyage to space, alongside Susan Storm and John Jameson. Like the others, Grimm is mutated, though he is the only survivor of the rocket's explosion. Ben is transformed into a rock-skinned creature with superhuman strength and a diminished intellect. He is taken in by Dr. Doom, who names him the It. The It becomes one of the Fearsome Four, though he is treated like an animal and often the victim of Doom's frustrations.\nMarvel 1602.\nIn Neil Gaiman's \"Marvel 1602\", Benjamin Grimm is the captain of the ship \"The Fantastick\", before gaining his abilities from the Anomaly. His power is associated with the classical element of earth.\nIn the sequel, \"1602: Fantastick Four\", Benjamin finds work as an actor with William Shakespeare's troupe, where he can hide his monstrous form behind false whiskers as Falstaff. He is soon forced to reveal himself, however, when Otto von Doom's vulture soldiers kidnap Shakespeare.\nMarvel 2099.\nOn the Marvel 2099 reality of Earth-96943, the Thing of 2099 is a clone of Ben Grimm. He and his fellow Fantastic Four clones were created by the 2099 version of Uatu the Watcher.\nMarvel Mangaverse.\nIn the Marvel Mangaverse comics, Benjamin (pronounced \"Ben-ya-meen\") Grimm is a member of the Megascale Metatalent Response Team Fantastic Four.\nMarvel Zombies.\nIn this miniseries, the Thing, along with the other three members of the Fantastic Four, is a cannibalistic zombie because of an alien virus infection that has spread to all heroes. Reed Richards has gone insane after deliberately infecting Sue Storm, Johnny Storm, and Ben Grimm. They turn into zombies and infect Reed, too, who willingly allows them to do so to feel what being infected is like. Zombie Reed contacts Ultimate Reed and his Ultimate team counterparts and is subsequently foiled. They are even foiled by Magneto, who had saved Ultimate Reed from the zombies. The Thing and the others find Ultimate Doctor Doom's body swapped with Ultimate Reed. Ultimate Reed (in Ultimate Doom's body) kills all of the Fantastic Four. The Thing is seemingly killed by Reed/Doom when he rips off his arm and beats him with it, but his remains are sent back to his universe.\nMC2.\nIn the alternative future timeline of the Marvel universe published under the MC2 imprint, Ben is still a member of the Fantastic Four, whose roster has expanded to make them the Fantastic 5. In this future, he is married to Sharon Ventura and has a set of twin children by her (Jacob and Alyce), though they are now divorced. He appears alongside the F5 whenever they appear in the \"Spider-Girl\" series and related mini-series.\nNew Amsterdam.\nIn \"Marvel Two-in-One\" #50 (April 1979), Reed Richards advises Ben that the cure Reed has developed for his condition will not work. Ben time-travels to the past to give himself the cure at an earlier stage, where it might work. It does, but on return to the present, nothing has changed. Reed advises him that he succeeded only in creating an alternative universe. In \"Marvel Two-in-One\" #100 (June 1983), Reed examines records of that trip and determines that Ben did not create that reality after all, based on a newspaper that shows the name of the city as \"New Amsterdam\" instead of \"New York\". Ben returns to that reality, where Ben Grimm is a bartender and the leader of the remaining humans in a post-apocalyptic city.\n\"Ruins\".\nIn Warren Ellis' 1995 \"Ruins\" miniseries, Ben refuses to fly Reed's ship the \"Astraea\", feeling it inadequately engineered. Victor von Doom pilots it instead. This results in the horrific mutation and subsequent deaths of all on board. Grimm avoids becoming the Thing, but is left to live with the guilt of thinking he could have prevented the tragedy. Grimm's decision to refuse Richards' offer seems to be the single moment that caused this reality to go horribly wrong, with ramifications leading to a corrupt government, concentration camps and the horrific fates of the would-be Marvels of this universe.\n\"Spider-Gwen\".\nIn this reality where Gwen Stacy became Spider-Woman, Ben Grimm is an NYPD cop who never became Thing. Noticeably out of all the Fantastic Four members in this reality, Ben is the only one who is an adult, as Johnny and Sue are child television stars and Reed is a kid genius.\nUltimate Marvel.\nIn the Ultimate Marvel universe, Ben is Reed's childhood friend: Ben would protect Reed from bullies and Reed would help Ben with his homework. When Ben is invited to watch Reed's teleportation experiment, he is caught in it with Reed and the others. The resulting event gives Ben a rocky hide and enormous strength.\nIn one storyline, the four travel through time to prevent Reed's experiment from failing. Instead, he contacts the Skrulls, and the resultant trade of information gives humanity super-powers from the aliens, rather than from the accident. While most of the Fantastic Four gain the same powers they would have in most other worlds, Ben himself opts to refuse. When the Skrulls betray humanity and the super-powered humans are all killed, Ben confronts their leader and travels back in time once more to set things \"right,\" although he sacrifices himself in the process.\nLater, Ben transforms again, potentially thanks to Reed, back to a more human form, as if the rocky exterior were a cocoon. In his new form, he typically appears human, but his skin may take on a purple glow accompanying moments of strength. Other abilities include the capacity to move through Susan's force fields and others hinted at but yet unclear. He later demonstrated the ability to go back and forth between his two forms.\nAt the end of the Doomsday trilogy, Ben and Susan are engaged.\nUltimate Universe.\nDuring the \"Ultimate Invasion\" storyline, Maker traveled to Earth-6160 and remade it into his own image. One of the things he did was to make sure that those who would have become the Fantastic Four did not fly into the cosmic storm. Maker's memory log lists Ben Grimm as \"deceased\". This was further elaborated in Doom's flashback where they took the shuttle into outer space against Franklin Storm's orders. Because of Maker's sabotage, Ben Grimm and Johnny Storm were killed, Susan Storm sustained terminal radiation poisoning, and Reed Richards was imprisoned.\n\"What If?\".\nThing has been featured in several \"What If\" stories.\nIn other media.\nMiscellaneous.\nThe Thing appears in the BBC radio adaptation of the \"Spider Man\" comics, voiced by Gary Martin.\nReception.\nIn 2011, \"IGN\" ranked the Thing 18th in the \"Top 100 Comic Book Heroes\", and 23rd in their list of \"The Top 50 Avengers\" in 2012. The Thing was named \"Empire\" magazine's tenth of \"The 50 Greatest Comic Book Characters\" in 2008.\nThe Thing was ranked #2 on a listing of Marvel Comics' monster characters in 2015.\nIn 2022, \"Screen Rant\" included The Thing in their \"MCU: 10 Most Desired Fan Favorite Debuts Expected In The Multiverse Saga\" list.\nLee later noted that The Thing was the most popular character in the Fantastic Four; he surmised that the character fit the classic grotesque archetype, much as Quasimodo was more popular than Claude Frollo, Esmerelda or the more \"glamorous\" characters in \"The Hunchback of Notre-Dame\". For his next superhero creation, he deliberately drew on that popularity in creating the similarly monstrous Hulk.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75828", "revid": "49870617", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75828", "title": "Johnson County, Wyoming", "text": "County in Wyoming, United States\nJohnson County is a county in the north central part of the U.S. state of Wyoming. At the 2020 United States census, the population was 8,447. The county seat is Buffalo. Kaycee is the only other incorporated town in the county. Johnson County lies to the southeast of the Bighorn Mountains along Interstate 25 and Interstate 90. The Powder River flows northward through eastern Johnson County.\nHistory.\nJohnson County was created on December 8, 1875, as Pease County from parts of Albany, Carbon and Sweetwater Counties. It was organized in 1881. The county was initially named for Dr. E. L. Pease of Uinta County. But, in 1879, the county was renamed Johnson, for E. P. Johnson, a Cheyenne attorney.\nIn 1888, Sheridan County was created from a portion of Johnson County. In 1890, Big Horn County was created from Johnson County along with land from Fremont County and Sheridan County.\nFrom 1889 to 1893, Johnson County was the scene of the Johnson County War, where wealthy cattle ranchers seeking to control limited resources enlisted hired guns to fight smaller settlers and homesteaders.\nIn 1911, the boundaries of Johnson County and adjacent Crook, Natrona and Weston Counties were adjusted to run along federal land survey lines.\nGeography.\nAccording to the US Census Bureau, the county has an area of , of which is land and (0.5%) is water.\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 census, the county had a population of 8,447. Of the residents, 20.9% were under the age of 18 and 26.0% were 65 years of age or older; the median age was 48.0 years. For every 100 females there were 99.4 males, and for every 100 females age 18 and over there were 98.8 males.\nThe racial makeup of the county was 92.0% White, 0.3% Black or African American, 0.9% American Indian and Alaska Native, 0.2% Asian, 1.3% from some other race, and 5.2% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino residents of any race comprised 4.1% of the population.\nThere were 3,718 households in the county, of which 25.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them and 23.4% had a female householder with no spouse or partner present. About 31.4% of all households were made up of individuals and 16.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.\nThere were 4,598 housing units, of which 19.1% were vacant. Among occupied housing units, 75.6% were owner-occupied and 24.4% were renter-occupied. The homeowner vacancy rate was 2.0% and the rental vacancy rate was 13.6%.\n2010 census.\nAt the 2010 United States census, there were 8,569\u00a0people, 3,782\u00a0households, and 2,410\u00a0families in the county. The population density was . There were 4,553 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup was 96.5% white, 1.1% American Indian, 0.4% Asian, 0.2% black or African American, 0.7% from other races, and 1.1% from two or more races. Those of Hispanic or Latino origin made up 3.2% of the population. In terms of ancestry, 31.6% were German, 22.4% were Irish, 18.3% were English, and 6.1% were American.\nOf the 3,782\u00a0households, 26.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.5% were married couples living together, 6.7% had a female householder with no husband present, 36.3% were non-families, and 31.8% of all households were made up of individuals. The average household size was 2.25 and the average family size was 2.83. The median age was 44.8 years.\nThe median household income was $45,638 and the median family income was $58,983. Males had a median income of $40,572 and females $30,352. The per capita income was $26,753. About 5.9% of families and 8.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 8.0% of those under age 18 and 7.3% of those age 65 or over.\n2000 census.\nAt the 2000 United States census, there were 7,075 people, 2,959 households and 2,006 families in the county. The population density was . There were 3,503 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 97.03% White, 0.08% Black or African American, 0.64% Native American, 0.11% Asian, 0.55% from other races, and 1.58% from two or more races. 2.09% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 27.0% were of German, 15.2% English, 10.8% Irish and 7.9% American ancestry.\nThere were 2,959 households, of which 28.70% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.00% were married couples living together, 7.10% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.20% were non-families. 28.50% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.00% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.36 and the average family size was 2.89.\n24.20% of the population were under the age of 18, 5.60% from 18 to 24, 23.50% from 25 to 44, 28.70% from 45 to 64, and 18.00% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 43 years. For every 100 females there were 96.60 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.30 males.\nThe median household income was $34,012 and the median family income was $42,299. Males had a median income of $29,271 and females $20,469. The per capita income was $19,030. About 7.20% of families and 10.10% of the population were below the poverty line, including 9.10% of those under age 18 and 10.60% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment and infrastructure.\nJohnson County voters are reliably Republican. Since Wyoming statehood, the voters of this county have selected the Democratic Party candidate in only three national elections: William Jennings Bryan in 1896; Woodrow Wilson in 1912 by two votes and with only 37.5 percent of the total vote (due to Roosevelt's independent run that year); and Franklin D. Roosevelt by seventy votes in his 1932 landslide. FDR did not carry the county in his re-election campaigns; in 1936 Johnson was Alf Landon\u2019s second-best county in the Western United States behind Rio Blanco County, Colorado. In the 1964 Democratic landslide it was Barry Goldwater's best county in Wyoming, and second-best in the West behind Utah's traditional banner Republican county of Kane.\nThe Wyoming Department of Health Veteran's Home of Wyoming, an assisted living facility for veterans and their dependents, is in Buffalo. The Wyoming Board of Charities and Reform operated the facility until the agency was dissolved as a result of a state constitutional amendment passed in November 1990.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75829", "revid": "15170843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75829", "title": "Johnson County War", "text": "1889\u20131893 range conflict in Johnson County, Wyoming\nThe Johnson County War, also known as the War on Powder River and the Wyoming Range War, was a range war in Johnson County, Wyoming from 1889 to 1893. The conflict began when cattle companies started ruthlessly persecuting alleged rustlers in the area, many of whom were settlers who competed with them for livestock, land and water rights. As violence swelled between the large established ranchers and the smaller settlers in the state, it culminated in the Powder River Country, when the ranchers hired gunmen to invade the county. The gunmen's initial incursion in the territory alerted the small farmers and ranchers, as well as the state lawmen, and they formed a posse of 200 men that led to a grueling standoff, ending when the United States Cavalry on the orders of President Benjamin Harrison relieved the two forces, although further fighting persisted.\nThe events have since become a highly mythologized and symbolic story of the Wild West and over the years variations of the story have come to include some of its most famous historical figures. In addition to being one of the best-known range wars of the American frontier, its themes, especially class warfare, served as a basis for numerous popular novels, films and television shows in the Western genre.\nBackground.\nConflict over land was a common occurrence in the development of the American West, but was particularly prevalent during the late 19th century, when large portions of the West were being settled by new immigrants for the first time through the Homestead Acts. It is a period that one historian, Richard Maxwell Brown, has called the \"Western Civil War of Incorporation\", of which the Johnson County War was a part.\nIn the early days of Wyoming, most of the land was in public domain, which was open to stock raising as an open range and farmlands for homesteading. Large numbers of cattle were turned loose on the open range by ranches. Each spring, round-ups were held to separate the cattle belonging to different ranchers. Before a round-up, an orphan or stray calf was sometimes surreptitiously branded, which was the common way to identify the cow's owners. However, as more and more homesteaders called \"nesters\" and \"grangers\" moved into Wyoming, competition for land and water soon enveloped the state, and the large cattle companies, also known as \u201ccattle barons\u201d, reacted by monopolizing large areas of the open range, preventing homesteaders from using it. The often uneasy relationship between the wealthier ranchers and smaller settlers of relatively modest means steadily aggravated after the harsh winter of 1886\u20131887, when a series of blizzards and temperatures of , followed by an extremely hot and dry summer, ravaged the frontier. Thousands of cattle were lost in the calamity.\nTo protect whatever livestock survived, the cattle barons reacted with a catch-all allegation of rustling against their competition. Hostilities worsened when the Wyoming legislature passed the Maverick Act, which stated that all unbranded cattle in the open range automatically belonged to the large ranchers. The cattle barons also held a firm grip on Wyoming's stock interests by limiting the number of small ranchers and grangers who could participate, including in the annual round-ups. They also forbade their employees from owning cattle for fear of additional competition, and they threatened anyone they suspected to be rustlers. Although at a financial disadvantage, the homesteaders outnumbered the cattle barons significantly, and they tried to use this to win court cases by participating in the jury. However, records showed that they were still not successful.\nWyoming Stock Growers Association.\nMany of the large ranching outfits in Wyoming were organized as the Wyoming Stock Growers Association (the WSGA) and gathered socially at the Cheyenne Club in Cheyenne, Wyoming. Comprising some of the state's wealthiest and most influential residents, the organization held a great deal of political sway in the state and region. The WSGA organized the cattle industry by scheduling roundups and cattle shipments. The WSGA also employed an agency of detectives to investigate cases of cattle theft from its members' holdings. Grangers and rustlers often intermixed with one another in the community, making it more difficult for detectives to differentiate the criminals and the innocent homesteaders.\nRustling in the local area was likely increasing because of the harsh grazing conditions, and the illegal exploits of organized groups of rustlers were becoming well publicized in the late 1880s. Well-armed outfits of horse and cattle rustlers roamed across various portions of Wyoming and Montana, with Montana vigilantes such as the infamous Stuart's Stranglers declaring \"War on the Rustlers\" in 1884. Bandits taking refuge in the infamous hideout known as the Hole-in-the-Wall were also preying upon the herds. Frank M. Canton, Sheriff of Johnson County in the early 1880s and better known as a detective for the WSGA, was a prominent figure in supposedly eliminating these criminals from Wyoming. Before the events in Johnson County, Canton had already developed a reputation as a lethal gunman. At a young age he had worked as a cowboy in Texas, and in 1871 he started a career in robbery and cattle rustling, as well as killing a Buffalo Soldier on October 10, 1874. Historian Harry Sinclair Drago described Canton as a \"merciless, congenital, emotionless killer. For pay, he murdered eight\u2014very likely ten\u2014men.\"\nWar.\nEarly killings.\nOn July 20, 1889, a range detective from the WSGA named George Henderson accused Ella Watson (better known as Cattle Kate), a local rancher, of stealing cattle from a fellow rancher by the name of Albert John Bothwell. The cattlemen sent riders to seize Watson before capturing her husband Jim Averell as well. Both of them were subsequently lynched. This gruesome act was one of the rare cases in the Old West in which a woman was lynched, an event that appalled many of the local residents and paved the way for future events in the war. County Sheriff Frank Hadsell arrested six men for the lynching and a trial date was set. However, before the trial, threats were sent to the witnesses who were to testify against the aggressors. One of those witnesses was young Gene Crowder, who mysteriously disappeared under unknown circumstances before the trial. Another, Averell's nephew and foreman Frank Buchanan, disappeared from the county as well after a shootout with unknown suspects, and was presumed to be hiding or murdered. Ralph Cole, another nephew of Averell's, died on the day of the trial from poisoning.\nEnemies of the WSGA soon fought back. Henderson, the range detective who had accused Watson, was murdered near Sweetwater Creek in October 1890. The cattle barons soon tightened their control and hunted down those who tried to oppose them. The double lynching of the Averells was followed by the lynching of Tom Waggoner, a horse trader from Newcastle, Wyoming, in June 1891. A friend of Waggoner named Jimmy the Butcher, who was once arrested for rustling cattle belonging to the Standard Cattle Company, was also murdered. Range detective Tom Smith killed a suspected rustler, and when he was indicted for murder, political connections to the WSGA secured his release. These killings precipitated more hostilities and violence in the years to come.\nAfter the lynchings of their prominent competitors, the WSGA's control over the range was undisputed, until a group of smaller ranchers formed the Northern Wyoming Farmers and Stock Growers' Association (NWFSGA) to compete with the WSGA, led by a local cowboy named Nate Champion. Upon hearing this, members of the WSGA immediately viewed the new association as a threat to their hold on the stock interests. The WSGA then blacklisted members of the NWFSGA from the round-ups in order to stop their operations. However, the NWFSGA refused the orders to disband and instead publicly announced their plans to hold their own round-up in the spring of 1892.\nSoon, the prominent cattlemen sent out an assassination squad to kill Champion on the morning of November 1, 1891. Champion and another man, named Ross Gilbertson, were sleeping in a cabin near the Middle Fork of the Powder River when a group of armed men went inside. Only two were able to fit into the small cabin while four others stood by outside. Champion was immediately awakened by the intrusion, and as the gunmen pointed their weapons at him, Champion reached for his own pistol hidden under a pillow and a shootout commenced. Champion successfully shot two of the gunmen, mortally wounding and killing assassin Billy Lykins. The rest of the assassination squad subsequently fled. Champion was left uninjured except for some facial burns from gunpowder. In a subsequent investigation of the attack, the names of those involved were leaked to two ranchers: John A. Tisdale and Orley \"Ranger\" Jones. However, both men were ambushed and murdered while they were riding, which outraged many of the small ranchers and farmers in the county.\nInvaders.\nThe WSGA, led by Frank Wolcott (WSGA member and large North Platte rancher), hired gunmen with the intention of eliminating alleged rustlers in Johnson County and breaking up the NWFSGA. By that time, prominent names in Wyoming started taking sides. Acting governor Amos W. Barber supported the cattlemen, who blamed the small ranchers and homesteaders for the criminal activity in the state. Former cowboy, Indian War veteran, and Sheriff of Buffalo (the county seat of Johnson County), William \"Red\" Angus, supported the homesteaders, and believed that the cattle barons were abusing the homesteaders.\nIn March 1892, the cattlemen sent agents to Texas from Cheyenne and Idaho to recruit gunmen and finally carry out their plans for exterminating the homesteaders. This group became known as the \"Invaders\". The cattle barons had always used hired guns from Texas to take out suspected rustlers and scare away the nesters in Wyoming. One particular act of violence perpetrated by the Texans was recounted by cowboy John J. Baker, where the Texans ambushed and killed nine trappers whom they mistook for rustlers in Big Dry Creek, Wyoming. They received a $450 bonus for the slaughter.\nSoon, 23 gunmen from Paris, Texas, and 4 cattle detectives from the WSGA were hired, as well as Wyoming dignitaries who also joined the expedition. State Senator Bob Tisdale, State Water Commissioner W. J. Clarke, as well as William C. Irvine and Hubert Teshemacher, who had both been instrumental in the organization of the State of Wyoming four years earlier, also joined the band. They were accompanied by surgeon Charles Bingham Penrose as well as Ed Towse, a reporter for the \"Cheyenne Sun\", and a newspaper reporter for the \"Chicago Herald\", Sam T. Clover, whose lurid first-hand accounts later appeared in eastern newspapers. A total expedition of 50 men was organized which consisted of cattlemen, range detectives, and the 23 hired guns from Texas. To lead the expedition, the WSGA hired Frank M. Canton. Canton's gripsack was later found to contain a list of 70 county residents to be either shot or hanged, and a contract to pay the Texans $5 a day plus a bonus of $50 for every rustler, real or alleged, they killed. The group became known as the \"Invaders\", or alternately, \"Wolcott's Regulators\".\nJohn Clay, a prominent Wyoming businessman, was suspected of playing a major role in planning the Johnson County invasion. Clay denied this, saying that in 1891 he advised Wolcott against the scheme and was out of the country when it was undertaken. He later helped the \"Invaders\" avoid punishment after their surrender. The group organized in Cheyenne and proceeded by train to Casper, Wyoming, and then toward Johnson County on horseback, cutting the telegraph lines north of Douglas, Wyoming, in order to prevent an alarm. While on horseback, Canton and the gunmen traveled ahead while the party of WSGA officials led by Wolcott followed a safe distance behind.\nGunfight at the KC Ranch.\nThe first target of the WSGA was Nate Champion, who was at the KC Ranch at that time. They were tasked to perform the assassination that others had failed to carry out five months before. The group traveled to the ranch late Friday, April 8, 1892, quietly surrounded the buildings, and waited for daybreak. Three men besides Champion were at the KC. Two men who were evidently going to spend the night on their way through were captured as they emerged from the cabin early that morning to collect water at the nearby Powder River, while the third, Nick Ray, was shot while standing inside the doorway of the cabin. As the gunmen opened fire on the cabin, Champion dragged the mortally wounded Ray back to the cabin. Ray died hours later, and Champion was left besieged inside the log cabin alone.\nChampion held out for several hours, wounding three of the vigilantes, and was said to have killed four others. Another settler by the name of Jack Flagg passed by Champion's ranch on his wagon together with his stepson and witnessed the siege. The Invaders recognized Flagg as one of the men on the list and they started shooting at him. Flagg then rode away and, as the Invaders gave chase, he grabbed his rifle and beat them back. During the siege, Champion kept a poignant journal which contained a number of notes he wrote to friends while taking cover inside the cabin. \"Boys, I feel pretty lonesome just now. I wish there was someone here with me so we could watch all sides at once,\" he wrote. The last journal entry read: \"Well, they have just got through shelling the house like hail. I heard them splitting wood. I guess they are going to fire the house tonight. I think I will make a break when night comes, if alive. Shooting again. It's not night yet. The house is all fired. Goodbye, boys, if I never see you again.\"\nThe Invaders continued to shoot at the cabin while others set it on fire using a wagon they managed to steal from Flagg. Champion signed his journal entry and put it in his pocket before running from the back door with a six-shooter in one hand and either a knife or a rifle in the other. As he emerged, the Invaders shot him dead. The killers pinned a note on Champion's bullet-riddled chest that read, \"Cattle thieves beware\". Flagg, after escaping his pursuers, rode to Buffalo where he reported Champion's dilemma to the townsfolk. Sheriff Angus then raised a posse of 200 men, many of whom were Civil War veterans, over the next 24 hours and set out for the KC on Sunday night, April 10.\nSiege of the TA Ranch.\nThe WSGA group then headed north on Sunday toward Buffalo to continue its show of force. By early morning of the 11th however, news quickly came of a large hostile force heading towards them. They quickly rode and took refuge in the TA Ranch in Crazy Woman Creek. The sheriff's posse finally reached the remaining Invaders holed up in a log barn at the TA Ranch, but the latter managed to hold them back, resulting in a siege that would last for three days. The posse surrounded the whole ranch, building pits on the ground for cover and killing the Invaders' horses to prevent them from escaping. Throughout the battle, the Invaders incurred a number of casualties, including the deaths of gunmen Jim Dudley and Alex Lowther, as well as several more who tried to escape through a fusillade. As the siege dragged on, a settler rode off to Fort McKinney requesting to borrow a cannon but was turned down. A blacksmith named Rap Brown tried to build his own cannon, but it exploded upon first testing. He then built a siege engine that the posse referred to as a \"go-devil' or \"ark of safety\" - a large, bullet-resistant wagon that would help the settlers get close to the ranch so they could throw dynamite at the Invaders.\nFortunately for the Invaders, one of their members, Mike Shonsey, managed to slip from the barn and was able to contact Governor Barber the next day. Frantic efforts to save the WSGA group ensued, and two days into the siege, late on the night of April 12, 1892, Governor Barber telegraphed President Benjamin Harrison a plea for help. For unknown reasons, the telegram failed to reach President Harrison, so Wyoming senators Joseph M. Carey and Francis E. Warren visited the White House in person and woke the President, informing him of the increasingly dangerous \"insurrection\" in Johnson County. Harrison immediately ordered the U.S. Secretary of War Stephen B. Elkins to address the situation under Article IV, Section 4, Clause 2 of the U.S. Constitution, which allows for the use of U.S. forces under the president's orders for \"protection from invasion and domestic violence\". The Sixth Cavalry from Fort McKinney near Buffalo, Wyoming, was ordered to proceed to the TA Ranch at once and take the WSGA expedition into custody. The Sixth Cavalry left Fort McKinney a few hours later at 2:00 on the morning of April 13 and reached the TA Ranch at 6:45\u00a0A.M. Colonel J.J. Van Horn, the officer in charge of the unit, negotiated with Sheriff Angus to lift the siege, and in return the Invaders were to be handed to civilian authorities. The Sixth Cavalry took possession of Wolcott and 45 other men with 45 rifles, 41 revolvers and some 5,000 rounds of ammunition, before escorting them first to Fort McKinney and then to Cheyenne. \nThe text of Barber's telegram to the President was printed on the front page of \"The New York Times\" on April 14, and a first-hand account of the siege at the T.A. appeared in \"The Times\" and the \"Chicago Herald\" and other papers.\nArrest and legal action.\nThe WSGA group was taken to Cheyenne to be held at the barracks of Fort D.A. Russell (currently Francis E. Warren Air Force Base) since the Laramie County Jail was unable to hold that many prisoners. They received preferential treatment and were allowed to roam the base by day as long as they agreed to return to the jail to sleep at night. Johnson County officials were upset that the group was not kept locally at Ft. McKinney. The general in charge of the 6th Cavalry felt that tensions were too high for the prisoners to remain in the area. Hundreds of armed locals sympathetic to both sides of the conflict were said to have gone to Ft. McKinney over the next few days under the mistaken impression the Invaders were being held there.\nThe Johnson County attorney began to gather evidence for the case and the details of the WSGA's plan emerged. Canton's gripsack was found to contain a list of seventy alleged rustlers who were to be shot or hanged, a list of ranch houses the Invaders had burned, and a contract to pay each Texan five dollars a day plus a bonus of $50 for each person killed. The Invader's plans reportedly included the eventual murder of people as far away as Casper and Douglas. \"The Times\" reported on April 23 that \"the evidence is said to implicate more than twenty prominent stockmen of Cheyenne whose names have not been mentioned heretofore, also several wealthy stockmen of Omaha, as well as to compromise men high in authority in the State of Wyoming. They will all be charged with aiding and abetting the invasion, and warrants will be issued for the arrest of all of them.\"\nThe Invaders, however, were protected by a friendly judicial system, and they took advantage of the cattle barons' corruption. Charges against the men \"high in authority\" in Wyoming were never filed. Eventually they were released on bail and were told to return to Wyoming for the trial. Many fled to Texas and were never seen again. In the end, the WSGA group went free after the charges were dropped on the excuse that Johnson County refused to pay for the costs of the long prosecution. The costs of housing the men at Fort D.A. Russell were said to exceed $18,000 and the sparsely populated Johnson County was unable to pay for them\nFinal killings.\nTensions in Johnson County remained high. On May 9, U.S. Marshal George Wellman was ambushed and killed by locals en route to the town of Buffalo. The incident received national attention, with Wellman being the only marshal to die in the war. Wellman had been one of the hired guns who joined the Invaders, and his death was grieved by a large crowd. The Sixth Cavalry, sent to relieve the county of its violence, was said to be influenced by intense local political and social pressure, and they were unable to keep the peace. One infamous event occurred when a group of men set fire to the post exchange and planted a homemade bomb in the cavalry's barracks. Noted officer Charles B. Gatewood was seriously injured by the bomb blast in the barracks, shattering his left arm and ending his cavalry career.\nThe Ninth Cavalry of \"Buffalo Soldiers\" was ordered to Fort McKinney to replace the Sixth, commanded by Major Charles S. Isley. In a fortnight the Buffalo Soldiers moved from Nebraska to the rail town of Suggs, Wyoming, where they created \"Camp Bettens\" to quell the local population. Reception from the settlers was negative and in one violent incident a gunfight erupted between them and some Buffalo Soldiers who entered the town. After being initially driven off, 20 more soldiers slipped from the camp to exact revenge, but the locals fought back, resulting in the death of one Buffalo Soldier named Private Willis Johnson, and the wounding of two other soldiers. The brief skirmish became known as the Battle of Suggs. Another two detachments were sent and this time the locals allowed the soldiers to investigate but no one was convicted. Another buffalo soldier, by the name of Brown, was also murdered, when a cowboy shot him while both were in a rifle range. Johnson and Brown were buried next to each other, and these events forced the Army to retire the regiment from the place in November 1892. Phil DuFran, a range detective and member of the Invaders, mysteriously disappeared.\nIn the fall of 1892, as the aftershocks of the stand-off were still being felt throughout the county, two alleged horse rustlers were gunned down by range detectives east of the Big Horn River. The killers escaped the law with assistance from Otto Franc, a rancher who had sided with the large cattle company faction. On May 24, 1893, Champion's brother, Dudley, came to Wyoming looking for work and was shot and killed in cold blood. from town, Dudley had come across the ranch of Mike Shonsey, who, after seeing him, immediately grabbed a gun and fired at him. A coroner's inquiry ruled Shonsey's actions were self-defense and he was acquitted of murder. Afterwards, Shonsey left the country before the officials could continue with the investigation. A year before Nate Champion's death, Shonsey actually met him near the Beaver Creek Canyon, where a fight almost commenced between the two as Champion suspected that Shonsey was one of the five men who had attacked him in his cabin. He further threatened Shonsey and demanded he give up the names of the rest of the assassins. This event made Shonsey harbor hatred toward Champion and probably toward his brother Dudley as well. Dudley Champion was the last person killed in association with the Johnson County War.\nAftermath.\nApproximately 20-40 people were killed in the conflict, beginning with the lynching of the Averells to the death of Dudley Champion. Emotions ran high for many years afterward. Some considered the large and wealthy ranchers as heroes who had sought what they regarded as justice by using violence to defend what they regarded as their rights to range land and water rights, while others saw the WSGA as heavy-handed outlaw vigilantes running roughshod over the law. A number of tall tales were spun by both sides afterwards to make their actions appear morally justified. Parties sympathetic to the invaders painted Watson as a prostitute and cattle rustler. They painted Averell as her murderous partner in crime and pimp and Nate Champion as the leader of a vast cattle rustling empire. They claimed that he was a leading member of the fabled \"Red Sash Gang\" of outlaws that supposedly included the likes of the Jesse James gang. These claims have since been discredited.\nWhile men frequently visited Watson's cabin, this was because she mended clothing for cowboys as a source of income. While some accounts do note that Champion wore a red sash at the time of his death, such sashes were common. While the Hole in the Wall Gang was known to hide out in Johnson County, there is no evidence that Champion had any relationship to them. Parties sympathetic to the smaller ranchers spun tales that included some of the West's most notorious gunslingers under the employ of the Invaders, including such legends as Tom Horn. Horn did briefly work as a detective for the WSGA in the 1890s but there is little evidence he was involved in the war.\nPolitical effects.\nAlthough many of the leaders of the WSGA's hired force, such as William C. Irvine, were Democrats, the ranchers who had hired the group were tied to the Republican Party and their opponents were mostly Democrats. Many viewed the rescue of the WSGA group at the order of President Harrison (a Republican) and the failure of the courts to prosecute them a serious political scandal with overtones of class war. As a result of the scandal, the Democratic Party became popular in Wyoming for a time, winning the governorship in 1892 and taking control of both houses of the state legislature in that election. Wyoming voted for the Democrat William Jennings Bryan in the 1896 U.S. presidential election, and Johnson County was one of the two counties in the state with the largest Bryan majorities.\nEconomic analysis.\nHistorian Daniel Belgrad argues that in the 1880s centralized range management was emerging as the solution to the overgrazing that had depleted open ranges. Moreover, cattle prices at the time were low. Larger ranchers were also hurt by mavericking (taking lost, unbranded calves from other ranchers' herds), and responded by organizing cooperative roundups, blacklisting, and lobbying for stricter anti-maverick laws. These ranchers formed the WSGA and hired gunmen to hunt down rustlers, but local farmers resented the ranchers' collective political power. The farmers moved toward decentralization and the use of private winter pastures. Randy McFerrin and Douglas Wills argue that the confrontation represented opposing property rights systems. The result was the end of the open-range system and the dominance of large-scale stock ranching and farming. \nThe popular image of the war, however, remains that of vigilantism by aggressive landed interests against small individual settlers defending their rights. By 1893, the WSGA was opened to the other small ranchers and farmers, finally ending their monopoly and control over Wyoming business interests. Previous practices of the WSGA, such as vigilantism and confiscation of cattle, were finally stopped. Many prominent leaders of the association such as Frank Wolcott, Frank M. Canton and Tom Smith later left the area.\nLegacy.\nThe Johnson County War, with its overtones of class warfare coupled with the intervention ordered by the President of the United States to save the lives of a gang of hired killers and set them free, is not a flattering reflection on the American myth of the west. The Johnson County War has been one of the best-known range wars of the frontier. It has been a popular feature of the Western genre of fiction, which includes literature, films and television shows. \"The Banditti of the Plains\", written in 1894 by witness Asa Mercer, is the earliest record of the Johnson County War. The book was suppressed for many years by the WSGA, who seized and destroyed all but a few of the first edition copies from the 1894 printing; they were rumored to have hijacked and destroyed the second printing as it was being shipped from a printer north of Denver, Colorado. The book was reprinted several times in the 20th century and most recently in 2015. Frances McElrath's 1902 novel \"The Rustler\", took inspiration from the Johnson County War, and was sympathetic to the perspective of the small ranchers.\n\"The Virginian\", a seminal 1902 western novel by Owen Wister, took the side of the wealthy ranchers, creating a myth of the Johnson County War, but bore little resemblance to a factual account of the actual characters and events. Jack Schaefer's popular 1949 novel \"Shane\" treated themes associated with the Johnson County War and took the side of the settlers. The 1953 film \"The Redhead from Wyoming,\" starring Maureen O'Hara, dealt with similar themes; in one scene O'Hara's character is told, \"It won't be long before they're calling you Cattle Kate.\" In the 1968 novel \"True Grit\" by Charles Portis, the main character, Rooster Cogburn, was involved in the Johnson County War. In the early 1890s Cogburn had gone north to Wyoming where he was \"hired by stock owners to terrorize thieves and people called nesters and grangers... . I fear that Rooster did himself no credit in what they called the Johnson County War.\"\nFilms such as \"Heaven's Gate\" (1980) and \"The Johnson County War\" (TV-movie, 2002) painted the wealthy ranchers as the \"bad guys\". \"Heaven's Gate\" was a dramatic romance loosely based on historical events, while \"The Johnson County War\" was based on the 1957 novel \"Riders of Judgment\" by Frederick Manfred. The range war was also portrayed in an episode of Jim Davis's syndicated Western television series \"Stories of the Century\", with Henry Brandon as Nate Champion and Jean Parker as Ella Watson. American Heroes Channel presented the Johnson County War in the sixth episode of their \"Blood Feuds\" series documentary.\nThe story of the Johnson County War from the point of view of the small ranchers was chronicled by Kaycee resident Chris LeDoux in his song \"Johnson County War\" on the 1989 album \"Powder River\". The song included references to the burning of the KC Ranch, the capture of the WSGA men, the intervention of the U.S. Cavalry and the release of the cattlemen and hired guns. The Jim Gatchell Memorial Museum in Buffalo featured dioramas and exhibits about the Johnson County War, as well as a bronze statue of Nate Champion. Kaycee, Wyoming, the old site of the KC Ranch, also erected the \"Hoofprints of the Past\" Museum to commemorate the war.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75830", "revid": "744", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75830", "title": "War on Powder River", "text": ""}
{"id": "75831", "revid": "48181213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75831", "title": "Flavius Aetius", "text": "Roman general and statesman (c. 390 \u2013 454)\nFlavius Aetius (also spelled A\u00ebtius; ; c. 390 \u2013 21 September 454) was a Roman general and statesman of the closing period of the Western Roman Empire. He was a military commander and the most influential man in the Empire for two decades (433\u2013454). He managed policy in regard to the attacks of barbarian federates settled throughout the West. Notably, he mustered a large Roman and allied (\"foederati\") army in the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains, ending an invasion of Gaul by Attila in 451, though the Hun and his subjugated allies still managed to invade Italy the following year, an incursion best remembered for the Sack of Aquileia and the intercession of Pope Leo I. In 454, he was assassinated by the emperor Valentinian III.\nAetius has often been called the \"Last of the Romans\". Edward Gibbon refers to him as \"the man universally celebrated as the terror of Barbarians and the support of the Republic\" for his victory at the Catalaunian Plains. J.B. Bury notes, \"That he was the one prop and stay of the Western Empire during his life time was the unanimous verdict of his contemporaries.\"\nBiography.\nOrigins and family.\nAetius was born at Durostorum in Moesia Secunda (modern Silistra, Bulgaria), roughly around 390, as he was described as a \"young adolescent\" in 405. His father, Gaudentius, was a Roman general and described as a native of the province of Scythia. Aetius' mother, whose name is unknown, was a wealthy aristocratic woman of ancestry from Rome or some other city in the Italian peninsula. Before 425 Aetius married the daughter of Carpilio, who gave him a son, also named Carpilio. Later he married Pelagia, widow of Bonifacius, from whom he had a son, Gaudentius. It is possible that he also had a daughter, whose husband, Thraustila, avenged Aetius' death by killing emperor Valentinian III.\nEarly years and service under Joannes.\nAs a boy, Aetius was at the service of the imperial court, enrolled in the military unit of the \"Protectores Domestici\" and then elevated to the position of \"tribunus praetorianus partis militaris\", setting him up for future political eligibility. Between 405 and 408 he was kept as hostage at the court of Alaric I, king of the Visigoths. In 408 Alaric asked to keep Aetius as a hostage, but was refused, as Aetius was sent to the court of Uldin, king of the Huns, where he would stay throughout much of the reign of Charaton, Uldin's successor. Some modern historians have suggested that Aetius's upbringing amongst militaristic peoples gave him a martial vigour not common in contemporary Roman generals.\nIn 423 the Western Emperor Honorius died. The most influential man in the West, Castinus, chose as his successor Joannes, a high-ranking officer. Joannes was not a member of the Theodosian dynasty so he was not recognized by the eastern court. The Eastern Emperor Theodosius II organised a military expedition westward, led by Ardaburius and his son Aspar, to put his cousin, the young Valentinian III (who was a nephew of Honorius), on the western throne. Aetius entered the service of the usurper as \"cura palatii\" and was sent by Joannes to ask the Huns for assistance. Joannes lacked a strong army and fortified himself in his capital, Ravenna, where he was killed in the summer of 425. Shortly afterwards, Aetius returned to Italy with a large force of Huns to find that power in the west was now in the hands of Valentinian III and his mother Galla Placidia. After fighting against Aspar's army, Aetius managed to compromise with Galla Placidia. He sent back his army of Huns and in return obtained the rank of \"comes et magister militum per Gallias\", the commander in chief of the Roman army in Gaul.\nFirst Gallic campaigns.\nIn 426, Aetius arrived in southern Gaul and took command of the field army. At that time Arelate, an important city in Narbonensis near the mouth of the Rhone, was under siege from the Visigoths, led by their king Theodoric I. Aetius defeated Theodoric, lifted the siege of Arelate, and drove the Visigoths back to their holdings in Aquitania.\nIn 428, he fought the Salian Franks, defeating their king Chlodio and recovering some territory they had occupied along the Rhine. In 429 he was elevated to the rank of \"magister militum\"; this was probably the \"junior\" of the two offices of \"comes et magister utriusque militiae\", as the \"senior\" is known to have been the patrician Flavius Constantinus Felix, the most influential man in those years, and a supporter of Galla Placidia. \nBegin 430 the Goths led by Anaolsus attacked Arelate again but were defeated by Aetius. \nIn May 430, Aetius and the Army accused Felix of plotting against him and some sources believe Aetius had him, his wife, and a deacon killed. Once Felix was dead, Aetius was the highest ranking amongst the \"magistri militiae\", even if he had not yet been granted the title of \"patricius\" or the senior command. During 430 and 431 Aetius was in Raetia and Noricum, re-establishing Roman rule on the Danubian Limes, campaigning against the Juthungi and defeating the Bagaudae in Augusta Vindelicorum. In 431 he returned to Gaul, where he received Hydatius, bishop of Aquae Flaviae, who complained about the attacks of the Suebes. Aetius then defeated the Franks, recapturing Tournacum and Cambriacum. He then sent Hydatius back to the Suebes in Hispania.\nWar with Bonifacius.\nWhile Aetius was campaigning in Gaul, there was an ongoing power struggle among Aetius, Felix, Bonifacius, and the emperor Valentinian's mother and regent Galla Placidia. In 427 while Bonifacius was away as governor (\"comes\") of Africa, Felix caused him to fall into disfavour with Placidia. Bonifacius was eventually returned to favor by Placidia, but only after Felix had sent Sigisvult and two other armies against him when Aetius warned him of Felix's intentions. In 429, the Vandals exploited this power struggle and crossed over to Africa.\nAfter the execution of Felix in 430, Aetius and Bonifacius remained as the empire's most influential generals, both constantly vying for the favor of Placidia.\nIn 432 Aetius held the consulate, but Bonifacius was recalled to Italy and received warmly by Placidia. Bonifacius was given the rank of patrician and made the senior \"comes et magister utriusque militiae\", while Aetius was stripped of his military command. Aetius, believing his fall now imminent, marched against Bonifacius and fought him at the Battle of Rimini. Bonifacius won the battle but was mortally wounded, dying a few months later. Aetius escaped to Pannonia and traveled to the court of his friend, Rugila, the king of the Huns. With their help he returned to power, receiving the title of \"comes et magister utriusque militiae\". Aetius then had Bonifacius' son-in-law, Sebastianus, who had succeeded Bonifacius as \"magister militum\", exiled from Italy to Constantinople, bought the properties of Bonifacius, and married his widow Pelagia.\nCampaigns against Burgundians, Bagaudae, and Visigoths.\nFrom 433 to 450, Aetius was the dominant figure in the Western Empire, obtaining the rank of \"magnificus vir parens patriusque noster\" (5 September 435) and playing the role of \"protector\" of Galla Placidia and Valentinian III while the Emperor was still young. At the same time he continued to devote attention to Gaul. In 436, the Burgundians of King Gundacar were defeated and obliged to accept peace by Aetius and Avitus; however, the following year he sent Hun \"foederati\" to destroy them. Allegedly 20,000 Burgundians were killed in a slaughter which probably became the basis of the Nibelungenlied, a German epic. That same year Aetius was probably in Armorica with Litorius to suppress a rebellion of the Bagaudae under a certain Tibatto. The year 437 saw his second consulship and the wedding of Valentinian and Licinia Eudoxia in Constantinople; it is probable that Aetius attended the ceremony that marked the restoration of the direct rule of the Emperor. At that time his general Litorius had broken the siege of Narbona and had turned the war in favor of the Romans. The following two years were occupied by a campaign against the Suebi and by the war against the Visigoths; in 438 Aetius won a major battle (probably the Battle of Mons Colubrarius), but in 439 the Visigoths defeated and killed Litorius and his Hun Foederati. Aetius returned to Gaul after Vetericus had stabilized the situation, and defeated the Visigoths and obtained a treaty. On his return to Italy, he was honoured by a statue erected by the Senate and the People of Rome by order of the Emperor; this was probably the occasion for the panegyric written by Merobaudes.\nIn 443, Aetius settled the remaining Burgundians in Sapaudia, south of Lake Geneva. His most pressing concern in the 440s was with problems in Gaul and Iberia, mainly with the Bagaudae. He settled the Alans around Valence in 440 and along the Loire including Aurelianum in 442 to contain unrest in Armorica.\nIn Spain, Aetius was slowly losing his grip on the situation. In 441 he appointed Asturius \"Magister Militum per Hispanias\", in order to put down the Bagaudae in Tarraconensis. He was recalled and Merobaudes defeated the Bagaudae of Aracellitanus in 443. In 445 the Romans had the Vandals attack Turonium in Gallaecia, followed by Vitus who campaigned with a combined force of Romans and Goths in 446, but was ultimately defeated.\nThe Bagaudae in Armorica revolted again in 447 or 448, and were put down by the Alans of Goar. As a result, the leader of the revolt Eudoxius fled to the court of Attila the Hun. In 449 the Bagaudae in Spain revolted and sacked Tyriasso, Caesaragusta, and Illerdensus. The Suebi also entered Tarraconensis to assist Basilius and his revolt.\nIn 445 Majorian defeated a Frankish siege of Turonum, which was followed by a Frankish attack under Clodio in the region of Atrebatum, in Belgica Secunda. The \"foederati\" were stopped in an ambush near \"Vicus Helena\", where Aetius directed the operations while his commander Majorian (later Emperor) fought with the cavalry. However, by 450 Aetius had already returned to good terms with the Franks. In 449 Chlodio died, and the \"patricius\" supported his younger son Merovaeus's claim to the throne. Aetius adopted him as his own son and sent him from Rome, where he had been an ambassador, to the Frankish court with many presents.\nHun invasions of Gaul and Italy.\nBefore 449 Aetius had signed an agreement with the Huns, allowing some of them to settle in Pannonia, along the Sava River; he also sent to Attila, the king of the Huns, a man called Constantius as a secretary. In 449, Attila was angry over an alleged theft of a golden plate, and Aetius sent him an embassy under Romulus to calm him; Attila sent him a dwarf, Zerco, as a present, whom Aetius gave back to his original owner, Aspar.\nHowever, the good terms between Romans and Huns did not last, as Attila wanted to attack Roman Gaul; he knew that Aetius was a serious obstacle to his enterprise, and tried to have him removed, but in 451, when the Huns attacked, Aetius was still the commander of the Roman army in Gaul. The large Hunno-German army captured several cities, and proceeded towards Aurelianum.\nAetius, with the help of the influential Gallo-Roman senator Avitus, convinced the Visigoths of king Theodoric I to join him against the external menace; he also succeeded in persuading Sambida (who was falsely accused of planning to join the Huns), the Armoricans, the Salian Franks, some of the Saxons, and the Burgundians of Sapaudia to join his forces. Then the joint Roman and Visigothic army moved to relieve the besieged city of Aurelianum, forcing the Huns to abandon the siege and retreat to open country.\nOn 20 June 451 Aetius and Theodoric engaged Attila and his allies at the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains. Theodoric died in the battle, and Aetius suggested his son Thorismund retreat to Tolosa to secure his throne, and persuaded Merovaeus to return to the lands of the Franks; for this reason it is said that Aetius kept all of the battlefield loot for his army.\nAttila returned in 452 to again press his claim of marriage to Honoria; Aetius was unable to block Attila's advance through the Julian Alps. Instead, he chose to garrison Aquileia against Attila's onslaught. Attila invaded and ravaged Italy, sacking numerous cities and razing Aquileia completely, allegedly leaving no trace of it behind. Valentinian III fled from the court at Ravenna to Rome; Aetius remained in the field but lacked the strength to offer battle, instead positioning his army at Bononia to block the roads through the Apennines to Ravenna and Rome. Edward Gibbon however says Aetius never showed his greatness more clearly in managing to harass and slow Attila's advance with only a shadow force. Attila finally halted at the Po, where he met an embassy including the prefect Trygetius, the ex-consul Gennadius Avienus, and Pope Leo I. After the meeting he turned his army back, having gained neither Honoria's hand nor the territories he desired. Ancient and medieval historians tended to give Pope Leo and supernatural forces credit for halting Attila, but a number of practical factors may have also induced Attila to retreat: his army was unable to obtain sufficient food and was suffering from disease, Aetius' army was busy harassing the Huns, and finally Marcian had sent forces north of the Danube to attack the homelands of the Huns and their vassals under a separate Aetius.\nAssassination.\nAlthough in 453 Aetius had been able to betroth his son Gaudentius to Valentinian's daughter Placidia, Valentinian felt intimidated by Aetius, who some 30 years prior had supported Joannes against him and who, Valentinian believed, wanted to place his son on the throne. The Roman senator Petronius Maximus and the chamberlain Heraclius were therefore able to enlist Valentinian in a plot to assassinate Aetius. The ancient historian Priscus of Panium reports that on 21 September 454, while Aetius was at court in Ravenna delivering a financial account, Valentinian suddenly leaped from his seat and declared that he would no longer be the victim of Aetius's drunken depravities. He held Aetius responsible for the empire's troubles and accused him of trying to steal the empire from him. When Aetius attempted to defend himself from the charges, Valentinian drew his sword and together with Heraclius, struck Aetius on the head, killing him instantly. Later, when Valentinian boasted that he had done well in disposing of Aetius, someone at court responded, \"Whether well or not, I do not know. But know that you have cut off your right hand with your left.\" Edward Gibbon credits Sidonius Apollinaris with this famous observation.\nMaximus expected to be made patrician in place of Aetius, but was blocked by Heraclius. Seeking revenge, Maximus arranged with two Huns who were friends of Aetius, Optila and Thraustila, to assassinate both Valentinian III and Heraclius. On 16 March 455, Optila stabbed the emperor in the temple as he dismounted in the Campus Martius and prepared for a session of archery practice. As the stunned emperor turned to see who had struck him, Optila finished him off with another thrust of his blade. Meanwhile, Thraustila stepped forward and killed Heraclius. Most of the soldiers standing close by had been faithful followers of Aetius, and none lifted a hand to save the emperor.\nLegacy.\nMilitary legacy.\nAetius is generally viewed as a great military commander \u2013 indeed, he was held in such high esteem by the Eastern Roman Empire that he became known as the last true Roman of the west. Traditionally, historians also consider the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains as decisively important, crippling Attila by destroying his aura of invincibility. Gibbon states this view:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Attila's] retreat across the Rhine confessed the last victory which was achieved in the name of the Western Roman Empire.\nAetius effectively ruled the western empire from 433 to 454, and attempted to stabilize its European borders under a deluge of barbarians, foremost of which were Attila and the Huns. One of his greatest achievements was the assembling of the coalition against Attila. Regarding this, historian Arther Ferrill states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;After he secured the Rhine, Attila moved into central Gaul and put Orl\u00e9ans under siege. Had he gained his objective, he would have been in a strong position to subdue the Visigoths in Aquitaine, but Aetius had put together a formidable coalition against the Hun. The Roman leader had built a powerful alliance of Visigoths, Alans and Burgundians, uniting them with their traditional enemy, the Romans, for the defense of Gaul. Even though all parties to the protection of the Western Roman Empire had a common hatred of the Huns, it was still a remarkable achievement on Aetius' part to have drawn them into an effective military relationship.\nWhile J. B. Bury viewed Aetius as a great military commander and a prominent historical figure, he did not consider the battle itself to be particularly decisive. He argues that Aetius attacked the Huns when they were already retreating from Orl\u00e9ans (so the danger to Gaul was departing anyway); and he declined to renew the attack on the Huns next day, precisely in order to preserve the balance of power. (Others suggest that the Huns may have abandoned the siege of Orl\u00e9ans \"because\" Aetius's armies were advancing on them.) Bury suggests that the Germanic victory over the Huns at the Battle of Nedao, three years later, was more important. This determined that there would be no long-term Hun empire in Europe, which Bury thinks would have been unlikely even if they had crushed the Germanic tribes on that occasion. For Bury, the result of the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains determined chiefly that Attila spent his last year looting Italy, rather than Gaul.\nModern authors typically overlook the battle and focus on the greater impact of Aetius' career, and he is generally seen as one of the greatest Roman military commanders of all time, as well as an excellent diplomat and administrator. Meghan McEvoy states that the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains is more a testament to his political aptitude than his military skill due to his foresight in the ability to provision treaties and obligations. John Julius Norwich caustically referred to the assassination of Valentinian III by his own guards as an act that Valentinian brought on himself by his foolish execution of Aetius, the \"Empire's greatest commander.\" Hugh Elton notes that Aetius and his army were one of the most effective Roman armies to have existed, with its speed and mobility pointing to a highly efficient logistical and manpower resupply system not directly evidenced by the sources. It is generally seen that the rapid fragmentation and collapse of the West after his death was a testament to his ability to hold the empire together.\nControversies.\nAetius' legacy has been filled with controversy somewhat similar to that of Stilicho as both left the Empire significantly weaker when they died. Like Stilicho's critics pointing towards his inability or unwillingness to deal with usurpation in Britain, Gaul and Spain, and the Rhine crossing of 406, critics of Aetius point towards the civil wars of 427\u2013433 that allowed for the Vandal crossing to Africa and its eventual loss, and Aetius' inability to retake Carthage. Hughes attempts to address this, pointing out that Felix was responsible for the war that allowed for the Vandal crossing, and that the Romans did attempt to deal with it on several occasions, including Bonifacius in 429\u2013432, Aspar in 430\u2013435, and Aetius in 441. Heather states that the rise of Attila ultimately led to the loss of Africa as the Eastern Roman army and navy, which was bearing the brunt of the cost for the expedition, had to be recalled to the Balkans. Halsall argues that the black mark on Aetius' career was his mixed success in Spain, where the majority of the province was lost by 449, although he later rectified this. Hughes states that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Stilicho and Aetius, who certainly knew each other, although they were from different generations, were responding to the specific, and vastly different, problems with which they were faced. Neither could find all of the answers.\nIn popular culture.\nAetius appears in several popular works of historical fiction, usually as a foil for Attila the Hun. The earliest known appearance is in 1728, in the libretto Ezio (the Italian variation of Aetius). This libretto, in which Ezio becomes involved in a plot to kill Attilla, has been set to music by several different composers. Verdi's 1846 opera \"Attila\" tells the same story, though with a different libretto.\nThe struggle between Aetius and Attila is also depicted in Thomas B. Costain's 1959 novel \"The Darkness and the Dawn\" and William Napier's \"Attila\" trilogy. Polish writer Teodor Parnicki wrote a historical novel \"Aetius, the Last Roman\" (1937).\nIn the 1954 Italian-French film production \"Attila, Scourge of God\", Aetius is portrayed by Henri Vidal. In the 2001 American TV Miniseries \"Attila\", Aetius is portrayed by Powers Boothe as a former mentor and friend to Attila who becomes his nemesis. At the same time, he is depicted as the only general capable of keeping the empire standing and facing Attila as an equal.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75832", "revid": "1300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75832", "title": "Juror", "text": ""}
{"id": "75833", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75833", "title": "S\u00f8ren Peder Lauritz S\u00f8rensen", "text": ""}
{"id": "75835", "revid": "48523215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75835", "title": "Paul Dukas", "text": "French composer (1865\u20131935)\nPaul Abraham Dukas ( 1 October 1865 \u2013 17 May 1935) was a French composer, critic, scholar and teacher. A studious man of retiring personality, he was intensely self-critical, having abandoned and destroyed many of his compositions. His best-known work is the orchestral piece \"The Sorcerer's Apprentice\" (\"L'apprenti sorcier\"), the fame of which has eclipsed that of his other surviving works, largely due to its usage in the 1940 Disney film \"Fantasia\". Among these are the opera \"Ariane et Barbe-bleue\", his Symphony in C and Piano Sonata in E-flat minor, the \"Variations, Interlude and Finale on a Theme by Rameau\" (for solo piano), and a ballet, \"La\u00a0P\u00e9ri\".\nAt a time when French musicians were divided into conservative and progressive factions, Dukas adhered to neither but retained the admiration of both. His compositions were influenced by composers including Beethoven, Berlioz, Franck, d'Indy and Debussy.\nIn tandem with his composing career, Dukas worked as a music critic, contributing regular reviews to at least five French journals. Later in his life he was appointed professor of composition at the Conservatoire de Paris and the \u00c9cole normale de musique de Paris; his pupils included Maurice Durufl\u00e9, Olivier Messiaen, Walter Piston, Manuel Ponce, Joaqu\u00edn Rodrigo and Xian Xinghai.\nLife and career.\nEarly years.\nDukas was born in Paris, the second son in a Jewish family of three children. His father, Jules Dukas, was a banker, and his mother, Eug\u00e9nie, was a capable pianist. When Dukas was five years old, his mother died giving birth to her third child, Marguerite-Lucie. Dukas took piano lessons but showed no unusual musical talent until he was 14 when he began to compose while recovering from an illness. He entered the Conservatoire de Paris at the end of 1881, aged 16, and studied piano with Georges Mathias, harmony with Th\u00e9odore Dubois and composition with Ernest Guiraud. Among his fellow students was Claude Debussy, with whom Dukas formed a close friendship. Two early overtures survive from this period, \"Goetz de Berlichingen\" (1883) and \"Le Roi Lear\" (1883). The manuscript of the latter was rediscovered in the 1990s and the work was performed for the first time in 1995.\nDukas won several prizes, including the second place in the Conservatoire's most prestigious award, the Prix de Rome, for his cantata \"Vell\u00e9da\" in 1888. Disappointed at his failure to win the top prize, he left the Conservatoire in 1889. After compulsory military service he began a dual career as a composer and a music critic.\n1890s.\nDukas's career as a critic began in 1892 with a review of Wagner's \"Der Ring des Nibelungen\" conducted by Gustav Mahler at Covent Garden in London. His review was published in \"La Revue Hebdomadaire\"; he later wrote also for \"Minerva\", \"La Chronique des Arts\", \"Gazette des Beaux-Arts\" and \"Le Courrier Musical\". His Parisian debut as composer was a performance of his overture \"Polyeucte\", written in 1891 and premiered by Charles Lamoureux and his Orchestre Lamoureux in January 1892. Based on a tragedy by Corneille, the work, like many French works of the period, shows the influence of Wagner, but is coherent and displays some individuality.\nAlthough Dukas wrote a fair amount of music, he was a perfectionist and destroyed many of his pieces out of dissatisfaction with them. Only a few of his compositions remain. After \"Polyeucte\", he began writing an opera in 1892. He wrote his own libretto, \"Horn et Riemenhild\", but he composed only one act, \"realising too late that the work's developments were more literary than musical\".\nThe Symphony in C major was composed in 1895\u201396, when Dukas was in his early 30s. It is dedicated to Paul Vidal, and had its first performance in January 1896, under the direction of the dedicatee. In a study of Dukas published towards the end of the composer's life, Irving Schwerk\u00e9 wrote, \"The work \u2026 is an opulent expression of modernism in classical form. Its ideational luxuriance, nobility of utterance and architectural solidity mark it as one of the most conspicuous achievements of contemporaneous writing, and magnificently refute the generally prevalent notion that no French composer has ever produced a great symphony.\"\nLike Franck's only symphony, Dukas's is in three movements rather than the conventional four. Schwerk\u00e9 wrote of it:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Expressed in an individual and spontaneous idiom, the Symphony in C gives free play to the author's creative spirit and to his fund of exalted emotion. The high-spirited, impetuous first movement,\" Allegro non troppo vivace\" is intensely rhythmic. Its logical structure, strong thematic material, polyphonic richness and virile instrumentation combine to create an exhilarating effect of life and pageant color. The second movement, \"Andante\", in sharp contrast to the first, reveals the perfect finish of the composer's style and the ineffable charm of his melody. The robust last movement, \"Allegro spiritoso\", so verdant in instrumentation, brings the symphony to a vigorous close.\nThe work received a mixed reception at its first performance. D\u00e9sir\u00e9-\u00c9mile Inghelbrecht, later known as a conductor, was a member of the orchestra at the premiere, and wrote, \"the work which nowadays seems to us so lucid aroused not only the protestations of the public, but also those of the musicians of the orchestra.\" The symphony was better received when the Lamoureux Orchestra revived it in 1902.\nThe symphony was followed by another orchestral work, by far the best known of Dukas' compositions, his scherzo for orchestra, \"L'apprenti sorcier\" (\"The Sorcerer's Apprentice\") (1897), a short piece (lasting for between 10 and 12 minutes in performance) based on Goethe's poem \"Der Zauberlehrling\". During Dukas's lifetime \"The Musical Quarterly\" commented that the world fame of the work not only overshadowed all other compositions by Dukas, but also eclipsed Goethe's original poem. The popularity of the piece became a matter of irritation to Dukas. In 2011, the \"Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians\" observed, \"The popularity of \"L'apprenti sorcier\" and the exhilarating film version of it in Disney's \"Fantasia\" possibly hindered a fuller understanding of Dukas, as that single work is far better known than its composer.\"\n20th-century works.\nIn the decade after \"L'apprenti sorcier\", Dukas completed two complex and technically demanding large-scale works for solo piano: the Piano Sonata (1901), dedicated to Saint-Sa\u00ebns, and \"Variations, Interlude and Finale on a Theme by Rameau\" (1902). In Dukas's piano works critics have discerned the influence of Beethoven, or, \"Beethoven as he was interpreted to the French mind by C\u00e9sar Franck\". Both works were premiered by \u00c9douard Risler, a celebrated pianist of the era. There are also two smaller works for piano solo. The Sonata, described by the critic Edward Lockspeiser as \"huge and somewhat recondite\", did not enter the mainstream repertoire, but it has been more recently championed by such pianists as Marc-Andr\u00e9 Hamelin and Margaret Fingerhut. Lockspeiser describes the \"Rameau Variations\" as more developed and assured ... Dukas infuses the conventional form with a new and powerful spirit.\"\nIn 1899 Dukas turned once again to operatic composition. His second attempt, \"L'arbre de science\", was abandoned, incomplete, but in the same year he began work on his one completed opera, \"Ariane et Barbe-bleue\" (\"Ariadne and Bluebeard\"). The work is a setting of a libretto by Maurice Maeterlinck. The author had intended the libretto to be set by Grieg but in 1899 he offered it to Dukas. Dukas worked on it for seven years and it was produced at the Op\u00e9ra-Comique in 1907. The opera has often been compared to Debussy's \"Pell\u00e9as et M\u00e9lisande\" which was first performed while Dukas was writing \"Ariane et Barbe-bleue\". Not only are both works settings of Maeterlinck, but there are musical similarities; Dukas even quotes from the Debussy work in his score. Although it won considerable praise, its success was overshadowed by the Paris premiere of Richard Strauss's sensational opera \"Salome\" at much the same time. Nonetheless, within a short time of its premiere, Dukas's opera was produced in Vienna, where it aroused much interest in Schoenberg's circle, and in Frankfurt, Milan and New York. It did not maintain a regular place in the repertory, despite the advocacy of Arturo Toscanini, who conducted it in New York three years in succession, and Sir Thomas Beecham, who pronounced it \"one of the finest lyrical dramas of our time\", and staged it at Covent Garden in 1937. Interest in it revived in the 1990s, with productions in Paris (Th\u00e9\u00e2tre du Ch\u00e2telet, 1990) and Hamburg (Staatsoper, 1997), and at the Op\u00e9ra Bastille in Paris in 2007.\nDukas's last major work was the sumptuous oriental ballet \"La P\u00e9ri\" (1912). Described by the composer as a \"po\u00e8me dans\u00e9\" it depicts a young Persian prince who travels to the ends of the Earth in a quest to find the lotus flower of immortality, coming across its guardian, the P\u00e9ri (fairy). Because of the very quiet opening pages of the ballet score, the composer added a brief \"Fanfare pour pr\u00e9c\u00e9der \"La Peri\"\" which gave the typically noisy audiences of the day time to settle in their seats before the work proper began. \"La P\u00e9ri\" was written for the Russian-French dancer Natalia Trouhanova, who starred in the first performance at the Ch\u00e2telet in 1912. Diaghilev planned a production with his Ballets Russes but the production did not take place; the company's choreographer Fokine staged \"L'apprenti sorcier\" as a ballet in 1916.\nIn 1916, Dukas married Suzanne Pereyra (1883\u20131947), who was of Portuguese descent. They had one child, a daughter Adrienne-Th\u00e9r\u00e8se, born in December 1919. \nLater years.\nIn the last years of his life, Dukas became well known as a teacher of composition. When Charles-Marie Widor retired as professor of composition at the Paris Conservatoire in 1927, Dukas was appointed in his place. He also taught at the \u00c9cole normale de musique in Paris. His many students included Jehan Alain, Elsa Barraine, Yvonne Desportes, Francis Chagrin, Carlos Ch\u00e1vez, Maurice Durufl\u00e9, Georges Hugon, Jean Langlais, Olivier Messiaen, Walter Piston, Manuel Ponce, Joaqu\u00edn Rodrigo, David Van Vactor and Xian Xinghai. As a teacher he was conservative but always encouraging of talent, telling one student, \"It's obvious that you really love music. Always remember that it should be written from the heart and not with the head.\" He said his method of teaching was \"to help young musicians to express themselves in accordance with their own natures. Music necessarily has to express something; it is also obliged to express somebody, namely, its composer.\" \"Grove\" observes that his wide knowledge of the history of European music, and his editorial work on Rameau, Scarlatti and Beethoven, gave him \"particular authority in teaching historical styles\".\nAfter \"La P\u00e9ri\", Dukas completed no new large-scale compositions, although, as with his contemporary Jean Sibelius, there were frequent reports of major work in hand. After several years of silence, in 1920 he produced a tribute to his friend Debussy in the form of \"La plainte, au loin, du faune...\" for piano, which was followed by \"Amours\", a setting of a sonnet by Pierre de Ronsard, for voice and piano, published in 1924 to mark the four hundredth anniversary of the poet's birth. Shortly before his death he had been working on a symphonic poem inspired by Shakespeare's \"The Tempest\", a play of which he had made a French translation in 1918 with an operatic version in mind.\nIn the last year of his life Dukas was elected to membership of the Acad\u00e9mie des Beaux-Arts. Though adhering to neither the progressive nor conservative factions among French musicians of the era, Dukas had the friendship and respect of both. In 1920, Vincent d'Indy published a study of Dukas's music; Debussy remained a lifelong friend, though feeling that Dukas's music was not French enough; Saint-Sa\u00ebns worked with Dukas to complete an unfinished opera by Guiraud, and they were both engaged in the rediscovery and editing of the works of Jean-Philippe Rameau; Faur\u00e9 dedicated his Piano Quintet No. 2 to Dukas in 1921.\nIn 1920, he became a member of the Royal Academy of Science, Letters and Fine Arts of Belgium.\nDukas died in Paris in 1935, aged 69. He was cremated and his ashes were placed in the columbarium at P\u00e8re Lachaise Cemetery in Paris.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75837", "revid": "2255048", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75837", "title": "Hippias", "text": "5th century BC Greek sophist\nHippias of Elis (; ; late 5th century BC) was a Greek sophist, and a contemporary of Socrates. With an assurance characteristic of the later sophists, he claimed to be regarded as an authority on all subjects, and lectured on poetry, grammar, history, politics, mathematics, and much else. Most current knowledge of him is derived from Plato, who characterizes him as vain and arrogant.\nLife.\nHippias was born at Elis in the mid 5th-century BC (c. 460 BC) and was thus a younger contemporary of Protagoras and Socrates. He lived at least as late as Socrates (399 BC). He was a disciple of Hegesidamus. Owing to his talent and skill, his fellow-citizens availed themselves of his services in political matters, and in a diplomatic mission to Sparta. But he was in every respect like the other sophists of the time: he travelled about in various towns and districts of Greece for the purpose of teaching and public speaking. The two dialogues of Plato, the \"Hippias major\" and the \"Hippias minor\" characterize him as vain and arrogant. The \"Hippias major\" (the authorship of this work by Plato is sometimes doubted) concerns the question about the beautiful, and purposely puts the knowledge and presumption of Hippias in a ludicrous light. The \"Hippias minor\" discusses the deficiency of human knowledge, and characterizes Hippias as ridiculously vain.\nWork.\nHippias was a man of very extensive knowledge, and he occupied himself not only with rhetorical, philosophical, and political studies, but was also well versed in poetry, music, mathematics, painting and sculpture, and he claimed some practical skill in the ordinary arts of life, for he used to boast of wearing on his body nothing that he had not made himself with his own hands, such as his seal-ring, his cloak, and shoes. He was credited with a lost work known as the \"Olympionik\u014d\u0302n Anagraph\u1e17\" () which computed Coroebus's victory as occurring in 776\u00a0BC and became the basis of all later lists of the Olympiads and their victors. On the other hand, his knowledge always appears superficial, he does not enter into the details of any particular art or science, and is satisfied with certain generalities, which enabled him to speak on everything without a thorough knowledge of any. This arrogance, combined with ignorance, is the main cause which provoked Plato to his severe criticism of Hippias, as the sophist enjoyed a very extensive reputation, and thus had a large influence upon the education of the youths of the higher classes. Plutarch also criticized Hippias in \"The\" \"Life of Numa\" in \"Parallel Lives\" when writing about the chronology of Numa's relationship with Pythagoras, mentioning that the chronology was based on the \"Olympionik\u014d\u0302n Anagraph\u1e17\" and stating that Hippias had no authoritative basis on his work. A mathematical discovery ascribed to Hippias is sometimes called the quadratrix of Hippias.\nHis great skill seems to have consisted in delivering grand show speeches; and Plato has him arrogantly declaring that he would travel to Olympia, and there deliver before the assembled Greeks an oration on any subject that might be proposed to him; and Philostratus in fact speaks of several such orations delivered at Olympia, and which created great sensation. If such speeches were published by Hippias, then no specimen has come down to us. Plato claims he wrote epic poetry, tragedies, dithyrambs, and various orations, as well as works on grammar, music, rhythm, harmony, and a variety of other subjects. He seems to have been especially fond of choosing antiquarian and mythical subjects for his show speeches. Athenaeus mentions a work of Hippias under the title \"Synagoge\" which is otherwise unknown. An epigram of his is preserved in Pausanias.\nNatural law.\nHippias is credited with originating the idea of natural law. This ideal began at first during the 5th century BC. According to Hippias, natural law was never to be superseded as it was universal. Hippias saw natural law as a habitual entity that humans take part in without pre-meditation. He regarded the elite in states as indistinguishable from one another and thus they should perceive each other as so. Because of this, he reasons, they should consider and treat each other as a society of a unanimous state. These ideas were passed on through Cynicism and Stoicism, later being the foundation for turning Roman law in legislation. Along with natural law, Hippias also wrote about self-sufficiency as a binding principle. He used this principle in his teachings as he gathered knowledge in numerous subjects, so as to be never outwitted or have his reputation questioned.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75838", "revid": "50011661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75838", "title": "Pen", "text": "Writing and drawing implement using liquid or paste ink\nA pen is a common writing instrument that applies ink to a surface, typically paper, for writing or drawing. Early pens such as reed pens, quill pens, dip pens and ruling pens held a small amount of ink on a nib or in a small void or cavity that had to be periodically recharged by dipping the tip of the pen into an inkwell. \nToday, such pens find only a small number of specialized uses, such as in illustration and calligraphy. Reed pens, quill pens and dip pens, which were used for writing, have been replaced by ballpoint pens, rollerball pens, fountain pens and felt or ceramic tip pens. \nRuling pens, which were used for technical drawing and cartography, have been replaced by technical pens such as the Rapidograph. All of these modern pens contain internal ink reservoirs, such that they do not need to be dipped in ink while writing.\nHistory.\nAncient Egyptians had developed writing on papyrus scrolls when scribes used thin reed brushes or reed pens from the \"Juncus maritimus\" or sea rush. In his book \"A History of Writing\", Steven Roger Fischer suggests, on the basis of finds at Saqqara, that the reed pen might well have been used for writing on parchment as long ago as the First Dynasty, or around 3000 BC. Reed pens continued to be used until the Middle Ages, but were slowly replaced by quills from about the 7th century. The reed pen, made from reed or bamboo, is still used in some parts of Pakistan by young students and is used to write on small wooden boards.\nThe reed pen survived until papyrus was replaced as a writing surface by animal skins, vellum and parchment. The smoother surface of skin allowed finer, smaller writing with a quill pen, derived from the flight feather. The quill pen was used in Qumran, Judea to write some of the Dead Sea Scrolls, which date back to around 100 BC. The scrolls were written in Hebrew dialects with bird feathers or quills. There is a specific reference to quills in the writings of St. Isidore of Seville in the 7th century. Quill pens were still widely used in the eighteenth century, and were used to write and sign the Constitution of the United States in 1787.\nA copper nib was found in the ruins of Pompeii, showing that metal nibs were used in the year 79. There is also a reference to 'a silver pen to carry ink in', in Samuel Pepys' diary for August 1663. 'New invented' metal pens are advertised in \"The Times\" in 1792. A metal pen point was patented in 1803, but the patent was not commercially exploited. A patent for the manufacture of metal pens was advertised for sale by Bryan Donkin in 1811. John Mitchell of Birmingham started to mass-produce pens with metal nibs in 1822, and after that, the quality of steel nibs improved enough so that dip pens with metal nibs came into general use.\nThe earliest historical record of a pen with a reservoir dates back to the 10th century AD. In 953, Ma'\u0101d al-Mu'izz, the Fatimid Caliph of Egypt, demanded a pen which would not stain his hands or clothes, and was provided with a pen which held ink in a reservoir and delivered it to the nib. This pen may have been a fountain pen, but its mechanism remains unknown, and only one record mentioning it has been found. A later reservoir pen was developed in 1636. In his \"Deliciae Physico-Mathematicae\" (1636), German inventor Daniel Schwenter described a pen made from two quills. One quill served as a reservoir for ink inside the other quill. The ink was sealed inside the quill with cork. Ink was squeezed through a small hole to the writing point. In 1809, Bartholomew Folsch received a patent in England for a pen with an ink reservoir.\nA student in Paris, Romanian Petrache Poenaru invented a fountain pen that used a quill as an ink reservoir. The French Government patented this in May 1827. Fountain pen patents and production then increased in the 1850s.\nThe first patent on a ballpoint pen was issued on October 30, 1888, to John J. Loud. In 1938, L\u00e1szl\u00f3 B\u00edr\u00f3, a Hungarian newspaper editor, with the help of his brother George, a chemist, began to design new types of pens, including one with a tiny ball in its tip that was free to turn in a socket. As the pen moved along the paper, the ball rotated, picking up ink from the ink cartridge and leaving it on the paper. B\u00edr\u00f3 filed a British patent on June 15, 1938. In 1940, the B\u00edr\u00f3 brothers and a friend, Juan Jorge Meyne, moved to Argentina, fleeing Nazi Germany. On June 17, 1943, they filed for another patent. They formed \"B\u00edr\u00f3 Pens of Argentina\", and by the summer of 1943, the first commercial models were available. Erasable ballpoint pens were introduced by Paper Mate in 1979, when the Erasermate was put on the market.\nSlavoljub Eduard Penkala, a Croatian engineer and inventor, became renowned for further development of the mechanical pencil (1906) \u2013 then called an \"automatic pencil\" \u2013 and the first solid-ink fountain pen (1907). Collaborating with the Croatian entrepreneur Edmund Moster, he started the Penkala-Moster Company and built a pen-and-pencil factory that was one of the biggest in the world at the time. This company, now called \"TOZ-Penkala\", still exists today. \"TOZ\" stands for \"\", meaning \"Zagreb Pencil Factory\".\nIn the 1960s, the fiber- or felt-tipped pen was invented by Yukio Horie of the Tokyo Stationery Company, Japan. Paper Mate's Flair was among the first felt-tip pens to hit the U.S. market in the 1960s, and it has been the leader ever since. Marker pens and highlighters, both similar to felt pens, have become popular in recent times.\nRollerball pens were introduced in the early 1970s. They use a mobile ball and liquid ink to produce a smoother line. Technological advances during the late 1980s and early 1990s have improved the roller ball's overall performance. A porous point pen contains a point made of some porous material such as felt or ceramic. A high quality drafting pen will usually have a ceramic tip, since this wears well and does not broaden when pressure is applied while writing.\nAlthough the invention of the typewriter and personal computer with the keyboard input method has offered another way to write, the pen is still the main means of writing. Many people like to use expensive types and brands of pens, including fountain pens, and these are sometimes regarded as a status symbol.\nTypes.\nModern.\nPens commonly used today can be categorized based on the mechanism of the writing tip and the type of ink:\nHistoric.\nThese historic types of pens are no longer in common use as writing instruments, but may be used by calligraphers and other artists:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75839", "revid": "1304538682", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75839", "title": "Aquileia", "text": "Aquileia is a (municipality) in the Friuli-Venezia Giulia region of northeastern Italy. It is situated at the head of the Adriatic at the edge of the lagoons, about from the sea, on the river Natiso (modern Natisone), the course of which has changed somewhat since the Roman era.\nIn classical antiquity, Aquileia was a major Roman city with an estimated population close to 100,000 in the 2nd century CE. Founded as a Roman military colony in 181 BCE, Aquileia became the capital of the Augustan X region and a metropolitan center for early Christianity. During late antiquity, it was the first city in the Italian Peninsula to be sacked by Attila the Hun.\nToday, Aquileia is one of the most significant archaeological sites in northern Italy. Its ruins, including mosaics and an early Christian basilica, are a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Aquileia also holds historical importance as one of the former capitals of Friuli, with its coat of arms being the symbol of the region.\nHistory.\nClassical Antiquity.\nRoman Republic.\nAquileia was founded as a colony by the Romans in 180/181\u00a0BC along the Natiso River, on land south of the Julian Alps but about north of the lagoons. The colony served as a strategic frontier fortress at the north-east corner of transpadane Italy (on the far side of the Po river) and was intended to protect the Veneti, faithful allies of Rome during the invasion of Hannibal in the Second Punic War and during the Illyrian Wars. The colony would serve as a citadel to check the advance into Cisalpine Gaul of other warlike peoples, such as the hostile Carni to the northeast in what is now Carnia and Histri tribes to the southeast in what is now Istria. In fact, the site chosen for Aquileia was about from where an estimated 12,000 Celtic Taurisci had attempted to settle in 183\u00a0BC. However, since the thirteenth century BC, the site, on the river and at the head of the Adriatic, had also been of commercial importance as the end of the Baltic amber (\"sucinum\") trade. It is, therefore, theoretically not unlikely that Aquileia had been a Gallic \"oppidum\" even before the coming of the Romans. However, few Celtic artefacts have been discovered from 500 BC to the Roman arrival.\nThe colony was established with Latin Rights by the triumvirate of Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica, Caius Flaminius, and Lucius Manlius Acidinus, two of whom were of consular and one of praetorian rank. Each of the men had first-hand knowledge of Cisalpine Gaul. Nasica had conquered the Boii in 191. Flaminius had overseen the construction of the road named after him from Bononia (Bologna) to Arretium (Arezzo). Acidinus had conquered the Taurisci in 183.\nThe triumvirate led 3,000 families to settle the area meaning Aquileia probably had a population of 20,000 soon after its founding. Meanwhile, based on the evidence of names chiselled on stone, the majority of colonizing families came from Picenum, Samnium, and Campania, which also explains why the colony was \"Latin\" and not \"Roman\". Among these colonists, \"pedites\" received 50 \"iugera\" of land each, \"centuriones\" received 100 \"iugera\" each, and \"equites\" received 140 \"iugera\" each. Either at the founding or not long afterwards, colonists from the nearby Veneti supplemented these families.\nRoads soon connected Aquileia with the Roman colony of Bologna probably in 173 BC. In 148 BC, it was connected with Genua by the \"Via Postumia\", which stretched across the Padanian plain from Aquileia through or near to Opitergium, Tarvisium, Vicetia, Verona, Bedriacum, and the three Roman colonies of Cremona, Placentia, and Dertona. The construction of the \"Via Popilia\" from the Roman colony of Ariminium to Ad Portum near Altinum in 132 BC improved communications still further. In the first century, the \"Via Gemina\" would link Aquileia with Emona to the east of the Julian Alps, and by 78 or 79 the \"Via Flavia\" would link Aquileia to Pula.\nMeanwhile, in 169\u00a0BC, 1,500 more Latin colonists with their families, led by the triumvirate of Titus Annius Lucius, Publius Decius Subulo, and Marcus Cornelius Cethegus, settled in the town as a reinforcement to the garrison. The discovery of the gold fields near the modern Klagenfurt in 130\u00a0BC brought the growing colony into further notice, and it soon became a place of importance, not only owing to its strategic military position, but as a centre of commerce, especially in agricultural products and viticulture. It also had, in later times at least, considerable brickfields.\nIn 90\u00a0BC, the original Latin colony became a \"municipium\" and its citizens were ascribed to the Roman tribe Velina. The customs boundary of Italy was close by in Cicero's day. Julius Caesar visited the city on a number of occasions and pitched a winter camp nearby in 59\u201358 BC.\nRoman Empire.\nAlthough the Iapydes plundered Aquileia during the Augustan period, subsequent increased settlement and no lack of profitable work meant the city was able to develop its resources. Jewish artisans established a flourishing trade in glass-work. Metal from Noricum was forged and exported. The ancient Venetic trade in amber from the Baltic continued. Wine, especially its famous \"Pucinum\" was exported. Olive oil was imported from Proconsular Africa. By sea, the port of Aquae Gradatae \"(\"modern Grado) was developed. On land, Aquileia was the starting-point of several important roads leading outside Italy to the north-eastern portion of the empire \u2014 the road (\"Via Julia Augusta\") by Iulium Carnicum (Zuglio) to Veldidena (mod. Wilten, near Innsbruck), from which branched off the road into Noricum, leading by Virunum (Klagenfurt) to Laurieum (Lorch) on the Danube, the road leading via Emona into Pannonia and to Sirmium (Sremska Mitrovica), the road to Tarsatica (near Fiume, now Rijeka) and Siscia (Sisak), and the road to Tergeste (Trieste) and the Istrian coast.\nAugustus was the first of a number of emperors to visit Aquileia, notably during the Pannonian wars in 12\u201310\u00a0BC. It was the birthplace of Tiberius' son by Julia, in the latter year. The Roman poet Martial praised Aquileia as his hoped-for haven and resting place in his old age.\nIn terms of religion, the populace adopted the Roman pantheon, although the Celtic sun-god, Belenus, had a large following. Jews practiced their ancestral religion. Meanwhile, soldiers brought the martial cult of Mithras.\nIn the war against the Marcomanni in 167, the town was hard pressed; its fortifications had fallen into disrepair during the long peace. Nevertheless, when in 168 Marcus Aurelius made Aquileia the principal fortress of the empire against the barbarians of the North and East, it rose to the pinnacle of its greatness and soon had a population of 100,000. Septimius Severus visited in 193. In 238, when the town took the side of the Senate against the emperor Maximinus Thrax, the fortifications were hastily restored, and proved of sufficient strength to resist for several months, until Maximinus himself was assassinated.\nLate Antiquity.\nAn imperial palace was constructed in Aquileia, in which the emperors after the time of Diocletian frequently resided.\nDuring the fourth century, Aquileia maintained its importance. Constantine sojourned there on numerous occasions. It became a naval station and the seat of the \"Corrector Venetiarum et Histriae\". A mint was established, of which the coins were very numerous. The bishop of the Diocese of Aquileia obtained the rank of metropolitan archbishop. A council held in the city in 381 was only the first of a series of Councils of Aquileia that have been convened over the centuries. However, the city played a part in the struggles between the rulers of the fourth century. In 340, the emperor Constantine II was killed nearby while invading the territory of his younger brother Constans.\nAt the end of the fourth century, Ausonius enumerated Aquileia as the ninth among the great cities of the world, placing Rome, Constantinople, Carthage, Antioch, Alexandria, Trier, Mediolanum, and Capua before it. However, such prominence made it a target and Alaric and the Visigoths besieged it in 401, during which time some of its residents fled to the nearby lagoons. Alaric again attacked it in 408. Attila attacked the city in 452. During this invasion, on July 18, Attila and his Huns so utterly destroyed the city that it was afterwards hard to recognize its original site. The fall of Aquileia was the first of Attila's incursions into Roman territory; followed by cities like Mediolanum and Ticinum. The Roman inhabitants, together with those of smaller towns in the neighbourhood, fled \"en masse\" to the lagoons, where they laid the foundations of the cities of Venice and nearby Grado.\nYet Aquileia would rise again, though much diminished, and continue to exist until the Lombards invaded in 568; the Lombards destroyed it a second time in 590. Meanwhile, the patriarch fled to the island town of Grado, which was under the protection of the Byzantines. When the patriarch residing in Grado reconciled with Rome in 606, those continuing in the Schism of the Three Chapters, rejecting the Second Council of Constantinople, elected a patriarch at Aquileia. Thus, the diocese was essentially divided into two parts, with the mainland patriarchate of Aquileia under the protection of the Lombards, and the insular patriarchate of Aquileia seated in Grado being protected by the exarchate of Ravenna and later the Doges of Venice, with the collusion of the Lombards. The line of the patriarchs elected in Aquileia would continue in schism until 699. However, although they kept the title of patriarch of Aquileia, they moved their residence first to Cormons and later to Cividale.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe Lombard dukes of Friuli ruled Aquileia and the surrounding mainland territory from Cividale. In 774, Charlemagne conquered the Lombard duchy and made it into a Frankish one with Eric of Friuli as duke. In 787, Charlemagne named the priest and \"master of grammar\" at the Palace School of Paulinus II, the new patriarch of Aquileia. The patriarchate, despite being divided with a northern portion assigned to the pastoral care of the newly created Archbishopric of Salzburg, would remain one of the largest dioceses. Although Paulinus resided mainly at Cividale, his successor Maxentius considered rebuilding Aquileia. However, the project never came to fruition.\nWhile Maxentius was patriarch, the pope approved the Synod of Mantua, which affirmed the precedence of the mainland patriarch of Aquileia over the patriarch of Grado. However, material conditions were soon to worsen for Aquileia. The ruins of Aquileia were continually pillaged for building material. And with the collapse of the Carolingians in the tenth century, the inhabitants would suffer under the raids of the Magyars.\nBy the eleventh century, the patriarch of Aquileia had grown strong enough to assert temporal sovereignty over Friuli and Aquileia. The Holy Roman Emperor gave the region to the patriarch as a feudal possession. However, the patriarch's temporal authority was constantly disputed and assailed by the territorial nobility.\nIn 1027 and 1044, Patriarch Poppo of Aquileia, who rebuilt the cathedral of Aquileia, entered and sacked neighbouring Grado, and, though the Pope reconfirmed the Patriarch of the latter in his dignities, the town never fully recovered, though it continued to be the seat of the Patriarchate until its formal transference to Venice in 1450.\nIn the fourteenth century, the Patriarchal State reached its largest extension, stretching from the Piave river to the Julian Alps and northern Istria. The seat of the Patriarchate of Aquileia had been transferred to Udine in 1238, but returned to Aquileia in 1420 when Venice annexed the territory of Udine.\nIn 1445, the defeated patriarch Ludovico Trevisan acquiesced in the loss of his ancient temporal estate in return for an annual salary of 5,000 ducats allowed him from the Venetian treasury. Henceforth only Venetians were allowed to hold the title of Patriarch of Aquileia. The Patriarchal State was incorporated into the Republic of Venice with the name of \"Patria del Friuli\", ruled by a \"provveditore generale\" or a \"luogotenente\" living in Udine.\nModern era.\nIn the 16th century Aquileia fell under the Habsburg County of Gorizia (later the Princely County of Gorizia and Gradisca), a part of the Holy Roman Empire.\nThe patriarchal diocese was finally officially suppressed in 1751, and the sees of Udine and Gorizia were established from its territory.\nDuring the Napoleonic Wars Aquileia was annexed to the Napoleonic Kingdom of Italy by the 1807 Treaty of Fontainebleau. It returned to Austrian control in 1815 following the Congress of Vienna, initially as part of the Kingdom of Illyria, then the reconstituted Gorizia and Gradisca (part of the Austrian Littoral).\nFollowing the Austro-Hungarian defeat in World War I, Aquileia passed to the Kingdom of Italy in 1920 (Treaty of Rapallo).\nMain sights.\nCathedral.\nAquileia Cathedral is a flat-roofed basilica that was erected by Patriarch Poppo in 1031 on the site of an earlier church and rebuilt in the Gothic style by Patriarch Marquard of Randeck (1365\u20131381).\nAncient Roman Remains.\nAquileia is a smaller town today than the colony first founded by Rome. Over the centuries, sieges, earthquakes, floods and pillaging of the ancient buildings for materials mean that no building from the Roman period remain above ground. The site of Aquileia is believed to be the largest Roman city yet to be excavated and is on the UNESCO World Heritage List. Excavations, however, have revealed some of the layout of the Roman town like a segment of a street, the north-western angle of the town walls; the river port; and the former locations of baths, an amphitheatre, a circus, a cemetery, the \"Via Sacra\", the forum and a market. The National Archaeological Museum of Aquileia contains over 2,000 inscriptions, statues and other antiquities and mosaics, as well as glasses of local production and a collection.\nOthers.\nIn the Monastero fraction is a fifth-century Christian basilica, later a Benedictine monastery, which now houses the Palaeo-Christian Museum. Another Byzantine-style basilica, expanded in the 6th century under Justinian, was discovered at the site in 2024.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nAquileia is twinned with the following settlements:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75840", "revid": "46040862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75840", "title": "Iapodes", "text": "Ancient Illyrian tribe\nThe Iapodes (or Iapydes, Japodes; ; ) were an ancient people who dwelt north of and inland from the Liburnians, off the Adriatic coast and eastwards of the Istrian peninsula. They occupied the interior of the country between the \"Colapis\" (Kupa) and \"Oeneus\" (Una) rivers, and the Velebit mountain range (\"Mons Baebius\") which separated them from the coastal Liburnians. Their territory covered the central inlands of modern Croatia and Una River Valley in today's Bosnia and Herzegovina. Archaeological documentation confirms their presence in these countries at least from 9th century BC, and they persisted in their area longer than a millennium. The ancient written documentation on inland Iapodes is scarcer than on the adjacent coastal peoples (Liburni, Delmatae, etc.) that had more frequent maritime contacts with ancient Greeks and Romans.\nThe Iapodes had their maximal development and territorial expansion from the 8th to 4th centuries BC. They settled mostly in inland mountain valleys between Pannonia and the coastal Adriatic basin, but in disputation with southern \"Liburni\" they periodically reached also the northern Adriatic coast at Vinodol valley (classical \"Valdevinum\").\nKnowledge of the Iapodes' culture is largely nebulous due to a lack of material evidence. The Iapodes are believed to have been Illyrians, probably a subgroup of Pannonians, or a mixed group with connections to the Pannonians, Celts, and/or Veneti.\nA major scholar of the Japodi was archaeologist Branka Raunig.\nOrigin and affinity.\nThe exact origin of early Iapodes is uncertain; archaeological documentation suggests mixed affinities to early \"Pannonii\" and other Illyrians. The first written mention of an Illyrian tribe is from Greek writers from the 6th century BC. They are provisionally described by Strabo as a mixed race of Celts and Illyrians, who used Celtic weapons, tattooed themselves, and lived chiefly on spelt and millet; however, Strabo's suggestion of a mixed Celtic-Illyrian Iapodes culture is not confirmed by archaeology. Originally, Iapodes existed at least from the 9th century BC, and Celtic influence reached the region in the 4th century BC when Iapodes entered a decline. Archeological evidence of typical Celtic culture is documented only in the marginal contact zone of the Iapodes and the Celtic \"Taurisci\" along the Kupa river valley (now the Slovenian-Croatian border). Elsewhere, and especially in the main Iapodian area of the Lika highlands in Croatia, definite Celtic artifacts are scarce and explicable merely by commercial exchanges.\nRoman conquest.\nRomans said of the Iapodes that they were a warlike race addicted to plundering expeditions, but other archaeological documentation confirms their main economical activity was mining and metallurgy. That attracted the pragmatic Romans to conquer their country, whose river valleys were also a natural way for strategic communications between the Adriatic and Pannonia. Therefore, induced conflicts started from 171 BC, when consul Gaius Cassius Longinus first attacked Iapodes. In 129 BC, Gaius Sempronius Tuditanus attacked the Iapodes and was nearly defeated, but Decimus Iunius Brutus arrived and rescued him, and he celebrated a triumph. Lucius Aurelius Cotta and Gaius Caecilius Metellus undertook another expedition against the Iapodes in 119, which concluded with a triumph in 117. In 78\u201376 BC they were also attacked by Gaius Cosconius as part of a war against the Dalmatians. They had a \"foedus\" from 56 BC with Rome and paid a \"tributum\", but then from 52\u201347 BC rebelled. In 34 BC they were finally conquered by Augustus Caesar. Then they conserved a partial autonomy with a domestic \"praepositus Iapodum\".\nCulture and society.\nDue to the rich and extensive forests of their mountainous country, their houses were mostly wooden huts, and they rarely used stone constructions except in some major fortifications. Their settlements were mostly on hilltops, including between 400\u20133,000 dwellers, and the main Iapodian settlements in Roman times were \"Metulum\", \"Terpon\", \"Arupium\" and \"Avendo\".\nThey cultivated chiefly cereals and grapes, and kept varied cattle. Their early metallurgy developed a half millennium before Celtic influence that induced here minor modifications. Their society was simple including warriors, villagers, herdsmen, miners, and metalworkers. In that early phase neither leaders nor elite were indicated, and these independent Iapodes had no detectable collective political organisation. Under the Romans, a Romanized elite emerged, led by the \"praepositus Iapodum\" installed by Romans.\nTheir classical culture was a varied mixture of Pannonian, Illyrian, Greek and Roman influences, mostly without proper peculiarities. Their figural art included the frequent metal decorations in the form of triangles and spirals, and large amber pearls and amber figurines. The Iapodian language before the Romans is mostly unknown: the only indications available are their toponyms and necropolis inscriptions from Roman times. These scarce onomastic indications suggest the Iapodian tongue may be correlated with other Illyrian and Pannonian tribes. During their independence, the Iapodes appear to have been completely illiterate and left no inscriptions before the Roman conquest.\nReligion.\nThe original religion of Iapodes is scarcely known, and it appears to be similar with other eastward Illyrians. They knew the divine pair of water-deities \"Vidassus\" (as Roman Sylvanus) and \"Thana\" (as Roman Diana), whose rocky reliefs persist today at some springs in their area. They worshiped the holy horse as their tribal totem, and also the holy snakes as the symbol of their ancestors. Their early tombs were usually in caves, and then in Roman times often in wooden sarcophagi and also incinerated in ceramic urns.\nJapodian burial urns were art a unique form influenced to a degree by the Situla art of northern Illyria and Italy and by Greek art.\nArchaeogenetics.\nA archaeogenetic studies published in \"Nature\" (2022) examined 8 samples from three Early Iron Age Iapodes sites. All five tested men belonged to the Y-DNA haplogroup patrilineal line J2b2a1-L283 (&gt; J-Y86930). The mtDNA haplogroups fell under H, H1, 2x H3b, H5, T2a1a, T2b and U5a1g.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75841", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75841", "title": "Quercus marilandica", "text": "Species of oak tree\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nQuercus marilandica, the blackjack oak, is a small oak, one of the red oak group \"Quercus\" sect. \"Lobatae\". It is native to the eastern and central United States.\nDescription.\n\"Quercus marilandica\" is a small deciduous tree growing to tall, with bark cracked into rectangular black plates with narrow orange fissures. The leaves are long and broad, and typically flare from a tapered base to a broad three-lobed bell shape with only shallow indentations. They are dark green and glossy above, pubescent underneath, and often remain attached to the twigs through the winter after turning colors from red to brown in the fall. The acorn is small, long and broad; like those of other red oaks, it takes 18 months to mature.\nBlackjack oaks in the Cross Timbers can grow from high but seldom reach more than , with a trunk diameter of . The leaves are from in length and about the same width.\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe blackjack oak can be found from Long Island in New York to Florida, west as far as Texas, Oklahoma, and Nebraska. There are reports of a few isolated populations in southern Michigan, but these appear to represent introductions.\nThe species grows in poor, thin, dry, rocky or sandy soils where few other woody plants can thrive, usually on low ground, from sea level up to approximately in altitude. Some sources say that it does not have the beautiful form of many oaks, but is nonetheless a valuable tree for growing in problem sites. Some say that the tree is \"tough but ugly\", but also underappreciated. At times the tree has even been actively eradicated to provide room for trees deemed to be more commercially valuable.\nIt is sometimes an understory tree in pine stands on sandy knolls in the southeastern US. Along the coastal plain of New Jersey the probability of finding this species is increased in relatively sunny, open areas such as those near coastal salt marshes. It often occurs near scarlet and post oaks as well as pitch pine; understory companions include winged sumac, bracken, sweetfern, and bayberry, and can be found as far north as parts of Ohio and New York.\nA variety, \"Quercus marilandica\" M\u00fcnchhausen var. \"ashei\" Sudworth, grows in the western portions of its range \u2013 northern Texas, Oklahoma, and into southern Kansas. In this area, blackjack and post oak form a semi-savanna area composed of forested strips intermixed with prairie grass glades along the eastern edge of the southern Great Plains. This semi-savanna is known as the Cross Timbers. Scrub forms of \"Q.\u00a0marilandica\" dominate on many chert glades along with \"Q.\u00a0stellata\" in Arkansas's Ozark plateau.\nEcology.\nBlackjack oak sometimes hybridizes with bear oak (\"Q.\u00a0ilicifolia\"), forming a hybrid known as \"Q.\" \u00d7 \"brittonii\".\nBlackjack acorns provide food for both whitetail deer and wild turkey. Blackjacks may, however, cause tannic acid poisoning in cattle.\nUses.\nThe wood is very dense and produces a hot flame when burned, which functions as an excellent source of heat for barbecues and wood-burning stoves. However, the wood is not desirable for wood fireplaces because the heat causes popping, thereby increasing the risk of house fires.\nTraditionally blackjack wood is used as both a fuel and smoke wood for barbecue in Oklahoma.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75842", "revid": "4928500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75842", "title": "Orchestrator", "text": ""}
{"id": "75845", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75845", "title": "Capua", "text": "Capua ( ; ) is a city and \"comune\" in the province of Caserta, in the region of Campania, southern Italy, located on the northeastern edge of the Campanian plain.\nHistory.\nAncient era.\nCapua's name comes from the Etruscan \"Capeva\", which means 'City of Marshes'. Its foundation is attributed by Cato the Elder to the Etruscans, and the date is given as about 260 years before it was \"taken\" by Rome. That, if true, refers not to its capture in the Second Punic War (211 BC), but to its submission to Rome in 338 BC. That places the date of foundation at about 600 BC, while Etruscan power was at its highest. In the area, several settlements of the Villanovian civilization were present in prehistoric times. These were probably enlarged by the Oscans, and subsequently by the Etruscans.\nEtruscan supremacy in Campania came to an end with the Samnites' invasion in the latter half of the 5th century BC.\nIn about 424 BC, Capua was captured by the Samnites, and in 343 BC, it sought Roman help against its conquerors. They allied for protection against the Samnite mountain tribes, along with its dependent communities of Casilinum, Calatia, Atella and so the greater part of Campania now fell under Roman supremacy. The citizens of Capua received the (citizenship without the vote).\nIn the second Samnite War with Rome, Capua proved an untrustworthy Roman ally, so that after the defeat of the Samnites, the Ager Falernus on the right bank of the Volturnus was confiscated. In 318 BC the powers of the native officials () were limited by the appointment of officials with the title \"praefecti Capuam Cumas\" (taking their name from the most important towns of Campania); they were at first mere deputies of the \"praetor urbanus\" but after 123 BC were elected Roman magistrates, four in number; they governed the whole of Campania until the time of Augustus, when they were abolished. It was the capital of \"Campania Felix\".\nIn 312 BC, Capua was connected with Rome by the construction of the \"Via Appia\", the most important of the military highways of Italy. The gate by which it left the Servian walls of Rome bore the name \"Porta Capena\"; perhaps the only case in which a gate in this line of fortifications bears the name of the place to which it led. At some time the \"Via Latina\" was extended to Casilinum. It afforded a route only longer, and the difficulties with its construction were much less; it also avoided the troublesome journey through the Pontine Marshes.\nThe importance of Capua increased steadily during the 3rd century BC, and at the beginning of the Second Punic War, it was considered to be only slightly behind Rome and Carthage themselves and furnished 30,000 infantry and 4,000 cavalry. Until after the defeat of Cannae, it remained faithful to Rome, but, after an unsuccessful demand that one of the consuls should always be selected from it (or perhaps to secure regional supremacy in the event of a Carthaginian victory), it defected to Hannibal. He made it his winter quarters, and he and his army were voluntarily received by Capua. Livy and others have suggested that the luxurious conditions were Hannibal's \"Cannae\" because his troops became soft and demoralized by luxurious living. Historians from Reginald Bosworth Smith onwards have been skeptical of that and observed that his troops gave as good an account of themselves in battle after that winter as before. After a long siege, Capua was taken by the Romans in 211 BC and severely punished; its magistrates and communal organization were abolished, the inhabitants who had not been killed lost their civic rights, and its territory was declared (Roman state domain). Parts of it were sold in 205 BC and 199 BC, another part was divided among the citizens of the new colonies of Volturnum and Liternum, established near the coast in 194 BC, but the greater portion of it was reserved to be let by the state.\nConsiderable difficulties occurred in preventing illegal encroachments by private persons, and it became necessary to buy a number of them out in 162 BC. It was, after that period, let not to large but to small proprietors. Frequent attempts were made by the democratic leaders to divide the land among new settlers. M. Junius Brutus the Elder in 83 BC actually succeeded in establishing a colony, but it was soon dissolved; and Cicero's speeches \"De Lege Agrania\" were directed against a similar attempt by Servilius Rullus in 63 BC.\nIn the meantime, the necessary organization of the inhabitants of this thickly populated district was in a measure supplied by grouping them round important shrines. Many inscriptions testify to a associated with the shrine to Diana Tifatina; a is also known.\nThe town of Capua belonged to none of those organizations, and was entirely dependent on the . It enjoyed great prosperity, however, from its growing of spelt, a grain that was put into groats, wine, roses, spices, unguents etc and also from its manufacture, especially of bronze objects, of which both the elder Cato and the elder Pliny speak in the highest terms.\nIts luxury remained proverbial, and Campania was especially noted as the home of gladiatorial combat. It was from the gladiatorial schools of the region that Spartacus and his followers emerged during their revolt in 73 BC. In 59 BC, Julius Caesar, serving as consul, established a Roman colony in the territory\u2014named \"Colonia Julia Felix\"\u2014under his agrarian reform, settling 20,000 Roman citizens in Capua.\nThe number of colonists was increased by Mark Antony, Augustus (who constructed an aqueduct from the \"Mons Tifata\" and gave the town of Capua estates in the district of Knossos in Crete valued at 12 million sesterces) and Nero.\nIn the War of 69 AD, Capua took the side of Vitellius. Under the later empire, it is not often mentioned, but in the 4th century, it was the seat of the \"consularis Campaniae\" and its chief town, though Ausonius put it behind Mediolanum (Milan) and Aquileia in his \"ordo nobilium urbium\".\nMiddle Ages.\nUnder Constantine, a Christian church was founded in Capua. In 456, it was taken and destroyed by the Vandals under Gaiseric but was likely soon rebuilt.\nDuring the Gothic War, Capua suffered greatly. When the Lombards invaded Italy in the second half of the 6th century, Capua was ravaged, Later, it was included in the Duchy of Benevento, and ruled by an official styled gastald.\nIn 839, the prince of Benevento, Sicard, was assassinated by Radelchis I of Benevento, who took over the throne. Sicard's brother Siconulf was proclaimed independent prince in Salerno and the gastald of Capua declared himself independent.\nIn 840, ancient Capua was burned to the ground by a band of Saracen mercenaries called by Radelchis I of Benevento with only the church of Santa Maria Maggiore (founded about 497) remaining, which was purposely spared by the invading Muslims, whose policy was that to leave houses of worship alone. A new city was built in 856, but at some distance from the former site, where another town later appeared under the name of Santa Maria Capua Vetere (\"Capua the Old\").\nPrince Atenulf I conquered Benevento in 900 and united the principalities until 981, when Pandulf Ironhead separated them in his will for his children. Capua eclipsed Benevento thereafter and became the chief rival of Salerno. Under Pandulf IV, the principality brought in the aid of the Normans and, for a while had the loyalty of Rainulf Drengot, until the latter abandoned him to aid the deposed Sergius IV of Naples take back his city, annexed by Pandulf in 1027.\nUpon Pandulf's death, Capua fell to his weaker sons and, in 1058, the city itself fell in a siege to Rainulf's nephew Richard I, who took the title Prince of Aversa. For seven years (1091\u20131098), Richard II was exiled from his city, but with the aid of his relatives, he retook the city after a siege in 1098. His dynasty lived on as princes of Capua until the last claimant of their line died in 1156 and the principality was definitively united to the kingdom of Sicily. In the 1230s, King Frederick I built the monumental City Gate of Capua.\nIn the early 1500s, it was reported to Pope Alexander VI that his son, Cesare Borgia, had captured the city and promptly killed all 6,000 citizens, which included women and children, while commanding French troops during the sieges of Naples and Capua.\nModern Age.\nOn 3 January 1799, during the French Revolutionary Wars, the community was successfully attacked by a French-controlled 1798\u20131799 Roman Republic Army, led by Governor \u00c9tienne MacDonald.\nThe Battle of Volturnus (1860), at the conclusion of Garibaldi's Expedition of the Thousand, partially took place in and around Capua. Prior to the battle, the Neapolitan Army, defeated in earlier engagements, was rebuilt in Capua under marshal Giosu\u00e8 Ritucci. After fighting elsewhere in which the Neapolitans were ultimately defeated, the last of them, around 3,000 troops under Colonel Ettore Perrone di San Martino, were holed up in Capua. The city was attacked by the Garibaldines and one Piedmontese regular Bersaglieri battalion, and captured. In the referendum several months later, its inhabitants voted overwhelmingly to join the new Kingdom of Italy.\nArchaeological sites.\nRemains.\nNo pre-Roman remains have been found within the town of Capua itself, but important cemeteries have been discovered on all sides of it, the earliest of which go back to the 7th or 6th century BC.\nThe tombs are of various forms, partly chambers with frescoes on the walls, partly cubical blocks of peperino, hollowed out, with grooved lids. The objects found within them consist mainly of vases of bronze (many of them without feet, and with incised designs of Etruscan style) and of clay, some of Greek, some of local manufacture, and of paintings. On the east of the town, in the Patturelli property, a temple has been discovered with Oscan votive inscriptions originally thought to be Oscan, now recognized as Etruscan, some of them inscribed upon terracotta tablets, the most famous of which is the Tabula Capuana, conserved in Berlin, still, after more than a century of searching, the second-longest Etruscan text. Other brief inscriptions are on \"cippi\". A group of 150 tuff statuettes represent a matron holding one or more children in her lap: three bore Latin inscriptions of the early Imperial period.\nThe site of the town being in a perfectly flat plain, without natural defences, it was possible to lay it out regularly. Its length from east to west is accurately determined by the fact that the \"Via Appia\", which runs from north-west to south-east from Casilinum to Calatia, turns due east very soon after passing the so-called Arch of Hadrian (a triumphal arch of brickwork, once faced with marble, with three openings, erected in honour of some emperor unknown), and continues to run in this direction for (6,000 ancient Oscan feet).\nThe west gate was the \"Porta Romana\"; remains of the east gate have also been found, although its name is unknown. This fact shows that the main street of the town was perfectly oriented, and that before the \"Via Appia\" was constructed, i.e. in all probability in pre-Roman times. The width of the town from north to south cannot be so accurately determined as the line of the north and south walls is not known, though it can be approximately fixed by the absence of tombs. Beloch fixes it at 4,000 Oscan feet = , nor is it absolutely certain (though it is in the highest degree probable, for Cicero praises its regular arrangement and fine streets) that the plan of the town was rectangular.\nWithin the town are remains of public baths on the north of the Via Appia and of a theatre opposite, on the south. The former consisted of a large \"cryptoporticus\" round three sides of a court, the south side being open to the road; it now lies under the prisons. Beloch (see below) attributes this to the Oscan period; but the construction as shown in Labruzzi's drawing (v. 17) 1 is partly of brick-work and opus reticulatum, which may, of course, belong to a restoration. The stage of the theatre had its back to the road; Labruzzi (v. 18) gives an interesting view of the cavea. It appears from inscriptions that it was erected after the time of Augustus.\nOther inscriptions, however, prove the existence of a theatre as early as 94 BC. The Roman colony was divided into regions and possessed a \"capitolium\", with a temple of Jupiter, within the town, and the marketplace, for unguents especially, was called Seplasia; an \"aedes alba\" is also mentioned, which is probably the original senate house, which stood in an open space known as albana. But the sites of all these are uncertain. A Mithraeum may also be seen, by appointment.\nAmphitheatre.\nOutside the town, in Santa Maria Capua Vetere, there is the amphitheatre, built in the time of Augustus, restored by Hadrian and dedicated by Antoninus Pius, as the inscription over the main entrance recorded. The exterior was formed by 80 Doric arcades of four stories each, but only two arches now remain. The keystones were adorned with heads of divinities.\nThe interior is better preserved; beneath the arena are subterranean passages like those in the amphitheatre at Puteoli. It is one of the largest in existence; the longer diameter is , the shorter , and the arena measures , the corresponding dimensions in the Colosseum at Rome being 188, 155, 85, 53 metres (615, 510, 279 and 174\u00a0ft).\nTo the east are considerable remains of baths \u2013 a large octagonal building, an apse against which the church of Santa Maria delle Grazie is built, and several heaps of debris. On the Via Appia, to the south-east of the east gate of the town, arc two large and well-preserved tombs of the Roman period, known as \"le Carceri vecchie\" and \"la Conocchia\".\nTo the east of the amphitheatre an ancient road, the \"Via Dianae\", leads north to the Pagus Dianae, on the west slopes of the Mons Tifata, a community which sprang up around the famous and ancient temple of Diana, and probably received an independent organization after the abolition of that of Capua in 211 BC. The place often served as a base for attacks on the latter, and Sulla, after his defeat of Gaius Norbanus, gave the whole of the mountain to the temple.\nWithin the territory of the \"pagus\" were several other temples with their \"magistri\". After the restoration of the community of Capua, \"magistri\" of the temple of Diana are still attested, but they were probably officials of Capua itself.\nThe site is occupied by the Benedictine church of \"San Michele Arcangelo\" in Sant'Angelo in Formis. It dates from 944, and was reconstructed by the abbot Desiderius (afterwards Pope Victor III) of Monte Cassino. It has interesting paintings, dating from the end of the 11th century to the middle of the 12th, in which five different styles may be distinguished. They form a complete representation of all the chief episodes of the New Testament. Deposits of votive objects (\"favissae\"), removed from the ancient temple from time to time as new ones came in and occupied all the available space, have been found, and considerable remains of buildings belonging to the \"Vicus Dianae\" (among them a triumphal arch and some baths, also a hail with frescoes, representing the goddess herself ready for the chase) still exist.\nThe ancient road from Capua went on beyond the \"Vicus Dianae\" to the Volturnus (remains of the bridge still exist) and then turned east along the river valley to Caiatia and Telesia. Other roads ran to Puteoli and Cumae (the so-called Via Campana) and to Neapolis, and the Via Appia passed through Capua, which was thus the most important road centre of Campania.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75846", "revid": "50690292", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75846", "title": "Publius Servilius Rullus", "text": "Roman plebeian tribune in 63 BC\nPublius Servilius Rullus was plebeian tribune of the Roman Republic in 63 BC. He proposed an agrarian law aimed at redistributing land for the landless poor in Rome to farm. We know about this through the speeches delivered by Marcus Tullius Cicero against this bill. Cicero delivered four speeches. Three are extant. The beginning of the first speech is missing. The fourth speech is lost. We do not have any other sources except for passing references by Plutarch and Suetonius.\nAgrarian bill.\nThe bill provided for the election of a ten-man commission (decemviri) which would have authority for five years. Its task was to distribute land to 5,000 colonists in lots of ten jugera in the ager Campanus and in lots of twelve jugera in the nearby campus Stellaris (both areas were in Campania, north of Naples). Further plots of land were intended and land was to be bought for this. To raise funds for this, the decemviri were empowered to sell public land whose sale had been recommended by senatus consulta (written advice by the senate) since 81 BC, but had not been carried out. It was also empowered to sell domains outside Italy which had become public property in 88 BC or later. The decimviri were also authorised to tax public land outside Italy, to use the Vectigalia from 63 BC and the gold and silver from war booty not paid into the treasury or spent on monuments. Military commanders gave some of their booty to the state treasury and spent some of it to build temples and public facilities or to erect statues. Pompey was exempted from this. He was commanding the Roman troops in the last phase of the Third Mithridatic War (73\u201363 BC) against Pontus and Armenia (in present-day eastern Turkey). Because of his absence from Rome he was not eligible to be a candidate for the election of the decemviri.\nCicero portrayed Publius Servilius Rullus as an insignificant figure and alleged that he was a front for unsavoury men he described as the real architects of the bill, as 'machinators' and as the men who had the real power and were to be feared more than Rullus. He claimed that they hoped to become decemviri. He did not name these men, but dropped hints which made them identifiable. He said that among those men who were after joining the commission there would be \"some of them to whom nothing appears sufficient to possess, some to whom nothing seems sufficient to squander.\" The first was a reference to the popular image of Marcus Licinius Crassus and the second one referred to the popular image of Julius Caesar. The speeches of Cicero need to be understood in terms of the frictions between two political factions, the populares (in favour of the people) and the optimates (the good men). The former favoured the plebeians (the commoners), wanted to address the problems of the urban poor and promoted reforms which would help them, particularly the redistribution of land for the landless poor to farm and the problem of indebtedness. The latter was a conservative faction which favoured the wealthy equestrians and the senatorial aristocracy. It opposed the mentioned reforms. It also wanted to limit the power of the plebeian tribunes and the Plebeian Council (the assembly of the plebeians) and strengthen the power of the Senate. At that time Crassus and Caesar were leading figures of the populares. Cicero was a leading figure of the optimates and as such he was opposed to the bill.\nCicero exaggerated the power which the land commission would be given by the bill. He described the commission as \"... ten Kings of the treasury, of the revenues, of all provinces, of the whole Republic, of the kingdoms allied with us, the free nations confederate with us - in fact, ten Lords of the world are to be set up under the pretence and name of an agrarian law.\" He also exaggerated the implications of the commission's power to sell domains outside Italy which had become public property. He claimed that \"all nations, and people, and provinces, and kingdoms, are given up and handed over to the dominion, and judgment, and power of the decimviri \u2026 and asked \u2026 what place there is anywhere in the world which the decemviri may not be able to say has been made the property of the Roman people [public property]?\" He also alleged that all the lands and cities in Asia which had been \u2018recovered\u2019 by Sulla and Pompey in Asia would be declared public property and sold by the commissioners. He said Lucius Cornelius Sulla (the commander in the First Mithridatic War, 89\u201385 BC) had recovered land in Asia. However, Sulla had fought and recovered territories only in Greece. There was no land which was Roman public property or could be declared as such in Greece. He said that Pompey also recovered land in Asia. After winning the Third Mithridatic War Pompey annexed Cilicia Trachea, part of Pontus (both in today's Turkey), and Syria. However, these were annexations, rather than recoveries of territories. Moreover, at the time of the bill the war was still on and Pompey's settlements in Asia were yet to be completed. Sumner points out that by mos maiorum the adjudication and control of the estates in the acquired territories were to rest with Pompey. Hence, here Cicero's statements were contentious and part of effort to purport that Crassus and Caesar wanted to use the bill to prepare for a conflict with Pompey (see below).\nInterpretations.\nThere are various interpretations of the political motivations of this agrarian bill among various historians. 1) The most common one is that Crassus and Caesar sought to seize power through a coup d\u2019 \u00e9tat against Pompey and/or the senate or that they were after command in Egypt to enable them to fight Pompey. 2) Crassus wanted to control the allotment of land so that he would have a strong bargaining position when Pompey came back from the war and sought land for his veterans (soldiers were entitled to a grant of a plot of land on their discharge); 3) The bill was a bribery scheme to provide profits for the merchants and a new tax source for the publicani (these were private tax collectors, the republican state tendered this collection to private tax collectors who used their position to line their pockets and for extortion); 4) The bill was never meant to be passed and served to show up Cicero in his true colours, as an optimate-lover, rather than consul in favour of the people and to heighten the conflict between the plebeians and the senate. 5) The purpose of the bill was genuinely to give land to the landless poor. According to this view, this was intended to rid Rome of these people who were seen as idle and dangerous and improve the security of the city. Conspiracy theories are unlikely and based on the rhetoric of Cicero and on the remarks of Plutarch and Suetonius. These two later writers had pro-aristocracy views and always portrayed the plebeian tribunes in a negative light. As for Cicero's speeches, their rhetoric appears to be designed to undermine support for the bill.\nCicero tried to give a conspiratorial hue to the bill. He alleged that the architects of the bill were against both Pompey and himself. He said that they hoped to use the powers of the commissioners to allot land to discharged soldiers to take away from Pompey his right to give his veterans land and, through this, the support of his veterans. He added that he was concerned that they would do so during his term as consul to undermine him because they despised him. This is what interpretations 2 and 4 rest on. Cicero repeatedly made his claim about an anti-Pompeian agenda. He said that the commissions would \"in the first place take care that Gnaeus [Pompey] should be removed from all power of protecting your [the people's] liberty, from all power to promote, from all commission to watch over, and from all means of protecting your interests [,]\" and that they thought it \"expedient to oppose Gnaeus [Pompey] as your defence against all defects and wickednesses in the law.\" He called the commissioners \"Ten general against Pompey.\" Cicero was also at pain to present himself as a consul who stood for the people and not for the aristocrats or the optimantes: \"I have been made consul, not by the zeal of the powerful citizens, nor by the preponderating influence of a few men, but by the deliberate judgment of the Roman people, and that, too, in such a way as to be preferred to men of the very highest rank, to avoid, both in this magistracy and throughout my whole life, devoting myself to the interests of the people.\" He presented himself as a man who stood in opposition against men who pretended to stand in the interests of the people but were in fact a danger to the people (this was a reference to the populares): \"For there is a great error abroad, by reason of the treacherous pretences made by some people, who, though they oppose and hinder not only the advantage but even the safety of the people, still endeavour by their speeches to make men believe them zealous for the interests of the people.\"\nTo further bolster his speeches, Cicero claimed that the Publius Rullus would sell Alexandria and Egypt. In 65 BC there was a proposal to annex Egypt. This was made by the plebeian tribunes. According to Suetonius Julius Caesar, who wanted to get the command in Egypt, put them up to it. According to Plutarch, instead, Crassus promoted this. Both Plutarch and Suetonius wrote over 160 years after these events. The proposal was made on the basis of a claim that Ptolemy Alexander I of Egypt bequeathed his kingdom to Rome. Cicero said: \"I know that there is a resolution of the senate extant to the effect that it accepted the inheritance \u2026 [Publius Servilius Rullus] will also, in accordance with his own law, sell Alexandria, and sell Egypt. He will be found to be the judge, the arbiter, the master, of a most wealthy city, and of a most beautiful country; yes, he will be found to be the king of a most opulent kingdom. Will he abstain from taking all this? from desiring all this? He will decide that Alexandria belongs to the king; he will by his sentence deprive the Roman people of it.\" In the last part of the sentence Cicero implied that, should Egypt be annexed, the plebeian tribune and the other decemviri would use the sale of Alexandria and Egypt for their own profit.\nSumner points out that the proposal to annex Egypt by some plebeian tribunes in 65 BC had been rejected and that the commission would have to have the annexation approved by the senate or the assembly of the people. The bill did leave the possibility of annexation open by setting the cut off for the selling of domains outside Italy which had been seen as public property form 88 BC onward. This was the year in which Ptolemy Alexander I was deposed. However, not only the annexation would have to be approved by either of the mentioned bodies, so would the declaration of the royal property in Egypt as Roman public property. Thus, as Sumner notes, the bill did not allow the land commission 'to go and grab Egypt'. One this could add to this that the law did not allow the land commission to make a declaration on public land. The annexation of Egypt was a very unlikely scenario. Even in such a case, Sumner points out that the most likely Roman commander who would have benefited would have been Pompey, who was already in the east and was ending the war there. He would have been the best positioned man to handle the annexation of Egypt. Moreover, the 65 BC proposal to annex Egypt occurred during the period of ascendancy of Pompey and followed the Gabinian Law (67 BC), which gave Pompey extraordinary proconsular powers in any province within 50 miles of the Mediterranean Sea to deal with the problem of piracy, and the 66 BC Manilian Law (which Cicero had supported), which gave Pompey the mandate to replace the previous Romans commander in the Third Mithridatic War and gave him supreme command in the last phase of this war. Sumner also notes that the opponents to these two laws were optimates and that Julius Caesar had supported them. The planned coup d' \u00e9tat interpretation of the political motivations behind the bill is based on the idea that Caesar was after the command of Egypt after its annexation.\nFate of the bill.\nThe bill did not pass the vote. Cicero opposed subsequent proposals for agrarian laws to redistribute land. In 59 BC Julius Caesar managed to pass a law which gave land to 20,000 Roman citizens with more than three children in Campania, in the same area which had been earmarked for redistribution by the bill of Publius Servilius Rullus. Caesar managed to do so thanks to the enormous political power of the First Triumvirate, the informal political alliance Caesar made with Crassus and Pompey.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nPrimary Sources\nSecondary sources"}
{"id": "75847", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75847", "title": "Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov", "text": "Russian composer (1844\u20131908)\nNikolai Andreyevich Rimsky-Korsakov (18 March 1844 \u2013 21 June 1908) was a Russian composer, a member of the group of composers known as The Five. His best-known orchestral compositions\u2014\"Capriccio Espagnol\", the \"Russian Easter Festival Overture\", and the symphonic suite \"Scheherazade\"\u2014are staples of the classical music repertoire, along with suites and excerpts from some of his fifteen operas. \"Scheherazade\" is an example of his frequent use of fairy-tale and folk subjects.\nRimsky-Korsakov believed in developing a nationalistic style of classical music, employing Russian folk song and lore along with exotic harmonic, melodic and rhythmic elements in a practice known as musical orientalism, and eschewing traditional Western compositional methods. Rimsky-Korsakov appreciated Western musical techniques after he became a professor of musical composition, harmony, and orchestration at the Saint Petersburg Conservatory in 1871. He undertook a rigorous three-year program of self-education and became a master of Western methods, incorporating them alongside the influences of Mikhail Glinka and fellow members of The Five. Rimsky-Korsakov's techniques of composition and orchestration were further enriched by his exposure to the works of Richard Wagner.\nFor much of his life, Rimsky-Korsakov combined his composition and teaching with a career in the Russian armed forces\u2014first as an officer in the Imperial Russian Navy, then as the civilian Inspector of Naval Bands. He wrote that he developed a passion for the ocean in childhood from reading books and hearing of his older brother's exploits in the navy. This love of the sea may have influenced him to write two of his best-known orchestral works, the musical tableau \"Sadko\" (not to be confused with his later opera of the same name) and \"Scheherazade\". As Inspector of Naval Bands, Rimsky-Korsakov expanded his knowledge of woodwind and brass playing, which enhanced his abilities in orchestration. He passed this knowledge to his students, and also posthumously through a textbook on orchestration that was completed by his son-in-law Maximilian Steinberg.\nRimsky-Korsakov left a considerable body of original Russian nationalist compositions. He prepared works by The Five for performance, which brought them into the active classical repertoire (although there is controversy over his editing of the works of Modest Mussorgsky), and shaped a generation of younger composers and musicians during his decades as an educator. Rimsky-Korsakov is therefore considered \"the main architect\" of what the classical-music public considers the \"Russian style\". His influence on younger composers was especially important, as he served as a transitional figure between the autodidactism exemplified by Glinka and The Five, and professionally trained composers, who became the norm in Russia by the closing years of the 19th century. While Rimsky-Korsakov's style was based on those of Glinka, Balakirev, Hector Berlioz, Franz Liszt and, for a brief period, Wagner, he \"transmitted this style directly to two generations of Russian composers\" and influenced non-Russian composers including Maurice Ravel, Claude Debussy, Paul Dukas, and Ottorino Respighi.\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nRimsky-Korsakov was born in Tikhvin, east of Saint Petersburg, into a Russian noble family. Tikhvin was a town of Novgorod Governorate at that time.\nThroughout history, members of the family served in Russian government and took various positions as governors and war generals. Ivan Rimsky-Korsakov was famously a lover of Catherine the Great. By a Tsar's decree on 15 May 1677, 18 representatives of the Korsakov family acquired the right to be called the Rimsky-Korsakov family (the Russian adjective 'Rimsky' means 'Roman') since the family \"had a beginning within the Roman borders\", i.e. Czech lands, which used to be a part of the Holy Roman Empire. In 1390, Wenceslaus Korsak moved to the Grand Prince Vasily I of Moscow from the Duchy of Lithuania.\nThe father of the composer, Andrei Petrovich Rimsky-Korsakov, was one of the six illegitimate sons of Avdotya Yakovlevna, daughter of an Orthodox priest from Pskov, and lieutenant general Peter Voinovich Rimsky-Korsakov, who had to officially adopt his own children as he was unable to marry their mother because of her lower social status. Using his friendship with Aleksey Arakcheyev, he granted them all the privileges of the noble family. Andrei went on to serve in the Interior Ministry of the Russian Empire, as vice-governor of Novgorod, and in the Volhynian Governorate. The composer's mother, Sofya Vasilievna Rimskaya-Korsakova, was also born as an illegitimate daughter of a peasant serf and Vasily Fedorovich Skaryatin, a wealthy landlord who belonged to a noble Russian family. Her father raised her in full comfort, yet under an improvised surname, Vasilieva, and with no legal status. By the time Andrei Petrovich met her, he was already a widower: his first wife, knyazna Ekaterina Meshcherskaya, died just nine months after their marriage. Since Skaryatin found him unsuitable for his daughter, Andrei secretly \"stole\" his bride from the father's house and brought her to Saint Petersburg, where they married.\nThe Rimsky-Korsakov family had a long line of military and naval service. Nikolai's older brother Voin, 22 years his senior, became a well-known navigator and explorer and had a powerful influence on Nikolai's life. He later recalled that his mother played the piano a little, and his father could play a few songs on the piano by ear. Beginning at six, he took piano lessons from local teachers and showed a talent for aural skills, but he showed a lack of interest, playing, as he later wrote, \"badly, carelessly,\u00a0... poor at keeping time\".\nAlthough he started composing by age 10, Rimsky-Korsakov preferred literature to music. He later wrote that from his reading, and tales of his brother's exploits, he developed a poetic love for the sea \"without ever having seen it\". This love, with subtle prompting from Voin, encouraged the 12-year-old to join the Imperial Russian Navy. He studied at the School for Mathematical and Navigational Sciences in Saint Petersburg and at 18 took his final examination in April 1862.\nWhile at school, Rimsky-Korsakov took piano lessons from a man named Ulikh. Voin, now director of the school, sanctioned these lessons because he hoped they would help Nikolai develop social skills and overcome his shyness. Rimsky-Korsakov wrote that, while \"indifferent\" to lessons, he developed a love for music, fostered by visits to the opera and, later, orchestral concerts.\nUlikh perceived Rimsky-Korsakov's musical talent and recommended another teacher, Feodor A. Kanille (Th\u00e9odore Canill\u00e9). Beginning in late 1859, Rimsky-Korsakov took lessons in piano and composition from Kanille, whom he later credited as the inspiration for devoting his life to composition. Through Kanille, he was exposed to a great deal of new music, including Mikhail Glinka and Robert Schumann. Voin cancelled his brother Nikolai's musical lessons when the latter reached age 17, feeling they no longer served a practical purpose.\nKanille told Rimsky-Korsakov to continue coming to him every Sunday, not for formal lessons but to play duets and discuss music. In November 1861, Kanille introduced the 18-year-old Nikolai to Mily Balakirev. Balakirev in turn introduced him to C\u00e9sar Cui and Modest Mussorgsky; all three were known as composers, despite only being in their 20s. Rimsky-Korsakov later wrote, \"With what delight I listened to \"real business\" discussions [Rimsky-Korsakov's emphasis] of instrumentation, part writing, etc! And besides, how much talking there was about current musical matters! All at once I had been plunged into a new world, unknown to me, formerly only heard of in the society of my dilettante friends. That was truly a strong impression.\"\nBalakirev encouraged Rimsky-Korsakov to compose and taught him the rudiments when he was not at sea. Balakirev prompted him to enrich himself in history, literature and criticism. When he showed Balakirev the beginning of a symphony in E-flat minor that he had written, Balakirev insisted he continue working on it despite his lack of formal musical training.\nBy the time Rimsky-Korsakov sailed on a two-year-and-eight-month cruise aboard the clipper in late 1862, he had completed and orchestrated three movements of the symphony. He composed the slow movement during a stop in England and mailed the score to Balakirev before going back to sea.\nAt first, his work on the symphony kept Rimsky-Korsakov occupied during his cruise. He purchased scores at every port of call, along with a piano on which to play them, and filled his idle hours studying Berlioz's Treatise on Instrumentation. He found time to read the works of Homer, William Shakespeare, Friedrich Schiller and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe; he saw London, Niagara Falls, and Rio de Janeiro during his stops in port. Eventually, the lack of outside musical stimuli dulled the young midshipman's hunger to learn. He wrote to Balakirev that after two years at sea he had neglected his musical lessons for months.\n\"Thoughts of becoming a musician and composer gradually left me altogether\", he later recalled; \"distant lands began to allure me, somehow, although, properly speaking, naval service never pleased me much and hardly suited my character at all.\"\nMentored by Balakirev; time with The Five.\nOnce back in Saint Petersburg in May 1865, Rimsky-Korsakov's onshore duties consisted of a couple of hours of clerical duty each day, but he recalled that his desire to compose \"had been stifled\u00a0... I did not concern myself with music at all.\" He wrote that contact with Balakirev in September 1865 encouraged him \"to get accustomed to music and later to plunge into it\". At Balakirev's suggestion, he wrote a trio to the scherzo of the E-flat minor symphony, which it had lacked up to that point, and reorchestrated the entire symphony. Its first performance came in December of that year under Balakirev's direction in Saint Petersburg. A second performance followed in March 1866 under the direction of Konstantin Lyadov (father of composer Anatoly Lyadov).\nCorrespondence between Rimsky-Korsakov and Balakirev clearly shows that some ideas for the symphony originated with Balakirev, who seldom stopped at merely correcting a piece of music, and would often recompose it at the piano. Rimsky-Korsakov recalled,\nA pupil like myself had to submit to Balakirev a proposed composition in its embryo, say, even the first four or eight bars. Balakirev would immediately make corrections, indicating how to recast such an embryo; he would criticize it, would praise and extol the first two bars, but would censure the next two, ridicule them, and try hard to make the author disgusted with them. Vivacity of composition and fertility were not at all in favor, frequent recasting was demanded, and the composition was extended over a long period of time under the cold control of self-criticism.\nRimsky-Korsakov recalled that \"Balakirev had no difficulty in getting along with me. At his suggestion I most readily rewrote the symphonic movements composed by me and brought them to completion with the help of his advice and improvisations\". Though Rimsky-Korsakov later found Balakirev's influence stifling, and broke free from it, this did not stop him in his memoirs from extolling the older composer's talents as a critic and improviser. Under Balakirev's mentoring, Rimsky-Korsakov turned to other compositions. He began a symphony in B minor, but felt it too closely followed Beethoven's Ninth Symphony and abandoned it. He completed an Overture on Three Russian Themes, based on Balakirev's folksong overtures, as well as a Fantasia on Serbian Themes that was performed at a concert given for the delegates of the Slavonic Congress in 1867. In his review of this concert, nationalist critic Vladimir Stasov coined the phrase \"Moguchaya kuchka\" for the Balakirev circle (\"Moguchaya kuchka\" is usually translated as \"The Mighty Handful\" or \"The Five\"). Rimsky-Korsakov also composed the initial versions of \"Sadko\" and \"Antar\", which cemented his reputation as a writer of orchestral works.\nRimsky-Korsakov socialized and discussed music with the other members of The Five; they critiqued one another's works in progress and collaborated on new pieces. He became friends with Alexander Borodin, whose music \"astonished\" him. He spent an increasing amount of time with Mussorgsky. Balakirev and Mussorgsky played piano four-hand music, Mussorgsky would sing, and they frequently discussed other composers' works, with preferred tastes running \"toward Glinka, Schumann and Beethoven's late quartets\". Mendelssohn was not thought of highly, Mozart and Haydn \"were considered out of date and na\u00efve\", and J.S. Bach merely mathematical and unfeeling. Berlioz \"was highly esteemed\", Liszt \"crippled and perverted from a musical point of view\u00a0... even a caricature\", and Wagner discussed little. Rimsky-Korsakov \"listened to these opinions with avidity and absorbed the tastes of Balakirev, Cui and Mussorgsky without reasoning or examination\". Often, the musical works in question \"were played before me only in fragments, and I had no idea of the whole work\". This, he wrote, did not stop him from accepting these judgments at face value and repeating them \"as if I were thoroughly convinced of their truth\".\nRimsky-Korsakov became especially appreciated within The Five, and among those who visited the circle, for his talents as an orchestrator. He was asked by Balakirev to orchestrate a Schubert march for a concert in May 1868, by Cui to orchestrate the opening chorus of his opera \"William Ratcliff\" and by Alexander Dargomyzhsky, whose works were greatly appreciated by The Five and who was close to death, to orchestrate his opera \"The Stone Guest\".\nIn late 1871, Rimsky-Korsakov moved into Voin's former apartment, and invited Mussorgsky to be his roommate. The working arrangement they agreed upon was that Mussorgsky used the piano in the mornings while Rimsky-Korsakov worked on copying or orchestration. When Mussorgsky left for his civil service job at noon, Rimsky-Korsakov then used the piano. Time in the evenings was allotted by mutual agreement. \"That autumn and winter the two of us accomplished a good deal\", Rimsky-Korsakov wrote, \"with constant exchange of ideas and plans. Mussorgsky composed and orchestrated the Polish act of \"Boris Godunov\" and the folk scene 'Near Kromy.' I orchestrated and finished my \"Maid of Pskov\".\"\nProfessorship, marriage, inspector of bands.\nIn 1871, the 27-year-old Rimsky-Korsakov became Professor of Practical Composition and Instrumentation (orchestration) at the Saint Petersburg Conservatory, as well as leader of the Orchestra Class. He retained his position in active naval service, and taught his classes in uniform (military officers in Russia were required to wear their uniforms every day, as they were considered to be always on duty).\nRimsky-Korsakov explained in his memoirs that Mikha\u00edl Azanchevsky had taken over that year as director of the Conservatory, and wanting new blood to freshen up teaching in those subjects, had offered to pay generously for Rimsky-Korsakov's services. Biographer Mikhail Tsetlin (aka Mikhail Zetlin) suggests that Azanchevsky's motives might have been twofold. \nFirst, Rimsky-Korsakov was the member of the Five least criticized by its opponents, and inviting him to teach at the Conservatory may have been considered a safe way to show that all serious musicians were welcome there. \nSecond, the offer may have been calculated to expose him to an academic climate in which he would write in a more conservative, Western-based style. Balakirev had opposed academic training in music with tremendous vigor, but encouraged him to accept the post to convince others to join the nationalist musical cause.\nRimsky-Korsakov's reputation at this time was as a master of orchestration, based on \"Sadko\" and \"Antar\". He had written these works mainly by intuition. His knowledge of musical theory was elemental; he had never written any counterpoint, could not harmonize a simple chorale, nor knew the names or intervals of musical chords. He had never conducted an orchestra, and had been discouraged from doing so by the navy, which did not approve of his appearing on the podium in uniform. Aware of his technical shortcomings, Rimsky-Korsakov consulted Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, with whom he and the others in The Five had been in occasional contact. Tchaikovsky, unlike The Five, had received academic training in composition at the Saint Petersburg Conservatory, and was serving as Professor of Music Theory at the Moscow Conservatory. Tchaikovsky advised him to study.\nRimsky-Korsakov wrote that while teaching at the Conservatory he soon became \"possibly its very best \"pupil\" [Rimsky-Korsakov's emphasis], judging by the quantity and value of the information it gave me!\" To prepare himself, and to stay at least one step ahead of his students, he took a three-year sabbatical from composing original works, and assiduously studied at home while he lectured at the Conservatory. He taught himself from textbooks, and followed a strict regimen of composing contrapuntal exercises, fugues, chorales and \"a cappella\" choruses.\nRimsky-Korsakov eventually became an excellent teacher and a fervent believer in academic training. He revised everything he had composed prior to 1874, even acclaimed works such as \"Sadko\" and \"Antar\", in a search for perfection that would remain with him throughout the rest of his life. Assigned to rehearse the Orchestra Class, he mastered the art of conducting. Dealing with orchestral textures as a conductor, and making suitable arrangements of musical works for the Orchestra Class, led to an increased interest in the art of orchestration, an area into which he would further indulge his studies as Inspector of Navy Bands. The score of his Third Symphony, written just after he had completed his three-year program of self-improvement, reflects his hands-on experience with the orchestra.\nProfessorship brought Rimsky-Korsakov financial security, which encouraged him to settle down and to start a family. In December 1871 he proposed to Nadezhda Purgold, with whom he had developed a close relationship over weekly gatherings of The Five at the Purgold household. They married in July 1872, with Mussorgsky serving as best man. The Rimsky-Korsakovs had seven children. Their first son, Mikhail, became an entomologist while another son, Andrei, became a musicologist, married the composer Yuliya Veysberg and wrote a multi-volume study of his father's life and work.\nNadezhda became a musical as well as domestic partner with her husband, much as Clara Schumann had been with her own husband Robert. She was beautiful, capable, strong-willed, and far better trained musically than her husband at the time they married\u2014she had attended the Saint Petersburg Conservatory in the mid-1860s, studying piano with Anton Gerke (one of whose private students was Mussorgsky) and music theory with Nikolai Zaremba, who also taught Tchaikovsky. Nadezhda proved a fine and most demanding critic of her husband's work; her influence over him in musical matters was strong enough for Balakirev and Stasov to wonder whether she was leading him astray from their musical preferences. Musicologist Lyle Neff wrote that while Nadezhda gave up her own compositional career when she married Rimsky-Korsakov, she \"had a considerable influence on the creation of [Rimsky-Korsakov's] first three operas. She travelled with her husband, attended rehearsals and arranged compositions by him and others\" for piano four hands, which she played with her husband. \"Her last years were dedicated to issuing her husband's posthumous literary and musical legacy, maintaining standards for performance of his works\u00a0... and preparing material for a museum in his name.\"\nIn early 1873, the navy created the civilian post of Inspector of Naval Bands, with a rank of Collegiate Assessor, and appointed Rimsky-Korsakov. This kept him on the navy payroll and listed on the roster of the Chancellery of the Navy Department but allowed him to resign his commission. The composer commented, \"I parted with delight with both my military status and my officer's uniform\", he later wrote. \"Henceforth I was a musician officially and incontestably.\" As Inspector, Rimsky-Korsakov applied himself with zeal to his duties. He visited naval bands throughout Russia, supervised the bandmasters and their appointments, reviewed the bands' repertoire, and inspected the quality of their instruments. He wrote a study program for a complement of music students who held navy fellowships at the Conservatory, and acted as an intermediary between the Conservatory and the navy. He also indulged in a long-standing desire to familiarize himself with the construction and playing technique of orchestral instruments. These studies prompted him to write a textbook on orchestration. He used the privileges of rank to exercise and expand upon his knowledge. He discussed arrangements of musical works for military band with bandmasters, encouraged and reviewed their efforts, held concerts at which he could hear these pieces, and orchestrated original works, and works by other composers, for military bands.\nIn March 1884, an Imperial Order abolished the navy office of Inspector of Bands, and Rimsky-Korsakov was relieved of his duties. He worked under Balakirev in the Court Chapel as a deputy until 1894, which allowed him to study Russian Orthodox church music. He also taught classes at the chapel, and wrote his textbook on harmony for use there and at the Conservatory.\nBacklash and \"May Night\".\nRimsky-Korsakov's studies and his change in attitude regarding music education brought him the scorn of his fellow nationalists, who thought he was throwing away his Russian heritage to compose fugues and sonatas. After he strove \"to crowd in as much counterpoint as possible\" into his Third Symphony, he wrote chamber works adhering strictly to classical models, including a string sextet, a string quartet in F major (Op. 12) and a quintet for flute, clarinet, horn, bassoon and piano in B-flat. About the quartet and the symphony, Tchaikovsky wrote to his patroness, Nadezhda von Meck, that they \"were filled with a host of clever things but\u00a0... [were] imbued with a dryly pedantic character\". Borodin commented that when he heard the symphony, he kept \"feeling that this is the work of a German \"Herr Professor\" who has put on his glasses and is about to write \"Eine grosse Symphonie in C\"\".\nAccording to Rimsky-Korsakov, the other members of the Five showed little enthusiasm for the symphony, and less still for the quartet. Nor was his public debut as a conductor, at an 1874 charity concert where he led the orchestra in the new symphony, considered favorably by his compatriots. He later wrote that \"they began, indeed, to look down upon me as one on the downward path\". Worse still to Rimsky-Korsakov was the faint praise given by Anton Rubinstein, a composer opposed to the nationalists' music and philosophy. Rimsky-Korsakov wrote that after Rubinstein heard the quartet, he commented that now Rimsky-Korsakov \"might amount to something\" as a composer. He wrote that Tchaikovsky continued to support him morally, telling him that he fully applauded what Rimsky-Korsakov was doing and admired both his artistic modesty and his strength of character. Privately, Tchaikovsky confided to Nadezhda von Meck, \"Apparently [Rimsky-Korsakov] is now passing through this crisis, and how it will end will be difficult to predict. Either a great master will come out of him, or he will finally become bogged down in contrapuntal tricks\".\nTwo projects helped Rimsky-Korsakov focus on less academic music-making. The first was the creation of two folk song collections in 1874. Rimsky-Korsakov transcribed 40 Russian songs for voice and piano from performances by folk singer Tvorty Filippov, who approached him at Balakirev's suggestion. This collection was followed by a second containing 100 songs, supplied by friends and servants, or taken from rare and out-of-print collections. Rimsky-Korsakov later credited this work as a great influence on him as a composer; it also supplied a vast amount of musical material from which he could draw for future projects, either by direct quotation or as models for composing fakeloric passages. The second project was the editing of orchestral scores by pioneer Russian composer Mikhail Glinka (1804\u20131857) in collaboration with Balakirev and Anatoly Lyadov. Glinka's sister, Lyudmila Ivanovna Shestakova, wanted to preserve her brother's musical legacy in print, and paid the costs of the project from her own pocket. No similar project had been attempted before in Russian music, and guidelines for scholarly musical editing had to be established and agreed. While Balakirev favored making changes in Glinka's music to \"correct\" what he saw as compositional flaws, Rimsky-Korsakov favored a less intrusive approach. Eventually, Rimsky-Korsakov prevailed. \"Work on Glinka's scores was an unexpected schooling for me\", he later wrote. \"Even before this I had known and worshipped his operas; but as editor of the scores in print I had to go through Glinka's style and instrumentation to their last little note\u00a0... And this was a beneficent discipline for me, leading me as it did to the path of modern music, after my vicissitudes with counterpoint and strict style\".\nIn mid-1877, Rimsky-Korsakov thought increasingly about the short story \"May Night\" by Nikolai Gogol. The story had long been a favorite of his, and his wife Nadezhda had encouraged him to write an opera based on it from the day of their betrothal, when they had read it together. While musical ideas for such a work predated 1877, now they came with greater persistence. By early 1878 the project took an increasing amount of his attention; in February he started writing in earnest, and he finished the opera by early November.\nRimsky-Korsakov wrote that \"May Night\" was of great importance because, despite the opera's containing a good deal of contrapuntal music, he nevertheless \"\"cast off the shackles of counterpoint\" [emphasis Rimsky-Korsakov]\". He wrote the opera in a folk-like melodic idiom, and scored it in a transparent manner much in the style of Glinka. Nevertheless, despite the ease of writing this opera and the next, \"The Snow Maiden\", from time to time he suffered from creative paralysis between 1881 and 1888. He kept busy during this time by editing Mussorgsky's works and completing Borodin's \"Prince Igor\" (Mussorgsky died in 1881, Borodin in 1887).\nBelyayev circle.\nRimsky-Korsakov wrote that he became acquainted with budding music patron Mitrofan Belyayev (M. P. Belaieff) in Moscow in 1882. Belyayev was one of a growing coterie of Russian nouveau-riche industrialists who became patrons of the arts in mid- to late-19th century Russia; their number included railway magnate Savva Mamontov and textile manufacturer Pavel Tretyakov. Belyayev, Mamontov and Tretyakov \"wanted to contribute conspicuously to public life\". They had worked their way into wealth, and being Slavophiles in their national outlook believed in the greater glory of Russia. Owing to this belief, they were more likely than the aristocracy to support native talent, and were more inclined to support nationalist artists over cosmopolitan ones. This preference paralleled a general upsurge in nationalism and Russophilia that became prevalent in mainstream Russian art and society.\nBy 1883 Rimsky-Korsakov had become a regular visitor to the weekly \"quartet Fridays\" (\"Les Vendredis\") held at Belyayev's home in Saint Petersburg. Belyayev, who had already taken a keen interest in the musical future of the teenage Alexander Glazunov, rented a hall and hired an orchestra in 1884 to play Glazunov's First Symphony plus an orchestral suite Glazunov had just composed. This concert and a rehearsal the previous year gave Rimsky-Korsakov the idea of offering concerts featuring Russian compositions, a prospect to which Belyayev was amenable. The Russian Symphony Concerts were inaugurated during the 1886\u201387 season, with Rimsky-Korsakov sharing conducting duties with Anatoly Lyadov. He finished his revision of Mussorgsky's \"Night on Bald Mountain\" and conducted it at the opening concert. The concerts also coaxed him out of his creative drought; he wrote \"Scheherazade\", \"Capriccio Espagnol\" and the \"Russian Easter Overture\" specifically for them. He noted that these three works \"show a considerable falling off in the use of contrapuntal devices\u00a0... [replaced] by a strong and virtuoso development of every kind of figuration which sustains the technical interest of my compositions\".\nRimsky-Korsakov was asked for advice and guidance not just on the Russian Symphony Concerts, but on other projects through which Belyayev aided Russian composers. \"By force of matters purely musical I turned out to be the head of the Belyayev circle\", he wrote. \"As the head Belyayev, too, considered me, consulting me about everything and referring everyone to me as chief\". In 1884 Belyayev set up an annual Glinka prize, and in 1885 he founded his own music publishing firm, through which he published works by Borodin, Glazunov, Lyadov and Rimsky-Korsakov at his own expense. To select which composers to assist with money, publication or performances from the many who now appealed for help, Belyayev set up an advisory council made up of Glazunov, Lyadov and Rimsky-Korsakov. They would look through the compositions and appeals submitted and suggest which composers were deserving of patronage and public attention.\nThe group of composers who now congregated with Glazunov, Lyadov and Rimsky-Korsakov became known as the Belyayev circle, named after their financial benefactor. These composers were nationalistic in their musical outlook, as The Five before them had been. Like The Five, they believed in a uniquely Russian style of classical music that utilized folk music and exotic melodic, harmonic and rhythmic elements, as exemplified by the music of Balakirev, Borodin and Rimsky-Korsakov. Unlike The Five, these composers also believed in the necessity of an academic, Western-based background in composition\u2014which Rimsky-Korsakov had instilled in his years at the Saint Petersburg Conservatory. Compared to the \"revolutionary\" composers in Balakirev's circle, Rimsky-Korsakov found those in the Belyayev circle to be \"progressive\u00a0... attaching as it did great importance to technical perfection, but\u00a0... also broke new paths, though more securely, even if less speedily\u00a0...\"\nIncreased contact with Tchaikovsky.\nIn November 1887, Tchaikovsky arrived in Saint Petersburg in time to hear several of the Russian Symphony Concerts. One of them included the first complete performance of his First Symphony, subtitled \"Winter Daydreams\", in its final version. Another concert featured the premiere of Rimsky-Korsakov's Third Symphony in its revised version. Rimsky-Korsakov and Tchaikovsky corresponded considerably before the visit and spent a lot of time together, along with Glazunov and Lyadov. Though Tchaikovsky had been a regular visitor to the Rimsky-Korsakov home since 1876, and had at one point offered to arrange Rimsky-Korsakov's appointment as director of the Moscow Conservatory, this was the beginning of closer relations between the two. Within a couple of years, Rimsky-Korsakov wrote, Tchaikovsky's visits became more frequent.\nDuring these visits and especially in public, Rimsky-Korsakov wore a mask of geniality. Privately, he found the situation emotionally complex, and confessed his fears to his friend, the Moscow critic Semyon Kruglikov. Memories persisted of the tension between Tchaikovsky and The Five over the differences in their musical philosophies\u2014tension acute enough for Tchaikovsky's brother Modest to liken their relations at that time to \"those between two friendly neighboring states\u00a0... cautiously prepared to meet on common ground, but jealously guarding their separate interests\". Rimsky-Korsakov observed, not without annoyance, how Tchaikovsky became increasingly popular among Rimsky-Korsakov's followers. This personal jealousy was compounded by a professional one, as Tchaikovsky's music became increasingly popular among the composers of the Belyayev circle, and remained on the whole more famous than his own. Even so, when Tchaikovsky attended Rimsky-Korsakov's nameday party in May 1893, Rimsky-Korsakov asked Tchaikovsky personally if he would conduct four concerts of the Russian Musical Society in Saint Petersburg the following season. After hesitation, Tchaikovsky agreed. While his sudden death in late 1893 prevented him from fulfilling this commitment in its entirety, the list of works he had planned to conduct included Rimsky-Korsakov's Third Symphony.\nIncreasing conservatism; second creative drought.\nIn March 1889, Angelo Neumann's traveling \"Richard Wagner Theater\" visited Saint Petersburg, giving four cycles of \"Der Ring des Nibelungen\" there under the direction of Karl Muck. The Five had ignored Wagner's music, but \"The Ring\" impressed Rimsky-Korsakov: he was astonished with Wagner's mastery of orchestration. He attended the rehearsals with Glazunov, and followed the score. After hearing these performances, Rimsky-Korsakov devoted himself almost exclusively to composing operas for the rest of his creative life. Wagner's use of the orchestra influenced Rimsky-Korsakov's orchestration, beginning with the arrangement of the polonaise from Mussorgsky's \"Boris Godunov\" that he made for concert use in 1889.\nToward music more adventurous than Wagner's, especially that of Richard Strauss and later Claude Debussy, Rimsky-Korsakov's mind remained closed. He would fume for days afterwards when he heard pianist Felix Blumenfeld play Debussy's \"Estampes\" and write in his diary about them, \"Poor and skimpy to the nth degree; there is no technique, even less imagination.\" This was part of an increasing musical conservatism on his part (his \"musical conscience\", as he put it), under which he now scrutinized his music and that of others as well. Compositions by his former compatriots in The Five were not immune. While working on his first revision of Mussorgsky's \"Boris Godunov\", in 1895 he would tell his amanuensis, Vasily Yastrebtsev, \"It's incredible that I ever could have liked this music and yet it seems there was such a time.\" By 1901 he would write of growing \"indignant at all [of Wagner's] blunders of the ear\"\u2014this about the same music which caught his attention in 1889.\nIn 1892, Rimsky-Korsakov suffered a second creative drought, brought on by bouts of depression and alarming physical symptoms. Rushes of blood to the head, confusion, memory loss and unpleasant obsessions led to a medical diagnosis of neurasthenia. Crises in the Rimsky-Korsakov household may have been a factor\u2014the serious illnesses of his wife and one of his sons from diphtheria in 1890, the deaths of his mother and youngest child, as well as the onset of the prolonged, ultimately fatal illness of his second youngest child. He resigned from the Russian Symphony Concerts and the Court Chapel and considered giving up composition permanently. After making third versions of the musical tableau \"Sadko\" and the opera \"The Maid of Pskov\", he closed his musical account with the past; he had left none of his major works before \"May Night\" in their original form.\nAnother death brought about a creative renewal. The passing of Tchaikovsky presented a twofold opportunity\u2014to write for the Imperial Theaters and to compose an opera based on Nikolai Gogol's short story \"Christmas Eve\", a work on which Tchaikovsky had based his opera \"Vakula the Smith\". The success of Rimsky-Korsakov's \"Christmas Eve\" encouraged him to complete an opera approximately every 18 months between 1893 and 1908 \u2014 a total of 11 during this period. He also started and abandoned another draft of his treatise on orchestration, but made a third attempt and almost finished it in the last four years of his life. (His son-in-law Maximilian Steinberg completed the book in 1912.) Rimsky-Korsakov's scientific treatment of orchestration, illustrated with more than 300 examples from his work, set a new standard for texts of its kind.\n1905 Revolution.\nIn 1905, demonstrations took place in the St. Petersburg Conservatory as part of the 1905 Revolution; these, Rimsky-Korsakov wrote, were triggered by similar disturbances at St. Petersburg State University, in which students demanded political reforms and the establishment of a constitutional monarchy in Russia. \"I was chosen a member of the committee for adjusting differences with agitated pupils\", he recalled; almost as soon as the committee had been formed, \"[a]ll sorts of measures were recommended to expel the ringleaders, to quarter the police in the Conservatory, to close the Conservatory entirely\".\nA lifelong liberal politically, Rimsky-Korsakov wrote that he felt someone had to protect the rights of the students to demonstrate, especially as disputes and wrangling between students and authorities were becoming increasingly violent. In an open letter, he sided with the students against what he saw as unwarranted interference by Conservatory leadership and the Russian Musical Society. A second letter, this time signed by a number of faculty including Rimsky-Korsakov, demanded the resignation of the head of the Conservatory. Partly as a result of these two letters he wrote, approximately 100 Conservatory students were expelled and he was removed from his professorship.\nJust before the dismissal was enacted, Rimsky-Korsakov received a letter from one of the members of the school directorate, suggesting that he take up the directorship in the interest of calming student unrest. \"Probably the member of the Directorate held a minority opinion, but signed the resolution nevertheless,\" he wrote. \"I sent a negative reply.\" Partly in defiance of his dismissal, Rimsky-Korsakov continued teaching his students from his home.\nNot long after Rimsky-Korsakov's dismissal, a student production of his opera \"Kashchey the Immortal\" was followed not with the scheduled concert but with a political demonstration, which led to a police ban on Rimsky-Korsakov's work. Due in part to widespread press coverage of these events, an immediate wave of outrage against the ban arose throughout Russia and abroad; liberals and intellectuals deluged the composer's residence with letters of sympathy, and even peasants who had not heard a note of Rimsky-Korsakov's music sent small monetary donations. Several faculty members of the St. Petersburg Conservatory resigned in protest, including Glazunov and Lyadov. Eventually, over 300 students walked out of the Conservatory in solidarity with Rimsky-Korsakov. By December he had been reinstated under a new director, Glazunov. Rimsky-Korsakov retired from the Conservatory in 1906. The political controversy continued with his opera \"The Golden Cockerel\". Its implied criticism of monarchy, Russian imperialism and the Russo-Japanese War gave it little chance of passing the censors. The premiere was delayed until 1909, after Rimsky-Korsakov's death, and even then it was performed in an adapted version.\nIn April 1907, Rimsky-Korsakov conducted a pair of concerts in Paris, hosted by impresario Sergei Diaghilev, which featured music of the Russian nationalist school. The concerts were hugely successful in popularizing Russian classical music of this kind in Europe, Rimsky-Korsakov's in particular. The following year, his opera \"Sadko\" was produced at the Paris Op\u00e9ra and \"The Snow Maiden\" at the Op\u00e9ra-Comique. He also had the opportunity to hear more recent music by European composers. He hissed unabashedly when he heard Richard Strauss's opera \"Salome\", and told Diaghilev after hearing Claude Debussy's opera \"Pell\u00e9as et M\u00e9lisande\", \"Don't make me listen to all these horrors or I shall end up liking them!\" Hearing these works led him to appreciate his place in the world of classical music. He admitted that he was a \"convinced kuchkist\" (after \"kuchka\", the shortened Russian term for The Five) and that his works belonged to an era that musical trends had left behind.\nDeath.\nBeginning around 1890, Rimsky-Korsakov suffered from angina. While this ailment initially wore him down gradually, the stresses concurrent with the 1905 Revolution and its aftermath greatly accelerated its progress. After December 1907, his illness became severe, and he could not work.\nIn 1908, he died at the age of 64 in his Lubensk estate near Luga (modern day Plyussky District of Pskov Oblast), and was interred in Tikhvin Cemetery at the Alexander Nevsky Monastery in Saint Petersburg, next to Borodin, Glinka, Mussorgsky and Stasov.\nCompositions.\nRimsky-Korsakov followed the musical ideals espoused by The Five. He employed Orthodox liturgical themes in the \"Russian Easter Festival Overture\", folk song in \"Capriccio Espagnol\" and orientalism in \"Scheherazade\", possibly his best known work. He proved a prolific composer but also a perpetually self-critical one. He revised every orchestral work up to and including his Third Symphony\u2014some, like \"Antar\" and \"Sadko\", more than once. These revisions range from minor changes of tempo, phrasing and instrumental detail to wholesale transposition and complete recomposition.\nRimsky-Korsakov was open about the influences in his music, telling Vasily Yastrebtsev, \"Study Liszt and Balakirev more closely, and you'll see that a great deal in me is not mine\". He followed Balakirev in his use of the whole tone scale, treatment of folk songs and musical orientalism and Liszt for harmonic adventurousness. (The violin melody used to portray Scheherazade is very closely related to its counterpart in Balakirev's symphonic poem \"Tamara\", while the \"Russian Easter Overtures\" follows the design and plan of Balakirev's Second Overture on Russian Themes.)\nNevertheless, while he took Glinka and Liszt as his harmonic models, his use of whole tone and octatonic scales do demonstrate his originality. He developed both these compositional devices for the \"fantastic\" sections of his operas, which depicted magical or supernatural characters and events.\nRimsky-Korsakov maintained an interest in harmonic experiments and continued exploring new idioms throughout his career. He tempered this interest with an abhorrence of excess and kept his tendency to experiment under constant control. The more radical his harmonies became, the more he attempted to control them with strict rules\u2014applying his \"musical conscience\", as he called it. In this sense, he was both a progressive and a conservative composer. The whole tone and octatonic scales were both considered adventurous in the Western classical tradition, and Rimsky-Korsakov's use of them made his harmonies seem radical. Conversely, his care about how or when in a composition he used these scales made him seem conservative compared with later composers like Igor Stravinsky, though they were often building on Rimsky-Korsakov's work.\nOperas.\nWhile Rimsky-Korsakov is best known in the West for his orchestral works, his operas are more complex, offering a wider variety of orchestral effects than in his instrumental works and fine vocal writing. Excerpts and suites from them have proved as popular in the West as the purely orchestral works. The best-known of these excerpts is probably \"Flight of the Bumblebee\" from \"The Tale of Tsar Saltan,\" which has often been heard by itself in orchestral programs, and in countless arrangements and transcriptions, most famously in a piano version made by Russian composer Sergei Rachmaninoff. Other selections familiar to listeners in the West are \"Dance of the Tumblers\" from \"The Snow Maiden\", \"Procession of the Nobles\" from \"Mlada\", and \"Song of the Indian Guest\" (or, less accurately, \"Song of India\") from \"Sadko\", as well as suites from \"The Golden Cockerel\" and \"The Legend of the Invisible City of Kitezh and the Maiden Fevroniya\".\nThe Operas fall into three categories:\nOf this range, Rimsky-Korsakov wrote in 1902, \"In every new work of mine I am trying to do something that is new for me. On the one hand, I am pushed on by the thought that in this way, [my music] will retain freshness and interest, but at the same time I am prompted by my pride to think that many facets, devices, moods and styles, if not all, should be within my reach.\" Among his operatic works, Rimsky-Korsakov\u2019s \"Snegurochka\", also known as \"The Snow-Maiden\", sums up his compositional character. The Snow-maiden is a character who is the personification of love and passion, and yet she melts in the first rays of the sun. Rimsky-Korsakov\u2019s works mirror the snow-maiden, as they are exquisite, but can quickly turn cold and pellucid and \u201cdissolve at the touch of the living language of passion\u201d.\nAmerican music critic and journalist Harold C. Schonberg wrote that the operas \"open up a delightful new world, the world of the Russian East, the world of supernaturalism and the exotic, the world of Slavic pantheism and vanished races. Genuine poetry suffuses them, and they are scored with brilliance and resource.\" According to some critics Rimsky-Korsakov's music in these works lacks dramatic power, a seemingly fatal flaw in an operatic composer. This may have been conscious, as he repeatedly stated in his writing that he felt operas were first and foremost musical works rather than mainly dramatic ones. Ironically, the operas succeed dramatically in most cases by being deliberately non-theatrical.\nOrchestral works.\nThe purely orchestral works fall into two categories. The best-known ones in the West, and perhaps the finest in overall quality, are mainly programmatic in nature \u2014 in other words, the musical content and how it is handled in the piece is determined by the plot or characters in a story, the action in a painting or events reported through another non-musical source. The second category of works is more academic, such as his First and Third Symphonies and his Sinfonietta. In these, Rimsky-Korsakov still employed folk themes but subjected them to abstract rules of musical composition.\nProgram music came naturally to Rimsky-Korsakov. To him, \"even a folk theme has a program of sorts.\" He composed the majority of his orchestral works in this genre at two periods of his career\u2014at the beginning, with \"Sadko\" and \"Antar\" (also known as his Second Symphony, Op. 9), and in the 1880s, with \"Scheherazade\", \"Capriccio Espagnol\" and the \"Russian Easter Overture\". Despite the gap between these two periods, the composer's overall approach and the way he used his musical themes remained consistent. Both \"Antar\" and \"Scheherazade\" use a robust \"Russian\" theme to portray the male protagonists (the title character in \"Antar\"; the sultan in \"Scheherazade\") and a more sinuous \"Eastern\" theme for the female ones (the peri Gul-Nazar in \"Antar\" and the title character in \"Scheherazade\").\nWhere Rimsky-Korsakov changed between these two sets of works was in orchestration. While his pieces were always celebrated for their imaginative use of instrumental forces, the sparser textures of \"Sadko\" and \"Antar\" pale compared to the luxuriance of the more popular works of the 1880s. While a principle of highlighting \"primary hues\" of instrumental color remained in place, it was augmented in the later works by a sophisticated cachet of orchestral effects, some gleaned from other composers including Wagner, but many invented by himself.\nAs a result, these works resemble brightly colored mosaics, striking in their own right and often scored with a juxtaposition of pure orchestral groups. The final \"tutti\" of \"Scheherazade\" is a prime example of this scoring. The theme is assigned to trombones playing in unison, and is accompanied by a combination of string patterns. Meanwhile, another pattern alternates with chromatic scales in the woodwinds and a third pattern of rhythms is played by percussion.\nRimsky-Korsakov's non-program music, though well-crafted, does not rise to the same level of inspiration as his programmatic works; he needed fantasy to bring out the best in him. The First Symphony follows the outlines of Schumann's Fourth extremely closely, and is slighter in its thematic material than his later compositions. The Third Symphony and Sinfonietta each contain a series of variations on less-than-the-best music that can lead to tedium.\nSmaller-scale works.\nRimsky-Korsakov composed dozens of art songs, arrangements of folk songs, chamber and piano music. While the piano music is relatively unimportant, many of the art songs possess a delicate beauty. While they yield in overt lyricism to Tchaikovsky and Rachmaninoff, otherwise they reserve their place in the standard repertory of Russian singers.\nRimsky-Korsakov also wrote a body of choral works, both secular and for Russian Orthodox Church service. The latter include settings of portions of the \"Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom\" (despite his own atheism).\nLegacy.\nTransitional figure.\nThe critic Vladimir Stasov, who along with Balakirev had founded The Five, wrote in 1882, \"Beginning with Glinka, all the best Russian musicians have been very skeptical of book learning and have never approached it with the servility and the superstitious reverence with which it is approached to this day in many parts of Europe.\" This statement was not true for Glinka, who studied Western music theory assiduously with Siegfried Dehn in Berlin before he composed his opera \"A Life for the Tsar\". It was true for Balakirev, who \"opposed academicism with tremendous vigor,\" and it was true initially for Rimsky-Korsakov, who had been imbued by Balakirev and Stasov with the same attitude.\nOne point Stasov omitted purposely, which would have disproved his statement completely, was that at the time he wrote it, Rimsky-Korsakov had been pouring his \"book learning\" into students at the Saint Petersburg Conservatory for over a decade. Beginning with his three years of self-imposed study, Rimsky-Korsakov had drawn closer to Tchaikovsky and further away from the rest of The Five, while the rest of The Five had drawn back from him and Stasov had branded him a \"renegade\". Richard Taruskin wrote, \"The older he became, the greater was the irony with which Rimsky-Korsakov looked back on his kuchkist days.\" When the young Semyon Kruglikov was considering a future in composition, Rimsky-Korsakov wrote the future critic,\nAbout a talent for composition\u00a0... I can say nothing as yet. You have tried your powers too little\u00a0... Yes, one can study on one's own. Sometimes one needs advice, but one must study\u00a0... All of us, that is, I myself and Borodin, and Balakirev, and especially Cui and Mussorgsky, did disdain these things. I consider myself lucky that I bethought myself in time and forced myself to work. As for Balakirev, owing to his insufficient technique he writes little; Borodin, with difficulty; Cui, carelessly; and Mussorgsky, sloppily and often incoherently.\nTaruskin points out this statement, which Rimsky-Korsakov wrote while Borodin and Mussorgsky were still alive, as proof of his estrangement from the rest of The Five and an indication of the kind of teacher he eventually became. By the time he instructed Liadov and Glazunov, \"their training hardly differed from [Tchaikovsky's]. An ideal of the strictest professionalism was instilled in them from the beginning.\" By the time Borodin died in 1887, the era of autodidactism for Russian composers had effectively ended. Every Russian who aspired to write classical music attended a conservatory and received the same formal education. \"There was no more 'Moscow', no 'St. Petersburg'.\" Taruskin writes; \"at last all Russia was one. Moreover, by century's end, the theory and composition faculties of Rubinstein's Conservatory were entirely in the hands of representatives of the New Russian School. Viewed against the background of Stasov's predictions, there could scarcely be any greater irony.\"\nStudents.\nRimsky-Korsakov taught theory and composition to 250 students over his 35-year tenure at the Saint Petersburg Conservatory, \"enough to people a whole 'school' of composers\". This does not include pupils at the two other schools where he taught, including Glazunov, or those he taught privately at his home, such as Igor Stravinsky. Apart from Glazunov and Stravinsky, students who later found fame included Anatoly Lyadov, Mikhail Ippolitov-Ivanov, Alexander Spendiaryan, Sergei Prokofiev, Ottorino Respighi, Witold Maliszewski, Mykola Lysenko, Artur Kapp, and Konstanty Gorski. Other students included the music critic and musicologist Alexander Ossovsky, and the composer Lazare Saminsky.\nRimsky-Korsakov felt talented students needed little formal dictated instruction. His teaching method included distinct steps: show the students everything needed in harmony and counterpoint; direct them in understanding the forms of composition; give them a year or two of systematic study in the development of technique, exercises in free composition and orchestration; instill a good knowledge of the piano. Once these were properly completed, studies would be over. He carried this attitude into his conservatory classes. Conductor Nikolai Malko remembered that Rimsky-Korsakov began the first class of the term by saying, \"I will speak, and you will listen. Then I will speak less, and you will start to work. And finally I will not speak at all, and you will work.\" Malko added that his class followed exactly this pattern. \"Rimsky-Korsakov explained everything so clearly and simply that all we had to do was to do our work well.\"\nEditing the work of The Five.\nRimsky-Korsakov's editing of works by The Five is significant. It was a practical extension of the collaborative atmosphere of The Five during the 1860s and 1870s, when they heard each other's compositions in progress and worked on them together, and was an effort to save works that would otherwise either have languished unheard or become lost entirely. This work included the completion of Alexander Borodin's opera \"Prince Igor\", which Rimsky-Korsakov undertook with the help of Glazunov after Borodin's death, and the orchestration of passages from C\u00e9sar Cui's \"William Ratcliff\" for its first production in 1869. He also completely orchestrated the opera \"The Stone Guest by \"Alexander Dargomyzhsky three times\u2014in 1869\u201370, 1892 and 1902. While not a member of The Five himself, Dargomyzhsky was closely associated with the group and shared their musical philosophy.\nMusicologist Francis Maes wrote that while Rimsky-Korsakov's efforts are laudable, they are also controversial. It was generally assumed that with \"Prince Igor\", Rimsky-Korsakov edited and orchestrated the existing fragments of the opera while Glazunov composed and added missing parts, including most of the third act and the overture. This was exactly what Rimsky-Korsakov stated in his memoirs. Both Maes and Richard Taruskin cite an analysis of Borodin's manuscripts by musicologist Pavel Lamm, which showed that Rimsky-Korsakov and Glazunov discarded nearly 20 percent of Borodin's score. According to Maes, the result is more a collaborative effort by all three composers than a true representation of Borodin's intent. Lamm stated that because of the extremely chaotic state of Borodin's manuscripts, a modern alternative to Rimsky-Korsakov and Glazunov's edition would be extremely difficult to complete.\nMore debatable, according to Maes, is Rimsky-Korsakov's editing of Mussorgsky's works. After Mussorgsky's death in 1881, Rimsky-Korsakov revised and completed several of Mussorgsky's works for publication and performance, helping to spread Mussorgsky's works throughout Russia and to the West. Maes, in reviewing Mussorgsky's scores, wrote that Rimsky-Korsakov allowed his \"musical conscience\" to dictate his editing, and he changed or removed what he considered musical over-experimentation or poor form. Because of this, Rimsky-Korsakov has been accused of pedantry in \"correcting\", among other things, matters of harmony. Rimsky-Korsakov may have foreseen questions over his efforts when he wrote,\nIf Mussorgsky's compositions are destined to live unfaded for fifty years after their author's death (when all his works will become the property of any and every publisher), such an archeologically accurate edition will always be possible, as the manuscripts went to the Public Library on leaving me. For the present, though, there was need of an edition for performances, for practical artistic purposes, for making his colossal talent known, and not for the mere studying of his personality and artistic sins.\nMaes stated that time proved Rimsky-Korsakov correct when it came to posterity's re-evaluation of Mussorgsky's work. Mussorgsky's musical style, once considered unpolished, is now admired for its originality. While Rimsky-Korsakov's arrangement of \"Night on Bald Mountain\" is still the version generally performed, Rimsky-Korsakov's other revisions, like his version of \"Boris Godunov\", have been replaced by Mussorgsky's original.\nFolklore and pantheism.\nRimsky-Korsakov may have saved the most personal side of his creativity for his approach to Russian folklore. Folklorism as practiced by Balakirev and the other members of The Five had been based largely on the \"protyazhnaya\" dance song. \"Protyazhnaya\" literally meant \"drawn-out song\", or melismatically elaborated lyric song. The characteristics of this song exhibit extreme rhythmic flexibility, an asymmetrical phrase structure and tonal ambiguity. After composing \"May Night\", Rimsky-Korsakov was increasingly drawn to \"calendar songs\", which were written for specific ritual occasions. The ties to folk culture was what interested him most in folk music, even in his days with The Five; these songs formed a part of rural customs, echoed old Slavic paganism and the pantheistic world of folk rites. Rimsky-Korsakov wrote that his interest in these songs was heightened by his study of them while compiling his folk song collections. He wrote that he \"was captivated by the poetic side of the cult of sun-worship, and sought its survivals and echoes in both the tunes and the words of the songs. The pictures of the ancient pagan period and spirit loomed before me, as it then seemed, with great clarity, luring me on with the charm of antiquity. These occupations subsequently had a great influence in the direction of my own activity as a composer\".\nRimsky-Korsakov's interest in pantheism was whetted by the folkloristic studies of Alexander Afanasyev. That author's standard work, \"The Poetic Outlook on Nature by the Slavs\", became Rimsky-Korsakov's pantheistic bible. The composer first applied Afanasyev's ideas in \"May Night\", in which he helped fill out Gogol's story by using folk dances and calendar songs. He went further down this path in \"The Snow Maiden\", where he made extensive use of seasonal calendar songs and \"khorovodi\" (ceremonial dances) in the folk tradition.\nMusicologists and Slavicists have long recognized that Rimsky-Korsakov was an ecumenical artist whose folklore-inspired operas take up such issues as the relationship between paganism and Christianity and the seventeenth-century schism in the Orthodox Church.\nPublications.\nRimsky-Korsakov's autobiography and his books on harmony and orchestration have been translated into English and published. Two books he started in 1892 but left unfinished were a comprehensive text on Russian music and a manuscript, now lost, on an unknown subject.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nIn English\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn Russian\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75849", "revid": "1303916088", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75849", "title": "The Five (composers)", "text": "Five prominent Russian composers\nThe Five (), also known as the Mighty Handful or The Mighty Five, were five prominent 19th-century Russian composers who worked together to create a distinct national style of classical music: Mily Balakirev (the leader), C\u00e9sar Cui, Modest Mussorgsky, Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov and Alexander Borodin. They lived in Saint Petersburg and collaborated from 1856 to 1870.\nHistory.\nName.\nIn May 1867 the critic Vladimir Stasov wrote an article, titled \"Mr. Balakirev's Slavic Concert\", covering a concert that had been performed for visiting Slav delegations at the \"All-Russian Ethnographical Exhibition\" in Moscow. The four Russian composers whose works were played at the concert were Mikhail Glinka, Alexander Dargomyzhsky, Mily Balakirev, and Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov. The article ended with the following statement:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;God grant that our Slav guests may never forget today's concert; God grant that they may forever preserve the memory of how much poetry, feeling, talent, and intelligence are possessed by the small handful of Russian musicians.\u2014\u200a\nThe expression \"mighty handful\" (, \"Moguchaya kuchka\", \"Mighty Bunch\") was mocked by enemies of Balakirev and Stasov: Aleksandr Serov, academic circles of the conservatory, the Russian Musical Society, and their press supporters. The group ignored critics and continued operating under the moniker. This loose collection of composers gathered around Balakirev now included Cui, Mussorgsky, Rimsky-Korsakov, and Borodin \u2014 the five who have come to be associated with the name \"Mighty Handful\", or sometimes \"The Five\". Gerald Abraham stated flatly in the \"Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians\" that \"they never called themselves, nor were they ever called in Russia, 'The Five'\" (although today the Russian equivalent \"\u041f\u044f\u0442\u0451\u0440\u043a\u0430\" (\"Pyatyorka\") is occasionally used to refer to this group). In his memoirs, Rimsky-Korsakov routinely refers to the group as \"Balakirev's circle\", and occasionally uses \"The Mighty Handful\", usually with an ironic tone. He also makes the following reference to \"The Five\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If we leave out of account Lodyzhensky, who accomplished nothing, and Lyadov, who appeared later, Balakirev's circle consisted of Balakirev, Cui, Mussorgsky, Borodin, and me (the French have retained the denomination of \"Les Cinq\" for us to this day).\u2014\u200a\nThe Russian word \"kuchka\" also spawned the terms \"kuchkism\" and \"kuchkist\", which may be applied to artistic aims or works in tune with the sensibilities of the Mighty Handful.\nFormation.\nThe formation of the group began in 1856 with the first meeting of Balakirev and C\u00e9sar Cui. Modest Mussorgsky joined them in 1857, Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov in 1861, and Alexander Borodin in 1862. All the composers in The Five were young men in 1862. Balakirev was 25, Cui 27, Mussorgsky 23, Borodin the eldest at 28, and Rimsky-Korsakov just 18. They were all self-trained amateurs. Borodin combined composing with a career in chemistry. Cui was an army engineer who, starting in 1857 and throughout 1860s, taught fortification at military academies. Rimsky-Korsakov was a naval officer (he wrote his First Symphony on a three-year naval voyage circumnavigating the globe). Mussorgsky had been in the prestigious Preobrazhensky Regiment of the Imperial Guard, and then in the civil service before taking up music; even at the height of his career in the 1870s he was forced by the expense of his drinking habit to hold down a full-time job in the State Forestry Department.\nIn contrast to the \u00e9lite status and court connections of Conservatory composers such as Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, The Five were mainly from the minor gentry of the provinces. To some degree their \"esprit de corps\" depended on the myth, which they themselves created, of a movement that was more \"authentically Russian,\" in the sense that it was closer to the native soil, than the classic academy. Spurred on by Russian nationalist ideas, the Five \u201csought to capture elements of rural Russian life, to build national pride, and to prevent western ideals from seeping into their culture.\u201d\nBefore them, Mikhail Glinka and Alexander Dargomyzhsky had gone some way towards producing a distinctly Russian kind of music, writing operas on Russian subjects, but the Mighty Handful represented the first concentrated attempt to develop such a music, with Stasov as their artistic adviser and Dargomyzhsky as an elder statesman to the group, so to speak. The circle began to fall apart during the 1870s, no doubt partially due to the fact that Balakirev withdrew from musical life early in the decade for a period of time. All of \"The Five\" are buried in Tikhvin Cemetery in Saint Petersburg.\nMusical language.\nStylization.\nThe musical language The Five developed set them far apart from the Conservatoire. This self-conscious Russian styling was based on two elements:\nOrientalism.\nOne hallmark of \"The Five\" was its reliance on orientalism. Many quintessentially \"Russian\" works were composed in orientalist style, such as Balakirev's \"Islamey\", Borodin's \"Prince Igor\" and Rimsky-Korsakov's \"Scheherazade\". Orientalism, in fact, became widely considered in the West both one of the best-known aspects of Russian music and a trait of Russian national character. As leader of \"The Five,\" Balakirev encouraged the use of eastern themes and harmonies to set their \"Russian\" music apart from the German symphonism of Anton Rubinstein and other Western-oriented composers. Because Rimsky-Korsakov used Russian folk and oriental melodies in his First Symphony, Stasov and the other nationalists dubbed it the \"First Russian Symphony,\" even though Rubinstein had written his \"Ocean\" Symphony a dozen years before it. These were themes Balakirev had transcribed in the Caucasus. \"The symphony is good,\" Cui wrote to Rimsky-Korsakov in 1863, while the latter was out on naval deployment. \"We played it a few days ago at Balakirev's\u2014to the great pleasure of Stassov. It is really Russian. Only a Russian could have composed it, because it lacks the slightest trace of any stagnant Germanness.\"\nOrientalism was not confined to using authentic Eastern melodies. What became more important than the melodies themselves were the musical conventions added to them. These conventions allowed orientalism to become an avenue for writing music on subjects considered unmentionable otherwise, such as political themes and erotic fantasies. It also became a means of expressing Russian supremacy as the empire expanded under Alexander II. \nTwo major works entirely dominated by orientalism are Rimsky-Korsakov's symphonic suite \"Antar\" and Balakirev's symphonic poem \"Tamara\". \"Antar\", set in Arabia, uses two different styles of music, Western (Russian) and Eastern (Arabian). The first theme, Antar's, is masculine and Russian in character. The second theme, feminine and oriental in melodic contour, belongs to the queen, Gul Nazar. However, female sensuality does exert a paralyzing, ultimately destructive influence. With Gul Nazar extinguishing Antar's life in a final embrace, the woman overcomes the man.\nBalakirev gives a more overtly misogynistic view of oriental women in \"Tamara\". He had originally planned to write a Caucasan dance called a \"lezginka\", modeled on Glinka, for this work. However, he discovered a poem by Mikhail Lermontov about the beautiful Tamara, who lived in a tower alongside the gorge of Daryal. She lured travelers and allowed them to enjoy a night of sensual delights, only to kill them and throw their bodies into the River Terek. Balakirev uses two specific codes endemic to orientalism in writing \"Tamara\". The first code, based on obsessive rhythms, note repetitions, climactic effects and accelerated tempi, represents Dionysian intoxication. The second code, consisting of unpredictable rhythms, irregular phrasing and based on long passages with many repeat notes, augmented and diminished intervals and extended melismas, depict sensual longing. Not only did Balakirev use these codes extensively, but he also attempted to supercharge them further when he revised the orchestration of \"Tamara\" in 1898.\nQuotations.\nRimsky-Korsakov provides the following picture of \"The Mighty Handful\" in his memoirs, \"Chronicle of My Musical Life\" (translated by J. A. Joffe):\nTastes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The tastes of the circle leaned towards Glinka, Schumann, and Beethoven's last quartets ... they had little respect for Mendelssohn ... Mozart and Haydn were considered out of date and naive ... J. S. Bach was held to be petrified ... Chopin was likened by Balakirev to a nervous society lady ... Berlioz was highly esteemed ...Liszt was comparatively unknown ... Little was said of Wagner ... They respected Dargomyzhsky for the recitative portions of \"Rusalka\" ... [but] he was not credited with any considerable talent and was treated with a shade of derision. ...Rubinstein had a reputation as a pianist, but was thought to have neither talent nor taste as a composer.\nBalakirev.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Balakirev, who had never had any systematic course in harmony and counterpoint and had not even superficially applied himself to them, evidently thought such studies quite unnecessary ... An excellent pianist, a superior sight reader of music, a splendid improviser, endowed by nature with the sense of correct harmony and part-writing, he possessed a technique partly native and partly acquired through a vast musical erudition, with the help of an extraordinary memory, keen and retentive, which means so much in steering a critical course in musical literature ... He instantly felt every technical imperfection or error, he grasped a defect in form at once. Whenever I or other young men, later on, played him our essays at composition, he instantly caught all the defects of form, modulation, and so on, and forthwith seating himself at the piano, he would improvise and show how the composition in question should be changed exactly as he indicated, and frequently entire passages in other people's compositions became his and not their putative authors' at all. He was obeyed absolutely, for the spell of his personality was tremendous. ... His influence over those around him was boundless, and resembled some magnetic or mesmeric force. ... he despotically demanded that the tastes of his pupils should exactly coincide with his own. The slightest deviation from his taste was severely censured by him. By means of raillery, a parody or caricature played by him, whatever did not suit him at the moment was belittled \u2014 and the pupil blushed with shame for his expressed opinion and recanted...\nAbilities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Balakirev considered me a symphony specialist ... in the sixties, Balakirev and Cui, though very intimate with Mussorgsky and sincerely fond of him, treated him like a lesser light, and of little promise at that, in spite of his undoubted talent. It seemed to them that there was something missing in him and, in their eyes, he was in need of advice and criticism. Balakirev often said that Mussorgsky had 'no head' or that his 'brains were weak.' ... Balakirev thought that Cui understood little in symphony and musical forms and nothing in orchestration, but was a past master in vocal and operatic music; Cui, in turn, thought Balakirev a master in symphony, form, and orchestration, but with little liking for operatic composition and vocal music in general. Thus they complemented each other, but each, in his own way, felt mature and grown up. Borodin, Mussorgsky, and I, however \u2014 we were immature and juvenile. Obviously, towards Balakirev and Cui we were in somewhat subordinate relations; their opinions were listened to unconditionally...\nInfluence.\nExcept perhaps for Cui, the members of this group influenced or taught many of the great Russian composers who were to follow, including Alexander Glazunov, Mikhail Ippolitov-Ivanov, Sergei Prokofiev, Igor Stravinsky, and Dmitri Shostakovich. They also influenced the two French symbolist composers Maurice Ravel and Claude Debussy through their radical tonal language.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75850", "revid": "3113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75850", "title": "Nicolai Rimsky-Korsakov", "text": ""}
{"id": "75851", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75851", "title": "Nikolay Rimsky-Korsakov", "text": ""}
{"id": "75852", "revid": "46791144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75852", "title": "Rimsky-Korsakov (disambiguation)", "text": "Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov (1844\u20131908) was a Russian composer.\nRimsky-Korsakov may also refer to:\nPeople with the surname.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "75854", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75854", "title": "Lempel\u2013Ziv\u2013Welch", "text": "Universal lossless data compression algorithm\nLempel\u2013Ziv\u2013Welch (LZW) is a universal lossless compression algorithm created by Abraham Lempel, Jacob Ziv, and Terry Welch. It was published by Welch in 1984 as an improvement to the LZ78 algorithm published by Lempel and Ziv in 1978. Claimed advantages include: simple to implement and the potential for high throughput in a hardware implementation.\nA large English text file can typically be compressed via LZW to about half its original size. \nThe algorithm became the first widely used universal data compression method used on computers. The algorithm was used in the compress program commonly included in Unix systems starting around 1986. It has since disappeared from many distributions, because it both infringed the LZW patent and because gzip produced better compression ratios using the LZ77-based DEFLATE algorithm. The algorithm found wide use when it became part of the GIF image format in 1987. It may optionally be used in TIFF and PDF files. Although LZW is available in Adobe Acrobat software, Acrobat by default uses DEFLATE for most text and color-table-based image data in PDF files.\nAlgorithm.\nThe scenario described by Welch's 1984 paper encodes sequences of 8-bit data as fixed-length 12-bit codes. The codes from 0 to 255 represent 1-character sequences consisting of the corresponding 8-bit character, and the codes 256 through 4095 are created in a dictionary for sequences encountered in the data as it is encoded. At each stage in compression, input bytes are gathered into a sequence until the next character would make a sequence with no code yet in the dictionary. The code for the sequence (without that character) is added to the output, and a new code (for the sequence with that character) is added to the dictionary.\nIn the practical application of image compression and for an image based on a color table, a natural character alphabet is the set of color table indexes. In the 1980s, many images had small color tables (on the order of 16 colors). For such a reduced alphabet, the full 12-bit codes yielded poor compression unless the image was large, so the idea of a variable-width code was introduced: codes typically start one bit wider than the symbols being encoded, and as each code size is used up, the code width increases by 1 bit, up to some prescribed maximum (typically 12 bits). When the maximum code value is reached, encoding proceeds using the existing table, but new codes are not generated for addition to the table.\nFurther refinements include reserving a code to indicate that the code table should be cleared and restored to its initial state (a \"clear code\", typically the first value immediately after the values for the individual alphabet characters), and a code to indicate the end of data (a \"stop code\", typically one greater than the clear code). The clear code lets the table be reinitialized after it fills up, which lets the encoding adapt to changing patterns in the input data. Smart encoders can monitor the compression efficiency and clear the table whenever the existing table no longer matches the input well.\nSince codes are added in a manner determined by the data, the decoder mimics building the table as it sees the resulting codes. It is critical that the encoder and decoder agree on the variety of LZW used: the size of the alphabet, the maximum table size (and code width), whether variable-width encoding is used, initial code size, and whether to use the clear and stop codes (and what values they have). Most formats that employ LZW build this information into the format specification or provide explicit fields for them in a compression header for the data.\nEncoding.\nThe encoding process can be described as:\nA dictionary is initialized to contain the single-character strings corresponding to all the possible input characters (and nothing else except the clear and stop codes if they're being used). The algorithm works by scanning through the input string for successively longer substrings until it finds one that is not in the dictionary. When such a string is found, the index for the string without the last character (i.e., the longest substring that \"is\" in the dictionary) is retrieved from the dictionary and sent to output, and the new string (including the last character) is added to the dictionary with the next available code. The last input character is then used as the next starting point to scan for substrings.\nIn this way, successively longer strings are registered in the dictionary and available for subsequent encoding as single output values. The algorithm works best on data with repeated patterns, so the initial parts of a message see little compression. As the message grows, however, the compression ratio tends asymptotically to the maximum (i.e., the compression factor or ratio improves on an increasing curve, and not linearly, approaching a theoretical maximum inside a limited time period rather than over infinite time).\nDecoding.\nThe decoding process can be described as:\nThe decoding algorithm works by reading a value from the encoded input and outputting the corresponding string from the dictionary. However, the full dictionary is not needed, only the initial dictionary that contains single-character strings (and that is usually hard coded in the program, instead of sent with the encoded data). Instead, the full dictionary is rebuilt during the decoding process the following way: after decoding a value and outputting a string, the decoder concatenates it with the first character of the \"next\" decoded string (or the first character of current string, if the next one can't be decoded; since if the next value is unknown, then it must be the value added to the dictionary in \"this\" iteration, and so its first character is the same as the first character of the current string), and updates the dictionary with the new string. The decoder then proceeds to the next input (which was already read in the previous iteration) and processes it as before, and so on until it has exhausted the input stream.\nVariable-width codes.\nIf variable-width codes are being used, the encoder and decoder must be careful to change the width at the same points in the encoded data so they don't disagree on boundaries between individual codes in the stream. In the standard version, the encoder increases the width from \"p\" to \"p\"\u00a0+\u00a01 when a sequence \u03c9\u00a0+\u00a0\"s\" is encountered that is not in the table (so that a code must be added for it) but the next available code in the table is 2\"p\" (the first code requiring \"p\"\u00a0+\u00a01 bits). The encoder emits the code for \u03c9 at width \"p\" (since that code does not require \"p\"\u00a0+\u00a01 bits), and then increases the code width so that the next code emitted is \"p\"\u00a0+\u00a01 bits wide.\nThe decoder is always one code behind the encoder in building the table, so when it sees the code for \u03c9, it generates an entry for code 2\"p\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01. Since this is the point where the encoder increases the code width, the decoder must increase the width here as well\u2014at the point where it generates the largest code that fits in \"p\" bits.\nUnfortunately, some early implementations of the encoding algorithm increase the code width and \"then\" emit \u03c9 at the new width instead of the old width, so that to the decoder it looks like the width changes one code too early. This is called \"early change\"; it caused so much confusion that Adobe now allows both versions in PDF files, but includes an explicit flag in the header of each LZW-compressed stream to indicate whether early change is being used. Of the graphics file formats that support LZW compression, TIFF uses early change, while GIF and most others don't.\nWhen the table is cleared in response to a clear code, both encoder and decoder change the code width after the clear code back to the initial code width, starting with the code immediately following the clear code.\nPacking order.\nSince the codes emitted typically do not fall on byte boundaries, the encoder and decoder must agree on how codes are packed into bytes. The two common methods are \"LSB-first\" (\"least significant bit first\") and \"MSB-first\" (\"most significant bit first\"). In LSB-first packing, the first code is aligned so that the least significant bit of the code falls in the least significant bit of the first stream byte, and if the code has more than 8 bits, the high-order bits left over are aligned with the least significant bits of the next byte; further codes are packed with LSB going into the least significant bit not yet used in the current stream byte, proceeding into further bytes as necessary. MSB-first packing aligns the first code so that its \"most\" significant bit falls in the MSB of the first stream byte, with overflow aligned with the MSB of the next byte; further codes are written with MSB going into the most significant bit not yet used in the current stream byte.\nGIF files use LSB-first packing order. TIFF files and PDF files use MSB-first packing order.\nFurther coding.\nMany applications extend the algorithm by applying further encoding to the sequence of output symbols. Some package the coded stream as printable characters using some form of binary-to-text encoding. This increases the encoded length and decreases the compression rate. Conversely, increased compression can often be achieved with an \"adaptive entropy encoder\". Such a coder estimates the probability distribution for the value of the next symbol, based on the observed frequencies of values so far. A standard entropy encoding such as Huffman coding or arithmetic coding then uses shorter codes for values with higher probabilities.\nExample.\nThe following example illustrates the LZW algorithm in action, showing the status of the output and the dictionary at every stage, both in encoding and decoding the data. This example has been constructed to give reasonable compression on a very short message. In real text data, repetition is generally less pronounced, so longer input streams are typically necessary before the compression builds up efficiency.\nThe plaintext to be encoded (from an alphabet using only the capital letters) is:\n TOBEORNOTTOBEORTOBEORNOT#\nThere are 26 symbols in the plaintext alphabet (the capital letters \"A\" through \"Z\"). \"#\" is used to represent a stop code: a code outside the plaintext alphabet that triggers special handling. We arbitrarily assign these the values 1 through 26 for the letters, and 0 for the stop code '#'. (Most flavors of LZW would put the stop code \"after\" the data alphabet, but nothing in the basic algorithm requires that. The encoder and decoder only have to agree what value it has.)\nA computer renders these as strings of bits. Five-bit codes are needed to give sufficient combinations to encompass this set of 27 values. The dictionary is initialized with these 27 values. As the dictionary grows, the codes must grow in width to accommodate the additional entries. A 5-bit code gives 25 = 32 possible combinations of bits, so when the 33rd dictionary word is created, the algorithm must switch at that point from 5-bit strings to 6-bit strings (for \"all\" code values, including those previously output with only five bits). Note that since the all-zero code 00000 is used, and is labeled \"0\", the 33rd dictionary entry is labeled 32. (Previously generated output is not affected by the code-width change, but once a 6-bit value is generated in the dictionary, it could conceivably be the next code emitted, so the width for subsequent output shifts to 6 bits to accommodate that.)\nThe initial dictionary, then, consists of the following entries:\nEncoding.\nBuffer input characters in a sequence \u03c9 until \u03c9 + next character is not in the dictionary. Emit the code for \u03c9, and add \u03c9 + next character to the dictionary. Start buffering again with the next character. (The string to be encoded is \"TOBEORNOTTOBEORTOBEORNOT#\".)\nUnencoded length = 25 symbols \u00d7 5 bits/symbol = 125 bits\nEncoded length = (6 codes \u00d7 5 bits/code) + (11 codes \u00d7 6 bits/code) = 96 bits.\nUsing LZW has saved 29 bits out of 125, reducing the message by more than 23%. If the message were longer, then the dictionary words would begin to represent longer and longer sections of text, sending repeated words very compactly.\nDecoding.\nTo decode an LZW-compressed archive, one needs to know in advance the initial dictionary used, but additional entries can be reconstructed as they are always simply concatenations of previous entries.\nAt each stage, the decoder receives a code X; it looks X up in the table and outputs the sequence \u03c7 it codes, and it conjectures \u03c7 + ? as the entry the encoder just added \u2013 because the encoder emitted X for \u03c7 precisely because \u03c7 + ? was not in the table, and the encoder goes ahead and adds it. But what is the missing letter? It is the first letter in the sequence coded by the \"next\" code Z that the decoder receives. So the decoder looks up Z, decodes it into the sequence \u03c9 and takes the first letter z and tacks it onto the end of \u03c7 as the next dictionary entry.\nThis works as long as the codes received are in the decoder's dictionary, so that they can be decoded into sequences. What happens if the decoder receives a code Z that is not yet in its dictionary? Since the decoder is always just one code behind the encoder, Z can be in the encoder's dictionary only if the encoder \"just\" generated it, when emitting the previous code X for \u03c7. Thus Z codes some \u03c9 that is \u03c7 + ?, and the decoder can determine the unknown character as follows:\nThis situation occurs whenever the encoder encounters input of the form \"cScSc\", where \"c\" is a single character, \"S\" is a string and \"cS\" is already in the dictionary, but \"cSc\" is not. The encoder emits the code for \"cS\", putting a new code for \"cSc\" into the dictionary. Next it sees \"cSc\" in the input (starting at the second \"c\" of \"cScSc\") and emits the new code it just inserted. The argument above shows that whenever the decoder receives a code not in its dictionary, the situation must look like this.\nAlthough input of form \"cScSc\" might seem unlikely, this pattern is fairly common when the input stream is characterized by significant repetition. In particular, long strings of a single character (which are common in the kinds of images LZW is often used to encode) repeatedly generate patterns of this sort.\nPatents.\nVarious patents have been issued in the United States and other countries for LZW and similar algorithms. LZ78 was covered by https:// by Lempel, Ziv, Cohn, and Eastman, assigned to Sperry Corporation, later Unisys Corporation, filed on August 10, 1981. Two US patents were issued for the LZW algorithm: https:// by Victor S. Miller and Mark N. Wegman and assigned to IBM, originally filed on June 1, 1983, and https:// by Welch, assigned to Sperry Corporation, later Unisys Corporation, filed on June 20, 1983.\nIn addition to the above patents, Welch's 1983 patent also includes citations to several other patents that influenced it, including two 1980 Japanese patents (https:// and https://) from NEC's Jun Kanatsu, https:// (1974) from John S. Hoerning, https:// (1977) from Klaus E. Holtz, and a 1981 German patent (https://) from Karl Eckhart Heinz.\nIn 1993\u201394, and again in 1999, Unisys Corporation received widespread condemnation when it attempted to enforce licensing fees for LZW in GIF images. The 1993\u20131994 Unisys-CompuServe controversy (CompuServe being the creator of the GIF format) prompted a Usenet comp.graphics discussion \"Thoughts on a GIF-replacement file format\", which in turn fostered an email exchange that eventually culminated in the creation of the patent-unencumbered Portable Network Graphics (PNG) file format in 1995.\nUnisys's US patent on the LZW algorithm expired on June 20, 2003, 20 years after it had been filed. Patents that had been filed in the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and Canada all expired in 2004, likewise 20 years after they had been filed.\nVariants.\nLZMW.\nLZMW (by V. Miller, M. Wegman, 1985) searches input for the longest string already in the dictionary (the \"current\" match); adds the concatenation of the previous match with the current match to the dictionary. Dictionary entries thus grow more rapidly; but this scheme is much more complicated to implement. Miller and Wegman suggest deleting low-frequency entries from the dictionary when the dictionary fills up.\nLZAP.\nLZAP (by James Storer, 1988) is a modification of LZMW. Instead of adding just the concatenation of the previous match with the current match to the dictionary, add the concatenations of the previous match with each initial substring of the current match (\"AP\" stands for \"all prefixes\"). For example, if the previous match is \"wiki\" and current match is \"pedia\", then the LZAP encoder adds 5 new sequences to the dictionary: \"wikip\", \"wikipe\", \"wikiped\", \"wikipedi\", and \"wikipedia\", where the LZMW encoder adds only the one sequence \"wikipedia\". This eliminates some of the complexity of LZMW, at the price of adding more dictionary entries.\nLZWL.\nLZWL is a syllable-based variant of LZW.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75855", "revid": "50709734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75855", "title": "LZ77 and LZ78", "text": "Lossless data compression algorithms\nLZ77 and LZ78 are the two lossless data compression algorithms published in papers by Abraham Lempel and Jacob Ziv in 1977 and 1978.\nThey are also known as Lempel-Ziv 1 (LZ1) and Lempel-Ziv 2 (LZ2) respectively. These two algorithms form the basis for many variations including LZW, LZSS, LZMA and others. Besides their academic influence, these algorithms formed the basis of several ubiquitous compression schemes, including the one used in GIF and the DEFLATE algorithm used in PNG and ZIP.\nThey are both theoretically dictionary coders. LZ77 maintains a sliding window during compression. This was later shown to be equivalent to the \"explicit dictionary\" constructed by LZ78\u2014however, they are only equivalent when the entire data is intended to be decompressed.\nSince LZ77 encodes and decodes from a sliding window over previously seen characters, decompression must always start at the beginning of the input. Conceptually, LZ78 decompression could allow random access to the input if the entire dictionary were known in advance. However, in practice the dictionary is created during encoding and decoding by creating a new phrase whenever a token is output.\nThe algorithms were named an IEEE Milestone in 2004. In 2021 Jacob Ziv was awarded the IEEE Medal of Honor for his involvement in their development.\nTheoretical efficiency.\nIn the second of the two papers that introduced these algorithms they are analyzed as encoders defined by finite-state machines. A measure analogous to information entropy is developed for individual sequences (as opposed to probabilistic ensembles). This measure gives a bound on the data compression ratio that can be achieved. It is then shown that there exists finite lossless encoders for every sequence that achieve this bound as the length of the sequence grows to infinity. In this sense an algorithm based on this scheme produces asymptotically optimal encodings. This result can be proven more directly, as for example in notes by Peter Shor.\nFormally, (Theorem 13.5.2 ).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLZ78 is universal and entropic\u2014If formula_1 is a binary source that is stationary and ergodic, then formula_2 with probability 1. Here formula_3 is the entropy rate of the source.\nSimilar theorems apply to other versions of LZ algorithm.\nLZ77.\nLZ77 algorithms achieve compression by replacing repeated occurrences of data with references to a single copy of that data existing earlier in the uncompressed data stream. A match is encoded by a pair of numbers called a \"length-distance pair\", which is equivalent to the statement \"each of the next \"length\" characters is equal to the characters exactly \"distance\" characters behind it in the uncompressed stream\". (The \"distance\" is sometimes called the \"offset\" instead.)\nTo spot matches, the encoder must keep track of some amount of the most recent data, such as the last 2\u00a0KB, 4\u00a0KB, or 32\u00a0KB. The structure in which this data is held is called a \"sliding window\", which is why LZ77 is sometimes called \"sliding-window compression\". The encoder needs to keep this data to look for matches, and the decoder needs to keep this data to interpret the matches the encoder refers to. The larger the sliding window is, the longer back the encoder may search for creating references.\nIt is not only acceptable but frequently useful to allow length-distance pairs to specify a length that actually exceeds the distance. As a copy command, this is puzzling: \"Go back \"four\" characters and copy \"ten\" characters from that position into the current position\". How can ten characters be copied over when only four of them are actually in the buffer? Tackling one byte at a time, there is no problem serving this request, because as a byte is copied over, it may be fed again as input to the copy command. When the copy-from position makes it to the initial destination position, it is consequently fed data that was pasted from the \"beginning\" of the copy-from position. The operation is thus equivalent to the statement \"copy the data you were given and repetitively paste it until it fits\". As this type of pair repeats a single copy of data multiple times, it can be used to incorporate a flexible and easy form of run-length encoding.\nAnother way to see things is as follows: While encoding, for the search pointer to continue finding matched pairs past the end of the search window, all characters from the first match at offset \"D\" and forward to the end of the search window must have matched input, and these are the (previously seen) characters that compose a single run unit of length \"L\"R, which must equal \"D\". Then as the search pointer proceeds past the search window and forward, as far as the run pattern repeats in the input, the search and input pointers will be in sync and match characters until the run pattern is interrupted. Then \"L\" characters have been matched in total, \"L\" &gt; \"D\", and the code is [\"D\", \"L\", \"c\"].\nUpon decoding [\"D\", \"L\", \"c\"], again, \"D\" = \"L\"R. When the first \"L\"R characters are read to the output, this corresponds to a single run unit appended to the output buffer. At this point, the read pointer could be thought of as only needing to return int(\"L\"/\"L\"R) + (1 if \"L\" mod \"L\"R \u2260 0) times to the start of that single buffered run unit, read \"L\"R characters (or maybe fewer on the last return), and repeat until a total of \"L\" characters are read. But mirroring the encoding process, since the pattern is repetitive, the read pointer need only trail in sync with the write pointer by a fixed distance equal to the run length \"L\"R until \"L\" characters have been copied to output in total.\nConsidering the above, especially if the compression of data runs is expected to predominate, the window search should begin at the end of the window and proceed backwards, since run patterns, if they exist, will be found first and allow the search to terminate, absolutely if the current maximal matching sequence length is met, or judiciously, if a sufficient length is met, and finally for the simple possibility that the data is more recent and may correlate better with the next input.\nPseudocode.\nThe following pseudocode is a reproduction of the LZ77 compression algorithm sliding window.\n while input is not empty do\n match := longest repeated occurrence of input that begins in window\n if match exists then\n d := distance to start of match\n l := length of match\n c := char following match in input\n else\n d := 0\n l := 0\n c := first char of input\n end if\n output (d, l, c)\n discard \"l\" + 1 chars from front of window\n s := pop \"l\" + 1 chars from front of input\n append s to back of window\n repeat\nImplementations.\nEven though all LZ77 algorithms work by definition on the same basic principle, they can vary widely in how they encode their compressed data to vary the numerical ranges of a length\u2013distance pair, alter the number of bits consumed for a length\u2013distance pair, and distinguish their length\u2013distance pairs from \"literals\" (raw data encoded as itself, rather than as part of a length\u2013distance pair). A few examples:\nLZ78.\nThe LZ78 algorithms compress sequential data by building a dictionary of token sequences from the input, and then replacing the second and subsequent occurrence of the sequence in the data stream with a reference to the dictionary entry. The observation is that the number of repeated sequences is a good measure of the non random nature of a sequence. The algorithms represent the dictionary as an n-ary tree where n is the number of tokens used to form token sequences. Each dictionary entry is of the form , where index is the index to a dictionary entry representing a previously seen sequence, and token is the next token from the input that makes this entry unique in the dictionary. Note how the algorithm is greedy, and so nothing is added to the table until a unique making token is found. The algorithm is to initialize last matching index = 0 and next available index = 1 and then, for each token of the input stream, the dictionary searched for a match: . If a match is found, then last matching index is set to the index of the matching entry, nothing is output, and last matching index is left representing the input so far. Input is processed until a match is \"not\" found. Then a new dictionary entry is created, , and the algorithm outputs last matching index, followed by token, then resets last matching index = 0 and increments next available index. As an example consider the sequence of tokens &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;AABBA&lt;/samp&gt; which would assemble the dictionary;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pre/styles.css\"/&gt;\nand the output sequence of the compressed data would be &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;0A1B0B&lt;/samp&gt;. Note that the last A is not represented yet as the algorithm cannot know what comes next. In practice an EOF marker is added to the input \u2013 &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;AABBA$&lt;/samp&gt; for example. Note also that in this case the output &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;0A1B0B1$&lt;/samp&gt; is longer than the original input but compression ratio improves considerably as the dictionary grows, and in binary the indexes need not be represented by any more than the minimum number of bits.\nDecompression consists of rebuilding the dictionary from the compressed sequence. From the sequence &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;0A1B0B1$&lt;/samp&gt; the first entry is always the terminator &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;0 {...}&lt;/samp&gt;, and the first from the sequence would be &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;1 {0,A}&lt;/samp&gt;. The &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;A&lt;/samp&gt; is added to the output. The second pair from the input is &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;1B&lt;/samp&gt; and results in entry number 2 in the dictionary, &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;{1,B}&lt;/samp&gt;. The token \"B\" is output, preceded by the sequence represented by dictionary entry 1. Entry 1 is an 'A' (followed by \"entry 0\" \u2013 nothing) so &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;AB&lt;/samp&gt; is added to the output. Next &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;0B&lt;/samp&gt; is added to the dictionary as the next entry, &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;3 {0,B}&lt;/samp&gt;, and B (preceded by nothing) is added to the output. Finally a dictionary entry for &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;1$&lt;/samp&gt; is created and &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;A$&lt;/samp&gt; is output resulting in &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;A AB B A$&lt;/samp&gt; or &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;AABBA&lt;/samp&gt; removing the spaces and EOF marker.\nLZW.\nLZW is an LZ78-based algorithm that uses a dictionary pre-initialized with all possible characters (symbols) or emulation of a pre-initialized dictionary. The main improvement of LZW is that when a match is not found, the current input stream character is assumed to be the first character of an existing string in the dictionary (since the dictionary is initialized with all possible characters), so only the \"last matching index\" is output (which may be the pre-initialized dictionary index corresponding to the previous (or the initial) input character). Refer to the LZW article for implementation details.\nBTLZ is an LZ78-based algorithm that was developed for use in real-time communications systems (originally modems) and standardized by CCITT/ITU as V.42bis. When the trie-structured dictionary is full, a simple re-use/recovery algorithm is used to ensure that the dictionary can keep adapting to changing data. A counter cycles through the dictionary. When a new entry is needed, the counter steps through the dictionary until a leaf node is found (a node with no dependents). This is deleted and the space re-used for the new entry. This is simpler to implement than LRU or LFU and achieves equivalent performance.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75856", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75856", "title": "LZ78", "text": ""}
{"id": "75857", "revid": "48035214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75857", "title": "Meierij van 's-Hertogenbosch", "text": "Part of the Duchy of Brabant\nThe Meierij van 's-Hertogenbosch (; Dutch for \"Bailiwick of 's-Hertogenbosch\") was one of the four parts of the Duchy of Brabant, the others being the Margraviate of Antwerp, the County of Brussels and the County of Leuven/Louvain. Located in the current-day Netherlands, it acquired its name from the bailiff of 's-Hertogenbosch, who administered the area in the name of the Dukes of Brabant. The \"Meierij\" roughly corresponds to the larger province of North Brabant.\nThe capital city of North Brabant and the most important city of the bailiwick is 's-Hertogenbosch (Dutch for 'the Duke's Forest'), also known as Den Bosch ('The Forest') or Bois-le-Duc (French name). Other parts of the bailiwick are the so-called \"Vier Kwartieren\" (four quarters):\nIn the northeast of the bailiwick there were some free lands which were also connected to the \"Meierij\":\nIn the south, the nowadays Belgian town of Lommel belonged to the bailiwick, while the village of Luyksgestel belonged to the Prince-bishopric of Li\u00e8ge. In 1807 these areas were exchanged.\nLandscape.\nThe Bailiwick of 's-Hertogenbosch consists mainly of the poor sandy grounds of the Peel and Kempen. Those areas, which in old times were not densely populated, consisted of enormous heaths and marshlands, interrupted by woods and fenlands. In the north and east the area is surrounded by the river Maas. Numerous little rivers rise in the high sand areas and find their way to the rivers Aa and Dommel. Both rivers come together in the marshlands around 's-Hertogenbosch where they form the river Dieze that ends up in the Maas.\nSince the Middle Ages the waste lands of Peel and Kempen have been cultivated. Only small parts of the once enormous heaths and marshlands have survived until modern times. In the first part of the 19th century the rivers Aa and Dommel were cultivated but nowadays they have gone back to their old run for the purpose of nature development. Legal re-division of land forms a major threat for the cultural and historical aspects of landscape at the moment.\nHistory.\nHistorically the Meierij is the descendant of Taxandria, when that area comes under the rule of the dukes of Brabant in the 12th century. To protect the area from the counts of Gelre, the dukes founded a new ring of cities. Hendrik I of Brabant granted city rights to 's-Hertogenbosch (c.\u20091185), Oisterwijk (1213 or 1230), Sint-Oedenrode (1232) and Eindhoven (1232). However, despite these foundings, the Meierij often suffered from conflicts and wars between Brabant and Gelre.\nThe bailiwick was prosperous in the 15th and first part of the 16th century. In these times many new monumental buildings were built (like the famous gothic style St. Jan's Cathedral of 's-Hertogenbosch), the activities of well-known painter Hieronymus Bosch (also called Jeroen Bosch) and the Latin school of 's-Hertogenbosch.\nIn the Eighty Years' War, times turned bad for the Meierij. The area was literally a battlefield and was heavily plagued by continuous raids. Around 1590 the area was solidly in Spanish hands. Like the southern Dutch states of Flanders and Hainaut, the Duchy Brabant-Limburg had chosen the side of the Catholic Habsburg monarchs of Spain. The strong catholic Counter-Reformation had had much influence on the population's mentality and culture; the Bailiwick remained Catholic.\nThough it was thought impossible, the mighty city of 's-Hertogenbosch was captured by the Dutch Protestants in 1629. As 's-Hertogenbosch was the main capital of the Meierij, the Protestants considered the bailiwick as their possession. However the Spanish kings refused to give it up, and thus one of the most difficult times for the city's people started, the so-called \"retorsie tijd\" in which the population suffered from both Spanish and Dutch oppression. Finally in 1648 the whole bailiwick was given to the Dutch republic at the Peace of Westphalia.\nThe former Brabant and Limburg areas were then placed under the reign of the generality as well as Zeelandic Flanders which had been taken from Flanders. Reign of the generality in fact meant nothing else than oppression and colonisation by the Protestants. There was no self-government and Catholicism was forbidden, which resulted in a flight of the Catholic clergy and occupation of the Catholic churches. Due to high taxes and oppression the bailiwick could not restore its old glory and became an intensely poor area without any importance. After the French war of 1795 and the proclamation of the Batavian Republic, the Meierij disappeared as a political unity and went up into Brabant. The people regained their old rights; self-government and Catholicism were not forbidden any longer.\nSince 1810 the area has been part of the province of North Brabant and the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Nowadays the area is still known as Meierij and is still mostly cultural Catholic. The population is considered to have a \u201cBurgundian character\u201d by the other Dutch, meaning that they are supposed to be companiable people who like to party exuberantly. (The term recalls the time of Burgundian rule over the Netherlands.)\nAround 1900 the area got an enormous growth of population when a combination of reviving Catholicism and economic recovery caused high birthrates. Eindhoven, Tilburg and Helmond developed into major industrial centres.\nAt the moment the area is again highly developing its industries (especially in Eindhoven and the surrounding region), and is one of the most prosperous areas of the Netherlands and Northwest Europe.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75859", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75859", "title": "Deflate", "text": "Data compression algorithm\nIn computing, Deflate (stylized as DEFLATE, and also called Flate) is a lossless data compression file format that uses a combination of LZ77 and Huffman coding. It was designed by Phil Katz, for version 2 of his PKZIP archiving tool. Deflate was later specified in Request for Comments (RFC) 1951 (1996).\nKatz also designed the original algorithm used to construct Deflate streams. This algorithm received software patent https://, assigned to PKWare, Inc. As stated in the RFC document, an algorithm producing Deflate files was widely thought to be implementable in a manner not covered by patents. This led to its widespread use. For example, in gzip compressed files and Portable Network Graphics (PNG) image files, in addition to the ZIP file format for which Katz originally designed it. The patent has since expired.\nStream format.\nA Deflate stream consists of a series of blocks. Each block is preceded by a 3-bit header:\nThe \"stored\" block option adds minimal overhead and is used for data that is incompressible.\nMost compressible data will end up being encoded using method codice_5, the \"dynamic Huffman\" encoding, which produces an optimized Huffman tree customized for each block of data individually. Instructions to generate the necessary Huffman tree immediately follow the block header. The static Huffman option is used for short messages, where the fixed saving gained by omitting the tree outweighs the percentage compression loss due to using a non-optimal (thus, not technically Huffman) code.\nCompression is achieved through two steps:\nDuplicate string elimination.\nWithin compressed blocks, if a duplicate series of bytes is spotted (a repeated string), then a back-reference is inserted, linking to the prior location of that identical string instead. An encoded match to an earlier string consists of an 8-bit length (3\u2013258 bytes) and a 15-bit distance (1\u201332,768 bytes) to the start of the duplicate. Relative back-references can be made across any number of blocks, as long as the distance appears within the last 32\u00a0KiB of uncompressed data decoded (termed the \"sliding window\").\nIf the distance is less than the length, the duplicate overlaps itself, indicating repetition. For example, a run of 10 identical bytes can be encoded as one byte, followed by a duplicate of length 9, starting with the prior byte.\nSearching the preceding text for duplicate substrings is the most computationally expensive part of the Deflate algorithm, and the operation which compression level settings affect.\nBit reduction.\nThe second compression stage consists of replacing commonly used symbols with shorter representations and less commonly used symbols with longer representations. The method used is Huffman coding which creates an unprefixed tree of non-overlapping intervals, where the length of each sequence is inversely proportional to the logarithm of the probability of that symbol needing to be encoded. The more likely it is that a symbol has to be encoded, the shorter its bit-sequence will be.\nA tree is created, containing space for 288 symbols:\nA match length code will always be followed by a distance code. Based on the distance code read, further \"extra\" bits may be read in order to produce the final distance. The distance tree contains space for 32 symbols:\nFor the match distance symbols 2\u201329, the number of extra bits can be calculated as formula_1.\nThe two codes (the 288-symbol length/literal tree and the 32-symbol distance tree) are themselves encoded as canonical Huffman codes by giving the bit length of the code for each symbol. The bit lengths are themselves run-length encoded to produce as compact a representation as possible. As an alternative to including the tree representation, the \"static tree\" option provides standard fixed Huffman trees. The compressed size using the static trees can be computed using the same statistics (the number of times each symbol appears) as are used to generate the dynamic trees, so it is easy for a compressor to choose whichever is smaller.\nEncoder\u2013compressor.\nDuring the compression stage, it is the \"encoder\" that chooses the amount of time spent looking for matching strings. The zlib/gzip reference implementation allows the user to select from a sliding scale of likely resulting compression-level vs. speed of encoding. Options range from codice_2 (do not attempt compression, just store uncompressed) to codice_9 representing the maximum capability of the reference implementation in zlib/gzip.\nOther Deflate encoders have been produced, all of which will also produce a compatible bitstream capable of being decompressed by any existing Deflate decoder. Differing implementations will likely produce variations on the final encoded bit-stream produced. The focus with non-zlib versions of an encoder has normally been to produce a more efficiently compressed and smaller encoded stream.\nDeflate64.\nDeflate64, specified by PKWARE, is a proprietary variant of Deflate. It's fundamentally the same algorithm. What has changed is the increase in dictionary size from 32\u00a0KB to 64\u00a0KB, an extension of the distance codes to 16\u00a0bits so that they may address a range of 64\u00a0KB, and the length code, which is extended to 16-bit, so that it may define lengths of three to 65,538 bytes. This leads to Deflate64 having a longer compression time, and potentially a slightly higher compression ratio, than Deflate. Several free and/or open source projects support Deflate64, such as 7-Zip, while others, such as zlib, do not, because the procedure is proprietary, and the performance increase over Deflate is small.\nUsing Deflate in new software.\nImplementations of Deflate are freely available in many languages. Apps written in C typically use the zlib library (under the permissive zlib License). Apps in Borland Pascal (and compatible languages) can use paszlib. Apps in C++ can take advantage of the improved Deflate library in 7-Zip. Both Java and .NET framework offer out-of-the-box support for Deflate in their libraries (respectively, codice_10 and https://). Apps in Ada can use https:// (pure) or https://.\nEncoder implementations.\nAdvanceCOMP uses the higher compression ratio versions of Deflate in 7-Zip, libdeflate, and Zopfli to enable recompression of gzip, PNG, multiple-image Network Graphics (MNG) and ZIP files with the possibility of smaller file sizes than zlib is able to achieve at maximum settings.\nDecoder, decompressor.\nInflate is the decoding process that takes a Deflate bitstream for decompression and correctly produces the original full-size data or file.\nInflate-only implementations.\nThe normal intent with an alternative Inflate implementation is highly optimized decoding speed, or extremely predictable random-access memory (RAM) use for microcontroller embedded systems.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75860", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75860", "title": "Franz Kafka/The Trial", "text": ""}
{"id": "75861", "revid": "30861941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75861", "title": "Cato the Elder", "text": "Roman politician, soldier and writer (234\u2013149 BC)\n Marcus Porcius Cato (, ; 234\u2013149 BC), also known as Cato the Censor (), the Elder and the Wise, was a Roman soldier, senator, and historian known for his conservatism and opposition to Hellenization. He was the first to write history in Latin with his \"Origines\", a now fragmentary work on the history of Rome. His work \"De agri cultura\", a treatise on agriculture, rituals, and recipes, is the oldest extant prose written in the Latin language. His epithet \"Elder\" distinguishes him from his great-grandson Senator Cato the Younger, who opposed Julius Caesar.\nHe came from an ancient plebeian family who were noted for their military service. Like his forefathers, Cato was devoted to agriculture when not serving in the army. Having attracted the attention of Lucius Valerius Flaccus, he was brought to Rome. He was successively military tribune (214 BC), quaestor (204), aedile (199), praetor (198), consul (195) together with Flaccus, and censor (184). As praetor, he expelled usurers from Sardinia. As censor, he tried to save Rome's ancestral customs and combat Hellenistic influences.\nBiography.\nCato the Elder was born in the municipal town of Tusculum, like some generations of his ancestors. His father had earned a reputation as a brave soldier, and his great-grandfather had received a reward from the state for having had five horses killed under him in battle. However, the Tusculan Porcii had never obtained the privileges of the Roman magistracy. Cato the Elder, their famous descendant, at the beginning of his career in Rome, was regarded as a \"novus homo\" (new man), and the feeling of his unsatisfactory position, working along with the belief of his inherent superiority, aggravated and drove his ambition. Early in life, he so far exceeded the previous deeds of his predecessors that he is frequently spoken of not only as the leader, but as the founder of the Porcia gens.\nCognomen Cato.\nHis ancestors for three generations had been named Marcus Porcius, and it was said by Plutarch that at first he was known by the additional cognomen \"Priscus\", but was afterwards called Cato\u2014a word (from Latin \"catus\") indicating 'common sense that is the result of natural wisdom combined with experience'. Priscus, like \"Major\", may have been merely an epithet used to distinguish him from the later Cato the Younger. \nThere is no precise information as to when he first received the title of Cato, which may have been given in childhood as a symbol of distinction. The qualities implied in the word Cato were acknowledged by the plainer and less outdated title of \"Sapiens\", by which he was so well known in his old age that Cicero says it became his virtual \"cognomen\". From the number and eloquence of his speeches, he was a gifted orator, but Cato the Censor (\"Cato Censorius\"), and Cato the Elder are now his most common, as well as his most characteristic names, since he carried out the office of Censor with extraordinary standing and was the only Cato who ever held it.\nDeducing Cato's date of birth.\nThe date of Cato's birth has to be deduced from conflicting reports of his age at the time of his death, which is known to have happened in 149 BC. According to the chronology of Cicero, Cato was born in 234 BC, in the year before the first Consulship of Quintus Fabius Maximus Verrucosus, and died at the age of 85, in the consulship of Lucius Marcius Censorinus and Manius Manilius. Pliny agrees with Cicero. Other authors exaggerate the age of Cato. According to Valerius Maximus he survived his 86th year, according to Livy and Plutarch he was 90 years old when he died. These exaggerated ages, however, are inconsistent with a statement of Cato himself that is recorded by Plutarch.\nYouth.\nIn the Punic Wars.\nWhen Cato was very young, after his father's death, he inherited a small property in Sabine territory, at a distance from his native town. There, he spent most of his childhood overseeing the operations of the farm, learning business and the rural economy. Near this land was a small hut owned by Manius Curius Dentatus, whose military feats and rigidly simple character were remembered and admired in the neighborhood. Cato was inspired to imitate that character, hoping to match the glory of Dentatus.\nSoon an opportunity came for a military campaign. In 218 BC Hannibal Barca attacked one of Rome's allies, starting the Second Punic War. Experts express some disagreement about Cato's early military life. In 214, he served at Capua, and the historian Wilhelm Drumann imagines that already, at the age of 20, he was a military tribune. Quintus Fabius Maximus Verrucosus had the command in this area, Campania, during the year of his fourth consulship. \nAt the siege of Tarentum, in 209, Cato was again at the side of Fabius. Two years later, Cato was one of the men who went with the consul Claudius Nero on his northern march from Lucania to check the progress of Hasdrubal Barca. It is recorded that the services of Cato contributed to the decisive and important victory of Sena at the Battle of the Metaurus, where Hasdrubal was slain.\nCato later gave several vehement speeches, which he often ended by saying \"Carthago delenda est\", or \"Carthage must be destroyed.\" He encouraged the Romans to attack Carthage.\nBetween the wars.\nIn the pauses between campaigns Cato returned to his Sabine farm, where he dressed simply, working and behaving like his laborers. Young as he was, the neighboring farmers liked his tough mode of living, enjoyed his old-fashioned and concise proverbs, and had a high regard for his abilities. His own active personality made him willing and eager to make himself available in the service of his neighbors. He was selected to act, sometimes as an arbitrator of disputes, and sometimes as a supporter in local causes, which were probably tried in front of \"recuperatores\", the judges for causes of great public interest. Consequently, he was enabled to strengthen by practice his oratorical abilities, to gain self-confidence, to observe the manners of men, to analyze the diversity of human nature, to apply the rules of law, and to practically investigate the principles of justice.\nFollower of the old Roman strictness.\nIn the area surrounding Cato's Sabine farm were the lands of Lucius Valerius Flaccus, a young nobleman of significant influence and high patrician family. Flaccus could not help remarking on Cato's energy, his military talent, his eloquence, his frugal and simple life, and his traditional principles. Flaccus himself was a member of that purist patrician faction which displayed its adherence to the stricter virtues of the Roman character. \nWithin Roman society a transition was in progress\u2014from Samnite rusticity to Grecian civilization and oriental luxuriance. The chief magistracies of the state had become almost hereditary for a few wealthy and upper-class families. They were popular by acts of generosity and charming manners, and they collected material wealth from their clients and followers, as well as intellectual prowess provided by their education, taste in the fine arts, and knowledge of literature. \nNonetheless, the less fortunate nobles, envious of this exclusive oligarchy and critical of the decadence and luxury, formed a party with a more conservative and ascetic ideology. In their eyes, rusticity and austerity were the marks of Sabine character, and of the old Roman inflexible integrity and love of order. Marcus Claudius Marcellus, Scipio Africanus and his family, and Titus Quinctius Flamininus may be taken as representative of the new culture; Cato's friends, Fabius and Flaccus, were the leading men in the faction defending the old plainness.\nPath to magistracies.\nFlaccus was a perceptive politician, who looked for young and emergent men to support him. He had observed Cato's martial spirit and heard his eloquent tongue. He knew how much courage and persuasiveness were valued at Rome. He also knew that distinction achieved on the battlefield opened the way to achievements in the higher civil offices. Flaccus knew too that for a stranger like Cato, the only way to the magisterial honours was success in the Roman Forum. \nFor that reason, he suggested to Cato that he shift his ambition to the field of Roman politics. The advice was followed. Invited to the townhouse of Flaccus, and ratified by his support, Cato began to distinguish himself in the forum, and became a candidate for assuming a post in the magistracy.\nEarly military career.\nQuaestor.\nIn 205 BC, Cato was appointed quaestor, and in the next year (204) he entered upon the duties of his place of work, following Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus Major to Sicily. When Scipio, after much opposition, obtained from the Senate permission to transport armed forces from Sicily to Africa, Cato and Gaius Laelius were appointed to escort the baggage ships. Yet there proved not to be the friendliness of cooperation between Cato and Scipio which ought to have existed between a quaestor and his proconsul.\nFabius had opposed the permission given to Scipio to carry the attack to the enemy's home, and Cato, whose appointment was intended to monitor Scipio's behavior, adopted the views of his friend. Plutarch reports that the lenient discipline of the troops under Scipio's command and the exaggerated expenses incurred by the general provoked Cato's protests, such that Scipio, immediately afterward, replied angrily, saying he would give an account of victories, not of money. \nCato left his place of duty after the dispute with Scipio about the latter's alleged extravagance, and returning to Rome, condemned the uneconomical activities of his general to the senate. Plutarch went on to say that at the joint request of Cato and Fabius, a commission of tribunes was sent to Sicily to examine Scipio's activity. Upon their review of his extensive and careful arrangements for the transport of the troops, they determined he was not guilty of Cato's charges. \nPlutarch's version, which seemed to attribute to Cato the wrongdoing of quitting his post before his time, is barely consistent with Livy's narrative. If Livy is correct, the commission was sent because of the complaints of the inhabitants of Locri, who had been harshly oppressed by Quintus Pleminius, Scipio's legate. Livy says nothing of Cato's interference in this matter, but mentions the bitterness with which Fabius blamed Scipio for corrupting military discipline and for having illegally left his province to take the town of Locri.\nThe author of the abridged life of Cato, commonly considered the work of Cornelius Nepos, asserts that Cato, after his return from Africa, put in at Sardinia, and brought the poet Quintus Ennius in his own ship from the island to Italy. But because Sardinia is rather out of the line of the trip to Rome, it is more likely that the first contact between Ennius and Cato happened at a later date, when the latter was praetor in Sardinia.\nAedile and praetor.\nIn 199 BC Cato was elected aedile, and with his colleague Helvius, restored the Plebeian Games, and gave upon that occasion a banquet in honour of Jupiter. In 198 BC he was elected praetor, and obtained Sardinia as his province, with the command of 3,000 infantry and 200 cavalry. Here he took the earliest opportunity to demonstrate his main beliefs by practicing his strict public morality. He reduced official operating costs, walked his trips with a single assistant, and placed his own frugality in contrast with the opulence of provincial magistrates. The rites of religion were celebrated with thrift, justice was administered with strict impartiality, and usury was severely punished. According to Aurelius Victor, a revolt in Sardinia was subdued by Cato during his praetorship.\nConsul.\nEnactment of the Porcian Laws.\nIn 195, when he was only 39 years old, Cato was elected junior consul to his old friend and patron Flaccus. During his consulship, he enacted the first two of the Porcian Laws, which expanded the protections of Roman citizens against degrading or capricious punishment under the Republic's Valerian Law.\nRepeal of the Oppian Law.\nIn 215, at the height of the Second Punic War and at the request of the tribune of the plebs Gaius Oppius, the Oppian Law (\"Lex Oppia\"), intended to restrict the luxury and extravagance of women in order to save money for the public treasury, was passed. The law specified that no woman could own more than half an ounce of gold, nor wear a garment of several colours, nor drive a carriage with horses closer than a mile to the city, except to attend public celebrations of religious rites.\nAfter Hannibal was defeated and Rome was resplendent with Carthaginian wealth, tribunes Marcus Fundanius and Lucius Valerius proposed to abolish the Oppian law, but tribunes Marcus Junius Brutus and Titus Junius Brutus opposed doing so. This conflict spawned far more interest than the most important state affairs. Middle-aged married Roman women crowded the streets, blocked access to the forum, and intercepted their approaching husbands, demanding to restore the traditional ornaments of Roman matrons.\nThey even begged the praetors, consuls and other magistrates. Even Flaccus hesitated, but his colleague Cato was inflexible, and made a characteristically impolite speech, which was later retold by Livy. The dissenting tribunes withdrew their opposition and the Oppian law was repealed by vote of all tribes. Women went in procession through the streets and the forum, dressed up with their now legitimate finery.\nDuring the controversy Cato maintained a firm opposition to the repeal, so he suffered politically and personally when it was finally repealed. Not only had the former consul been rejected by the senate by unanimous decision, but Flaccus failed to stand with him. However, perhaps because of Flaccus' connection to Lucius Valerius he was deliberately staying out of the controversy. He soon set sail for his appointed province, Hispania Citerior.\nPost in Hispania Citerior.\nIn his campaign in Hispania, Cato behaved in keeping with his reputation of untiring hard work and alertness. He lived soberly, sharing the food and the labours of the common soldier. Wherever it was possible, he personally superintended the execution of his orders. His movements were reported as bold and rapid, and he always pushed for victory. \nHis operations appear to have been carefully designed, and were coordinated with the plans of other generals in other parts of Hispania. His manoeuvres were considered original and successful. He managed to benefit by setting tribe against tribe, and took native mercenaries into his pay.\nThe details of the campaign, as related by Livy, and illustrated by incidental anecdotes by Plutarch, are full of horror and they make clear that Cato reduced Hispania Citerior to subjection with great speed and little mercy. We read of multitudes who put themselves to death because of the dishonour after they had been stripped of all their arms, of extensive massacres of surrendered troops, and the frequent harsh plunders. The phrase bellum se ipsum alet\u2014the war will feed itself\u2014was coined by Cato during this period. His conduct in Hispania were not contradictory with the traditional ideals of a Roman soldier, or with his own firm and over-assertive temper. He claimed to have destroyed more towns in Hispania than he had spent days in that country.\nRoman triumph.\nAfter he reduced the area between the River Iberus and the Pyrenees to a resentful and, as it turned out, temporary obedience, Cato turned his attention to administrative reforms, and increased the revenues of the province by improvements in the working of the iron and silver mines.\nFor his achievements in Hispania, the senate decreed a thanksgiving ceremony of three days. In the course of the year 194 BC, he returned to Rome and was rewarded with the honour of a Roman triumph, at which he exhibited an extraordinary quantity of captured brass, silver, and gold, both coin and lingots. Cato distributed the monetary prize to his soldiery, and was more liberal than might have been expected from his vigorous parsimony.\nEnd of consulship.\nThe return of Cato seems to have accelerated the enmity of Scipio Africanus, who was Consul in 194 BC and is said to have desired the command of the province in which Cato was harvesting notoriety. There is some disagreement between Nepos (or the pseudo-Nepos), and Plutarch, in their accounts of this topic. Nepos claims that Scipio failed to obtain the province, and, offended by the rejection, remained after his consulship in a private capacity at Rome. Plutarch claims that Scipio, who was disgusted by Cato's severity, was appointed to succeed him but could not convince the senate to censure Cato's administration, and passed his consulship in inactivity. Plutarch was probably mistaken, judging by the statement in Livy, that in 194 BC, Sextus Digitius was appointed to the province of Hispania Citerior. The notion that Scipio was appointed successor to Cato in Hispania may have arisen from a double confusion of name and place, since Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica was chosen in 194 BC to the province of Hispania Ulterior.\nHowever true this account, Cato used his eloquence and produced detailed financial accounts to successfully defend against criticism of his consulship. The known fragments of the speeches (or one speech under different names) made after his return attest to the strength of his arguments.\nPlutarch states that, after his consulship, Cato accompanied Tiberius Sempronius Longus as legatus to Thrace, but this seems incorrect because, although Scipio Africanus believed that one consul should have Macedonia, Sempronius was soon in Cisalpine Gaul, and in 193 BC Cato was in Rome dedicating a small temple to Victoria Virgo.\nLate military career.\nBattle of Thermopylae.\nThe military career of Cato had not yet ended. In 191, he, along with his old associate Lucius Valerius Flaccus, were appointed as lieutenant-generals (legatus) under the consul Manius Acilius Glabrio, who had been dispatched to Greece to oppose the invasion of Antiochus III the Great, King of the Seleucid Empire. In the decisive Battle of Thermopylae (191 BC), which led to the downfall of Antiochus, Cato behaved with his usual valor, and enjoyed good fortune. By a daring and difficult advance, he surprised and defeated a body of the enemy's Aetolian auxiliaries, who were posted upon the Callidromus, the highest peak of the range of Mount Oeta.\nThen, coming to the aid of forces under Flaccus's command, he began a sudden descent from the hills above the royal camp, and the panic caused by this unexpected movement promptly turned the day in favor of the Romans, and signaled the end of the Seleucid invasion of Greece. After the action, the consul hugged Cato with the greatest warmth and attributed to him the whole credit of the victory. This fact rests on the authority of Cato himself, who, like Cicero, often indulged in the habit, offensive to modern taste, of sounding his own praises.\nAfter an interval spent in the pursuit of Antiochus and the pacification of Greece, Cato was sent to Rome by Glabrio to announce the successful outcome of the campaign, and he performed his journey with such celerity that he had started his report in the senate before the return of Lucius Cornelius Scipio, the later conqueror of Antiochus, who had been sent off from Greece a few days before him.\nDoubtful visit to Athens.\nDuring the campaign in Greece under Glabrio, Plutarch's account (albeit rejected by historian Wilhelm Drumann) suggests that before the Battle of Thermopylae, Cato was chosen to prevent Corinth, Patrae, and Aegium from siding with Antiochus. During this period, Cato visited Athens where, in trying to prevent the Athenians from listening to the propositions of the Seleucid king, Cato addressed them in a Latin speech, which required an interpreter to be understood by the audience.\nWhether this was out of necessity or merely a choice by Cato remains unclear, since the assertion that he might very well have already known Greek at the time can be made from anecdotal evidence. For example, Plutarch said that while at Tarentum in his youth he had developed a close friendship with Nearchus, who was himself a Greek philosopher. Similarly, Aurelius Victor stated he had received instruction in Greek from Ennius while praetor in Sardinia. Nevertheless, because his speech was an affair of state, it is probable that he complied with the Roman norms of the day in using the Latin language while practicing diplomacy, which was considered as a mark of Roman dignity.\nInfluence in Rome.\nHis reputation as a soldier was now established; henceforth he preferred to serve the state at home, scrutinizing the conduct of the candidates for public honours and of generals in the field. If he was not personally engaged in the prosecution of the Scipiones (Africanus and Asiaticus) for corruption, it was his spirit that animated the attack upon them. Even Scipio Africanus\u2014who refused to reply to the charge, saying only, \"Romans, this is the day on which I conquered Hannibal\" and was absolved by acclamation\u2014found it necessary to retire, self-banished, to his villa at Liternum. Cato's enmity dated from the African campaign when he quarreled with Scipio for his lavish distribution of the spoil among the troops, and his general luxury and extravagance.\nCato was also opposed to the spread of Hellenic culture, which he believed threatened to destroy the rugged simplicity of the conventional Roman type. It was during this censorship that his determination to oppose Hellenism was most strongly exhibited, and hence, the behavior from which was derived the title (censor) by which he is most generally distinguished. He revised with unsparing severity the lists of senators and knights, ejecting from either order the men whom he judged unworthy of membership, either on moral grounds or on the basis of their lack of the prescribed means.\nSenators were supposed to be independently wealthy, their income to be based on land ownership rather than commerce, and there was also a financial \"means test.\" A Senator was expected to have what we would call a \"net worth\" of over a million sestertii, the standard Roman silver coin. Equivalencies in modern currencies are both misleading and impossible, but nevertheless, it would be fair to characterize the Roman Senate as a literal \"Millionaires club.\" The expulsion of L. Quinctius Flamininus for wanton cruelty was an example of his rigid justice.\nHis regulations against luxury were very stringent. He imposed a heavy tax upon dress and personal adornment, especially of women, and upon young slaves purchased as favourites. In 181 BC he supported the \"lex Orchia\" (according to others, he first opposed its introduction, and subsequently its repeal), which prescribed a limit to the number of guests at an entertainment, and in 169 BC the \"lex Voconia\", one of the provisions of which was intended to limit the accumulation of what Cato considered an undue amount of wealth in the hands of women.\nPublic works.\nAmong other things he repaired the aqueducts, mended as well as extended the sewage system, and prevented private persons from drawing off public water for their own use. The Aqua Appia was the first aqueduct of Rome. It was constructed in 312 BC by Appius Claudius Caecus, the same Roman censor who also built the important Via Appia. Unauthorised plumbing into Rome's aqueducts had always been a problem, as Frontinus records much later. Cato also ordered the demolition of shops and private houses which encroached on the public way, and built the first known basilica in 184 BC, named Basilica Porcia, in the Forum near the Curia (Livy, \"History\", 39.44; Plutarch, \"Marcus Cato\", 19). It served as a political and commercial activity center where courts were held and merchants accumulated. Some accounts state that the basilica was burned by the conflagration of Publius Clodius Pulcher's funeral pyre after his death in 52 BC, and was probably never rebuilt. \nToday, there are no remains of Basilica Porcia. Cato had also raised the amount paid by the publicani for the right to collect taxes and, at the same time, reduced the contract prices for the construction of public works. Which was seen as most beneficial for the State and least for contractors, creating controversies around him. According to Plutarch, the Senate \"strongly opposed the erection of the basilica\". Cato's expenditure on public works were objected by the party of Titus Flamininus and also deemed trivial by the Senate. After gaining influence, Flamininus repealed the public rentals and contracts of Cato while encouraging tribunes to ferment opprobrium against him and fine him.\nLater years.\nFrom the date of his censorship (184) to his death in 149, Cato held no public office, but continued to distinguish himself in the Senate as the persistent opponent of the new ideas. He was struck with horror, along with many other Romans, at the licence of the Bacchanalian mysteries, which he attributed to the influence of Greek manners, and he vehemently urged the dismissal of the philosophers Carneades, Diogenes, and Critolaus, who had come as ambassadors from Athens, on account of what he believed was the dangerous nature of their ideas. He also uttered warnings against the influence of Chaldean astrologers who had entered Italy along with Greek culture.\nHe had a horror of physicians, who were chiefly Greeks. He obtained the release of Polybius, the historian, and his fellow prisoners, contemptuously asking whether the Senate had nothing more important to do than discuss whether a few Greeks should die at Rome or in their own land. It was not until his eightieth year that he made his first acquaintance with Greek literature, though some think after examining his writings that he may have had a knowledge of Greek works for much of his life.\nIn his last years, he was known for strenuously urging his countrymen to prosecute the Third Punic War and to destroy Carthage. In 157, he was one of the deputies sent to Carthage to arbitrate between the Carthaginians and Massinissa, king of Numidia. The mission was unsuccessful and the commissioners returned home, but Cato was so struck by Carthage's growing prosperity that he was convinced that the security of Rome depended on its annihilation. From then on, he began concluding his speeches in the Senate\u2014on any topic whatsoever\u2014with the cry, \"Carthage must be destroyed\" ('). Other times, his phrase is fully quoted as \"Moreover, I advise that Carthage must be destroyed\" ('). Cicero's dialogue \"Cato the Elder on Old Age\" also depicted Cato's antipathy to Carthage. According to Ben Kiernan, Cato may have made the first recorded incitement to genocide.\nTo Cato the individual life was a continual discipline, and public life was the discipline of the many. He regarded the individual householder as the germ of the family, the family as the germ of the state. By strict economy of time he accomplished an immense amount of work; he demanded his dependents practice a similar dedication, and proved himself a hard husband, a strict father, and a severe and cruel master. There was little difference, apparently, in the esteem in which he held his wife and his slaves, although perhaps his pride caused him to take a warmer interest in his sons, Marcus Porcius Cato Licinianus and Marcus Porcius Cato Salonianus.\nTo the Romans themselves little in this behavior seemed worthy of censure, it was respected rather as a traditional example of the old Roman manners. In the remarkable passage in which Livy describes the character of Cato, there is no word of blame for the rigid discipline of his household.\nWritings.\nCato was and remains famous as an author as well. He was a historian, the first Latin prose writer of any importance, and the first author of a history of Italy in Latin. Some have argued that if it were not for the impact of Cato's writing, Latin might have been supplanted by Greek as the literary language of Rome. He was also one of the very few early Latin authors who could claim Latin as a native language.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In due course, my son Marcus, I shall explain what I found out in Athens about these Greeks, and demonstrate what advantage there may be in looking into their writings (while not taking them too seriously). They are a worthless and unruly tribe. Take this as a prophecy: when those folk give us their writings they will corrupt everything. All the more if they send their doctors here. They have sworn to kill all barbarians with medicine\u2014and they charge a fee for doing it, in order to be trusted and to work more easily. They call us barbarians, too, of course, and \"Opici\", a dirtier name than the rest. I have forbidden you to deal with doctors.\u2014\u200a\nThe two surviving collections of proverbs known as the \"Distichs of Cato\" and the \"Monosticha Catonis\" probably belong to the 4th century AD and are not works of Cato the Elder.\nLegacy.\nThe wrinkle ridge system Dorsa Cato on the Moon is named after Cato.\nThe comune of Monte Porzio Catone, one of the Castelli Romani and close to the ruins of Tusculum, is named in honour of the Porcius Cato family.\nCato is portrayed by Vittorio Gassman in \"Scipione detto anche l'Africano\", a 1971 Italian film starring Marcello Mastroianni as Scipio Africanus.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75863", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75863", "title": "Cyrus McCormick", "text": "American inventor and businessman (1809\u20131884)\nCyrus Hall McCormick (February 15, 1809 \u2013 May 13, 1884) was an American inventor and businessman who founded the McCormick Harvesting Machine Company, which became part of the International Harvester Company in 1902. Originally from the Blue Ridge Mountains of Virginia, he and many members of the McCormick family became prominent residents of Chicago.\nMcCormick always claimed credit as the single inventor of the mechanical reaper. He was, however, one of several designing engineers who produced working models in the 1830s. His efforts built on more than two decades of work by his father Robert McCormick Jr., with the aid of Jo Anderson, an enslaved African-American man held by the family. He also successfully developed a modern company, with manufacturing, marketing, and a sales force to market his products.\nEarly life and career.\nCyrus Hall McCormick was born on February 15, 1809, in Raphine, Virginia. He was the eldest of eight children born to inventor Robert McCormick Jr. and Mary Ann \"Polly\" Hall. As Cyrus's father saw the potential of the design for a mechanical reaper, he applied for a patent to claim it as his own invention. He worked for 28 years on a horse-drawn mechanical reaper to harvest grain, but was never able to produce a reliable version.\nBuilding on his father's years of development, Cyrus took up the project aided by Jo Anderson, an enslaved African-American man held on the McCormick plantation. A few machines based on a design of Patrick Bell of Scotland (which had not been patented) were available in the United States in these years. The Bell machine was pushed by horses. The McCormick design was pulled by horses and cut the grain to one side of the team.\nCyrus McCormick held one of his first demonstrations of mechanical reaping at the nearby village of Steeles Tavern, Virginia in 1831. He claimed to have developed a final version of the reaper in 18 months. The young McCormick was granted a patent on the reaper on June 21, 1834, two years after having been granted a patent for a self-sharpening plow. None was sold, however, because the machine could not handle varying conditions.\nThe McCormick family also worked together in a blacksmith/metal smelting business. The panic of 1837 almost caused the family to go into bankruptcy when a partner pulled out. In 1839 McCormick started doing more public demonstrations of the reaper, but local farmers still thought the machine was unreliable. He did sell one in 1840, but none for 1841.\nUsing the endorsement of his father's first customer, Khane Axel Hale, for a machine built by McPhetrich, Cyrus continually attempted to improve the design. He finally sold seven reapers in 1842, 29 in 1843, and 50 in 1844. They were all built manually in the family farm shop. He received a second patent for reaper improvements on January 31, 1845.\nAs word spread about the reaper, McCormick noticed orders arriving from farther west, where farms tended to be larger and the land flatter. While he was in Washington, D.C. to get his 1845 patent, he heard about a factory in Brockport, New York, where he contracted to have the machines mass-produced. He also licensed several others across the country to build the reaper, but their quality often proved poor, which hurt the product's reputation.\nMove to Chicago.\nIn 1847, after their father's death, Cyrus and his brother Leander J. McCormick (1819\u20131900) moved to Chicago, where they established a factory to build their machines. At the time, other cities in the midwestern United States, such as Cleveland, Ohio; St. Louis, Missouri; and Milwaukee, Wisconsin were more established. Chicago had the best water transportation from the east over the Great Lakes for his raw materials, as well as railroad connections to the west where most of his customers would be.\nWhen McCormick tried to renew his patent in 1848, the U.S. Patent Office noted that a similar machine had already been patented by Obed Hussey a few months earlier. McCormick claimed he had invented his machine in 1831, but the renewal was denied. William Manning of Plainfield, New Jersey had also received a patent for his reaper in May 1831, but at the time, Manning was evidently not defending his patent.\nMcCormick's brother William Sanderson McCormick (1815\u20131865) moved to Chicago in 1849, and joined the company to take care of financial affairs. The McCormick reaper sold well, partially as a result of savvy and innovative business practices. Their products came onto the market just as the explosive expansion of railroads offered inexpensive wide distribution. McCormick developed marketing and sales techniques, forming a wide network of salesmen trained to demonstrate the operation of his machines in the field, as well as to get parts quickly and repair machines in the field if necessary during crucial seasons in the farm year.\nA company advertisement was a take-off of the \"Westward the Course of Empire Takes Its Way\" mural by Emanuel Leutze; it added to the title: \"with McCormick Reapers in the Van.\"\nIn 1851, McCormick traveled to London to display a reaper at the Crystal Palace Exhibition. After his machine successfully harvested a field of green wheat while the Hussey machine failed, he won a gold medal and was admitted to the Legion of Honor. His celebration was short-lived after he learned that he had lost a court challenge to Hussey's patent.\nLegal controversies and success.\nAnother McCormick Company competitor was John Henry Manny of Rockford, Illinois. After the Manny Reaper beat the McCormick version at the Paris Exposition of 1855, McCormick filed a lawsuit against Manny for patent infringement. McCormick demanded that Manny stop producing reapers, and pay McCormick $400,000. The trial, originally scheduled for Chicago in September 1855, featured prominent lawyers on both sides. McCormick hired the former U.S. Attorney General Reverdy Johnson and New York patent attorney Edward Nicholl Dickerson. Manny hired George Harding and Edwin Stanton. Because the trial was set to take place in Illinois, Harding hired the local Illinois lawyer Abraham Lincoln. Manny finally won the case on appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court.\nIn 1856, McCormick's factory was producing more than 4,000 reapers each year, mostly sold in the Midwest and West. In 1861, however, Hussey's patent was extended but McCormick's was not. McCormick's outspoken opposition to Lincoln and the anti-slavery Republican party may not have helped his cause. McCormick decided to seek help from the U.S. Congress to protect his patent.\nIn 1871, the factory burned down in the Great Chicago Fire, but McCormick rebuilt and it reopened in 1873. In 1879, brother Leander changed the company's name from \"Cyrus H. McCormick and Brothers\" to \"McCormick Harvesting Machine Company\". To the annoyance of Cyrus, Leander tried to emphasize the contributions of others in the family to the reaper invention, especially their father.\nFamily relationships.\nOn January 26, 1858, 49-year-old Cyrus McCormick married Nancy \"Nettie\" Fowler. She was an orphan from New York who had graduated from the Troy Female Seminary and moved to Chicago. They had met six months earlier and shared views about business, religion and Democratic party politics. They had seven children:\nMary and Stanley both had schizophrenia. Stanley McCormick's life inspired the 1998 novel \"Riven Rock\" by T. Coraghessan Boyle.\nCyrus McCormick was an uncle of Robert Sanderson McCormick (son-in-law of Joseph Medill); granduncle of Joseph Medill McCormick and Robert Rutherford McCormick; and great-granduncle of William McCormick Blair Jr.\nActivism.\nMcCormick had always been a devout Presbyterian, as well as advocate of Christian unity. He also valued and demonstrated in his life the Calvinist traits of self-denial, sobriety, thriftiness, efficiency, and morality. He believed feeding the world, made easier by the reaper, was part of his religious mission in life.\nA lifelong Democrat, before the American Civil War, McCormick had published editorials in his newspapers, \"The Chicago Times\" and \"Herald\", calling for reconciliation between the national sections. His views, however, were unpopular in his adopted home town. Although his invention helped feed Union troops, McCormick believed the Confederacy would not be defeated and he and his wife traveled extensively in Europe during the war. McCormick unsuccessfully ran for Congress as a Democrat for Illinois's 2nd congressional district with a peace-now platform in 1864, and was soundly defeated by Republican John Wentworth. He also proposed a peace plan to include a Board of Arbitration. After the war, McCormick helped found the Mississippi Valley Society, with a mission to promote New Orleans and Mississippi ports for European trade. He also supported efforts to annex the Dominican Republic as a territory of the United States. Beginning in 1872, McCormick served a four-year term on the Illinois Democratic Party's Central Committee. McCormick later proposed an international mechanism to control food production and distribution.\nMcCormick also became the principal benefactor and a trustee of what had been the Theological Seminary of the Northwest, which moved to Chicago's Lincoln Park neighborhood in 1859, a year in which he endowed four professorships. The institution was renamed McCormick Theological Seminary in 1886, after his death, although it moved to Chicago's Hyde Park neighborhood in 1975 and began sharing facilities with the Lutheran School of Theology at Chicago.\nIn 1869, McCormick donated $10,000 to help Dwight L. Moody start YMCA, and his son Cyrus Jr. would become the first chairman of the Moody Bible Institute.\nMcCormick and later his widow, Nettie Day McCormick, also donated significant sums to Tusculum College, a Presbyterian institution in Tennessee, as well as to establish churches and Sunday Schools in the South after the war, even though that region was slow to adopt his farm machinery and improved practices. Also, in 1872, McCormick purchased a religious newspaper, the \"Interior\", which he renamed the \"Continent\" and became a leading Presbyterian periodical.\nFor the last 20 years of his life, McCormick was a benefactor and member of the board of trustees at Washington and Lee University in his native Virginia. His brother Leander also donated funds to build an observatory on Mount Jefferson, operated by the University of Virginia and named the McCormick Observatory.\nLater life and death.\nDuring the last four years of his life, McCormick became an invalid, after a stroke paralyzed his legs; he was unable to walk during his final two years. He died at home in Chicago on May 13, 1884. He was buried in Graceland Cemetery. He was survived by his widow, Nettie, who continued his Christian and charitable activities, within the United States and abroad, between 1890 and her death in 1923, donating $8 million (over $160 million in modern equivalents) to hospitals, disaster and relief agencies, churches, youth activities and educational institutions, and becoming the leading benefactress of Presbyterian Church activities in that era.\nOfficial leadership of the company passed to his eldest son Cyrus Hall McCormick Jr., but his grandson Cyrus McCormick III ran the company. Four years later, the company's labor practices (paying workers $9 per week) led to the Haymarket riots. Ultimately Cyrus Jr. teamed with J.P. Morgan to create the International Harvester Corporation in 1902. After Cyrus Hall McCormick Jr., Harold Fowler McCormick ran International Harvester. Various members of the McCormick family continued involvement with the corporation until Brooks McCormick, who died in 2006.\nLegacy and honors.\nNumerous prizes and medals were awarded McCormick for his reaper, which reduced human labor on farms while increasing productivity. Thus, it contributed to the industrialization of agriculture as well as migration of labor to cities in numerous wheat-growing countries (36 by McCormick's death). The French government named McCormick an Officier de la L\u00e9gion d'honneur in 1851, and he was elected a corresponding member of the French Academy of Sciences in 1878 \"as having done more for the cause of agriculture than any other living man.\"\nThe Wisconsin Historical Society holds Cyrus McCormick's papers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75864", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75864", "title": "Sisyphus", "text": "King of Ephyra in Greek mythology\nIn Greek mythology, Sisyphus or Sisyphos (; ) is the founder and king of Ephyra (now known as Corinth). He reveals Zeus's abduction of Aegina to the river god Asopus, thereby incurring Zeus's wrath. His subsequent cheating of death earns him eternal punishment in the underworld, once he dies of old age. The gods forced him to roll an immense boulder up a hill only for it to roll back down every time it neared the top, repeating this action for eternity. Through the classical influence on contemporary culture, tasks that are both laborious and futile are therefore described as Sisyphean ().\nEtymology.\nR. S. P. Beekes has suggested a pre-Greek origin and a connection with the root of the word (, \"wise\"). German mythographer Otto Gruppe thought that the name derived from (, \"a goat's skin\"), in reference to a rain-charm in which goats' skins were used.\nFamily.\nSisyphus was formerly a Thessalian prince as the son of King Aeolus of Aeolia and Enarete, daughter of Deimachus. He was the brother of Athamas, Salmoneus, Cretheus, Perieres, Deioneus, Magnes, Calyce, Canace, Alcyone, Pisidice and Perimede.\nSisyphus married the Pleiad Merope by whom he became the father of Ornytion (Porphyrion), Glaucus, Thersander and Almus. He was the grandfather of Bellerophon through Glaucus; and of Minyas, founder of Orchomenus, through Almus. Another account related that Minyas was Sisyphus's son instead.\nIn other versions of the myth, Sisyphus was the true father of Odysseus by Anticleia instead of La\u00ebrtes.\nMythology.\nReign.\nSisyphus was the founder and first king of Ephyra (supposedly the original name of Corinth). While king, according to Pausanias, he founded the Isthmian games in honor of Melicertes, whose dead body was brought to shore on the Isthmus of Corinth by a dolphin. In a fragment of Pindar, he instead founds the games (in honour of Melicertes) upon the instructions of a group of nymphs.\nConflict with Salmoneus.\nSisyphus and his brother Salmoneus were known to hate each other, and Sisyphus consulted the Oracle of Delphi on just how to kill Salmoneus without incurring any severe consequences for himself. From Homer onward, Sisyphus was famed as the craftiest of men. He seduced Salmoneus's daughter Tyro in one of his plots to kill Salmoneus, only for Tyro to slay their children when she discovered that Sisyphus was planning on using them to eventually dethrone her father.\nCheating death.\nSisyphus betrayed one of Zeus's secrets by revealing the whereabouts of the Asopid Aegina to her father, the river god Asopus, in return for causing a spring to flow on the Corinthian acropolis.\nZeus ordered Thanatos to chain Sisyphus in Tartarus. But Sisyphus sensed him coming, and seized the opportunity to trap Thanatos himself in chains instead. Once Thanatos was bound by the strong chains, no one died on Earth, causing an uproar. Ares, the god of war, perhaps annoyed that his battles had become less diverting because his opponents would not die, intervened and freed Thanatos, enabling deaths to happen again, and turned Sisyphus over to him.\nIn some versions, Hades was sent to chain Sisyphus and was chained himself. As long as Hades was trapped, nobody could die. Consequently, sacrifices could not be made to the gods, and those that were old and sick were suffering. The gods finally threatened to make life so miserable for Sisyphus that he would wish he were dead. He then had no choice but to release Hades.\nBefore Sisyphus died, he had told his wife to throw his naked corpse into the middle of the public square (purportedly as a test of his wife's love for him). This caused Sisyphus to end up on the shores of the river Styx when he was brought to the underworld. Complaining to either Hades or Persephone that this was a sign of his wife's disrespect for him, Sisyphus persuaded her to allow him to return to the upper world, in order to scold his wife for not burying his body and giving it a proper funeral as a loving wife should do. But when back in the world of the living, Sisyphus refused to return to the Underworld. He returned many years later either from dying of advanced age, or being forcibly dragged back there by Hermes.\nIn another version of the myth, Persephone was tricked by Sisyphus that he had been conducted to Tartarus by mistake, and so she ordered that he be released.\nIn \"Philoctetes\" by Sophocles, there is a reference to the father of Odysseus (rumoured to have been Sisyphus, and not La\u00ebrtes, whom we know as the father in the \"Odyssey\") upon having returned from the dead. Euripides, in \"Cyclops\", also identified Sisyphus as Odysseus's father.\nPunishment in the underworld.\nAs a punishment for his crimes, Hades made Sisyphus roll a huge boulder endlessly up a steep hill in Tartarus. The maddening nature of the punishment was reserved for Sisyphus due to his hubristic belief that his cleverness surpassed that of Zeus himself. Hades accordingly displayed his own cleverness by enchanting the boulder into rolling away from Sisyphus before he reached the top which ended up consigning Sisyphus to an eternity of useless efforts and unending frustration. Thus, pointless or interminable activities are sometimes described as \"Sisyphean\". Sisyphus was a common subject for ancient writers and was depicted by the painter Polygnotus on the walls of the Lesche at Delphi.\nInterpretations.\nAccording to the solar theory, King Sisyphus is the disk of the sun that rises every day in the east and then sinks into the west. Other scholars regard him as a personification of waves rising and falling, or of the treacherous sea. The 1st-century BC Epicurean philosopher Lucretius interprets the myth of Sisyphus as personifying politicians aspiring for political office who are constantly defeated, with the quest for power, in itself an \"empty thing\", being likened to rolling the boulder up the hill. Friedrich Welcker suggested that he symbolises the vain struggle of man in the pursuit of knowledge, and Salomon Reinach that his punishment is based on a picture in which Sisyphus was represented rolling a huge stone Acrocorinthus, symbolic of the labour and skill involved in the building of the Sisypheum. Albert Camus, in his 1942 essay \"The Myth of Sisyphus\", saw Sisyphus as personifying the absurdity of human life, but Camus concludes \"one must imagine Sisyphus happy\" as \"The struggle itself towards the heights is enough to fill a man's heart.\" In his 1994 \"The Body of Myth\", J. Nigro Sansonese, building on the work of Georges Dum\u00e9zil, speculates that the origin of the name \"Sisyphus\" is onomatopoetic of the continual back-and-forth, susurrant sound (\"siss phuss\") made by the breath in the nasal passages, situating the mythology of Sisyphus in a far larger context of archaic (see Proto-Indo-European religion) trance-inducing techniques related to breath control. The repetitive inhalation\u2013exhalation cycle is described esoterically in the myth as an up\u2013down motion of Sisyphus and his boulder on a hill.\nIn experiments that test how workers respond when the meaning of their task is diminished, the test condition is referred to as the Sisyphusian condition. The two main conclusions of the experiment are that people work harder when their work seems more meaningful, and that people underestimate the relationship between meaning and motivation.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75865", "revid": "1450053", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75865", "title": "Heloise (disambiguation)", "text": "H\u00e9lo\u00efse (1100?\u20131164) was a French writer, philosopher and abbess and wife of Peter Abelard.\nHeloise may also refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Name listThis page or section lists people that share the same given name. "}
{"id": "75870", "revid": "41927601", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75870", "title": "Moesia", "text": "Province of the Roman Empire\nMoesia (; Latin: \"Moesia\"; ) was a Roman province situated in the Balkans south of the Danube River. Created after the Danubian-Balkan conquest during the reign of Augustus, Moesia included most of the territory of modern eastern Serbia, Kosovo, north-eastern Albania, northern parts of North Macedonia (Moesia Superior), Northern Bulgaria, Romanian Dobruja and small parts of Southern Ukraine (Moesia Inferior).\nExtension.\nThe Roman province of Moesia (both Moesia Superior and Moesia Inferior) was bounded to the south by the Haemus (Balkan Mountains) and Scardus (\u0160ar) mountains, to the west by the Drinus (Drina) river, on the north by the Donaris (Danube) and on the east by the Euxine (Black Sea).\nName.\nA Paleo-Balkan tribe known as the \"Moesi\" never actually existed in the Danube area, it was a Roman invention of the Augustan era. The \"Moesi\" do not appear in ancient sources before Augustus's death in 14 CE and are mentioned only by three authors dealing with the Roman warfare in the region and the ethnonymic situation between mid-1st century BC and mid-1st century CE: Ovid, Strabo and Livy. The ethnonym was transplanted from Asia Minor \"Mysians\" to the Balkans by the Romans as a replacement of the name of the Dardani who lived in the territory that later became the province of Moesia Superior. This decision in Roman literature is linked to the appropriation of the name \"Dardani\" in official Roman ideological discourse as Trojan ancestors of the Romans and the creation of a fictive name for the actual Dardani who were seen as barbarians and antagonists of Rome in antiquity. This new fictive Augustan terminology was illogically and controversially argumented by Strabo as the result of Aelius Catus's displacement of 50,000 Getae from the north to the south of the Danube, who settled areas in the north-eastern parts of the later province of Moesia Superior, thereafter being called \"Moesi\".\nThe Latin name \"Moesia\" was given first to the province of Moesia Superior and expanded into Moesia Inferior along the Danube. After the recreation of Dardania, \"Moesia\" referred to Moesia Prima, the northern part of Moesia Superior. A \"civitas\" of the Moesi which was reorganized as a Roman colony was located around Ratiaria in the first century AD.\nHistory.\nRoman conquest.\nThe territory that under Roman rule became known as the province of Moesia was inhabited chiefly by Thracian, Illyrian, and Thraco-Illyrian peoples.\nBefore Roman rule, the territory that later became the province of Moesia Superior was dominated by the Dardani, who had constituted their own kingdom. The Dardani had resumed their enmity against Macedon since at least 230 BC. In the Roman-Macedonian Wars the Dardani sided with Rome and were among the biggest threats to Macedon. After the defeat of Macedon in the Third Macedonian War, the fragile Dardanian-Roman alliance weakened, in particular after the Senate's decision not to return to the Dardanian kingdom the territory that had been previously conquered by the Macedonians, notably Paeonia, which the Dardani claimed as their own territory. The Senate only recognized the Dardani the right to trade salt. Thereafter, from sworn enemies of Macedonia, the Dardani became enemies of Rome. Rome started its dominion over the Balkans establishing the protectorates of Illyricum and Macedonia after the Roman-Illyrian wars and Roman-Macedonian Wars. Roman offensives against the Dardani in the years 97 BC, 85 BC, and 77/6 BC were repelled. But in 75\u201373 BC the Dardani had to face terrible conflicts against Rome, known as \"Bellum Dardanicum\". During the Mithridatic Wars (88\u201363 BC) between the Roman Republic and Mithridates VI of Pontus, the Dardani, Eneti, and Sintians were raiding Roman Macedonia; afer his arrival, the consul Sulla attaked them, reportedly devastating their territory. The Dardani continued to fight against Rome and its proconsuls, and were finally defeated probably by Marcus Antonius in 39 BC or by Marcus Licinius Crassus in 29/8 BC. The Romans created the province of Moesia also including the territory of Dardania. After the Roman emperor Domitian divided the province of Moesia into Moesia Superior and Moesia Inferior in 86 AD, the Dardani were located in southern Moesia Superior. Emperor Diocletian later (284) made Dardania into a separate province with its capital at Naissus (Ni\u0161). The Romans found an ancient formed economy in Dardania, based on agriculture and animal husbandry, mining and metallurgy, in different handicrafts and in trade. The Romans focused especially in exploitation of mines, same as in other provinces, and in road construction.\nParts of the later province of Moesia belonged, before the Roman rule, to the polity of Burebista, a Getae (Dacian) king who established his rule over a large part of the northern Balkans between 82 BC and 44 BC. He led raids for plunder and conquest across Central and Southeastern Europe, subjugating most of the neighbouring tribes. After his assassination in a palace intrigue, the empire was divided into several smaller states. In 74 BC, C. Scribonius Curio, proconsul of Macedonia, took an army as far as the Danube and chased the Geto-Dacians to the border of their remote country. The expansion of the Dacians on the middle and lower reaches of the Danube worried the Romans and destruction of Dacian power became one of Julius Caesar's key political objectives, who made plans to launch an offensive from Macedonia in about 44 BC.\nOnce Augustus had established himself as sole ruler of the Roman state in 30 BC after the naval Battle of Actium in 31 BC, he took up Caesar's project and aimed to advance the empire's south-eastern European border from Macedonia to the line of the Danube. The main objective was to increase strategic depth between the border and Italy and also to provide a major river supply route between the Roman armies in the region. The lower Danube was given priority over the upper Danube and required the annexation of Moesia. It was therefore necessary to conquer the tribes who dwelt south of the Danube namely (from west to east) the Triballi, Moesi, Getae and the Bastarnae who had recently subjugated the Triballi, and with their capital at Oescus. Augustus also wanted to avenge the defeat of Gaius Antonius Hybrida at Histria 32 years before and to recover the lost military standards held in the powerful fortress of Genucla.\nMarcus Licinius Crassus, grandson of Crassus the triumvir was appointed for the task. He was an experienced general at 33 years of age, and proconsul of Macedonia from 29 BC. After a successful campaign against the Moesi, he drove the Bastarnae back toward the Danube and finally defeated them in pitched battle, killing their King Deldo in single combat. Augustus formally proclaimed this victory in 27 BC in Rome but blocked Cassius' entitlement to the Spolia opima and use of the term \"imperator\" apparently in favour of his own prestige.\nMoesia was split off as a separate military command some time before 10 BC.\nAs a result of the Dacians constant looting that occurred whenever the Danube froze, Augustus decided to send against them some of his proven generals such as Sextus Aelius Catus and Gnaeus Cornelius Lentulus Augur (sometime between 1-11 AD). Lentulus pushed them back across the Danube and placed numerous garrisons on the right bank of the river to defend against possible and future incursions. These became the Moesian Limes frontier defensive system that was developed further later.\nRoman Province.\nThe region, however, was not organised as a province until the last years of Augustus' reign; in 6 AD, mention is made of its governor, Caecina Severus. As a province, Moesia was under an imperial consular legate (who probably also had control of Achaea and Macedonia). In 15 AD complaints about the corruption of the governors of Macedonia and Achaia led Tiberius to put these provinces under the control of the governor of Moesia.\nIn 86 AD the Dacian king Duras attacked Moesia after which the Roman emperor Domitian personally arrived in Moesia and reorganised it in 87 into two provinces, divided by the river Cebrus (Ciabrus): to the west \"Moesia Superior\" (meaning upriver) and to the east \"Moesia Inferior\" or \"Ripa Thracia\" (from the Danube river's mouth and then upstream). Each was governed by an imperial consular legate and a procurator.\nFrom Moesia Domitian began planning future campaigns into Dacia and Domitian's Dacian War started by ordering General Cornelius Fuscus to attack who, in the summer of 87, led five or six legions across the Danube. The war ended without a decisive outcome and Decebalus, the Dacian King, later brazenly flouted the terms of the peace (89 AD) which had been agreed on.\nDacian Wars.\nTrajan's Dacian Wars (101\u2013102 AD, 105\u2013106 AD) were two military campaigns fought between the Roman Empire and Dacia during Emperor Trajan's rule. The conflicts were triggered by the constant Dacian threat on Moesia and also by the increasing need for resources of the economy of the Empire. \nStarting with AD 85, Dacia was unified under King Decebalus. Following an incursion into Moesia, which resulted in the death of its governor, Gaius Oppius Sabinus, a series of conflicts between the Romans and Dacians ensued. Although the Romans gained a major strategic victory at Tapae in AD 88, Emperor Domitian offered the Dacians favourable terms, in exchange for which Roman suzerainty was recognised. However, Emperor Trajan restarted the conflicts in 101-102 and then again in 105\u2013106, which ended with the annexation of most of Dacia and its reorganisation as a Roman Province.\nGothic raids.\nThe first incursion in Moesia that can be attributed to Goths is by the Costoboci in 170 in the Marcomannic Wars when they destroyed Tropaeum Traiani.\nIn 238 the Carpi sacked Histria and Tropaeum Traiani. Afterwards Moesia was frequently invaded or raided by the Dacian Carpi, and the East Germanic tribes of the Goths.\nIn the Gothic War (248\u2013253), the Gothic king Cniva captured the city of Philippopolis and then inflicted a devastating defeat upon the Romans at the Battle of Abrittus, in which the Roman Emperor Decius was killed, one of the most disastrous defeats in the history of the Roman army.\nRetreat from Dacia.\nAfter the abandonment of Roman Dacia to the Goths by Aurelian (270\u2013275) and the transfer of the Roman citizens from the former province to the south of the Danube, the central portion of Moesia took the name of \"Dacia Aureliana\" (later divided into \"Dacia Ripensis\" and \"Dacia Mediterranea\").\nDuring administrative reforms of Emperor Diocletian (284\u2013305), both of the Moesian provinces were reorganised. Moesia Superior was divided in two, northern part forming the province of Moesia Prima including cities Viminacium and Singidunum, while the southern part was organised as the new province of Dardania with cities Scupi and Ulpiana. At the same time, Moesia Inferior was divided into Moesia Secunda and Scythia Minor.\nAs a frontier province, Moesia was strengthened by stations and forts erected along the southern bank of the Danube, and a wall was built from Axiopolis to Tomis as a protection against the Scythians and Sarmatians. The garrison of Moesia Secunda included Legio I Italica and Legio XI Claudia, as well as auxiliary infantry units, cavalry units, and river flotillas.\nHard-pressed by the Huns, the Goths again crossed the Danube during the reign of Valens (376) and with his permission settled in Moesia. After they settled, quarrels soon took place, and the Goths under Fritigern defeated Valens in a great battle near Adrianople. These Goths are known as Moeso-Goths, for whom Ulfilas made the Gothic translation of the Bible.\nLate Empire.\nThe Slavs allied with the Avars invaded and destroyed much of Moesia in 583\u2013587 in the Avar\u2013Byzantine wars. Moesia was settled by Slavs during the 7th century. Bulgars, arriving from Old Great Bulgaria, conquered Lower Moesia by the end of the 7th century. During the 8th century the Byzantine Empire lost also Upper Moesian territory to the First Bulgarian Empire.. The region would return to Byzantine control under Basil II in 1018 and would last until the formation of the Second Bulgarian Empire in 1185.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75871", "revid": "3525933", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75871", "title": "Maas (surname)", "text": "Maas is a Dutch and North German patronymic surname, from an archaic short form of Thomas. It could also be a toponymic surname derived from the river Maas (). The surname is quite common in the Netherlands, ranking 43rd in 2007 (16,070 people).\nPeople with the surname Maas include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Surname listThis page lists people with the surname . "}
{"id": "75872", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75872", "title": "Maas River", "text": ""}
{"id": "75873", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75873", "title": "Nernst equation", "text": "Physical law in electrochemistry\nIn electrochemistry, the Nernst equation is a chemical thermodynamical relationship that permits the calculation of the reduction potential of a reaction (half-cell or full cell reaction) from the standard electrode potential, absolute temperature, the number of electrons involved in the redox reaction, and activities (often approximated by concentrations) of the chemical species undergoing reduction and oxidation respectively. It was named after Walther Nernst, a German physical chemist who formulated the equation.\nExpression.\nGeneral form with chemical activities.\nWhen an oxidized species (Ox) accepts a number \"z\" of electrons (\u200a\"e\"\u2212) to be converted in its reduced form (Red), the half-reaction is expressed as: \n &lt;chem&gt;Ox + ze- -&gt; Red&lt;/chem&gt;\nThe reaction quotient (\"Qr\"), also often called the ion activity product (\"IAP\"), is the ratio between the chemical activities (\"a\") of the reduced form (the reductant, aRed) and the oxidized form (the oxidant, aOx). The chemical activity of a dissolved species corresponds to its true thermodynamic concentration taking into account the electrical interactions between all ions present in solution at elevated concentrations. For a given dissolved species, its chemical activity (a) is the product of its activity coefficient (\u03b3) by its molar (mol/L solution), or molal (mol/kg water), concentration (C): a = \u03b3 C. So, if the concentration (\"C\", also denoted here below with square brackets [ ]) of all the dissolved species of interest are sufficiently low and that their activity coefficients are close to unity, their chemical activities can be approximated by their concentrations as commonly done when simplifying, or idealizing, a reaction for didactic purposes: \n formula_1\nAt chemical equilibrium, the ratio \"Qr\" of the activity of the reaction product (\"a\"Red) by the reagent activity (\"a\"Ox) is equal to the equilibrium constant \"K\" of the half-reaction: \n formula_2\nThe standard thermodynamics also says that the actual Gibbs free energy \u0394\"G\" is related to the free energy change under standard state \u0394\"G\" by the relationship:\nformula_3\nwhere \"Q\"r is the reaction quotient and R is the universal ideal gas constant.\nThe cell potential E associated with the electrochemical reaction is defined as the decrease in Gibbs free energy per coulomb of charge transferred, which leads to the relationship formula_4 The constant F (the Faraday constant) is a unit conversion factor \"F\" = \"N\"A\"q\", where \"N\"A is the Avogadro constant and q is the fundamental electron charge. This immediately leads to the Nernst equation, which for an electrochemical half-cell is\nformula_5\nFor a complete electrochemical reaction (full cell), the equation can be written as\nformula_6\nwhere:\nThermal voltage.\nAt room temperature (25\u00a0\u00b0C), the thermal voltage formula_7 is approximately 25.693\u00a0mV. The Nernst equation is frequently expressed in terms of base-10 logarithms (\"i.e.\", common logarithms) rather than natural logarithms, in which case it is written:\nformula_8\nwhere \"\u03bb\" = ln(10) \u2248 2.3026 and \"\u03bbVT\" \u2248 0.05916 Volt.\nForm with activity coefficients and concentrations.\nSimilarly to equilibrium constants, activities are always measured with respect to the standard state (1\u00a0mol/L for solutes, 1\u00a0atm for gases, and T = 298.15 K, \"i.e.\", 25 \u00b0C or 77 \u00b0F). The chemical activity of a species i, \"a\"i, is related to the measured concentration \"C\"i via the relationship \"a\"i = \"\u03b3\"i \"C\"i, where \"\u03b3\"i is the activity coefficient of the species i. Because activity coefficients tend to unity at low concentrations, or are unknown or difficult to determine at medium and high concentrations, activities in the Nernst equation are frequently replaced by simple concentrations and then, formal standard reduction potentials formula_9 used. \nTaking into account the activity coefficients (formula_10) the Nernst equation becomes: \nformula_11\nformula_12\nformula_13\nWhere the first term including the activity coefficients (formula_10) is denoted formula_15 and called the formal standard reduction potential, so that formula_16 can be directly expressed as a function of formula_15 and the concentrations in the simplest form of the Nernst equation:\nformula_18\nFormal standard reduction potential.\nWhen wishing to use simple concentrations in place of activities, but that the activity coefficients are far from unity and can no longer be neglected and are unknown or too difficult to determine, it can be convenient to introduce the notion of the \"so-called\" standard formal reduction potential (formula_15) which is related to the standard reduction potential as follows:\nformula_20\nSo that the Nernst equation for the half-cell reaction can be correctly formally written in terms of concentrations as:\nformula_18\nand likewise for the full cell expression.\nAccording to Wenzel (2020), a formal reduction potential formula_15 is the reduction potential that applies to a half reaction under a set of specified conditions such as, e.g., pH, ionic strength, or the concentration of complexing agents.\nThe formal reduction potential formula_15 is often a more convenient, but conditional, form of the standard reduction potential, taking into account activity coefficients and specific conditions characteristics of the reaction medium. Therefore, its value is a conditional value, \"i.e.\", that it depends on the experimental conditions and because the ionic strength affects the activity coefficients, formula_15 will vary from medium to medium. Several definitions of the formal reduction potential can be found in the literature, depending on the pursued objective and the experimental constraints imposed by the studied system. The general definition of formula_15 refers to its value determined when formula_26. A more particular case is when formula_15 is also determined at pH 7, as e.g. for redox reactions important in biochemistry or biological systems. \n\n 1====\nThe formal standard reduction potential formula_15 can be defined as the measured reduction potential formula_16 of the half-reaction at unity concentration ratio of the oxidized and reduced species (\"i.e.\", when \n 1) under given conditions. \nIndeed: \nas, formula_30, when formula_31, \n formula_32, when formula_26, \nbecause formula_34, and that the term formula_35 is included in formula_15. \nThe formal reduction potential makes possible to more simply work with molar (mol/L, M) or molal (mol/kg , m) concentrations in place of activities. Because molar and molal concentrations were once referred as formal concentrations, it could explain the origin of the adjective \"formal\" in the expression \"formal\" potential. \nThe formal potential is thus the reversible potential of an electrode at equilibrium immersed in a solution where reactants and products are at unit concentration. If any small incremental change of potential causes a change in the direction of the reaction, \"i.e.\" from reduction to oxidation or \"vice versa\", the system is close to equilibrium, reversible and is at its formal potential. When the formal potential is measured under standard conditions (\"i.e.\" the activity of each dissolved species is 1 mol/L, T = 298.15 K = 25 \u00b0C = 77 \u00b0F, Pgas = 1 bar) it becomes \"de facto\" a standard potential. According to Brown and Swift (1949): \n\"A formal potential is defined as the potential of a half-cell, measured against the standard hydrogen electrode, when the total concentration of each oxidation state is one formal\".\nIn this case, as for the standard reduction potentials, the concentrations of dissolved species remain equal to one molar (M) or one molal (m), and so are said to be one formal (F). So, expressing the concentration C in molarity M (1 mol/L): \n formula_37\nThe term formal concentration (F) is now largely ignored in the current literature and can be commonly assimilated to molar concentration (M), or molality (m) in case of thermodynamic calculations. \nThe formal potential is also found halfway between the two peaks in a cyclic voltammogram, where at this point the concentration of Ox (the oxidized species) and Red (the reduced species) at the electrode surface are equal. \nThe activity coefficients formula_38 and formula_39 are included in the formal potential formula_15, and because they depend on experimental conditions such as temperature, ionic strength, and pH, formula_15 cannot be referred as an immutable standard potential but needs to be systematically determined for each specific set of experimental conditions.\nFormal reduction potentials are applied to simplify calculations of a considered system under given conditions and measurements interpretation. The experimental conditions in which they are determined and their relationship to the standard reduction potentials must be clearly described to avoid to confuse them with standard reduction potentials.\nFormal standard reduction potential at pH 7.\nFormal standard reduction potentials (formula_15) are also commonly used in biochemistry and cell biology for referring to standard reduction potentials measured at pH 7, a value closer to the pH of most physiological and intracellular fluids than the standard state pH of 0. The advantage is to defining a more appropriate redox scale better corresponding to real conditions than the standard state. Formal standard reduction potentials (formula_15) allow to more easily estimate if a redox reaction supposed to occur in a metabolic process or to fuel microbial activity under some conditions is feasible or not. \nWhile, standard reduction potentials always refer to the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE), with [\u200aH+] = 1 M corresponding to a pH 0, and formula_44 fixed arbitrarily to zero by convention, it is no longer the case at a pH of 7. Then, the reduction potential formula_16 of a hydrogen electrode operating at pH 7 is \u22120.413 V with respect to the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE).\nExpression of the Nernst equation as a function of pH.\nThe formula_46 and pH of a solution are related by the Nernst equation as commonly represented by a Pourbaix diagram (formula_46 \u2013 pH plot). formula_46 explicitly denotes formula_16 expressed versus the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE). For a half cell equation, conventionally written as a reduction reaction (\"i.e.\", electrons accepted by an oxidant on the left side):\n formula_50\nThe half-cell standard reduction potential formula_51 is given by\n formula_52\nwhere formula_53 is the standard Gibbs free energy change, z is the number of electrons involved, and F is the Faraday's constant. The Nernst equation relates pH and formula_46 as follows:\n formula_55 \u00a0\nwhere curly brackets indicate activities, and exponents are shown in the conventional manner. This equation is the equation of a straight line for formula_16 as a function of pH with a slope of formula_57 volt (pH has no units). \nThis equation predicts lower formula_16 at higher pH values. This is observed for the reduction of O2 into H2O, or OH\u2212, and for the reduction of H+ into H2. formula_16 is then often noted as formula_46 to indicate that it refers to the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE) whose formula_16 = 0 by convention under standard conditions (T = 298.15 K = 25 \u00b0C = 77 F, Pgas = 1 atm (1.013 bar), concentrations = 1 M and thus pH = 0). \nMain factors affecting the formal standard reduction potentials.\nThe main factor affecting the formal reduction potentials in biochemical or biological processes is most often the pH. To determine approximate values of formal reduction potentials, neglecting in a first approach changes in activity coefficients due to ionic strength, the Nernst equation has to be applied taking care to first express the relationship as a function of pH. The second factor to be considered are the values of the concentrations taken into account in the Nernst equation. To define a formal reduction potential for a biochemical reaction, the pH value, the concentrations values and the hypotheses made on the activity coefficients must always be explicitly indicated. When using, or comparing, several formal reduction potentials they must also be internally consistent. \nProblems may occur when mixing different sources of data using different conventions or approximations (\"i.e.\", with different underlying hypotheses). When working at the frontier between inorganic and biological processes (e.g., when comparing abiotic and biotic processes in geochemistry when microbial activity could also be at work in the system), care must be taken not to inadvertently directly mix standard reduction potentials versus SHE (pH = 0) with formal reduction potentials (pH = 7). Definitions must be clearly expressed and carefully controlled, especially if the sources of data are different and arise from different fields (e.g., picking and mixing data from classical electrochemistry and microbiology textbooks without paying attention to the different conventions on which they are based).\nExamples with a Pourbaix diagram.\nTo illustrate the dependency of the reduction potential on pH, one can simply consider the two oxido-reduction equilibria determining the water stability domain in a Pourbaix diagram (Eh\u2013pH plot). When water is submitted to electrolysis by applying a sufficient difference of electrical potential between two electrodes immersed in water, hydrogen is produced at the cathode (reduction of water protons) while oxygen is formed at the anode (oxidation of water oxygen atoms). The same may occur if a reductant stronger than hydrogen (e.g., metallic Na) or an oxidant stronger than oxygen (e.g., F2) enters in contact with water and reacts with it. In the Eh\u2013pH plot here beside (the simplest possible version of a Pourbaix diagram), the water stability domain (grey surface) is delimited in term of redox potential by two inclined red dashed lines: \n (cathode: reduction)\n (anode: oxidation)\nWhen solving the Nernst equation for each corresponding reduction reaction (need to revert the water oxidation reaction producing oxygen), both equations have a similar form because the number of protons and the number of electrons involved within a reaction are the same and their ratio is one (2\u200aH+/2\u200a\"e\"\u2212 for H2 and 4\u200aH+/4\u200a\"e\"\u2212 with respectively), so it simplifies when solving the Nernst equation expressed as a function of pH. \nThe result can be numerically expressed as follows: \n formula_62\nNote that the slopes of the two water stability domain upper and lower lines are the same (\u221259.16 mV/pH unit), so they are parallel on a Pourbaix diagram. As the slopes are negative, at high pH, both hydrogen and oxygen evolution requires a much lower reduction potential than at low pH.\nFor the reduction of H+ into H2 the here above mentioned relationship becomes: \n formula_63 because by convention formula_51 = 0 V for the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE: pH = 0). So, at pH = 7, formula_16 = \u22120.414 V for the reduction of protons. \nFor the reduction of O2 into 2 H2O the here above mentioned relationship becomes: \n formula_66 because formula_51 = +1.229 V with respect to the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE: pH = 0). So, at pH = 7, formula_16 = +0.815 V for the reduction of oxygen.\nThe offset of \u2212414 mV in formula_16 is the same for both reduction reactions because they share the same linear relationship as a function of pH and the slopes of their lines are the same. This can be directly verified on a Pourbaix diagram. For other reduction reactions, the value of the formal reduction potential at a pH of 7, commonly referred for biochemical reactions, also depends on the slope of the corresponding line in a Pourbaix diagram \"i.e.\" on the ratio \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;h\u2044z\" of the number of \u200aH+ to the number of \u200a\"e\"\u2212 involved in the reduction reaction, and thus on the stoichiometry of the half-reaction. The determination of the formal reduction potential at pH = 7 for a given biochemical half-reaction requires thus to calculate it with the corresponding Nernst equation as a function of pH. One cannot simply apply an offset of \u2212414 mV to the Eh value (SHE) when the ratio \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;h\u2044z\" differs from 1.\nApplications in biology.\nBeside important redox reactions in biochemistry and microbiology, the Nernst equation is also used in physiology for calculating the electric potential of a cell membrane with respect to one type of ion. It can be linked to the acid dissociation constant.\nNernst potential.\nThe Nernst equation has a physiological application when used to calculate the potential of an ion of charge \"z\" across a membrane. This potential is determined using the concentration of the ion both inside and outside the cell:\nformula_70\nWhen the membrane is in thermodynamic equilibrium (i.e., no net flux of ions), and if the cell is permeable to only one ion, then the membrane potential must be equal to the Nernst potential for that ion.\nGoldman equation.\nWhen the membrane is permeable to more than one ion, as is inevitably the case, the resting potential can be determined from the Goldman equation, which is a solution of G-H-K influx equation under the constraints that total current density driven by electrochemical force is zero:\nformula_71\nwhere\nThe potential across the cell membrane that exactly opposes net diffusion of a particular ion through the membrane is called the Nernst potential for that ion. As seen above, the magnitude of the Nernst potential is determined by the ratio of the concentrations of that specific ion on the two sides of the membrane. The greater this ratio the greater the tendency for the ion to diffuse in one direction, and therefore the greater the Nernst potential required to prevent the diffusion. A similar expression exists that includes r (the absolute value of the transport ratio). This takes transporters with unequal exchanges into account. See: sodium-potassium pump where the transport ratio would be 2/3, so r equals 1.5 in the formula below. The reason why we insert a factor r = 1.5 here is that current density \"by electrochemical force\" Je.c.(Na+) + Je.c.(K+) is no longer zero, but rather Je.c.(Na+) + 1.5Je.c.(K+) = 0 (as for both ions flux by electrochemical force is compensated by that by the pump, i.e. Je.c. = \u2212Jpump), altering the constraints for applying GHK equation. The other variables are the same as above. The following example includes two ions: potassium (K+) and sodium (Na+). Chloride is assumed to be in equilibrium.\nformula_72\nWhen chloride (Cl\u2212) is taken into account, \nformula_73\nDerivation.\nUsing Boltzmann factor.\nFor simplicity, we will consider a solution of redox-active molecules that undergo a one-electron reversible reaction\n Ox + e\u2212 \u21cc Red\nand that have a standard potential of zero, and in which the activities are well represented by the concentrations (i.e. unit activity coefficient). The chemical potential \"\u03bc\"c of this solution is the difference between the energy barriers for taking electrons from and for giving electrons to the working electrode that is setting the solution's electrochemical potential. The ratio of oxidized to reduced molecules, , is equivalent to the probability of being oxidized (giving electrons) over the probability of being reduced (taking electrons), which we can write in terms of the Boltzmann factor for these processes:\nformula_74\nTaking the natural logarithm of both sides gives\nformula_75\nIf \"\u03bc\"c \u2260 0 at \u00a0=\u00a01, we need to add in this additional constant:\nformula_76\nDividing the equation by e to convert from chemical potentials to electrode potentials, and remembering that =, we obtain the Nernst equation for the one-electron process :\nformula_77\nUsing thermodynamics (chemical potential).\nQuantities here are given per molecule, not per mole, and so Boltzmann constant \"k\" and the electron charge \"e\" are used instead of the gas constant \"R\" and Faraday's constant \"F\". To convert to the molar quantities given in most chemistry textbooks, it is simply necessary to multiply by the Avogadro constant: \"R\" = \"kN\"A and \"F\" = \"eN\"A. The entropy of a molecule is defined as\nformula_78\nwhere \u03a9 is the number of states available to the molecule. The number of states must vary linearly with the volume \"V\" of the system (here an idealized system is considered for better understanding, so that activities are posited very close to the true concentrations). Fundamental statistical proof of the mentioned linearity goes beyond the scope of this section, but to see this is true it is simpler to consider usual isothermal process for an ideal gas where the change of entropy \u0394\"S\" = \"nR\" ln() takes place. It follows from the definition of entropy and from the condition of constant temperature and quantity of gas n that the change in the number of states must be proportional to the relative change in volume . In this sense there is no difference in statistical properties of ideal gas atoms compared with the dissolved species of a solution with activity coefficients equaling one: particles freely \"hang around\" filling the provided volume), which is inversely proportional to the concentration c, so we can also write the entropy as\nformula_79\nThe change in entropy from some state 1 to another state 2 is therefore\nformula_80\nso that the entropy of state 2 is\nformula_81\nIf state 1 is at standard conditions, in which \"c\"1 is unity (e.g., 1\u00a0atm or 1\u00a0M), it will merely cancel the units of \"c\"2. We can, therefore, write the entropy of an arbitrary molecule A as\nformula_82\nwhere formula_83 is the entropy at standard conditions and [A] denotes the concentration of A. The change in entropy for a reaction\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;aA + bB \u2192 yY + zZ\nis then given by\nformula_84\nWe define the ratio in the last term as the reaction quotient:\nformula_85\nwhere the numerator is a product of reaction product activities, \"aj\", each raised to the power of a stoichiometric coefficient, \"\u03bdj\", and the denominator is a similar product of reactant activities. All activities refer to a time \"t\". Under certain circumstances (see chemical equilibrium) each activity term such as \"a\" may be replaced by a concentration term, [A].In an electrochemical cell, the cell potential \"E\" is the chemical potential available from redox reactions (\"E\" =). \"E\" is related to the Gibbs free energy change \u0394\"G\" only by a constant: \n\u0394\"G\" = \u2212\"zFE\", where \"n\" is the number of electrons transferred and \"F\" is the Faraday constant. There is a negative sign because a spontaneous reaction has a negative Gibbs free energy \u0394\"G\" and a positive potential \"E\". The Gibbs free energy is related to the entropy by \"G\" = \"H\" \u2212 \"TS\", where \"H\" is the enthalpy and \"T\" is the temperature of the system. Using these relations, we can now write the change in Gibbs free energy,\nformula_86\nand the cell potential,\nformula_87\nThis is the more general form of the Nernst equation. \nFor the redox reaction , \nformula_88\nand we have:\nformula_89\nThe cell potential at standard temperature and pressure (STP) formula_90 is often replaced by the formal potential formula_91, which includes the activity coefficients of the dissolved species under given experimental conditions (T, P, ionic strength, pH, and complexing agents) and is the potential that is actually measured in an electrochemical cell.\nRelation to the chemical equilibrium.\nThe standard Gibbs free energy formula_53 is related to the equilibrium constant K as follows: \n formula_93\nAt the same time, formula_53 is also equal to the product of the total charge (zF) transferred during the reaction and the cell potential (formula_95):\n formula_96\nThe sign is negative, because the considered system performs the work and thus releases energy. \nSo, \n formula_97\nAnd therefore: \n formula_98\nStarting from the Nernst equation, one can also demonstrate the same relationship in the reverse way. \nAt chemical equilibrium, or thermodynamic equilibrium, the electrochemical potential (\"E\") = 0 and therefore the reaction quotient (\"Qr\") attains the special value known as the equilibrium constant (\"K\"eq): \n \"Qr\" = \"K\"eq \nTherefore,\nformula_99\nOr at standard state,\nformula_100\nWe have thus related the standard electrode potential and the equilibrium constant of a redox reaction.\nLimitations.\nIn dilute solutions, the Nernst equation can be expressed directly in the terms of concentrations (since activity coefficients are close to unity). But at higher concentrations, the true activities of the ions must be used. This complicates the use of the Nernst equation, since estimation of non-ideal activities of ions generally requires experimental measurements. The Nernst equation also only applies when there is no net current flow through the electrode. The activity of ions at the electrode surface changes when there is current flow, and there are additional overpotential and resistive loss terms which contribute to the measured potential. \nAt very low concentrations of the potential-determining ions, the potential predicted by Nernst equation approaches toward \u00b1\u221e. This is physically meaningless because, under such conditions, the exchange current density becomes very low, and there may be no thermodynamic equilibrium necessary for Nernst equation to hold. The electrode is called unpoised in such case. Other effects tend to take control of the electrochemical behavior of the system, like the involvement of the solvated electron in electricity transfer and electrode equilibria, as analyzed by Alexander Frumkin and B. Damaskin, Sergio Trasatti, etc.\nTime dependence of the potential.\nThe expression of time dependence has been established by Karaoglanoff.\nSignificance in other scientific fields.\nThe Nernst equation has been involved in the scientific controversy about cold fusion. Fleischmann and Pons, claiming that cold fusion could exist, calculated that a palladium cathode immersed in a heavy water electrolysis cell could achieve up to 1027 atmospheres of pressure inside the crystal lattice of the metal of the cathode, enough pressure to cause spontaneous nuclear fusion. In reality, only 10,000\u201320,000 atmospheres were achieved. The American physicist John R. Huizenga claimed their original calculation was affected by a misinterpretation of the Nernst equation. He cited a paper about Pd\u2013Zr alloys.\nThe Nernst equation allows the calculation of the extent of reaction between two redox systems and can be used, for example, to assess whether a particular reaction will go to completion or not. At chemical equilibrium, the electromotive forces (emf) of the two half cells are equal. This allows the equilibrium constant \"K\" of the reaction to be calculated and hence the extent of the reaction.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75874", "revid": "9084172", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75874", "title": "Z (1969 film)", "text": "1969 film by Costa-Gavras\nZ is a 1969 political thriller film directed by Costa-Gavras, from a screenplay he co-wrote with Jorge Sempr\u00fan, adapted from the 1967 novel by Vassilis Vassilikos. The film presents a thinly fictionalized account of the events surrounding the assassination of democratic Greek politician Grigoris Lambrakis in 1963. With its dark view of Greek politics and its downbeat ending, the film captures the director's outrage about the junta that then ruled Greece. The title refers to a popular Greek protest slogan (, ) meaning \"he lives,\" in reference to Lambrakis.\nA French and Algerian co-production, the film stars Jean-Louis Trintignant as the investigating magistrate, an analogue of Christos Sartzetakis, who would become the President of Greece from 1985 to 1990. International stars Yves Montand and Irene Papas also appear, but despite their star billing, they have shorter screen time. Jacques Perrin, who also produced the film, plays a key role as a photojournalist. Other actors in the film include Pierre Dux, Charles Denner, Fran\u00e7ois P\u00e9rier, Georges G\u00e9ret and Bernard Fresson. The musical score was composed by Mikis Theodorakis.\n\"Z\" was a surprise international hit and is considered to be a landmark film of the political thriller genre. It became the first non-English language film to receive nominations for the Academy Awards in both Best Picture and Best Foreign Language Film categories. It also received numerous accolades including Best Actor for Trintignant and Jury Prize at the Cannes Film Festival and the Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Film. \nPlot.\nThe left-wing opposition in an unnamed Mediterranean country (based on Greece under the junta) plan to have a famous government deputy (based on Grigoris Lambrakis) give a speech advocating for nuclear disarmament, but the government interferes by pressuring venues to deny them space and setting thugs on them to tear down posters and harass attendees. The opposition receive an anonymous tip about a threat to the deputy's life and report it to government officials, but they dismiss the claims. \nDuring the speech, Pirou, another deputy, goes to find their promised protection, but is mistaken for the real target and savagely beaten before his assailants realize they have the wrong man. As the intended target crosses the street from the hall after giving his speech, a delivery truck speeds past him, and a man on the open truck bed strikes him down with a club. The Chief Prosecutor is informed of the incident and the General (head of the state police and a fierce anticommunist) lies that the deputy has been injured by a drunk driver, Yago, who they have in custody. The phone then rings, revealing the deputy has died.\nAt the hospital, the magistrate assigned to the investigation learns that the autopsy indicates the deputy died from blows to the head, not a car crash. He is informed of a witness, but before he can testify, the man is hit by a club from a passing car. The General and the man's family, who are sympathetic to the government, visit the man in the hospital and pressure him not to testify, but he does anyway, saying that Yago (his delivery driver) talked openly about the plan to murder the Deputy. The journalist visits the man and unwittingly spoils an assassination attempt by the Deputy's assailant Vago, who has been placed in the hospital by the government and is arrested. During the interrogation, the magistrate baits Vago into revealing that he is part of a clandestine anti-communist group, the Christian Royalist Organization against Communism (CROC), with ties to the state police.\nWith the help of a CROC informer, the journalist learns more about the organization and photographs members that the informer points out. He then takes the photos to Pirou, who identifies his assailant. It is later revealed that the Colonel bribed Pirou's assailant with a lifetime peddling license and new house to assist in their plan against the deputy. As the magistrate continues to investigate CROC, he demands that the opposition counselor produce the witness who originally told them of the plot against the deputy, revealed to be a fellow deliveryman with ties to the former Greek communist resistance movement. He describes Yago threatening him into silence, and that he saw Yago with the Colonel and the head of CROC. As one of the other opposition lawyers heads to the office to testify, a car attempts to run him down in front of a crowd of witnesses.\nWith a large amount of corroborating evidence, the magistrate plans to charge high-ranking military officers and, upon learning of this plan, the country's attorney general arrives and criticizes his plans, arguing that they will harm the nation. He suggests that the magistrate try Yago and Vago apart, leave the issue of the police to be solved internally, and indict the opposition for inflammatory speech, but he follows through with his plans. The General denies any affiliation with CROC, but the magistrate presents a photo of a banquet he hosted in their honor. The action of the film concludes with one of the deputy's associates rushing to see his widow to give her the surprising news of the officers' indictments, to which she looks distressed.\nAn epilogue provides a synopsis of the subsequent turns of events. Instead of justice being served, the prosecutor is mysteriously removed from the case, several key witnesses die under suspicious circumstances, the assassins receive relatively short sentences, the officers receive only administrative reprimands, the deputy's close associates die or are deported and the photojournalist is sent to prison for disclosing official documents. The heads of the government resign after public disapproval, but before elections are carried out, a coup d'\u00e9tat occurs, and the military seize power. They ban modern art, popular music, avant-garde novelists, modern mathematics, classic and modern philosophers and the use of the letter \"\u0396\" (, or , which is used by protesters against the former government), which refers to the deputy and means \"He lives.\"\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Jean-Louis Trintignant as The Examining Magistrate (based on Christos Sartzetakis)\nBackground.\nThe 1963 murder of Greek politician and physician Grigoris Lambrakis and subsequent military junta in power from 1967\u20131973 served as the basis for the story. Among Costa-Gavras' references to the actual events was the frequency with which the military compared ideologies to diseases, seen when the General compares -isms to mildew. The Magistrate was based on real-life Greek jurist Christos Sartzetakis. Costa-Gavras opted to show the Deputy had adulteries and conflicts with his wife to demonstrate he was simply a man.\nCosta-Gavras was also motivated by the suspicious disappearance of Mehdi Ben Barka in 1965. Some American viewers infer parallels between the film and the assassination of John F. Kennedy, particularly given how some stylistic elements seem to mimic the Zapruder film. That said, Costa-Gavras has stated that the Zapruder film had not been widely circulated in Europe at the time and that Kennedy's assassination did not influence the production.\nProduction.\nPrincipal photography took place in Algiers at actor Jacques Perrin's suggestion, which the filmmakers approved for its Mediterranean environment and because the Ministry of Culture was accommodating. In Algiers, the Hotel St. Georges and the central square were filming locations, while Paris' Th\u00e9\u00e2tre des Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es was used for the ballet scenes. Marcel Bozzuffi performed his own stunts wrestling on the \"Kamikaze\" vehicle due to the production's lack of budget for professional stunt performers.\nCosta-Gavras chose \"Z\" as the title of the film based on its common occurrence in Greek graffiti for \"He lives\" (or even \"Lambrakis you live; it\u2019s you who guides us!\" [\u039b\u03b1\u03bc\u03c0\u03c1\u03ac\u03ba\u03b7 \u03b6\u03b5\u03b9\u03c2, \u03b5\u03c3\u03cd \u03bc\u03b1\u03c2 \u03bf\u03b4\u03b7\u03b3\u03b5\u03af\u03c2!; \"Lambr\u00e1ki zis, es\u00fd mas odig\u00eds!\"]); Costa-Gavras acknowledged a one-letter film title was unconventional and said Yves Montand expressed concern it would be confused with \"Zorro\", but Costa-Gavras said the novelty of the idea won him over.\nSoundtrack.\nThe soundtrack by Mikis Theodorakis was a hit record. The Greek junta had placed the composer under house arrest but he was able to give his approval to Costa-Gavras for the use of existing musical pieces.\nThe film features, but does not credit, Pierre Henry's contemporary hit song \"Psych\u00e9 Rock\". The soundtrack as released on LP and CD replaces Henry's song with a similar track written by Theodorakis titled \"Caf\u00e9 Rock.\"\n\"The Smiling Youth\" and \"Who's Not Talking About Easter\" were among the poems adapted from Brendan Behan's play \"The Hostage\" by Theodorakis in 1962. By referring to the Irish struggle against British rule rather than Greek realities, the poems offered a way to circumvent censorship in Greece and condemn Greece's post-war right-wing establishment. \"The Smiling Youth\" (\u03c4\u03bf \u03b3\u03b5\u03bb\u03b1\u03c3\u03c4\u03cc \u03c0\u03b1\u03b9\u03b4\u03af) was also one of the nicknames of Lambrakis.\nRelease.\n\"Z\" was picked up for U.S. distribution by the specialty company/New York City theatre chain Cinema 5.\nReception.\nPrints of the film were acquired by the Black Panther Party and shown at underground screenings. An advance copy of the film was shown at the United Front Against Fascism conference in 1969.\nIt first aired on American television on ABC on 18 March 1974.\nCritical response.\nAt the time of release, \"Chicago Sun-Times\" film critic Roger Ebert, who named \"Z\" the best film of 1969, liked the screenplay and its message, and wrote: \"[\"Z\"] is a film of our time. It is about how even moral victories are corrupted. It will make you weep and will make you angry. It will tear your guts out...When the Army junta staged its coup in 1967, the right-wing generals and the police chief were cleared of all charges and 'rehabilitated.' Those responsible for unmasking the assassination now became political criminals. These would seem to be completely political events, but the young director Costa-Gavras has told them in a style that is almost unbearably exciting. \"Z\" is at the same time a political cry of rage and a brilliant suspense thriller. It even ends in a chase: Not through the streets but through a maze of facts, alibis and official corruption.\"\nIn 2006, critic James Berardinelli wrote: \"\"Z\" was the third feature film from Greek-born Costa-Gavras, but it is the movie that captured him to the world's attention, winning a Best Foreign Language Film Oscar. It introduced the director's signature approach of combining overt political messages with edge-of-the-seat tension.\" Jonathan Richards wrote in 2009: \"It's hard to overstate the impact that this Oscar-winning procedural thriller had in 1969, on a world roiling in political activism, repression, and discord. In the U.S., the Vietnam War was on the front burner, the populace was passionately engaged, and the police riots outside the '68 Chicago Democratic Convention and the murder of Black Panther Fred Hampton were raw wounds. With this stylish, intense indictment of the assassination of a leftist political leader by a right-wing government cabal in his native Greece, director Costa-Gavras struck a nerve that resonated here and around the globe.\"\nIn 2009, Armond White praised the film and wrote: \"Ending with a provocative, unorthodox tally of fascist clampdowns on freedom of expression and the arts, Costa-Gavras angles his expos\u00e9 with a frightening coda that encapsulates the on-going political struggle. He avoids hippie optimism and foresees contemporary cynicism with a basic thriller device: a warning. \"Z\" carries the reverberations of that cultural shift from enlightenment to paranoia in each of its shrewdly devised tropes from common genres. Costa-Gavras expresses the tension and terror of political conspiracy that haunted the democratic and anti-war movements of the sixties\u2014and still does.\"\nOn Rotten Tomatoes, the film has a 94% \"fresh\" score based on 47 reviews, with an average rating of 8.2/10. The site's consensus states: \"Powerfully effective, this anti-fascist political thriller stands out as both high-conscience melodrama and high-tempo action movie.\"\nThe film was voted in \"Time\"'s list of \"The 15 Best Political Films of All Time.\"\nThe film was selected to be screened in the Cannes Classics section of the 2015 Cannes Film Festival.\nBox office.\nThe film had a total of 3,952,913 admissions in France and was the 4th highest-grossing film of the year. It was also very popular in the United States grossing $17.3 million, being one of the top five highest-grossing non-English language films.\nAwards and nominations.\n\"Z\" was the second foreign-language film in Academy history to receive a nomination for Best Picture, after \"Grand Illusion\". At the 27th Golden Globe Awards, its producers refused the award to protest the film's exclusion from the Best Motion Picture \u2013 Drama category.\nLegacy.\nFilmmakers Paul Greengrass and Aki Kaurism\u00e4ki listed the film in their top 10 films of all time for the 2012 \"Sight and Sound\" poll and other films directors such as Michael Haneke, Paul Schrader and John Woo have listed it as one of their favorite films.\nThe French filmmaker Mathieu Kassovitz listed the film as influential to his work.\nThe French filmmaker Rachid Bouchareb listed \"Z\" as an influence on his film \"Outside the Law\".\nIt is regarded as one of American filmmaker Oliver Stone's favorite films that inspired his filmmaking. John Milius also cited the film as an influence.\nThe American filmmaker Steven Soderbergh listed \"Z\" as an inspiration on his film \"Traffic\" and stated that he \"wanted to make it like [Costa-Gavras]'s Z\".\nThe American filmmaker William Friedkin listed \"Z\" as one of his favorite films and mentioned the film's influence on him when directing his film \"The French Connection\": \"After I saw \"Z\", I realized how I could shoot \"The French Connection\". Because he [Costa-Gavras] shot \"Z\" like a documentary. It was a fiction film but it was made like it was actually happening. Like the camera didn't know what was gonna happen next. And that is an induced technique. It looks like he happened upon the scene and captured what was going on as you do in a documentary. My first films were documentaries too. So I understood what he was doing but I never thought you could do that in a feature at that time until I saw \"Z\".\" As an homage, Friedkin cast actor Marcel Bozzuffi in a similar role.\nThe American actor and filmmaker Ben Affleck listed the film as an influence for his film \"Argo\".\nThe movie provided the inspiration for the name of Z Magazine, now ZNetwork.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75876", "revid": "1317127565", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75876", "title": "Walther Nernst", "text": "German physical chemist (1864\u20131941)\nWalther Hermann Nernst (; 25 June 1864 \u2013 18 November 1941) was a German physical chemist known for his work in thermodynamics, physical chemistry, electrochemistry, and solid-state physics. His formulation of the Nernst heat theorem helped pave the way for the third law of thermodynamics, for which he won the 1920 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. He is also known for developing the Nernst equation in 1887.\nHe studied physics and mathematics at the universities of Z\u00fcrich, Berlin, Graz and W\u00fcrzburg, where he received his doctorate 1887. In 1889, he finished his habilitation at University of Leipzig.\nLife and career.\nEarly years.\nNernst was born in Briesen, Germany (now W\u0105brze\u017ano, Poland) to Gustav Nernst (1827\u20131888) and Ottilie Nerger (1833\u20131876). His father was a country judge. Nernst had three older sisters and one younger brother. His third sister died of cholera. Nernst went to elementary school at Graudenz, Germany (now Grudzi\u0105dz, Poland).\nStudies.\nNernst started undergraduate studies at the University of Z\u00fcrich in 1883, then after an interlude in Berlin, he returned to Z\u00fcrich. He wrote his thesis at University of Graz, where Ludwig Boltzmann was professor, though he worked under the direction of Albert von Ettinghausen. They discovered the Ettingshausen and Nernst effects: that a magnetic field applied perpendicular to a metallic conductor in a temperature gradient gives rise to an electrical potential difference, reciprocally, an electric potential difference produces a thermal gradient. Next, he moved to the University of W\u00fcrzburg under Friedrich Kohlrausch where he submitted and defended his thesis.\nProfessional career.\nWilhelm Ostwald recruited him to the first department of physical chemistry at Leipzig University. Nernst moved there as an assistant, working on the thermodynamics of electrical currents in solutions. Promoted to lecturer, he taught briefly at the Heidelberg University and then moved to the University of G\u00f6ttingen. Three years later, he was offered a professorship in Munich. To keep him in Prussia the government created a chair for him at G\u00f6ttingen. There, he wrote a celebrated textbook \"Theoretical Chemistry\", which was translated into English, French, and Russian. He also derived the Nernst equation for the electrical potential generated by unequal concentrations of an ion separated by a membrane that is permeable to the ion. His equation is widely used in cell physiology and neurobiology.\nThe carbon electric filament lamp then in use was dim and expensive because it required a vacuum in its bulb. Nernst invented a solid-body radiator with a filament of rare-earth oxides, known as the Nernst glower, it is still important in the field of infrared spectroscopy. Continuous ohmic heating of the filament results in conduction. The glower operates best in wavelengths from 2 to 14 micrometers. It gives a bright light but only after a warm-up period. Nernst sold the patent for one million marks, wisely not opting for royalties because soon the tungsten filament lamp filled with inert gas was introduced. With his riches, Nernst in 1898 bought the first of the eighteen automobiles he owned during his lifetime and a country estate of more than five hundred hectares for hunting. He increased the power of his early automobiles by carrying a cylinder of nitrous oxide that he could inject into the carburetor. After eighteen productive years at G\u00f6ttingen, investigating osmotic pressure and electrochemistry and presenting a theory of how nerves conduct, he moved to Berlin, and was awarded the title of \"Geheimrat\".\nIn 1905, he proposed his \"New Heat Theorem\", later known as the Third law of thermodynamics. He showed that as the temperature approached absolute zero, the entropy approaches zero \u2014 while the free energy remains above zero. This is the work for which he is best remembered, as it enabled chemists to determine free energies (and therefore equilibrium points) of chemical reactions from heat measurements. Theodore Richards claimed that Nernst had stolen his idea, but Nernst is almost universally credited with the discovery. Nernst became friendly with Kaiser Wilhelm, whom he persuaded to found the \"Kaiser Wilhelm Gesellschaft\" for the Advancement of the Sciences with an initial capital of eleven million marks. Nernst's laboratory discovered that at low temperatures specific heats fell markedly and would probably disappear at absolute zero. This fall was predicted for liquids and solids in a 1909 paper of Albert Einstein's on the quantum mechanics of specific heats at cryogenic temperatures. Nernst was so impressed that he traveled all the way to Z\u00fcrich to visit Einstein, who was relatively unknown in Z\u00fcrich in 1909, so people said: \"Einstein must be a clever fellow if the great Nernst comes all the way from Berlin to Z\u00fcrich to talk to him.\" Nernst and Planck lobbied to establish a special professorship in Berlin and Nernst donated to its endowment. In 1913 they traveled to Switzerland to persuade Einstein to accept it; a dream job: a named professorship at the top university in Germany, without teaching duties, leaving him free for research.\nIn 1911, Nernst and Max Planck organized the first Solvay Conference in Brussels. In the following year, the impressionist painter Max Liebermann painted his portrait.\nWorld War I.\nIn 1914, the Nernsts were entertaining co-workers and students they had brought to their country estate in a private railway car when they learned that war had been declared. Their two older sons entered the army, while th\u00e9 father enlisted in the voluntary driver's corps. He supported the German army against their opponent's charges of barbarism by signing the Manifesto of the Ninety-Three, On 21 August 1914, he drove documents from Berlin to the commander of the German right wing in France, advancing with them for two weeks until he could see the glow of the Paris lights at night. The tide turned at the battle of the Marne. When the stalemate in the trenches began, he returned home. He contacted Colonel Max Bauer, the staff officer responsible for munitions, with the idea of driving the defenders out of their trenches with shells releasing tear gas. When his idea was tried one of the observers was Fritz Haber, who argued that too many shells would be needed, it would be better to release a cloud of heavier-than-air poisonous gas; the first chlorine cloud attack on 22 April 1915 was not supported by a strong infantry thrust, so the chance that gas would break the stalemate was irrevocably gone. Nernst was awarded the Iron Cross second class. As a Staff Scientific Advisor in the Imperial German Army, he directed research on explosives, much of which was done in his laboratory where they developed guanidine perchlorate. Then he worked on the development of trench mortars. He was awarded the Iron Cross first class and later the \"Pour le M\u00e9rite\". When the high command was considering unleashing unrestricted submarine warfare, he asked the Kaiser for an opportunity to warn about the enormous potential of the United States as an adversary. They would not listen, General Erich Ludendorff shouted him down for \"incompetent nonsense.\"\nReturn to research.\nNernst published his book \"The Foundations of the New Heat Theorem\". In 1918, after studying photochemistry, he proposed the atomic chain reaction theory. It stated that when a reaction in which free atoms are formed that can decompose target molecules into more free atoms would result in a chain reaction. His theory is closely related to the natural process of nuclear fission.\nIn 1920, he and his family briefly fled abroad because he was one of the scientists on the Allied list of war criminals. Later that year he received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in recognition of his work on thermochemistry. He was elected Rector of Berlin University for 1921\u20131922. He set up an agency to channel government and private funds to young scientists and declined becoming Ambassador to the United States. For two unhappy years, he was the president of the \"Physikalisch-Technische Reichsanstalt\" (National Physical Laboratory), where he could not cope with the \"mixture of mediocrity and red tape\". In 1924, he became director of the \"Institute of Physical Chemistry\" at Berlin.\nIn 1927, the decrease in specific heat at low temperatures was extended to gases. He studied the theories of cosmic rays and cosmology.\nAlthough a press release described him as \"completely unmusical\", Nernst developed an electric piano, the Neo-Bechstein-Fl\u00fcgel in 1930 in association with the Bechstein and Siemens companies, replacing the sounding board with vacuum tube amplifiers. The piano used electromagnetic pickups to produce electronically modified and amplified sound in the same way as an electric guitar. In fact, he was a pianist, sometimes accompanying Einstein's violin.\nRejection of antisemitism.\nIn 1933, Nernst learned that a colleague, with whom he had hoped to collaborate, had been dismissed from the department because he was a Jew. Nernst immediately taxied to see Haber to request a position in his Institute, which was not controlled by the government, only to learn that Haber was moving to England. Soon, Nernst was in trouble for declining to fill out a government form on his racial origins. He retired from his professorship but was sacked from the board of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute. He lived quietly in the country; in 1937 he traveled to the University of Oxford to receive an honorary degree, also visiting his eldest daughter, her husband, and his three grandchildren.\nDeath.\nNernst had a severe heart attack in 1939. He died in 1941 at Zibelle, Germany (now Niwica, Poland). He was buried three times. He was buried the first time near the place of his death. However, his remains were moved to Berlin, where he was buried a second time. Finally they were moved again and buried near the graves of Max Planck, Otto Hahn and Max von Laue in G\u00f6ttingen, Germany.\nPersonal life and family.\nNernst married Emma Lohmeyer in 1892 with whom he had two sons and three daughters. Both of Nernst's sons died fighting in World War I.\nWith his colleagues at the University of Leipzig, Jacobus Henricus van\u2019t Hoff and Svante Arrhenius, he was establishing the foundations of a new theoretical and experimental field of inquiry within chemistry and suggested setting fire to unused coal seams to increase the global temperature. He was a vocal critic of Adolf Hitler and of Nazism, and two of his three daughters married Jewish men. After Hitler came to power they emigrated, one to England and the other to Brazil.\nPersonality.\nNernst was mechanically minded in that he was always thinking of ways to apply new discoveries to industry. His hobbies included hunting and fishing. His friend Albert Einstein was amused by \"his childlike vanity and self-complacency\" \"His own study and laboratory always presented aspects of extreme chaos which his coworkers termed appropriately 'the state of maximum entropy'\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75877", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75877", "title": "The Chicago Manual of Style", "text": "Academic style guide for American English\nThe Chicago Manual of Style (CMOS) is a style guide for American English published since 1906 by the University of Chicago Press. Its 18 editions (the most recent in 2024) have prescribed writing and citation styles widely used in publishing.\nThe guide specifically focuses on American English and deals with aspects of editorial practice, including grammar and usage, as well as document preparation and formatting. It is available in print as a hardcover book, and by subscription as a searchable website. The online version provides some free resources, primarily aimed at teachers, students, and libraries.\nAvailability and uses.\n\"The Chicago Manual of Style\" is published in hardcover and online. The online edition includes the searchable text of the 16th through 18th\u2014its most recent\u2014editions with features such as tools for editors, a citation guide summary, and searchable access to a Q&amp;A, where University of Chicago Press editors answer readers' style questions. \"The Chicago Manual of Style\" also discusses the parts of a book and the editing process. An annual subscription is required for access to the online content of the manual (access to the Q&amp;A, however, is free, as are various editing tools).\nMany publishers throughout the world adopt \"Chicago\" as their style. It is used in some social science publications, most North American historical journals and remains the basis for the \"Style Guide of the American Anthropological Association\", the \"Style Sheet\" for the Organization of American Historians, and corporate style guides, including the \"Apple Style Guide\".\n\"The Chicago Manual of Style\" includes chapters relevant to publishers of books and journals. It is used widely by academic and some trade publishers, as well as editors and authors who are required by those publishers to follow it. Kate L. Turabian's \"A Manual for Writers of Research Papers, Theses, and Dissertations\" is a student-friendly presentation of Chicago style.\nCitation styles.\nTwo types of citation styles are provided. In both cases, two parts are needed: first, notation in the text, which indicates that the information immediately preceding was from another source; and second, the full citation, which is placed at another location.\nAuthor-date style.\nUsing author-date style, the sourced text is indicated parenthetically with the last name(s) of the author(s) and the year of publication with no intervening punctuation.\nResearch has found that students do not always cite their work properly (Smith 2016).\nWhen page numbers are used, they are placed along with the author's last name and date of publication after an interposed comma.\nResearch has found that students do not always cite their work properly (Smith 2016, 24).\nIf the author's name is used in the text, only the date of publication need be cited parenthetically (with or without the page number).\nResearch done by Smith found that students do not always cite their work properly (2016).\nIn-text citations are usually placed just inside a mark of punctuation. An exception to this rule is for block quotations, where the citation is placed outside the punctuation.\nThe full citation for the source is then included in a references section at the end of the material. As publication dates are prominent in this style, the reference entry places the publication date \"following\" the author(s) name.\nHeilman, James M., and Andrew G. West. 2015. \"Wikipedia and Medicine: Quantifying Readership, Editors, and the Significance of Natural Language.\" \"Journal of Medical Internet Research\" 17 (3): e62. https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.4069.\nNotes and bibliography style.\nUsing notes and bibliography style, the sourced text is indicated by a superscripted note number that corresponds to a full citation either at the bottom of the page (as a footnote) or at the end of a main body of text (as an endnote). In both instances, the citation is also placed in a bibliography entry at the end of the material, listed in alphabetical order of the author's last name. The two formats differ: notes use commas where bibliography entries use periods.\nThe following is an example of a journal article citation provided as a note and its bibliography entry.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;1. James M. Heilman and Andrew G. West, \"Wikipedia and Medicine: Quantifying Readership, Editors, and the Significance of Natural Language,\" \"Journal of Medical Internet Research\" 17, no. 3 (2015): e62, https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.4069.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;Heilman, James M., and Andrew G. West. \"Wikipedia and Medicine: Quantifying Readership, Editors, and the Significance of Natural Language.\" \"Journal of Medical Internet Research\" 17, no. 3 (2015): e62. https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.4069.\nIn order of appearance, the elements of a bibliography entry are:\nHistory.\nWhat now is known as \"The Chicago Manual of Style\" was first published in 1906 under the title \"Manual of Style: Being a compilation of the typographical rules in force at the University of Chicago Press, to which are appended specimens of type in use\". From its first 203-page edition, the \"CMOS\" evolved into a comprehensive reference style guide. It was one of the first editorial style guides published in the United States, and it is largely responsible for research methodology standardization, notably citation style.\nThe most significant revision to the manual was made for the 12th edition, published in 1969. Its first printing of 20,000 copies sold out before it was printed. In 1982, with the publication of the 13th edition, it was officially retitled \"The Chicago Manual of Style\", adopting the informal name already in widespread use.\nMore recently, the publishers have released a new edition about every seven to ten years. The 15th edition (2003) was revised to reflect the emergence of computer technology and the internet in publishing, offering guidance for citing electronic works. Other changes include a chapter on American English grammar and use, and a revised treatment of mathematical copy.\nIn August 2010, the 16th edition was published simultaneously in the hardcover and online editions for the first time in the manual's history. In a departure from the earlier red-orange cover, the 16th edition features a robin's-egg blue dust jacket (a nod to older editions with blue jackets, such as the 11th and 12th). It also expanded recommendations for producing electronic publications, including web-based content and e-books. An updated appendix on production and digital technology demystified the process of electronic workflow and offered a primer on the use of XML markup. It also includes a revised glossary, including a host of terms associated with electronic and print publishing. The \"Chicago\" system of documentation is streamlined to achieve greater consistency between the author-date and notes-bibliography systems of citation, making both systems easier to use. In addition, updated and expanded examples address the many questions that arise when documenting online and digital sources, from the use of DOIs to citing social networking sites. Figures and tables are updated throughout the book, including a return to manual's popular hyphenation table and new, selective listings of Unicode numbers for special characters.\nIn 2013, an adapted Spanish version was published by the University of Deusto in Bilbao, Spain.\nIn April 2016, the publisher released \"The Chicago Guide to Grammar, Usage, and Punctuation\", Bryan A. Garner's expansion of his \"Chicago Manual of Style\" chapter on the topic, and coinciding with the release of the new edition of \"Garner's Modern American Usage\".\nThe 17th edition was published in September 2017. It offers new and expanded style guidelines in response to advancing technology and social change. It also includes new and revised content reflecting the latest publishing practices and electronic workflows and self-publishing. Citation recommendations, the glossary of problematic words and phrases, and the bibliography have all been updated and expanded. In the 17th edition, email lost its hyphen, internet became lowercase, the singular \"they\" and \"their\" are now acceptable in certain circumstances, a major new section on syntax has been added, and the long-standing recommendation to use \"ibid\" has changed due to electronic publishing.\nThe 18th edition, published in September 2024, was the first to recommend omitting publication locations from citations. It added citation styles for A.I. generated text and images, increased the scope of usage of singular and non-binary \"they,\" and abandoned its efforts (since 1969) of writing \"Roman\" in \"Roman numerals\" in lowercase. It removed the chapter on mathematics in type (citing low usage) but increased its coverage of citations of Indigenous languages (now with capital \"I\") and of Korean.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75878", "revid": "300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75878", "title": "'s Hertogenbosch", "text": ""}
{"id": "75879", "revid": "86", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75879", "title": "Chicago Manual of Style", "text": ""}
{"id": "75880", "revid": "1216703034", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75880", "title": "430 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 430 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Crassus and Iullus (or, less frequently, year 324 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 430 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75881", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75881", "title": "433 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 433 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Tribunate of Vibulanus, Fidenas and Flaccinator (or, less frequently, year 321 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 433 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nArt.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75882", "revid": "4373810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75882", "title": "434 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 434 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Second year of the Consulship of Iullus and Tricostus or the Year of the Consulship of Capitolinus and Praetextatus and the Year of the Tribunate of Cossus, Praetextatus and Capitolinus (or, less frequently, year 320 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 434 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nMathematics.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75883", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75883", "title": "Treaty of Munster", "text": ""}
{"id": "75885", "revid": "43331825", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75885", "title": "Content management system", "text": "Software for managing digital content\nA content management system (CMS) is computer software used to manage the creation and modification of digital content (content management).\nIt is typically used for enterprise content management (ECM) and web content management (WCM). ECM typically supports multiple users in a collaborative environment, by integrating document management, digital asset management, and record retention. Alternatively, WCM is the collaborative authoring for websites and may include text and embed graphics, photos, video, audio, maps, and program code that display content and interact with the user. ECM typically includes a WCM function.\nStructure.\nA CMS typically has two major components: a content management application (CMA), as the front-end user interface that allows a user, even with limited expertise, to add, modify, and remove content from a website without the intervention of a webmaster; and a content delivery application (CDA), that compiles the content and updates the website.\nInstallation type.\nThere are two types of CMS installation: on-premises and cloud-based. On-premises installation means that the CMS software can be installed on the server. Notable CMSs which can be installed on-premises are Drupal, Grav, Joomla, ModX, Wordpress.org and others. The cloud-based CMS is hosted on the vendor environment. Examples of notable cloud-based CMSs are Adobe Experience Manager, Contentful, Ghost, Optimizely, SquareSpace, Webflow, WIX, Framer, Site.pro and Wordpress.com.\nCommon features.\nThe core CMS features are: indexing, search and retrieval, format management, revision control, and management. Features may vary depending on the system application but will typically include:\nPopular additional features may include:\nOther types of content management systems.\nDigital asset management systems are another type of CMS. They manage content with clearly defined author or ownership, such as documents, movies, pictures, phone numbers, and scientific data. Companies also use CMSs to store, control, revise, and publish documentation. There are also component content management systems (CCMS), which are CMSs that manage content at a modular level rather than as pages or articles. CCMSs are often used in technical communication, where many publications reuse the same content. Headless CMS, which separates content from its delivery layer, offers greater flexibility in content distribution across various platforms.\nWidely used CMSs.\nBased on a survey, the most widely used content management system is WordPress, used by 43.6% of the top 10 million websites as of October 2021. Other commonly used content management systems include Squarespace, Joomla, Shopify, and Wix.\nCross-reference.\nStructure.\nIn a document, especially those authored in a content management system,\na cross-reference has two major aspects:\nThe visible form contains text, graphics, and other indications that:\nThe technical mechanism that resides within the system:\nEnhancing usability.\nIf the cross-reference mechanism is well designed, the reader will be able to follow each cross-reference to the referenced content whether the content is presented in print or electronically.\nAn author working in a content management system is responsible for identifying subjects of interest that cross documents, and creating appropriate systems of cross-references to support readers who seek to understand those subjects. For an individual cross-reference, an author should ensure that location and content of the target of the cross-reference are clearly identified, and the reader can easily determine how to follow the cross-reference in each medium in which publication is supported.\nContent strategy practitioners (known as content strategists) specialize in planning content to meet business needs, taking into account the processes for creating and maintaining the content, and the systems that support the content.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75887", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75887", "title": "Webmail", "text": "Email service that can be accessed using a web browser\nWebmail (or web-based email) is an email service that can be accessed using a standard web browser. It contrasts with email service accessible through a specialised email client software. Additionally, many internet service providers (ISP) provide webmail as part of their internet service package. Similarly, some web hosting providers also provide webmail as a part of their hosting package.\nAs with any web application, webmail's main advantage over the use of a desktop email client is the ability to send and receive email anywhere from a web browser.\nHistory.\nEarly implementations.\nThe first Web Mail implementation was developed at CERN in 1993 by Phillip Hallam-Baker as a test of the HTTP protocol stack, but was not developed further. In the next two years, however, several people produced working webmail applications.\nIn Europe, there were three implementations, S\u00f8ren Vejrum's \"WWW Mail\", Luca Manunza's \"WebMail\", and Remy Wetzels' \"WebMail\". S\u00f8ren Vejrum's \"WWW Mail\" was written when he was studying and working at the Copenhagen Business School in Denmark, and was released on February 28, 1995. Luca Manunza's \"WebMail\" was written while he was working at CRS4 in Sardinia, from an idea of Gianluigi Zanetti, with the first source release on March 30, 1995. Remy Wetzels' \"WebMail\" was written while he was studying at the Eindhoven University of Technology in the Netherlands for the DSE and was released early January 1995.\nIn the United States, Matt Mankins wrote \"Webex\", and Bill Fitler, while at , began working on an implementation which he demonstrated publicly at Lotusphere on January 24, 1995. Matt Mankins, under the supervision of Dr. Burt Rosenberg at the University of Miami, released his \"Webex\" application source code in a post to comp.mail.misc on August 8, 1995, although it had been in use as the primary email application at the School of Architecture where Mankins worked for some months prior.\nBill Fitler's webmail implementation was further developed as a commercial product, which Lotus announced and released in the fall of 1995 as \"cc:Mail for the World Wide Web 1.0\"; thereby providing an alternative means of accessing a cc:Mail message store (the usual means being a cc:Mail desktop application that operated either via dialup or within the confines of a local area network).\nEarly commercialization of webmail was also achieved when \"Webex\" began to be sold by Mankins' company, DotShop, Inc., at the end of 1995. Within DotShop, \"Webex\" changed its name to \"EMUmail\"; which would be sold to companies like UPS and Rackspace until its sale to Accurev in 2001. EMUmail was one of the first applications to feature a free version that included embedded advertising, as well as a licensed version that did not.\nHotmail and Four11's RocketMail both launched in 1996 as free services and immediately became very popular.\nWidespread deployment.\nAs the 1990s progressed, and into the 2000s, it became more common for the general public to have access to webmail because:\nIn some cases, webmail application software is developed in-house by the organizations running and managing the application, and in some cases it is obtained from software companies that develop and sell such applications, usually as part of an integrated mail server package (an early example being Netscape Messaging Server). The market for webmail application software has continued into the 2010s.\nRendering and compatibility.\nEmail users may find the use of both a webmail client and a desktop client using the POP3 protocol presents some difficulties. For example, email messages that are downloaded by the desktop client and are removed from the server will no longer be available on the webmail client. The user is limited to previewing messages using the web client before they are downloaded by the desktop email client. However, one may choose to leave the emails on the server, in which case this problem does not occur. The use of both a webmail client and a desktop client using the IMAP4 protocol allows the contents of the mailbox to be consistently displayed in both the webmail and desktop clients and any action the user performs on messages in one interface will be reflected when the email is accessed via the other interface. There are significant differences in rendering capabilities for many popular webmail services such as Gmail, Outlook.com and Yahoo! Mail. Due to the varying treatment of HTML tags, such as &lt;style&gt; and &lt;head&gt;, as well as CSS rendering inconsistencies, email marketing companies rely on older web development techniques to send cross-platform mail. This usually means a greater reliance on tables and inline stylesheets.\nMicrosoft Windows applications by default create email messages via MAPI. Several vendors produce tools to provide a MAPI interface to webmail.\nPrivacy concerns.\nAlthough emails stored unencrypted on any service provider's servers can be read by that service provider, specific concerns have been raised regarding webmail services that automatically analyze the contents of users' emails for the purpose of targeted advertising. At least two such services, Gmail and Yahoo! Mail, give users the option to opt out of targeted advertising.\nWebmail that is accessed over unsecured HTTP may be readable by a third party who has access to the data transmission, such as over an unsecured Wi-Fi connection. This may be avoided by connecting to the webmail service via HTTPS, which encrypts the connection. Gmail has supported HTTPS since launch and in 2014 began requiring it for all webmail connections. Yahoo! Mail added the option to connect over HTTPS in 2013 and made HTTPS required in 2014.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "75890", "revid": "49214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75890", "title": "Motion Picture Association film rating system", "text": "American film rating system\nThe Motion Picture Association film rating system is used in the United States and its territories to rate a motion picture's suitability for certain audiences based on its content. The system and the ratings applied to individual motion pictures are the responsibility of the Motion Picture Association (MPA), previously known as the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) from 1945 to 2019. The MPA rating system is a voluntary scheme that is not enforced by law; films can be exhibited without a rating, although most theaters refuse to exhibit non-rated or NC-17 rated films. Non-members of the MPA may also submit films for rating. Other media, such as television programs, music and video games, are rated by other entities such as the TV Parental Guidelines, the RIAA and the ESRB, respectively.\nIn effect as of November 1968, following the Hays Code of the classical Hollywood cinema era, the MPA rating system is one of various motion picture rating systems that are used to help parents decide what films are appropriate for their children. It is administered by the Classification &amp; Ratings Administration (CARA), an independent division of the MPA.\nRatings.\nMPA film ratings.\nThe MPA film ratings are as follows:\nIn 2013, the MPA ratings were visually redesigned, with the rating displayed on a left panel and the name of the rating shown above it. A larger panel on the right provides a more detailed description of the film's content and an explanation of the rating level is placed on a horizontal bar at the bottom of the rating.\nContent descriptors.\nFilm ratings often have accompanying brief descriptions of the specifics behind the film's content and why it received a certain rating. They are displayed in trailers, posters, and on the backside of home video releases. Film rating content descriptors are used for films rated from PG to NC-17; they are not used for G-rated films, because the content in them is suitable for all audiences, even if it contains mildly-objectionable content.\nOther labels.\nIf a film has not been submitted for a rating or is an uncut version of a film that was submitted, the labels Not Rated (NR) or Unrated (UR) are often used. Uncut/extended versions of films that are labeled \"Unrated\" also contain warnings saying that the uncut version of the film contains content that differs from the theatrical release and might not be suitable for minors.\nIf a film has not yet been assigned a final rating, the label This Film Is Not Yet Rated is used in trailers and television commercials.\nRegulation of promotional materials and releases.\nThe MPA also rates film trailers, print advertising, posters, and other media used to promote a film.\nTheatrical trailers.\nRating cards appear at the head of trailers in the United States which indicate how closely the trailer adheres to the MPA's (and prior to November 2019, the MPAA's) standards.\nReleases.\nThe MPA also creates blue feature tags for theatrical and home media use. Theatrical releases show the blue tag after the film, with home media releases showing it prior to the film. They feature the rating block and any content descriptors as assigned by the Classification and Rating Administration, the MPA logo, and links to MPA websites along the bottom.\nHistory.\nReplacement of the Hays Code.\nJack Valenti, who had become president of the Motion Picture Association of America in May 1966, deemed the Motion Picture Production Code, which had been in place since 1930 and rigorously enforced since July 1, 1934, out of date and bearing \"the odious smell of censorship\". Filmmakers were pushing at the boundaries of the code with some even going as far as filing lawsuits against the \"Hays Code\" by invoking the First Amendment. Valenti cited examples such as \"Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?\", which used prohibited language including \"hump the hostess\", and \"Blowup\", which was denied Code approval due to nudity, resulting in Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, then a member studio of the MPAA, releasing it through a subsidiary. Valenti revised the Code to include the \"SMA\" (Suggested for Mature Audiences) advisory as a stopgap measure. To accommodate \"the irresistible force of creators determined to make 'their films'\", and to avoid \"the possible intrusion of government into the movie arena\", he developed a set of advisory ratings which could be applied after a film was completed.\nOn November 1, 1968, the voluntary MPAA film rating system took effect, with three organizations serving as its monitoring and guiding groups: the MPAA, the National Association of Theatre Owners (NATO), and the International Film Importers &amp; Distributors of America (IFIDA). Only films that premiered in the United States after that date were affected by this. Walter Reade was the only one of 75 top U.S. exhibitors who refused to use the ratings. Warner Bros.-Seven Arts' \"The Girl on a Motorcycle\" was the first film to receive the X rating, and was distributed by their Claridge Pictures subsidiary. Two other films were rated X by the time the MPAA published their first weekly bulletin listing ratings: Paramount's \"Sin With a Stranger\" and Universal's \"Birds in Peru\". Both films were subsequently released by subsidiaries.\nThe ratings used from 1968 to 1970 were:\nThis content classification system originally was to have three ratings, with the intention of allowing parents to take their children to any film they chose. However, the National Association of Theatre Owners urged the creation of an adults-only category, fearful of possible legal problems in local jurisdictions. The \"X\" rating was not an MPAA trademark and would not receive the MPAA seal; any producer not submitting a film for MPAA rating could self-apply the \"X\" rating (or any other symbol or description that was not an MPAA trademark).\nFrom M to GP to PG.\nIn 1970, the ages for \"R\" and \"X\" were raised from 16 to 17. Also, due to confusion over whether \"M\"-rated films were suitable for children, \"M\" was renamed to \"GP\" (for General audiences, Parental guidance suggested), and in 1971, the MPAA added the content advisory \"Some material not generally suitable for pre-teenagers\". On February 11, 1972, \"GP\" was revised to \"PG\".\nThe ratings used from 1970 to 1972 were:\nThe ratings used from 1972 to 1984 were:\nAddition of the PG-13 rating.\nIn the 1980s, complaints about violence and gore in films such as \"Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom\" and \"Gremlins\", both of which received PG ratings, refocused attention on films seen by younger children. According to author Filipa Antunes, this revealed the conundrum of a film that \"could not be recommended for all children but could also not be repudiated for all children uniformly,\" leading to speculation that the rating system's PG classification \"no longer matched a notion of childhood most parents in America could agree on.\" Steven Spielberg, director of \"Temple of Doom\" and executive producer of \"Gremlins\", suggested a new intermediate rating between \"PG\" and \"R\". The \"PG-13\" rating was introduced on July 1, 1984, with the advisory \"Parents Are Strongly Cautioned to Give Special Guidance for Attendance of Children Under 13 \u2013 Some Material May Be Inappropriate for Young Children\". The first film to be released with this rating was the John Milius war film \"Red Dawn\". In 1985, the wording was simplified to \"Parents Strongly Cautioned \u2013 Some Material May Be Inappropriate for Children Under 13\". Around the same time, the MPAA won a trademark infringement lawsuit against the producers and distributors of \"I Spit on Your Grave\" over a fraudulent application of its R rating to the uncut version of the film, and forced its member studios and several other home video distributors to put MPAA ratings on the packaging of MPAA-rated films via a settlement that would come into effect by fall that year.\nThe ratings used from 1984 to 1990 were:\nTennessee law.\nIn 1989, Tennessee state law set the minimum age to view a theatrically exhibited R-rated film without adult accompaniment at 18, instead of 17, and categorized the admission of minors to X-rated films as a misdemeanor. The statute remained in force until 2013, when it was ruled to be in violation of the First Amendment. The law was amended in 2013 as to prohibit persons under the age of 18 only if the film was considered \"harmful to minors\".\nX replaced by NC-17.\nIn the rating system's early years, \"X\"-rated films such as \"Midnight Cowboy\" (1969) and \"A Clockwork Orange\" (1971) were understood to be unsuitable for children, but non-pornographic and intended for the general public. However, pornographic films often self-applied the non-trademarked \"X\" rating, and it soon became synonymous with pornography in American culture. In late 1989 and early 1990, respectively, \"\" and \"The Cook, the Thief, His Wife &amp; Her Lover\", two critically acclaimed art films featuring strong adult content, were released. Neither film was approved for an MPAA rating, limiting their commercial distribution and prompting criticism of the rating system's lack of a designation for such films.\nIn September 1990, the MPAA introduced the rating NC-17 (\"No Children Under 17 Admitted\"). \"Henry &amp; June\", previously to be assigned an X rating, was the first film to receive the NC-17 rating instead. Although films with an NC-17 rating had more mainstream distribution opportunities than X-rated films, many theaters refused to screen them, most entertainment media did not accept advertising for them, and many large video outlets refused to stock them. Additionally, the MPAA started to include explanations, or \"descriptors\", of why each film received an \"R\" rating, allowing parents to know what type of content the film contained. For example, the descriptor for \"The Girl Who Played with Fire\" read \"Rated [R] for brutal violence including a rape, some strong sexual content, nudity and language.\"\nThe ratings used from 1990 to 1996 were:\nIn 1996, the minimum age for NC-17-rated films was raised to 18, by rewording it to \"No One 17 and Under Admitted\". The ratings used since 1996 are:\nBy the early 2000s, the MPAA also began applying rating explanations for PG, PG-13, and NC-17-rated films.\nRating components.\nViolence.\nDepictions of violence are permitted under all ratings but must be moderated for the lower ones. Violence must be kept to a minimum in G-rated films and must not be intense in PG-rated films. Depictions of intense violence are permitted under the PG-13 rating, but violence that is both realistic and extreme or persistent will generally require at least an R rating.\nLanguage.\nSnippets of language that go \"beyond polite conversation\" are permitted in G-rated films, but no stronger words are present. Profanity may be present in PG rated films, and use of one of the harsher \"sexually-derived words\" as an expletive will initially incur at least a PG-13 rating. More than one occurrence will usually incur an R rating as will the usage of such an expletive in a sexual context. Known as the \"automatic language rule\", the rule has been applied differently depending on the subject matter of the film. For example, \"All the President's Men\" (1976) received a PG rating after appealing it from an R, despite multiple instances of strong language, likely because of its historic subject matter. The automatic language rule is arguably the rule that can most often be successfully appealed. The ratings board may award a PG-13 rating passed by a two-thirds majority if they believe the language is justified by the context or by the manner in which the words are used.\nIt is sometimes claimed that films rated PG-13 are only able to use the expletive \"fuck\" once to avoid an R rating for language. There are several exceptional cases in which PG-13-rated films contain multiple occurrences of the word \"fuck\": \"Adventures in Babysitting,\" where the word is used twice in the same scene; \"Antwone Fisher\" which has three uses; \"\", which has four uses (six in the \"Taylor's Version\" cut); \"The Hip Hop Project\", which has seventeen uses; and \"Gunner Palace\", a documentary of soldiers in the Iraq War, which has 42 uses of the word with two used sexually. Both \"Bully\", a 2011 documentary about bullying, and \"Philomena\"\u2014which has two instances of the word\u2014released in 2013, were originally given R ratings on grounds of the language but the ratings were dropped to PG-13 after successful appeals (albeit \"Bully\" needed some cuts). \"The King's Speech\", however, was given an R rating for one scene using the word \"fuck\" several times in a speech therapy context; the MPAA refused to re-certify the film on appeal, despite the British Board of Film Classification reducing the British rating from a 15 rating to a 12A on the grounds that the uses of the expletive were not directed at anyone.\nThis was satirized in the 2005 film \"Be Cool\", in which the film producer Chili Palmer (John Travolta) says: \"Do you know that unless you're willing to use the R rating, you can only say the 'F' word once? You know what I say? Fuck that. I'm done.\" Often film producers will use the word for a scene of gravitas or humor and then bleep out any further instances with sound effects.\nSome forms of media are cut post-release so as to obtain a PG-13 rating for home media release or to feature on an Internet streaming service that will not carry films rated higher than PG-13. In 2020, a recording of \"Hamilton\" was released on Disney+ after cuts by Lin-Manuel Miranda to remove two of the three instances of \"fuck\" in the musical to qualify it as PG-13 under MPAA guidelines.\nA study of popular American teen-oriented films rated PG and PG-13 from 1980 to 2006 found that in those films, teenaged characters use more and stronger profanity than adult ones in the same movies. However, the study found that the overall amount of such language had declined somewhat since the 1980s.\nSubstances.\nDrug use content is restricted to PG-13 and above. An example of an otherwise PG film being assigned a PG-13 rating for a drug reference (momentary, along with brief language) is \"Whale Rider\". The film contained only mild profanity, but was rated PG-13 because of a scene where drug paraphernalia were briefly visible. Critic Roger Ebert criticized the MPAA for the rating and called it \"a wild overreaction\".\nIn May 2007, the MPAA announced that depictions of cigarette smoking would be considered in a film's rating. Anti-smoking advocates stated that the child-friendly PG rating was inappropriate for the 2011 Nickelodeon-animated film \"Rango\", which included over 60 depictions of characters smoking.\nNudity.\nNudity is restricted to PG and above, and anything that constitutes more than brief nudity will require at least a PG-13 rating. Nudity that is sexually oriented will generally require an R rating. Since 2006, films have been flagged by the MPAA for carrying nudity. In 2010, the MPAA flagged three films specifically for \"male nudity\", precipitated by parental pressure in response to \"Br\u00fcno\". In 2018, MPAA Ratings Chair Joan Graves clarified the MPA's position by stating that \"we don't usually define [nudity] as male or female ... usually, we just mention partial nudity, [or] graphic nudity.\"\nSex.\nThe MPAA does not have any explicit criteria for sexual content other than excluding sex scenes from G-rated films.\nEffects of ratings.\n\"The Exorcist\".\nPrior to the release of \"The Exorcist\" at the end of 1973, CARA president Aaron Stern took the unusual step of calling director William Friedkin to tell him that since it was an \"important film\", it would be rated R and could be released without any cuts. The film drew huge crowds upon its release, many of whom were horrified by the film; some vomited and/or fainted, and a psychiatric journal would later document four cases of \"cinematic neurosis\" induced by the film.\nAmong those patrons were many children, not always accompanied by adults. This left many commentators incredulous that the ratings board would have found that a film with disturbing scenes such as a possessed 12-year-old girl masturbating with a crucifix was acceptable for children to see. Roy Meacham, a Washington, D.C., critic who had praised the film while admonishing parents not to take their children to it, recalled those children he did see leaving showings \"drained and drawn afterward; their eyes had a look I had never seen before.\" Authorities in Washington invoked a municipal ordinance that would have prevented \"any\" minors from seeing the film, threatening theater owners with arrest if they did.\nMeacham insinuated that the board had succumbed to pressure from Warner Brothers, which had spent $10 million, more than twice its original budget, making the film; an X rating would have seriously limited \"The Exorcist\"'s commercial prospects. \"New Yorker\" critic Pauline Kael echoed his criticism. \"If \"The Exorcist\" had cost under a million or been made abroad,\" she wrote, \"it would almost certainly be an X film. But when a movie is as expensive as this one, the [board] doesn't dare give it an X.\"\nIn 1974, Richard Heffner took over as president of the board. During his interview process, he had asked to screen recent films that had sparked ratings controversies, including \"The Exorcist\". \"How could anything be worse than this?\" he recalled thinking later. \"And it got an R?\" After he took over as head, he would spearhead efforts to be more aggressive with the X rating, especially over violence in films. In 1976, he got the board to give the Japanese martial arts film \"The Street Fighter\" an X rating for its graphic violence, the first time a film had earned that rating purely for violence.\nCommercial viability of the NC-17 rating.\nThe NC-17 rating has been described as a \"kiss of death\" for any film that receives it. Like the X rating it replaced, NC-17 limits a film's prospects of being marketed, screened in theaters and sold in major video outlets. In 1995, MGM/UA released the big-budget film \"Showgirls\"; it became the most widely distributed film with an NC-17 rating (showing in 1,388 cinemas simultaneously), but it was a box office failure that grossed only 45% of its $45 million budget. Some modest successes can be found among NC-17 theatrical releases, however; Fox Searchlight Pictures released the original NC-17-rated American edition of the European film \"The Dreamers\" (2003) in theaters in the United States, and later released both the original NC-17 and the cut R-rated version on DVD. A Fox Searchlight spokesman said the NC-17 rating did not give them much trouble in releasing this film (they had no problem booking it, and only the Salt Lake City newspaper \"Deseret News\" refused to take the film's ad), and Fox Searchlight was satisfied with this film's United States box office result. Another notable exception is \"Bad Education\" (2004), an NC-17 foreign-language film that grossed $5.2 million in the United States theatrically (a moderate success for a foreign-language film).\nIn 2000, the Directors Guild of America called the NC-17 rating an \"abject failure\", for causing filmmakers to re-edit films to receive an R rating, rather than accept an NC-17 rating. They argued that this was \"not only compromising filmmakers' visions, but also greatly increasing the likelihood that adult-oriented movies are seen by the very groups for which they are not intended.\" As of March 2007, according to \"Variety\", MPAA chairman Dan Glickman had been made aware of the attempts to introduce a new rating, or find ways to reduce the stigma of the NC-17 rating. Film studios have pressured the MPAA to retire the NC-17 rating, because of its likely impact on their film's box office revenue.\nIn 2010, the MPAA controversially decided to give the film \"Blue Valentine\" an NC-17 rating. The Weinstein Company challenged this decision, and the MPAA ended up awarding the same cut an R rating on appeal. Actor Ryan Gosling, who stars in the film, noted that NC-17 films are not allowed wide advertisement and that, given the refusal of major cinema chains like AMC and Regal to show NC-17 rated movies, many such films will never be accessible to people who live in markets that do not have art house theatres.\nLegal scholar Julie Hilden wrote that the MPAA has a \"masterpiece exception\" that it has made for films that would ordinarily earn an NC-17 rating, if not for the broader artistic masterpiece that requires the violence depicted as a part of its message. She cites \"Saving Private Ryan\", with its bloody depiction of the D-Day landings, as an example. This exception is troubling, Hilden argues, because it ignores context and perspective in evaluating other films and favors conventional films over edgier films that contribute newer and more interesting points to public discourse about violence.\nIn 2022, the Netflix film \"Blonde\" received an NC-17 rating, becoming the first film produced for a streaming service to earn the rating. As a result of primarily being released through a streaming service (outside of a limited theatrical release to qualify for awards), the film did not receive the same amount of commercial stigma that a film produced for a regular theatrical release would have otherwise received. In a piece for \"GQ\", Keith Phipps argues that as a result, \"Blonde\" could usher in a new era of films and filmmakers that will \"push beyond the restrictions of the R rating\", writing, \"In theory, the NC-17 rating could thrive on services like Netflix, Hulu, and HBO Max and \"Blonde\" could be a sign of things to come, possibly serving as a cue for other filmmakers to push beyond the restrictions of the R rating.\"\nIssuance of \"R Cards\".\nStarting in 2004, GKC Theatres (since absorbed into AMC Theatres) introduced \"R Cards\", which parents could obtain for their children under 17 to see R-rated films without adult accompaniment. The cards generated much controversy; MPAA president Jack Valenti said in a news article: \"I think it distorts and ruptures the intent of this voluntary film ratings system. All R-rated films are not alike.\" John Fithian, the president of the National Association of Theatre Owners, also said that the cards can be harmful. He noted in a news article for the \"Christian Science Monitor\" that the R rating is \"broad enough to include relatively family-friendly fare such as \"Billy Elliot\" and \"Erin Brockovich\" (which were both rated R for language) along with films that push the extremes of violence, including \"Pulp Fiction\" and \"Kill Bill\"\".\nCriticisms.\nEmphasis on sex and language versus violence.\nThe film rating system has had a number of high-profile critics. Film critic Roger Ebert called for replacing the NC-17 rating with separate ratings for pornographic and non-pornographic adult film. Ebert argued that the system places too much emphasis on sex, while allowing the portrayal of massive amounts of gruesome violence. The uneven emphasis on sex versus violence is echoed by other critics, including David Ansen, as well as many filmmakers. Moreover, Ebert argued that the rating system is geared toward looking at trivial aspects of the film (such as the number of times a profane word is used) rather than at the general theme of the film (for example, if the film realistically depicts the consequences of sex and violence). He called for an A (adults only) rating, to indicate films high in violence or mature content that should not be marketed to teenagers, but do not have NC-17 levels of sex. He also called for the NC-17 rating to be removed and to have the X rating revived. He felt that everyone understood what X-rated means, while fewer people understood what NC-17 meant.\nMPAA chairman Dan Glickman has disputed these claims, stating that far more films are initially rated NC-17 for violence than for sex, but that these are later edited by studios to receive an R rating.\nDespite this, an internal critic of the early workings of the ratings system is film critic and writer Stephen Farber, who was a CARA intern for six months during 1969 and 1970. In \"The Movie Ratings Game\", he documents a prejudice against sex in relation to violence. The 2006 documentary \"This Film Is Not Yet Rated\" also points out that four times as many films received an NC-17 rating for sex as they did for violence according to the MPAA's own website, further mentioning a bias against homosexual content compared to heterosexual content, particularly with regards to sex scenes. Filmmaker Darren Stein further insists that his tame teen comedy \"G.B.F.\", which features multiple same-sex kisses but no intercourse, strong language, violence, or nudity, was \"rated R for being gay.\"\nThe 2011 documentary \"Bully\" received an R rating for the profanity contained within the film, which prevented most of the intended audience, middle and high schoolers, from seeing the film. The film's director, Lee Hirsch, has refused to recut the film, stating, \"I feel a responsibility as a filmmaker, as the person entrusted to tell (these kids') stories, to not water them down.\" A petition collected more than 200,000 signatures to change the film's rating and a version with less profanity was finally given a PG-13 rating. The same, however, could not be said about the 1995 teen drama \"Kids\", which director Larry Clark wanted rated R so parents could take their kids to it for educational purposes, but the MPAA rated it NC-17 due to its content of teen sex and turned down Clark's appeal. The film was then released unrated by Miramax (under Shining Excalibur Films because Miramax, formerly owned by Disney, hesitated to release it as an NC-17 film).\nInconsistent standards for independent studios.\nMany critics of the MPA rating system, especially independent distributors, have charged that major studios' releases often receive more lenient treatment than independent films.\nThe independent film \"Saints and Soldiers\", which contains no nudity, almost no sex (although there is a scene in which a German soldier is about to rape a French woman), very little profanity, and a minimum of violence, was said to have been rated R for a single clip where a main character is shot and killed, and required modification of just that one scene to receive a PG-13 rating. Eric Watson, producer of the independently distributed \"Requiem for a Dream\" (initially rated NC-17 before having its rating surrendered and released unrated) complained that the studios are paying the budget of the MPAA, which gives the studios leverage over the MPAA's decisions.\nThe comedy \"Scary Movie\", released by Dimension Films, at the time a division of The Walt Disney Company, contained \"strong crude sexual humor, language, drug use and violence,\" including images of ejaculation, fellatio and an erect penis, but was rated R, to the surprise of many reviewers and audiences; by comparison, the comparatively tame porn spoof \"Orgazmo\", an independent release by \"South Park\" creators Matt Stone and Trey Parker and distributed by October Films (since absorbed into Focus Features), contained \"explicit sexual content and dialogue\" and received an NC-17 (the only on-screen penis seen in the film is a dildo). Parker and Stone did not have the time and money to edit the film, so it retained its NC-17 rating, the duo later stated that the MPAA refused to note specific scenes to remove and theorized that the organization cared less because it was an independent release which would bring it significantly less money. In contrast, Parker and Stone's following feature film, \"\", was distributed by a major studio (Paramount Pictures) and, after multiple submissions and notes from the MPAA, received an R rating.\nInconsistent standards between G and PG.\nDisney's 1996 adaptation of \"The Hunchback of Notre Dame\" has been criticized for its depiction of lust, antiziganism, and genocide, despite being rated G. Twenty-five years after its release, one of the screenwriters for the film, Tab Murphy, talked about its rating in an interview with \"The New York Times\", saying, \"That's the most R-rated G you will ever see in your life.\" Pixar's 2011 film \"Cars 2\" has been criticized similarly for featuring on-screen gun violence and a torture scene despite being rated G. In contrast, critics of the system accuse the ratings board of giving PG ratings to family-friendly films such as \"Frozen\" and \"Finding Dory\" for no reason.\nCall for publicizing the standards.\nMany critics of the system, both conservative and liberal, would like to see the MPAA ratings unveiled and the standards made public. The MPAA has consistently cited nationwide scientific polls (conducted each year by the Opinion Research Corporation of Princeton, New Jersey), which show that parents find the ratings useful. Critics such as Matt Stone in Kirby Dick's documentary \"This Film Is Not Yet Rated\" respond this proves only that parents find the ratings more useful than nothing at all. In the film, it is also discussed how the MPAA will not reveal any information about how or why certain decisions are made, and that the association will not even reveal to the filmmaker the specific scenes that need to be cut in order to get an alternative rating.\nAccusation of \"ratings creep\".\nAlthough there has always been concern about the content of films, the MPAA has been accused of a \"ratings creep\", whereby the films that fell into specific ratings categories in 2010 contained more objectionable material than those that appeared in the same categories two decades earlier. A study put forward by the Harvard School of Public Health in 2004 concluded that there had been a significant increase in the level of profanity, sex and violence in films released between 1992 and 2003. Kimberly Thompson, director of the study, stated: \"The findings demonstrate that ratings creep has occurred over the last decade and that today's movies contain significantly more violence, sex, and profanity on average than movies of the same rating a decade ago.\"\nQuestions of relevance.\nIn 2010 \"Slashfilm\" managing editor David Chen wrote on the website: \"It's time for more people to condemn the MPAA and their outrageous antics. We're heading towards an age when we don't need a mommy-like organization to dictate what our delicate sensibilities can and can't be exposed to. I deeply hope that the MPAA's irrelevance is imminent.\"\n\"Chicago Tribune\" film critic Michael Phillips wrote in 2010 that the MPAA ratings board \"has become foolish and irrelevant, and its members do not have my interests at heart, or yours. They're too easy on violence yet bizarrely reactionary when it comes to nudity and language.\"\nTrademark infringement.\nIn 2005, the MPAA sent cease-and-desist letters to some writers of fan fiction regarding their usage of the film ratings -- many related websites still use alternate ratings systems intended to be parallel to that system. In 2025, the MPAA sent a cease-and-desist letter to Meta Platforms after it announced that Instagram content for teenagers would be \"\u2018guided by PG-13 ratings.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75891", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75891", "title": "Java API/Reflection", "text": ""}
{"id": "75894", "revid": "33328895", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75894", "title": "Henri IV of France", "text": ""}
{"id": "75898", "revid": "4052843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75898", "title": "The Monk (Doctor Who)", "text": ""}
{"id": "75899", "revid": "199747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75899", "title": "Huguenots", "text": "Historical religious group of French Protestants\nThe Huguenots ( , ; ) are a religious group of French Protestants who held to the Reformed (Calvinist) tradition of Protestantism. The term, which may be derived from the name of a Swiss political leader, the Genevan burgomaster Besan\u00e7on Hugues, was in common use by the mid-16th century. \"Huguenot\" was frequently used in reference to those of the Reformed Church of France from the time of the Protestant Reformation. By contrast, the Protestant populations of eastern France, in Alsace, Moselle, and Montb\u00e9liard, were mainly Lutherans.\nIn his \"Encyclopedia of Protestantism\", Hans Hillerbrand wrote that on the eve of the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre in 1572, the Huguenot community made up as much as 10% of the French population. By 1600, it declined to 7\u20138%, and was reduced further late in the century after the return of persecution under Louis XIV, who instituted the \"Dragonnades\" to forcibly convert Protestants, and then finally revoked all Protestant rights in his Edict of Fontainebleau of 1685. In 1686, the Protestant population sat at 1% of the population.\nThe Huguenots were concentrated in the southern and western parts of the Kingdom of France. As Huguenots gained influence and more openly displayed their faith, Catholic hostility grew. A series of religious conflicts followed, known as the French Wars of Religion, fought intermittently from 1562 to 1598. The Huguenots were led by Jeanne d'Albret; her son, the future Henry IV (who would later convert to Catholicism in order to become king); and the princes of Cond\u00e9. The wars ended with the Edict of Nantes of 1598, which granted the Huguenots substantial religious, political and military autonomy.\nHuguenot rebellions in the 1620s resulted in the abolition of their political and military privileges. They retained the religious provisions of the Edict of Nantes until the rule of Louis XIV, who gradually increased persecution of Protestantism until he issued the Edict of Fontainebleau (1685). This ended legal recognition of Protestantism in France and the Huguenots were forced to either convert to Catholicism (possibly as Nicodemites) or flee as refugees; they were subject to violent Dragonnades. Louis XIV claimed that the French Huguenot population was reduced from about 900,000 or 800,000 adherents to just 1,000 or 1,500. He exaggerated the decline, but the Dragonnades were devastating for the French Protestant community. The exodus of Huguenots from France created a brain drain, as many of them had occupied important places in society.\nThe remaining Huguenots faced continued persecution under Louis XV. By the time of his death in 1774, Calvinism had been all but eliminated from France. Persecution of Protestants officially ended with the Edict of Versailles, signed by Louis XVI in 1787. Two years later, with the Revolutionary Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen of 1789, Protestants gained equal rights as citizens.\nEtymology.\nA term used originally in derision, \"Huguenot\" has unclear origins. Various hypotheses have been promoted. The term may have been a combined reference to the Swiss politician Besan\u00e7on Hugues (died 1532) and the religiously conflicted nature of Swiss republicanism in his time. It used a derogatory pun on the name by way of the Dutch word (literally 'housemates'), referring to the connotations of a somewhat related word in German ('Confederate' in the sense of 'a citizen of one of the states of the Swiss Confederacy').\nGeneva was John Calvin's adopted home and the centre of the Calvinist movement. In Geneva, Hugues, though Catholic, was a leader of the \"Confederate Party\", so called because it favoured independence from the Duke of Savoy. It sought an alliance between the city-state of Geneva and the Swiss Confederation. The label \"Huguenot\" was purportedly first applied in France to those conspirators (all of them aristocratic members of the Reformed Church) who were involved in the Amboise plot of 1560: a foiled attempt to wrest power in France from the influential and zealously Catholic House of Guise. This action would have fostered relations with the Swiss.\nO. I. A. Roche promoted this idea among historians. He wrote in his book, \"The Days of the Upright, A History of the Huguenots\" (1965), that \"Huguenot\" is:\na combination of a Dutch and a German word. In the Dutch-speaking North of France, Bible students who gathered in each other's houses to study secretly were called (\"housemates\") while on the Swiss and German borders they were termed , or \"oath fellows\", that is, persons bound to each other by an oath. Gallicised into , often used deprecatingly, the word became, during two and a half centuries of terror and triumph, a badge of enduring honour and courage.\nSome disagree with such non-French linguistic origins. Janet Gray argues that for the word to have spread into common use in France, it must have originated there in French. The \"Hugues hypothesis\" argues that the name was derived by association with Hugues Capet, king of France, who reigned long before the Reformation. He was regarded by the Gallicians as a noble man who respected people's dignity and lives. Janet Gray and other supporters of the hypothesis suggest that the name would be roughly equivalent to 'little Hugos', or 'those who want Hugo'.\nPaul Ristelhuber, in his 1879 introduction to a new edition of the controversial and censored, but popular 1566 work \"Apologie pour H\u00e9rodote\", by Henri Estienne, mentions these theories and opinions, but tends to support a completely Catholic origin. As one legend holds, a gateway area in the streets of Tours was haunted by the ghosts of (a generic term for these spirits), \"because they were wont to assemble near the gate named after Hugon, a Count of Tours in ancient times, who had left a record of evil deeds and had become in popular fancy a sort of sinister and maleficent genius. This count may have been Hugh of Tours, who was disliked for his cowardice. Additionally, it is related, that, it was believed, (that of these spirits) instead of spending their time in Purgatory, came back to rattle doors and haunt and harm people at night. Protestants went out at nights to their lascivious conventicles, and so the priests and the people began to call them Huguenots in Tours and then elsewhere.\" The name, Huguenot, \"the people applied in hatred and derision to those who were elsewhere called Lutherans, and from Touraine it spread throughout France.\" The ('supposedly reformed') were said to gather at night at Tours, both for political purposes, and for prayer and singing psalms. Reguier de la Plancha (d. 1560) in his offered the following account as to the origin of the name, as cited by \"The Cape Monthly\":\nReguier de la Plancha accounts for it [the name] as follows: \"The name was given to those of the religion during the affair of Amboyse, and they were to retain it ever since. I'll say a word about it to settle the doubts of those who have strayed in seeking its origin. The superstition of our ancestors, to within twenty or thirty years thereabouts, was such that in almost all the towns in the kingdom they had a notion that certain spirits underwent their Purgatory in this world after death, and that they went about the town at night, striking and outraging many people whom they found in the streets. But the light of the Gospel has made them vanish, and teaches us that these spirits were street-strollers and ruffians. In Paris the spirit was called ; at Orl\u00e9ans, ; at Blois ; at Tours, ; and so on in other places. Now, it happens that those whom they called Lutherans were at that time so narrowly watched during the day that they were forced to wait till night to assemble, for the purpose of praying God, for preaching and receiving the Holy Sacrament; so that although they did not frighten nor hurt anybody, the priests, through mockery, made them the successors of those spirits which roam the night; and thus that name being quite common in the mouth of the populace, to designate the evangelical in the country of Tourraine and Amboyse, it became in vogue after that enterprise.\"\nSome have suggested the name was derived, with intended scorn, from (the 'monkeys' or 'apes of Jan Hus'). By 1911, there was still no consensus in the United States on this interpretation.\nSymbol.\nThe Huguenot cross is the distinctive emblem of the Huguenots (). It is now an official symbol of the (French Protestant church). Huguenot descendants sometimes display this symbol as a sign of (recognition) between them.\nDemographics.\nThe issue of demographic strength and geographical spread of the Reformed tradition in France has been covered in a variety of sources. Most of them agree that the Huguenot population reached as many as 10% of the total population, or roughly 2\u00a0million people, on the eve of the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre in 1572.\nLinks to nobility.\nThe new teaching of John Calvin attracted sizeable portions of the nobility and urban bourgeoisie. After John Calvin introduced the Reformation in France, the number of French Protestants steadily swelled to ten percent of the population, or roughly 1.8\u00a0million people, in the decade between 1560 and 1570. During the same period there were some 1,400 Reformed churches operating in France. Hans J. Hillerbrand, an expert on the subject, in his \"Encyclopedia of Protestantism: 4-volume Set\" claims the Huguenot community reached as much as 10% of the French population on the eve of the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre, declining to 7 to 8% by the end of the 16th century, and further after heavy persecution began once again with the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes by Louis XIV in 1685. Among the nobles, Calvinism peaked on the eve of the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre. Since then, it sharply decreased as the Huguenots were no longer tolerated by both the French royalty and the Catholic masses. By the end of the sixteenth century, Huguenots constituted 7\u20138% of the whole population, or 1.2\u00a0million people. By the time Louis XIV revoked the Edict of Nantes in 1685, Huguenots accounted for 800,000 to 1\u00a0million people.\nHuguenots controlled sizeable areas in southern and western France. In addition, many areas, especially in the central part of the country, were also contested between the French Reformed and Catholic nobles. Demographically, there were some areas in which the whole populations had been Reformed. These included villages in and around the Massif Central, as well as the area around Dordogne, which used to be almost entirely Reformed too. John Calvin was a Frenchman and himself largely responsible for the introduction and spread of the Reformed tradition in France. He wrote in French, but unlike the Protestant development in Germany, where Lutheran writings were widely distributed and could be read by the common man, it was not the case in France, where only nobles adopted the new faith and the folk remained Catholic. This is true for many areas in the west and south controlled by the Huguenot nobility. Although relatively large portions of the peasant population became Reformed there, the people, altogether, still remained majority Catholic.\nOverall, Huguenot presence was heavily concentrated in the western and southern portions of the French kingdom, as nobles there secured practise of the new faith. These included Languedoc-Roussillon, Gascony and even a strip of land that stretched into the Dauphin\u00e9. Huguenots lived on the Atlantic coast in La Rochelle, and also spread across provinces of Normandy and Poitou. In the south, towns like Castres, Montauban, Montpellier and N\u00eemes were Huguenot strongholds. In addition, a dense network of Protestant villages permeated the rural mountainous region of the Cevennes. Inhabited by Camisards, it continues to be the backbone of French Protestantism. Historians estimate that roughly 80% of all Huguenots lived in the western and southern areas of France.\nToday, there are some Reformed communities around the world that still retain their Huguenot identity. In France, Calvinists in the United Protestant Church of France and also some in the Protestant Reformed Church of Alsace and Lorraine consider themselves Huguenots. A rural Huguenot community in the Cevennes that rebelled in 1702 is still called \"Camisards\", especially in historical contexts. Huguenot exiles in the United Kingdom, the United States, South Africa, Australia, and a number of other countries still retain their identity.\nEmigration and diaspora.\nAs a final destination, most of the Huguenot \u00e9migr\u00e9s moved to Protestant states such as the Dutch Republic, England and Wales (prominently in Kent and London), Protestant-controlled Ireland, the Channel Islands, Scotland, Denmark, Sweden, Switzerland, the electorates of Brandenburg and the Palatinate in the Holy Roman Empire, and the Duchy of Prussia. Some fled as refugees to the Dutch Cape Colony, the Dutch East Indies, various Caribbean colonies, and several of the Dutch and English colonies in North America. A few families went to Orthodox Russia and Catholic Quebec.\nAfter centuries, most Huguenots assimilated into the various societies and cultures where they have settled. Remnant communities of Camisards in the C\u00e9vennes, most Reformed members of the United Protestant Church of France, French members of the largely German Protestant Reformed Church of Alsace and Lorraine, and the Huguenot diaspora in England and Australia, all still retain their beliefs and Huguenot designation.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe availability of the Bible in vernacular languages was important to the spread of the Protestant movement and development of the Reformed Church in France. The country had a long history of struggles with the papacy (see the Avignon Papacy, for example) by the time the Protestant Reformation finally arrived. Around 1294, a French version of the scriptures was prepared by the Roman Catholic priest, Guyard des Moulins. A two-volume illustrated folio paraphrase version based on his manuscript, by Jean de R\u00e9ly, was printed in Paris in 1487.\nThe first known translation of the Bible into one of France's regional languages, Arpitan or Franco-Proven\u00e7al, had been prepared by the 12th-century pre-Protestant reformer Peter Waldo (Pierre de Vaux). The Waldensians created fortified areas, as in Cabri\u00e8res, perhaps attacking an abbey. They were suppressed by Francis I in 1545 in the Massacre of M\u00e9rindol.\nOther predecessors of the Reformed church included the pro-reform and Gallican Roman Catholics, such as Jacques Lefevre (c. 1455\u20131536). The Gallicans briefly achieved independence for the French church, on the principle that the religion of France could not be controlled by the Bishop of Rome, a foreign power. During the Protestant Reformation, Lefevre, a professor at the University of Paris, published his French translation of the New Testament in 1523, followed by the whole Bible in the French language in 1530. William Farel was a student of Lefevre who went on to become a leader of the Swiss Reformation, establishing a Protestant republican government in Geneva. Jean Cauvin (John Calvin), another student at the University of Paris, also converted to Protestantism. Long after the sect was suppressed by Francis I, the remaining French Waldensians, then mostly in the Luberon region, sought to join Farel, Calvin and the Reformation, and Oliv\u00e9tan published a French Bible for them. The French Confession of 1559 shows a decidedly Calvinistic influence.\nAlthough usually Huguenots are lumped into one group, there were actually two types of Huguenots that emerged. Since the Huguenots had political and religious goals, it was commonplace to refer to the Calvinists as \"Huguenots of religion\" and those who opposed the monarchy as \"Huguenots of the state\", who were mostly nobles.\nReformation and growth.\nEarly in his reign, Francis I (r.\u20091515\u00a0\u2013\u00a01547) persecuted the old, pre-Protestant movement of Waldensians in southeastern France. Francis initially protected the Huguenot dissidents from Parlementary measures seeking to exterminate them. After the 1534 Affair of the Placards, however, he distanced himself from Huguenots and their protection.\nHuguenot numbers grew rapidly between 1555 and 1561, chiefly amongst nobles and city dwellers. During this time, their opponents first dubbed the Protestants \"Huguenots\"; but they called themselves , or \"Reformed\". They organised their first national synod in 1558 in Paris.\nBy 1562, the estimated number of Huguenots peaked at approximately two million, concentrated mainly in the western, southern, and some central parts of France, compared to approximately sixteen million Catholics during the same period. Persecution diminished the number of Huguenots who remained in France.\nWars of religion.\nAs the Huguenots gained influence and displayed their faith more openly, Roman Catholic hostility towards them grew, even though the French crown offered increasingly liberal political concessions and edicts of toleration.\nFollowing the accidental death of Henry II in 1559, his son succeeded as King Francis II along with his wife, the Queen Consort, also known as Mary, Queen of Scots. During the eighteen months of the reign of Francis II, Mary encouraged a policy of rounding up French Huguenots on charges of heresy and putting them in front of Catholic judges, and employing torture and burning as punishments for dissenters. Mary returned to Scotland a widow, in the summer of 1561.\nIn 1561, the Edict of Orl\u00e9ans declared an end to the persecution, and the Edict of Saint-Germain of January 1562 formally recognised the Huguenots for the first time. However, these measures disguised the growing tensions between Protestants and Catholics.\nCivil wars.\nThese tensions spurred eight civil wars, interrupted by periods of relative calm, between 1562 and 1598. With each break in peace, the Huguenots' trust in the Catholic throne diminished, and the violence became more severe, and Protestant demands became grander, until a lasting cessation of open hostility finally occurred in 1598. The wars gradually took on a dynastic character, developing into an extended feud between the Houses of Bourbon and Guise, both of which\u2014in addition to holding rival religious views\u2014staked a claim to the French throne. The crown, occupied by the House of Valois, generally supported the Catholic side, but on occasion switched over to the Protestant cause when politically expedient.\nThe French Wars of Religion began with the Massacre of Vassy on 1 March 1562, when dozens (some sources say hundreds) of Huguenots were killed, and about 200 were wounded. It was in this year that some Huguenots destroyed the tomb and remains of Saint Irenaeus (d. 202), an early Church father and bishop who was a disciple of Polycarp. The Michelade by Huguenotes against Catholics was later on 29 September 1567.\nSt. Bartholomew's Day massacre.\nIn what became known as the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre of 24 August \u2013 3 October 1572, Catholics killed thousands of Huguenots in Paris and similar massacres took place in other towns in the following weeks. The main provincial towns and cities experiencing massacres were Aix, Bordeaux, Bourges, Lyon, Meaux, Orl\u00e9ans, Rouen, Toulouse, and Troyes.\nAlthough the exact number of fatalities throughout the country is not known, on 23\u201324 August, between 2,000 and 3,000 Protestants were killed in Paris and a further 3,000 to 7,000 more in the French provinces. By 17 September, almost 25,000 Protestants had been massacred in Paris alone. Beyond Paris, the killings continued until 3 October. An amnesty granted in 1573 pardoned the perpetrators. Following the killings many Protestants fled to the Kentish coast among other places.\nEdict of Nantes.\nThe pattern of warfare, followed by brief periods of peace, continued for nearly another quarter-century. The warfare was definitively quelled in 1598, when Henry of Navarre, having succeeded to the French throne as Henry IV, and having recanted Protestantism in favour of Roman Catholicism in order to obtain the French crown, issued the Edict of Nantes. The Edict reaffirmed Roman Catholicism as the state religion of France, but granted the Protestants equality with Catholics under the throne and a degree of religious and political freedom within their domains. The Edict simultaneously protected Catholic interests by discouraging the founding of new Protestant churches in Catholic-controlled regions.\nWith the proclamation of the Edict of Nantes, and the subsequent protection of Huguenot rights, pressures to leave France abated. However, enforcement of the Edict grew increasingly irregular over time, making life so intolerable that many fled the country. The Huguenot population of France dropped to 856,000 by the mid-1660s, of which a plurality lived in rural areas. The greatest concentrations of Huguenots at this time resided in the regions of Guienne, Saintonge-Aunis-Angoumois and Poitou.\nMontpellier was among the most important of the 66 ('cities of protection' or 'protected cities') that the Edict of 1598 granted to the Huguenots. The city's political institutions and the university were all handed over to the Huguenots. Tension with Paris led to a siege by the royal army in 1622. Peace terms called for the dismantling of the city's fortifications. A royal citadel was built and the university and consulate were taken over by the Catholic party. Even before the Edict of Al\u00e8s (1629), Protestant rule was dead and the was no more.\nBy 1620, the Huguenots were on the defensive, and the government increasingly applied pressure. A series of three small civil wars known as the Huguenot rebellions broke out, mainly in southwestern France, between 1621 and 1629 in which the Reformed areas revolted against royal authority. The uprising occurred a decade following the death of Henry IV, who was assassinated by a Catholic fanatic in 1610. His successor Louis XIII, under the regency of his Italian Catholic mother Marie de' Medici, was more intolerant of Protestantism. The Huguenots responded by establishing independent political and military structures, establishing diplomatic contacts with foreign powers, and openly revolting against central power. The rebellions were implacably suppressed by the French crown.\nEdict of Fontainebleau.\nLouis XIV inherited the throne in 1643 and acted increasingly aggressively to force the Huguenots to convert. At first he sent missionaries, backed by a fund to financially reward converts to Roman Catholicism. Then he imposed penalties, closed Huguenot schools and excluded them from favoured professions. Escalating, he instituted dragonnades, which included the occupation and looting of Huguenot homes by military troops, in an effort to forcibly convert them. In 1685, he issued the Edict of Fontainebleau, revoking the Edict of Nantes and declaring Protestantism illegal.\nThe revocation forbade Protestant services, required education of children as Catholics, and prohibited emigration. It proved disastrous to the Huguenots and costly for France. It precipitated civil bloodshed, ruined commerce, and resulted in the illegal flight from the country of hundreds of thousands of Protestants, many of whom were intellectuals, doctors and business leaders whose skills were transferred to Britain as well as Holland, Switzerland, Prussia, South Africa and other places they fled to. 4,000 emigrated to the Thirteen Colonies, where they settled, especially in New York, the Delaware River Valley in Eastern Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Virginia. The English authorities welcomed the French refugees, providing money from both government and private agencies to aid their relocation. Those Huguenots who stayed in France were subsequently forcibly converted to Roman Catholicism and were called \"new converts\".\nAfter this, the Huguenots (with estimates ranging from 200,000 to 1,000,000) fled to Protestant countries: England, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Norway, Denmark, and Prussia\u2014whose Calvinist Great Elector Frederick William welcomed them to help rebuild his war-ravaged and underpopulated country. Following this exodus, Huguenots remained in large numbers in only one region of France: the rugged C\u00e9vennes region in the south. There were also some Calvinists in the Alsace region, which then belonged to the Holy Roman Empire. In the early 18th century, a regional group known as the Camisards (who were Huguenots of the mountainous Massif Central region) rioted against the Catholic Church, burning churches and killing the clergy. It took French troops years to hunt down and destroy all the bands of Camisards, between 1702 and 1709.\nEnd of persecution.\nBy the 1760s Protestantism was no longer a favourite religion of the elite. By then, most Protestants were C\u00e9vennes peasants. It was still illegal, and, although the law was seldom enforced, it could be a threat or a nuisance to Protestants. Calvinists lived primarily in the Midi; about 200,000 Lutherans accompanied by some Calvinists lived in the newly acquired Alsace, where the 1648 Treaty of Westphalia effectively protected them.\nPersecution of Protestants diminished in France after 1724, finally ending with the Edict of Versailles, commonly called the Edict of Tolerance, signed by Louis XVI in 1787. Two years later, with the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen of 1789, Protestants gained equal rights as citizens.\nRight of return to France in the 19th and 20th centuries.\nThe government encouraged descendants of exiles to return, offering them French citizenship in a 15 December 1790 law:\nAll persons born in a foreign country and descending in any degree of a French man or woman expatriated for religious reason are declared French nationals () and will benefit from rights attached to that quality if they come back to France, establish their domicile there and take the civic oath.\nArticle 4 of 26 June 1889 Nationality Law stated: \"Descendants of families proscribed by the revocation of the Edict of Nantes will continue to benefit from the 15 December 1790 Law, but on the condition that a nominal decree should be issued for every petitioner. That decree will only produce its effects for the future.\"\nForeign descendants of Huguenots lost the automatic right to French citizenship in 1945 (by force of the , which revoked the 1889 Nationality Law). It states in article 3: \"This application does not, however, affect the validity of past acts by the person or rights acquired by third parties on the basis of previous laws.\"\nModern times.\nIn the 1920s and 1930s, members of the extreme-right movement expressed strong animus against Huguenots and other Protestants in general, as well as against Jews and Freemasons. They were regarded as groups supporting the French Republic, which sought to overthrow.\nIn World War II, Huguenots led by in the village of in helped save many Jews. They hid them in secret places or helped them get out of Vichy France. Andr\u00e9 Trocm\u00e9 preached against discrimination as the Nazis were gaining power in neighbouring Germany and urged his Protestant Huguenot congregation to hide Jewish refugees from the Holocaust.\nIn the early 21st century, there were approximately one million Protestants in France, representing some 2% of its population. Most are concentrated in Alsace in northeast France and the mountain region in the south, who still regard themselves as Huguenots to this day. Surveys suggest that Protestantism has grown in recent years, though this is due primarily to the expansion of evangelical Protestant churches which particularly have adherents among immigrant groups that are generally considered distinct from the French Huguenot population.\nA diaspora of French Australians still considers itself Huguenot, even after centuries of exile. Long integrated into Australian society, it is encouraged by the Huguenot Society of Australia to embrace and conserve its cultural heritage, aided by the Society's genealogical research services.\nIn the United States there are several Huguenot worship groups and societies. The Huguenot Society of America has headquarters in New York City and has a broad national membership. One of the most active Huguenot groups is in Charleston, South Carolina. While many American Huguenot groups worship in borrowed churches, the congregation in Charleston has its own church. Although services are conducted largely in English, every year the church holds an Annual French Service, which is conducted entirely in French using an adaptation of the Liturgies of Neufchatel (1737) and Vallangin (1772). Typically the Annual French Service takes place on the first or second Sunday after Easter in commemoration of the signing of the Edict of Nantes.\nExodus.\nThe trip.\nFrench protestants reacted differently to persecution and the ban of Protestantism. Some converted to the Catholic faith, while others decided to leave. Some left their elderly parents, or children who were too young to travel. Those who left were from every social class and every profession including lawyers, merchants and officers. They came from all over France. The only common denominator was that they were Protestants, would not convert to Catholicism and were willing to risk it all to practice their religion freely. Those who left, left everything including land to be confiscated unless a family who converted to Catholicism inherited it and paid the refugees. This last scenario happened very rarely.\n40% of the protestants from the Northern part of France left while 25% of the south did the same. Those closer to the border (both land and sea) as well as where they are a minority in the population of the area left more: it was the case in the Paris area, Normandy and the Atlantic coast. Farmers often stayed attached to the land while craftsman and merchants represented a large group of those who left. Some temporarily converted to Catholicism to sell their property before leaving. Others left overnight.\nThose who left must rely on guides who knew the routes out of France. Most were honest but some sold out their customers to the authorities. Paying for those guides was expensive as they risked being sent to the galley until 1687, and later hanging. They traveled by night and were often disguised. Often, the Huguenots purchased paper guides at a very high price. These guides told the reader which cities to go to, where to avoid, who to contact, etc.\nMany left the country by sea, leaving from Bordeaux, La Rochelle, the \u00cele de R\u00e9, Nantes, and other ports along the coast aboard English and Dutch ships after they had made their way to the coast using what was available and what could be afforded. Others went by land to the Dutch Republic or Switzerland. Many walked hundreds of miles. The borders with other countries were well guarded, as well as the border between provinces within France and the risk of arrest was a constant fear until they arrived safely. On the way they encountered honest people who help them as well as some who sold them out or stole their money. Help came from Protestants and Catholics. The fugitives sometimes had to lie about their identity. Entire networks existed to escort them across France to a safe country. Some fugitives were arrested on the way. For those who made it, they often arrived tired, starving, with nothing to wear, and no money to their name.\nThe details of these trips have been recently discovered through the memoirs written by Huguenots for their families. These were written often years later once safely outside of France and published only recently. These include:\nEarly emigration to colonies.\nThe first Huguenots to leave France sought freedom from persecution in Switzerland and the Netherlands. A group of Huguenots was part of the French colonisers who arrived in Brazil in 1555 to found . A couple of ships with around 500 people arrived at the Guanabara Bay, present-day Rio de Janeiro, and settled on a small island. A fort, named Fort Coligny, was built to protect them from attack from the Portuguese troops and Brazilian natives. It was an attempt to establish a French colony in South America. The fort was destroyed in 1560 by the Portuguese, who captured some of the Huguenots. The Portuguese threatened their Protestant prisoners with death if they did not convert to Roman Catholicism. The Huguenots of Guanabara, as they are now known, produced what is known as the Guanabara Confession of Faith to explain their beliefs. The Portuguese executed them.\nSouth Africa.\nHuguenots first settled at the Cape of Good Hope in 1671; the first documented was the wagonmaker Fran\u00e7ois Vilion (Viljoen). The first Huguenot to arrive at the Cape of Good Hope was Maria de la Quellerie, wife of commander Jan van Riebeeck (and daughter of a Walloon church minister), who arrived on 6 April 1652 to establish a settlement at what is today Cape Town. The couple left for Batavia ten years later.\nBut it was not until 31 December 1687 that the first organised group of Huguenots set sail from the Netherlands to the Dutch East India Company post at the Cape of Good Hope. The largest portion of the Huguenots to settle in the Cape arrived between 1688 and 1689 in seven ships as part of the organised migration, but quite a few arrived as late as 1700; thereafter, the numbers declined and only small groups arrived at a time. Many of these settlers were given land in an area that was later called (Dutch for 'French Corner'), in the present-day Western Cape province of South Africa. A large monument to commemorate the arrival of the Huguenots in South Africa was inaugurated on 7 April 1948 at Franschhoek. The Huguenot Memorial Museum was also erected there and opened in 1957.\nThe official policy of the Dutch East India governors was to integrate the Huguenot and the Dutch communities. When Paul Roux, a pastor who arrived with the main group of Huguenots, died in 1724, the Dutch administration, as a special concession, permitted another French cleric to take his place \"for the benefit of the elderly who spoke only French\". But with assimilation, within three generations the Huguenots had generally adopted Dutch as their first and home language.\nMany of the farms in the Western Cape province in South Africa still bear French names. Many families, today, mostly Afrikaans-speaking, have surnames indicating their French Huguenot ancestry. Examples include: Blignaut, Cilliers, Cronje (Cronier), de Klerk (Le Clercq), de Villiers, du Plessis, Du Preez (Des Pres), du Randt (Durand), du Toit, Duvenhage (Du Vinage), Franck, Fouch\u00e9, Fourie (Fleurit), Gervais, Giliomee (Guilliaume), Gous/Gouws (Gauch), Hugo, Jordaan (Jourdan), Joubert, Kriek, Labuschagne (la Buscagne), le Roux, Lombard, Malan, Malherbe, Marais, Maree, Minnaar (Mesnard), Nel (Nell), Naud\u00e9, Nortj\u00e9 (Nortier), Pienaar (Pinard), Retief (Retif), Roux, Rossouw (Rousseau), Taljaard (Taillard), TerBlanche, Theron, Viljoen (Vilion) and Visagie (Visage). The wine industry in South Africa owes a significant debt to the Huguenots, some of whom had vineyards in France, or were brandy distillers, and used their skills in their new home.\nNorth America.\nFrench Huguenots made two attempts to establish a haven in North America. In 1562, naval officer Jean Ribault led an expedition that explored Florida and the present-day Southeastern US, and founded the outpost of Charlesfort on Parris Island, South Carolina. The French Wars of Religion precluded a return voyage, and the outpost was abandoned. In 1564, Ribault's former lieutenant Ren\u00e9 Goulaine de Laudonni\u00e8re launched a second voyage to build a colony; he established Fort Caroline in what is now Jacksonville, Florida. War at home again precluded a resupply mission, and the colony struggled. In 1565 the Spanish decided to enforce their claim to , and sent Pedro Men\u00e9ndez de Avil\u00e9s, who established the settlement of St. Augustine near Fort Caroline. Men\u00e9ndez' forces routed the French and executed most of the Protestant captives.\nBarred by the government from settling in New France, Huguenots led by Jess\u00e9 de Forest, sailed to North America in 1624 and settled instead in the Dutch colony of New Netherland (later incorporated into New York and New Jersey); as well as Great Britain's colonies, including Nova Scotia. A number of New Amsterdam's families were of Huguenot origin, often having emigrated as refugees to the Netherlands in the previous century. In 1628 the Huguenots established a congregation as (the French church in New Amsterdam). This parish continues today as , now a part of the Episcopal Church (Anglican) communion, and welcomes Francophone New Yorkers from all over the world. Upon their arrival in New Amsterdam, Huguenots were offered land directly across from Manhattan on Long Island for a permanent settlement and chose the harbour at the end of Newtown Creek, becoming the first Europeans to live in Brooklyn, then known as Boschwick, in the neighbourhood now known as Bushwick.\nHuguenot immigrants settled throughout pre-colonial America, including in New Amsterdam (New York City), some 21 miles north of New York in a town which they named New Rochelle, and some further upstate in New Paltz. The \"Huguenot Street Historic District\" in New Paltz has been designated a National Historic Landmark site and contains one of the oldest streets in the United States of America. A small group of Huguenots also settled on the south shore of Staten Island along the New York Harbor, for which the current neighbourhood of Huguenot was named. Huguenot refugees also settled in the Delaware River Valley of Eastern Pennsylvania and Hunterdon County, New Jersey in 1725. Frenchtown in New Jersey bears the mark of early settlers.\nNew Rochelle, located in the county of Westchester on the north shore of Long Island Sound, seemed to be the great location of the Huguenots in New York. It is said that they landed on the coastline peninsula of Davenports Neck called \"Bauffet's Point\" after travelling from England where they had previously taken refuge on account of religious persecution, four years before the revocation of the Edict of Nantes. They purchased from John Pell, Lord of Pelham Manor, a tract of land consisting of six thousand one hundred acres with the help of Jacob Leisler. It was named New Rochelle after La Rochelle, their former strong-hold in France. A small wooden church was first erected in the community, followed by a second church that was built of stone. Previous to the erection of it, the strong men would often walk twenty-three miles on Saturday evening, the distance by the road from New Rochelle to New York, to attend the Sunday service. The church was eventually replaced by a third, Trinity-St. Paul's Episcopal Church, which contains heirlooms including the original bell from the French Huguenot Church on Pine Street in New York City, which is preserved as a relic in the tower room. The Huguenot cemetery, or the \"Huguenot Burial Ground\", has since been recognised as a historic cemetery that is the final resting place for a wide range of the Huguenot founders, early settlers and prominent citizens dating back more than three centuries.\nSome Huguenot immigrants settled in central and eastern Pennsylvania. They assimilated with the predominantly Pennsylvania German settlers of the area.\nIn 1700 several hundred French Huguenots migrated from England to the colony of Virginia, where the King William III of England had promised them land grants in Lower Norfolk County. When they arrived, colonial authorities offered them instead land 20 miles above the falls of the James River, at the abandoned Monacan village known as Manakin Town, now in Goochland County. Some settlers landed in present-day Chesterfield County. On 12 May 1705, the Virginia General Assembly passed an act to naturalise the 148 Huguenots still resident at Manakintown. Of the original 390 settlers in the isolated settlement, many had died; others lived outside town on farms in the English style; and others moved to different areas. Gradually they intermarried with their English neighbours. Through the 18th and 19th centuries, descendants of the French migrated west into the Piedmont, and across the Appalachian Mountains into the West of what became Kentucky, Tennessee, Missouri, and other states. In the Manakintown area, the Huguenot Memorial Bridge across the James River and Huguenot Road were named in their honour, as were many local features, including several schools, including Huguenot High School.\nIn the early years, many Huguenots also settled in the area of present-day Charleston, South Carolina. In 1685, Rev. Elie Prioleau from the town of Pons in France, was among the first to settle there. He became pastor of the first Huguenot church in North America in that city. After the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685, several Huguenots including Edmund Bohun of Suffolk, England, Pierre Bacot of Touraine France, Jean Postell of Dieppe France, Alexander Pepin, Antoine Poitevin of Orsement France, and Jacques de Bordeaux of Grenoble, immigrated to the Charleston Orange district. They were very successful at marriage and property speculation. After petitioning the British Crown in 1697 for the right to own land in the Baronies, they prospered as slave owners on the Cooper, Ashepoo, Ashley and Santee River plantations they purchased from the British Landgrave Edmund Bellinger. Some of their descendants moved into the Deep South and Texas, where they developed new plantations.\nThe French Huguenot Church of Charleston, which remains independent, is the oldest continuously active Huguenot congregation in the United States. in New York, founded in 1628, is older, but it left the French Reformed movement in 1804 to become part of the Episcopal Church.\nMost of the Huguenot congregations (or individuals) in North America eventually affiliated with other Protestant denominations with more numerous members. The Huguenots adapted quickly and often married outside their immediate French communities. Their descendants in many families continued to use French first names and surnames for their children well into the nineteenth century. Assimilated, the French made numerous contributions to United States economic life, especially as merchants and artisans in the late Colonial and early Federal periods. For example, E.I. du Pont, a former student of Lavoisier, established the Eleutherian gunpowder mills. Howard Hughes, famed investor, pilot, film director, and philanthropist, was also of Huguenot descent and descendant from Rev. John Gano.\nPaul Revere was descended from Huguenot refugees, as was Henry Laurens, who signed the Articles of Confederation for South Carolina. Other descendants of Huguenots included Jack Jouett, who made the ride from Cuckoo Tavern to warn Thomas Jefferson and others that Tarleton and his men were on their way to arrest him for crimes against the king; Reverend John Gano, a Revolutionary War chaplain and spiritual advisor to George Washington; Francis Marion; and a number of other leaders of the American Revolution and later statesmen. The last active Huguenot congregation in North America worships in Charleston, South Carolina, at a church that dates to 1844. The Huguenot Society of America maintains the Manakin Episcopal Church in Virginia as a historic shrine with occasional services. The Society has chapters in numerous states, with the one in Texas being the largest.\nAfter the British Conquest of New France, British authorities in Lower Canada tried to encourage Huguenot immigration in an attempt to promote a Francophone Protestant Church in the region, hoping that French-speaking Protestants would be more loyal clergy than those of Roman Catholicism. While a small number of Huguenots did come, the majority switched from speaking French to English. As a result, Protestants are still a religious minority in Quebec today.\nSpoken language.\nThe Huguenots originally spoke French on their arrival in the American colonies, but after two or three generations, they had switched to English. They did not promote French-language schools or publications and \"lost\" their historic identity. In upstate New York they merged with the Dutch Reformed community and switched first to Dutch and then in the early 19th century to English. In colonial New York City they switched from French to English or Dutch by 1730.\nNetherlands.\nSome Huguenots fought in the Low Countries alongside the Dutch against Spain during the first years of the Dutch Revolt (1568\u20131609). The Dutch Republic rapidly became a destination for Huguenot exiles. Early ties were already visible in the of William the Silent, condemning the Spanish Inquisition, which was written by his court minister, the Huguenot Pierre L'Oyseleur, lord of Villiers. Louise de Coligny, daughter of the murdered Huguenot leader Gaspard de Coligny, married William the Silent, leader of the Dutch (Calvinist) revolt against Spanish (Catholic) rule. As both spoke French in daily life, their court church in the Prinsenhof in Delft held services in French. The practice has continued to the present day. The Prinsenhof is one of the 14 active Walloon churches of the Dutch Reformed Church (now of the Protestant Church in the Netherlands). The ties between Huguenots and the Dutch Republic's military and political leadership, the House of Orange-Nassau, which existed since the early days of the Dutch Revolt, helped support the many early settlements of Huguenots in the Dutch Republic's colonies. They settled at the Cape of Good Hope in South Africa and New Netherland in North America.\nStadtholder William III of Orange, who later became King of England, emerged as the strongest opponent of King Louis XIV after the French attacked the Dutch Republic in 1672. William formed the League of Augsburg as a coalition to oppose Louis and the French state. Consequently, many Huguenots considered the wealthy and Calvinist-controlled Dutch Republic, which also happened to lead the opposition to Louis XIV, as the most attractive country for exile after the revocation of the Edict of Nantes. They also found many French-speaking Calvinist churches there (which were called the \"Walloon churches\").\nAfter the revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685, the Dutch Republic received the largest group of Huguenot refugees, an estimated total of 75,000 to 100,000 people. This was a huge influx as the entire population of the Dutch Republic amounted to c.\u20092\u00a0million at that time. Around 1700, it is estimated that nearly 25% of the Amsterdam population was Huguenot. In 1705, Amsterdam and the area of West Frisia were the first areas to provide full citizens rights to Huguenot immigrants, followed by the whole Dutch Republic in 1715. Huguenots intermarried with Dutch from the outset.\nOne of the most prominent Huguenot refugees in the Netherlands was Pierre Bayle. He started teaching in Rotterdam, where he finished writing and publishing his multi-volume masterpiece, \"Historical and Critical Dictionary\". It became one of the 100 foundational texts of the US Library of Congress. Some Huguenot descendants in the Netherlands may be noted by French family names, although they typically use Dutch given names. Due to the Huguenots' early ties with the leadership of the Dutch Revolt and their own participation, some of the Dutch patriciate are of part-Huguenot descent. Some Huguenot families have kept alive various traditions, such as the celebration and feast of their patron , similar to the Dutch (Sinterklaas) feast.\nGreat Britain and Ireland.\nEngland.\nAs a major Protestant nation, England patronized and helped protect Huguenots since at least the mid-1500s. Kent hosted the first congregation of Huguenots in England in around 1548. During the reign of Mary I (1553\u20131558) they were expelled but, with the accession of Elizabeth I, returned to London in 1559 and Kent in 1561. An early group of Huguenots settled in Colchester in 1565. There was a small naval Anglo-French War (1627\u20131629), in which the English supported the French Huguenots against King Louis XIII. London financed the emigration of many to England and its colonies around 1700. Some 40,000\u201350,000 settled in England, mostly in towns near the sea in the southern districts, with the largest concentration in London where they constituted about 5% of the total population in 1700. Many others went to the American colonies, especially South Carolina. The immigrants included many skilled craftsmen and entrepreneurs who facilitated the economic modernization of their new home, in an era when economic innovations were transferred by people rather than through printed works. The British government ignored the complaints made by local craftsmen about the favoritism shown to foreigners. The immigrants assimilated well in terms of using English, joining the Church of England, intermarriage and business success. They founded the silk industry in England. Many became private tutors, schoolmasters, travelling tutors and owners of riding schools, where they were hired by the upper class.\nBoth before and after the 1708 passage of the Foreign Protestants Naturalization Act, an estimated 50,000 Protestant Walloons and French Huguenots fled to England, with many moving on to Ireland and elsewhere. In relative terms, this was one of the largest waves of immigration ever of a single ethnic community to Britain. Andrew Lortie (born Andr\u00e9 Lortie), a leading Huguenot theologian and writer who led the exiled community in London, became known for articulating their criticism of the Pope and the doctrine of transubstantiation during Mass.\nOf the refugees who arrived on the Kent coast, many gravitated towards Canterbury, then the county's Calvinist hub. Many Walloon and Huguenot families were granted asylum there. Edward VI granted them the whole of the western crypt of Canterbury Cathedral for worship. In 1825, this privilege was reduced to the south aisle and in 1895 to the former chantry chapel of the Black Prince. Services are still held there in French according to the Reformed tradition every Sunday at 3\u00a0pm.\nOther evidence of the Walloons and Huguenots in Canterbury includes a block of houses in Turnagain Lane, where weavers' windows survive on the top floor, as many Huguenots worked as weavers. The Weavers, a half-timbered house by the river, was the site of a weaving school from the late 16th century to about 1830. (It has been adapted as a restaurant\u2014see illustration above. The house derives its name from a weaving school which was moved there in the last years of the 19th century, reviving an earlier use.) Other refugees practiced the variety of occupations necessary to sustain the community as distinct from the indigenous population. Such economic separation was the condition of the refugees' initial acceptance in the city. They also settled elsewhere in Kent, particularly Sandwich, Faversham and Maidstone\u2014towns in which there used to be refugee churches.\nThe French Protestant Church of London was established by Royal Charter in 1550. It is now located at Soho Square. Huguenot refugees flocked to Shoreditch, London. They established a major weaving industry in and around Spitalfields (see Petticoat Lane and the Tenterground) in East London. In Wandsworth, their gardening skills benefited the Battersea market gardens. The flight of Huguenot refugees from Tours, France drew off most of the workers of its great silk mills which they had built. Some of these immigrants moved to Norwich, which had accommodated an earlier settlement of Walloon weavers. The French added to the existing immigrant population, then comprising about a third of the population of the city.\nSome Huguenots settled in Bedfordshire, one of the main centres of the British lace industry at the time. Although 19th-century sources have asserted that some of these refugees were lacemakers and contributed to the East Midlands lace industry, this is contentious. The only reference to immigrant lace makers in this period is of twenty-five widows who settled in Dover, and there is no contemporary documentation to support there being Huguenot lace makers in Bedfordshire. The implication that the style of lace known as 'Bucks Point' demonstrates a Huguenot influence, being a \"combination of Mechlin patterns on Lille ground\", is fallacious: what is now known as Mechlin lace did not develop until the first half of the eighteenth century and lace with Mechlin patterns and Lille ground did not appear until the end of the 18th century, when it was widely copied throughout Europe.\nMany Huguenots from the Lorraine region also eventually settled in the area around Stourbridge in the modern-day West Midlands, where they found the raw materials and fuel to continue their glassmaking tradition. Anglicized names such as Tyzack, Henzey and Tittery are regularly found amongst the early glassmakers, and the region went on to become one of the most important glass regions in the country.\nWinston Churchill was the most prominent Briton of Huguenot descent, deriving from the Huguenots who went to the colonies; his American grandfather was Leonard Jerome.\nIreland.\nFollowing the French crown's revocation of the Edict of Nantes, many Huguenots settled in Ireland in the late 17th and early 18th centuries, encouraged by an act of parliament for Protestants' settling in Ireland. Huguenot regiments fought for William of Orange in the Williamite War in Ireland, for which they were rewarded with land grants and titles, many settling in Dublin. Significant Huguenot settlements were in Dublin, Cork, Portarlington, Lisburn, Waterford and Youghal. Smaller settlements, which included Killeshandra in County Cavan, contributed to the expansion of flax cultivation and the growth of the Irish linen industry.\nFor over 150 years, Huguenots were allowed to hold their services in Lady Chapel in St. Patrick's Cathedral. A Huguenot cemetery is located in the centre of Dublin, off St. Stephen's Green. Prior to its establishment, Huguenots used the Cabbage Garden near the cathedral. Another Huguenot cemetery is located off French Church Street in Cork.\nA number of Huguenots served as mayors in Dublin, Cork, Youghal and Waterford in the 17th and 18th centuries. Numerous signs of Huguenot presence can still be seen with names still in use, and with areas of the main towns and cities named after the people who settled there. Examples include the Huguenot District and French Church Street in Cork City; and D'Olier Street in Dublin, named after a High Sheriff and one of the founders of the Bank of Ireland. A French church in Portarlington dates back to 1696, and was built to serve the significant new Huguenot community in the town. At the time, they constituted the majority of the townspeople.\nOne of the more notable Huguenot descendants in Ireland was Se\u00e1n Lemass (1899\u20131971), who was appointed as \"Taoiseach\", serving from 1959 until 1966. Additionally, Irish Gothic author Joseph Sheridan Le Fanu (1814-1873) was of Huguenot descent.\nScotland.\nWith the precedent of a historical alliance\u2009\u2014\u2009the Auld Alliance\u2009\u2014\u2009between Scotland and France, Huguenots were mostly welcomed to, and found refuge in the nation from around the year 1700. Although they did not settle in Scotland in such significant numbers as in other regions of Britain and Ireland, Huguenots have been romanticised, and are generally considered to have contributed greatly to Scottish culture. John Arnold Fleming wrote extensively of the French Protestant group's impact on the nation in his 1953 \"Huguenot Influence in Scotland\", while sociologist Abraham Lavender, who has explored how the ethnic group transformed over generations \"from Mediterranean Catholics to White Anglo-Saxon Protestants\", has analyzed how Huguenot adherence to Calvinist customs helped facilitate compatibility with the Scottish people.\nWales.\nA number of French Huguenots settled in Wales, in the upper Rhymney valley of the current Caerphilly County Borough. The community they created there is still known as \"Fleur de Lys\" (the symbol of France), an unusual French village name in the heart of the valleys of Wales. Nearby villages are Hengoed, and Ystrad Mynach. Apart from the French village name and that of the local rugby team, Fleur De Lys RFC, little remains of the French heritage.\nGermany and Scandinavia.\nAround 1685, Huguenot refugees found a safe haven in the Lutheran and Reformed states in Germany and Scandinavia. Nearly 50,000 Huguenots established themselves in Germany, 20,000 of whom were welcomed in Brandenburg-Prussia, where Frederick William (r.\u20091640\u00a0\u2013\u00a01688), granted them special privileges (Edict of Potsdam of 1685) and churches in which to worship (such as the Church of St. Peter and St. Paul, Angerm\u00fcnde and the French Cathedral, Berlin). The Huguenots furnished two new regiments of his army: the Altpreu\u00dfische Infantry Regiments No. 13 (Regiment on foot Varenne) and 15 (Regiment on foot Wylich). Another 4,000 Huguenots settled in the German territories of Baden, Franconia (Principality of Bayreuth, Principality of Ansbach), Landgraviate of Hesse-Kassel, Duchy of W\u00fcrttemberg, in the Wetterau Association of Imperial Counts, in the Palatinate and Palatine Zweibr\u00fccken, in the Rhine-Main-Area (Frankfurt), in modern-day Saarland; and 1,500 found refuge in Hamburg, Bremen and Lower Saxony. Three hundred refugees were granted asylum at the court of George William, Duke of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg in Celle.\nIn Berlin the Huguenots created two new neighborhoods: Dorotheenstadt and Friedrichstadt. By 1700 one fifth of the city's population was French-speaking. The Berlin Huguenots preserved the French language in their church services for nearly a century. They ultimately decided to switch to German in protest against the occupation of Prussia by Napoleon in 1806\u201307. Many of their descendants rose to positions of prominence. Several congregations were founded throughout Germany and Scandinavia, such as those of Fredericia (Denmark), Berlin, Stockholm, Hamburg, Frankfurt, Helsinki, and Emden.\nPrince Louis de Cond\u00e9, along with his sons Daniel and Osias, arranged with Count Ludwig von Nassau-Saarbr\u00fccken to establish a Huguenot community in present-day Saarland in 1604. The Count supported mercantilism and welcomed technically skilled immigrants into his lands, regardless of their religion. The Cond\u00e9s established a thriving glass-making works, which provided wealth to the principality for many years. Other founding families created enterprises based on textiles and such traditional Huguenot occupations in France. The community and its congregation remain active to this day, with descendants of many of the founding families still living in the region. Some members of this community emigrated to the United States in the 1890s.\nIn Bad Karlshafen, Hessen, Germany is the Huguenot Museum and Huguenot archive. The collection includes family histories, a library, and a picture archive.\nPoland.\nAfter the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre of 1572, some persecuted Huguenots fled to Poland, taking advantage of its religious tolerance confirmed by the Warsaw Confederation, marking the first significant historical wave of French migration to Poland.\nEffects.\nThe exodus of Huguenots from France created a brain drain, as many of them had occupied important places in society. The kingdom did not fully recover for years. The French crown's refusal to allow non-Catholics to settle in New France may help to explain that colony's low population compared to that of the neighboring British colonies, which opened settlement to religious dissenters. By the start of the French and Indian War, the North American front of the Seven Years' War, a sizeable population of Huguenot descent lived in the British colonies, and many participated in the British defeat of New France in 1759\u20131760.\nFrederick William, Elector of Brandenburg, invited Huguenots to settle in his realms, and a number of their descendants rose to positions of prominence in Prussia. Several prominent German military, cultural and political figures were ethnic Huguenot, including the poet Theodor Fontane, General Hermann von Fran\u00e7ois, the hero of the First World War's Battle of Tannenberg, Luftwaffe general and fighter ace Adolf Galland, the Luftwaffe flying ace Hans-Joachim Marseille, WWII Wehrmacht Lieutenant Colonel/Inspector General of the Bundeswehr Ulrich de Maizi\u00e8re and the famed U-boat Captains Lothar von Arnauld de la Peri\u00e8re and Wilhelm Souchon. Related to Ulrich de Maizi\u00e8re were also the last prime minister of East Germany, Lothar de Maizi\u00e8re and the former German Federal Minister of the Interior, Thomas de Maizi\u00e8re. A 2014 study in the \"American Economic Review\" linked Huguenot migration to Prussia with a boost in industrial productivity.\nThe persecution and the flight of the Huguenots greatly damaged the reputation of Louis XIV abroad, particularly in England. Both kingdoms, which had enjoyed peaceful relations until 1685, became bitter enemies and fought each other in a series of wars, called the \"Second Hundred Years' War\" by some historians, from 1689 onward.\n1985 apology.\nIn October 1985, to commemorate the tricentenary of the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, President Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand of France announced a formal apology to the descendants of Huguenots around the world. At the same time, the government released a special postage stamp in their honour reading \"France \"is\" the home of the Huguenots\" ().\nLegacy.\nHuguenot's Legacy persists both in France and abroad.\nThe Huguenots of Geneva\u2019s French Protestant Utopia and its influence on Western economic thought.\nThe Genevan utopian tradition, rooted in French Calvinism, combined religious conviction with civic responsibility, laying early groundwork for modern capitalism and welfare economics. Max Weber famously identified the Calvinist \u201cProtestant ethic\u201d as foundational to capitalist development. In Geneva, communal support, education, and moral discipline informed a civic model that inspired Enlightenment thinkers and later economic theorists. As Huguenot ideals spread to Protestant regions, they influenced American and European welfare institutions. Thinkers like J.S. Mill and Karl Marx reinterpreted this moral framework, promoting visions of economic justice. In the U.S., similar values are enshrined in the Constitution\u2019s call to \u201cpromote the general Welfare.\u201d The legacy of Genevan utopianism persists in debates over ethical capitalism, redistribution, and social policy.\nFrance.\nSeveral French Protestant churches are descended from or tied to the Huguenots, including:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nTexts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75901", "revid": "14965160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75901", "title": "Synod of Ancyra", "text": "Ecclesiastical council, or synod, convened in modern-day Ankara in 314.\nThe Synod of Ancyra was an ecclesiastical council, or synod, convened in Ancyra, the seat of the Roman administration for the province of Galatia, in 314. Together with the synods of Neocaesarea, Antioch, Gangra and Laodicea, the canons of the council formed the nucleus of nearly all future collections of church law.\nSetting.\nThe season was soon after Easter; the year may be safely deduced from the fact that the first nine canons are intended to repair havoc wreaked in the church by persecution, which ceased after the overthrow of Maximinus II in 313. Three lists of bishops who attended have been preserved, varying between 12 and 18 participating bishops. Though the lists might have been amended later, most participants can be dated to the period and were present at the council of Nicaea. Either Vitalis, Bishop of Antioch, or Marcellus of Ancyra, bishop of Ancyra, presided, and possibly both were present, although the Libellus Synodicus, also known as the Synodicon Vetus, assigns to the latter.\nDecrees.\nThe synod issued 25 canons, with the oldest preserved version of the Greek text dating to the ninth or tenth century. The first nine canons of the council dealt with the readmission of clergy and laity who had lapsed during the persecutions. Depending on the clerical rank and circumstances of this apostasy, different penances were prescribed.\nThe remaining fifteen canons dealt with issues of ecclesiastic discipline and jurisdiction, asceticism and violence arising from clerical appointments. \nThe tenth canon tolerates the marriages of deacons who previous to ordination had reserved the right to take a wife. The thirteenth forbids chorepiscopi to ordain presbyters or deacons.\nThe sixteenth canon brackets the Christians who have committed bestiality, or may still have been doing so, into several different groups based on the offender's age, and assigns different penances to each group; married men over 20 were sanctioned more harshly than unmarried youths, and married men over 50 received the harshest sanctions.\nThe seventeenth canon condemns the Christians who have either committed bestiality or had sexual intercourse with a leprous woman, while themselves being leprous, to having to pray with the \"wintering people\" - i.e. outside church buildings. The equation of leprous women with beasts is generally considered difficult to interpret.\nThe eighteenth safeguards the right of the people in objecting to the appointment of a bishop whom they do not wish. \nCanon twenty-two concerns itself with wilful murderers, proscribing them to remain prostrators but allows them at the end of life to be indulged with full communion. Canon twenty-four imposes five years of penance upon those who consult magicians.\nThe Council also condemned both abortion and infanticide, though it only suggested a ten year excommunication compared to the lifelong excommunication imposed by the council of Elvira.\nLegacy.\nThe canons resulting from the synod have a particular importance for the history of the institution of penance and are among the earliest evidence for the three-step system of penance, which later became the four-step system. Further, canon 13 contains the first evidence for chorepiscopi. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75903", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75903", "title": "ISO/IEC 8859-3", "text": "ISO standard\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Mono/styles.css\" /&gt;\nISO/IEC 8859-3:1999, \"Information technology \u2014 8-bit single-byte coded graphic character sets \u2014 Part 3: Latin alphabet No. 3\", is part of the ISO/IEC 8859 series of ASCII-based standard character encodings, first edition published in 1988. It is informally referred to as Latin-3 or \"South European\". It was designed to cover Turkish, Maltese and Esperanto, though the introduction of ISO/IEC 8859-9 superseded it for Turkish. The encoding was popular for users of Esperanto, but fell out of use as application support for Unicode became more common.\nISO-8859-3 is the IANA preferred charset name for this standard when supplemented with the C0 and C1 control codes from ISO/IEC 6429. Microsoft has assigned code page 28593 a.k.a. Windows-28593 to ISO-8859-3 in Windows. IBM has assigned code page 913 (CCSID 913) to ISO 8859-3.\nCodepage layout.\nDifferences from ISO-8859-1 are shown with their Unicode code point below.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75907", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75907", "title": "Amilcare Ponchielli", "text": "Italian opera composer (1834\u20131886)\nAmilcare Ponchielli (, ; 31 August 1834 \u2013 16 January 1886) was an Italian opera composer, best known for his opera \"La Gioconda\". He was married to the soprano Teresina Brambilla.\nLife and work.\nBorn in Paderno Fasolaro (now Paderno Ponchielli) near Cremona, then Kingdom of Lombardy-Venetia, Ponchielli won a scholarship at the age of nine to study music at the Milan Conservatory, writing his first symphony by the time he was ten years old.\nIn 1856, he wrote his first opera\u2014based on Alessandro Manzoni's novel \"The Betrothed\" (\"I promessi sposi\")\u2014and it was as an opera composer that he eventually found fame.\nHis early career was disappointing. Manoeuvred out of a professorship at the Milan Conservatory that he had won in a competition, he took small-time jobs in small cities and composed several operas, none successful at first. In spite of his disappointment, he gained much experience as the bandmaster (\"capobanda\") in Piacenza and Cremona, arranging and composing over 200 works for wind band. Notable among his \"original\" compositions for band are the first-ever concerto for euphonium (Concerto per Flicornobasso, 1872), fifteen variations on the popular Parisian song \"Carnevale di Venezia\", and a series of festive and funeral marches that resound with the pride of the newly unified Italy and the private grief of his fellow Cremonese. The turning point was the big success of the revised version of \"I promessi sposi\" in 1872, which brought him a contract with the music publisher G. Ricordi &amp; Co. and the musical establishment at the Conservatory and at La Scala. The role of Lina in the revised version was sung by Teresina Brambilla, whom he married in 1874. Their son Annibale became a music critic and minor composer. The ballet \"Le due gemelle\" (1873) confirmed his success.\nThe following opera, \"I Lituani\" (\"The Lithuanians\") of 1874, had a three-night run in 1903 at La Scala, where the casting was particularly poorly reviewed; it was scheduled for performances in 1939 that did not take place because the Second World War broke out, and it was not performed again until 1979, when RAI recovered the score. It has been revived several times since then. His best-known opera is \"La Gioconda\" (1876), which his librettist Arrigo Boito adapted from the same play by Victor Hugo that had been previously set by Saverio Mercadante as \"Il giuramento\" in 1837 and Carlos Gomes as \"Fosca\" in 1873. The opera contains the famous ballet Dance of the Hours as the third act finale. It was first produced in 1876 and revised several times. The version that has become popular today was first given in 1880.\nIn 1876, he started working on \"I Mori di Valenza\", although the project dates back to 1873. It was an opera that he never finished, although it was completed later by Arturo Cadore and performed posthumously in 1914.\nAfter \"La Gioconda\", Ponchielli wrote the monumental biblical melodrama in four acts, \"Il figliuol prodigo\", given in Milan at La Scala on 26 December 1880, and \"Marion Delorme\", from another play by Victor Hugo, which was presented at La Scala on 17 March 1885. In spite of their rich musical invention, neither of these operas met with the same success, but both exerted great influence on the composers of the rising generation, such as Giacomo Puccini, Pietro Mascagni, and Umberto Giordano.\nIn 1881, Ponchielli was appointed \"maestro di cappella\" of the Bergamo Cathedral, and from the same year, he was a professor of composition at the Milan Conservatory, where among his students were Puccini, Mascagni, Emilio Pizzi, and Giovanni Tebaldini.\nHe died of pneumonia in Milan in 1886 and was interred in the city's Monumental Cemetery.\nLegacy.\nAlthough in his lifetime Ponchielli was very popular and influential (and introduced an enlarged orchestra and more complex orchestration), only one of his operas, \"La Gioconda\", is regularly performed today. It contains a strong and memorable aria for contralto, 'Voce de donna o d'angelo' (the Rosary song); the great tenor romanza \"Cielo e mar\"; a well-known duet for tenor and baritone titled \"Enzo Grimaldo, Principe Di Santafior\"; the soprano aria \"Suicidio!\"; and the ballet \"Dance of the Hours\", which is widely known thanks in part to its having been featured in Walt Disney's \"Fantasia\" in 1940, in Allan Sherman's novelty song \"Hello Muddah, Hello Fadduh\", and in numerous other popular works.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nAn Amilcare Ponchielli Bibliography-\nBooks, Collections, Proceedings and Correspondence\nPeriodicals\nDissertations\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "75908", "revid": "39594410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75908", "title": "Charles IX of France", "text": "King of France from 1560 to 1574\nCharles IX (Charles Maximilien; 27 June 1550 \u2013 30 May 1574) was King of France from 1560 until his death in 1574. He ascended the French throne upon the death of his brother Francis II in 1560, and as such was the penultimate monarch of the House of Valois.\nCharles' reign saw the culmination of decades of tension between Protestants and Catholics. Civil and religious war broke out between the two parties after the massacre of Vassy in 1562. In 1572, following several unsuccessful attempts at brokering peace, Charles arranged the marriage of his sister Margaret to Henry of Navarre, a major Protestant nobleman in the line of succession to the French throne, in a last desperate bid to reconcile his people. Facing popular hostility against this policy of appeasement and at the instigation of his mother Catherine de' Medici, Charles oversaw the massacre of numerous Huguenot leaders who gathered in Paris for the royal wedding, though his direct involvement is still debated. This event, known as the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre, was a significant blow to the Huguenot movement, and religious civil warfare soon began anew. Charles sought to take advantage of the disarray of the Huguenots by ordering the siege of La Rochelle, but was unable to take the Protestant stronghold.\nMany of Charles' decisions were influenced by his mother, a fervent Roman Catholic who initially supported a policy of relative religious tolerance. After the events of the St. Bartholomew's Day Massacre, he began to support the persecution of Huguenots. However, the incident haunted Charles for the rest of his life, and historians suspect that it caused his physical and mental health to deteriorate over the next two years. Charles died of tuberculosis in 1574 without legitimate male issue, and was succeeded by his brother Henry III, whose own death in 1589 without issue allowed for the ascension of Henry of Navarre to the French throne as Henry IV, establishing the House of Bourbon as the new French royal dynasty.\nBiography.\nBirth and childhood.\nCharles Maximilien of France, third son of King Henry II of France and Catherine de' Medici, was born on 27 June 1550 at the Ch\u00e2teau de Saint-Germain-en-Laye. He was the fifth of ten children born to the royal couple. Styled since birth as Duke of Angoul\u00eame, he was created Duke of Orl\u00e9ans after the death of his elder brother Louis, his parents' second son, who had died in infancy on 24 October 1550. The royal children were raised under the supervision of the governor and governess of the royal children, Claude d'Urf\u00e9 and Fran\u00e7oise d'Humi\u00e8res, under the orders of Diane de Poitiers.\nOn 14 May 1564, Charles was presented the Order of the Garter by Henry Carey.\nAccession.\nCharles' father died in 1559, and was succeeded by Charles' elder brother, King Francis II. Francis II died in 1560. The ten-year-old Charles was immediately proclaimed king on 5 December 1560, and the Privy Council appointed his mother, Catherine de' Medici, as governor of France (\"gouvernante de France\"), with sweeping powers, at first acting as regent for her young son. On 15 May 1561, Charles was consecrated in the cathedral at Reims. Antoine of Bourbon, himself in line to the French throne and husband to Queen Jeanne III of Navarre, was appointed Lieutenant-General of France.\nFirst war of religion.\nRelations with the Huguenots.\nIn 1560, a group of Huguenot nobles at Amboise had planned to try to abduct King Francis II and arrest the Catholic leaders Francis, Duke of Guise, and his brother Charles, Cardinal of Lorraine. The plot was discovered ahead of time, and the Guises were prepared, executing hundreds of Huguenots. This was followed by cases of Protestant iconoclasm and Catholic reprisals.\nThe regent Catherine tried to foster reconciliation at the Colloquy at Poissy and, after that failed, made several concessions to the Huguenots in the Edict of Saint-Germain in January 1562. Nonetheless, the Massacre of Vassy, perpetrated on 1 March 1562, when the Duke of Guise and his troops attacked and killed or wounded over 100 Huguenot worshipers and citizens, brought France spiralling towards civil war. \nThe massacre lit the fuse that sparked the French Wars of Religion. Louis of Bourbon, Prince of Cond\u00e9, brother of the Lieutenant-General and the suspected architect of the Amboise conspiracy, had already prepared for war and, taking Wassy as the pretext, assumed the role of a protector of Protestantism and began to seize and garrison strategic towns along the Loire Valley. In response, the monarchy revoked the concessions given to the Huguenots. After the military leaders of both sides were either killed or captured in battles at Rouen, Dreux, and Orl\u00e9ans, the regent mediated a truce and issued the Edict of Amboise (1563).\nArmed peace.\nThe war was followed by four years of an uneasy \"armed peace\", during which time Catherine united the factions in the successful effort to recapture Le Havre from the English. After this victory, Charles declared his legal majority in August 1563, formally ending the regency. However, Catherine continued to play a principal role in politics, and often dominated her son. In March 1564, the King and his mother set out from Fontainebleau on a grand tour of France. Their tour spanned two years and brought them through Bar, Lyon, Salon-de-Provence (where they visited Nostradamus), Carcassonne, Toulouse (where the King and his younger brother Henry were confirmed), Bayonne, La Rochelle, and Moulins. During this trip, Charles IX issued the Edict of Roussillon, which standardised 1 January as the first day of the year throughout France.\nSecond and third war of religion.\nWar again broke out in 1567 after Charles added 6,000 Swiss mercenaries to his personal guards. Huguenots, fearing a Catholic attack was imminent, tried to abduct the king at Meaux, seized various cities, and massacred Catholics at N\u00eemes in an action known as the Michelade. The Battle of Saint-Denis resulted in a Huguenot defeat and the death of Anne de Montmorency, the royal commander-in-chief, and the short war ended in 1568 with the Peace of Longjumeau. The privileges granted to Protestants were widely opposed, however, leading to their cancellation and the resumption of war. The Dutch Republic, England and Navarre intervened on the Protestant side, while Spain, Tuscany and Pope Pius V supported the Catholics. Finally, the royal debt and the King's desire to seek a peaceful solution led to yet another truce, the Peace of Saint-Germain-en-Laye in August 1570, which again granted concessions to the Huguenots.\nMarriage and children.\nOn 26 November 1570, Charles married Elisabeth of Austria, with whom he fathered one daughter, Marie Elisabeth. In 1573, Charles fathered an illegitimate son, Charles, Duke of Angoul\u00eame, with his mistress, Marie Touchet.\nColigny's ascendancy and the massacre.\nAfter the conclusion of the Peace of Saint-Germain-en-Laye in 1570, the king increasingly came under the influence of Admiral Gaspard de Coligny, who had succeeded the slain Prince of Cond\u00e9 as leader of Huguenots after the Battle of Jarnac in 1569. Catherine, however, became increasingly fearful of Coligny's unchecked power, especially since he was pursuing an alliance with England and the Dutch. Coligny was also hated by Henry, Duke of Guise, who accused the Admiral of having ordered the assassination of his father Francis of Guise during the siege of Orl\u00e9ans in 1563.\nDuring the peace settlement, a marriage was arranged between Charles' sister Margaret of Valois and Henry of Navarre, the future King Henry IV, who was at that time heir to the throne of Navarre and one of the leading Huguenots. Many Huguenot nobles, including Admiral de Coligny, thronged into Paris for the wedding, which was set for 18 August 1572. On 22 August, a failed attempt on Coligny's life put the city in a state of apprehension, as both visiting Huguenots and Parisian Catholics feared an attack by the other side.\nIn this situation, in the early morning of 24 August 1572, the Duke of Guise moved to avenge his father and murdered Coligny in his lodgings. As Coligny's body was thrown into the street, Parisians mutilated the body. The mob action then erupted into the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre, a systematic slaughter of Huguenots that was to last five days. Henry of Navarre managed to avoid death by pledging to convert to Catholicism. Over the next few weeks, the disorder spread to more cities across France. In all, up to 10,000 Huguenots were killed in Paris and the provinces.\nThough the massacres weakened Huguenot power, they also reignited war, which only ceased after the Edict of Boulogne in 1573 granted Huguenots amnesty and limited religious freedom. However, the year 1574 saw a failed Huguenot coup at Saint-Germain and successful Huguenot uprisings in Normandy, Poitou and the Rh\u00f4ne valley, setting the stage for another round of war.\nDecline and death.\nIn the aftermath of the massacre, the king's fragile mental and physical constitution weakened drastically. His moods swung from boasting about the extremity of the massacre to exclamations that the screams of the murdered Huguenots kept ringing in his ears. Frantically, he blamed alternately himself \u2013 \"What blood shed! What murders!\", he cried to his nurse. \"What evil counsel I have followed! O my God, forgive me... I am lost! I am lost!\" \u2013 or his mother \u2013 \"Who but you is the cause of all of this? God's blood, you are the cause of it all!\" Catherine responded by declaring she had a lunatic for a son.\nCharles' physical condition, tending towards tuberculosis, deteriorated to the point where, by spring of 1574, his hoarse coughing turned bloody and his hemorrhages grew more violent.\nCharles IX died at the Ch\u00e2teau de Vincennes on 30 May 1574, aged 23. Given that his younger brother Henry, Duke of Anjou, had recently been elected King of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth and was away from France, their mother Catherine resumed the regency until Henry's return from Poland.\nIn 1625, long after his death, a book Charles wrote on hunting, \"La Chasse Royale\", was published. It is a valuable source for those interested in the history of hounds and hunting.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75909", "revid": "43066271", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75909", "title": "Hellespont", "text": ""}
{"id": "75910", "revid": "382591", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75910", "title": "Henry II of France", "text": "King of France from 1547 to 1559\nHenry II (; 31 March 1519 \u2013 10 July 1559) was King of France from 1547 until his death in 1559. The second son of Francis I and Claude, Duchess of Brittany, he became Dauphin of France upon the death of his elder brother Francis in 1536.\nAs a child, Henry and his elder brother spent over four years in captivity in Spain as hostages in exchange for their father. Henry pursued his father's policies in matters of art, war, and religion. He persevered in the Italian Wars against the Habsburgs and tried to suppress the Reformation, even as the Huguenot numbers were increasing drastically in France during his reign.\nUnder the April 1559 Peace of Cateau-Cambr\u00e9sis which ended the Italian Wars, France renounced its claims in Italy, but gained certain other territories, including the Pale of Calais and the Three Bishoprics. These acquisitions strengthened French borders while the abdication of Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor in January 1556 and division of his empire between Spain and Austria provided France with greater flexibility in foreign policy. Nostradamus also served King Henry as physician and astrologer.\nIn June 1559, Henry was injured in a jousting tournament held to celebrate the treaty, and died ten days later after his surgeon, Ambroise Par\u00e9, was unable to cure the wound inflicted by Gabriel de Montgomery, the captain of his Scottish Guard. Though he died early, the succession appeared secure, for he left four young sons \u2013 as well as a widow (Catherine de' Medici) to lead a capable regency during their minority. Three of those sons lived long enough to become king; but their youth and sometimes infirmity, and the unpopularity of Catherine's regency, led to challenges to the throne by powerful nobles, and helped to spark the French Wars of Religion between Catholics and Protestants, and an eventual end to the House of Valois as France's ruling dynasty.\nEarly years.\nHenry was born in the royal Ch\u00e2teau de Saint-Germain-en-Laye, near Paris, the son of King Francis I and Claude, Duchess of Brittany, daughter of King Louis XII and Anne, Duchess of Brittany. Francis and Claude were second cousins; both had Louis I, Duke of Orl\u00e9ans, as a patrilineal great-grandfather, and their marriage strengthened the family's claim to the throne.\nHenry's father was captured at the Battle of Pavia in 1525 by the forces of the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V, and held prisoner in Spain. To obtain his release, it was agreed that Henry and his older brother Francis be sent to Spain in his place. They remained in captivity for over four years.\nHenry married Catherine de' Medici, a member of the ruling family of Florence, on 28 October 1533, when they were both fourteen years old. The wedding was officiated by Pope Clement VII, himself a Medici. At this time, Henry's brother Francis was alive and there was little prospect of Henry coming to the throne. The following year, he became romantically involved with a thirty-five-year-old widow, Diane de Poitiers. Henry and Diane had always been very close: the woman had fondly embraced Henry on the day he, as a seven-year-old child, set off to captivity in Spain, and the bond had been renewed after his return to France. At the tournament to honour his father's new bride, Eleanor, in 1531, Henry and Francis dressed as chevaliers, and Henry wore Diane's colors.\nExtremely confident, mature and intelligent, Diane left Catherine powerless to intervene. She did, however, insist that Henry sleep with Catherine in order to produce heirs to the throne. The couple struggled to produce an heir in the first decade of their marriage but the physician Jean Fernel, who may have noticed slight abnormalities in the couple's sexual organs, advised them how to solve the problem. However, he denied ever providing such advice.\nWhen his elder brother Francis died in 1536 after a game of tennis, Henry became heir apparent to the throne.\nHis attachment to Diane caused a breach with his father in 1544; the royal mistress Anne de Pisseleu d'Heilly persuaded Francis that Henry and Diane were conspiring on behalf of the Constable Montmorency, who had been banished from court in 1540. Francis banished Diane from court. Henry also withdrew to the Ch\u00e2teau d'Anet; father and son were reconciled in 1545.\nHe succeeded his father on his 28th birthday and was crowned King of France on 25 July 1547 at Reims Cathedral.\nReign.\nAttitude towards Protestants.\nHenry's reign was marked by the persecution of Protestants, mainly Calvinists known as Huguenots. Henry II severely punished them, particularly the ministers, for example by burning at the stake or cutting off their tongues for uttering heresies.\nHenry II was made a Knight of the Garter by Edward VI, King of England, in April 1551. By 19 July, after some lengthy haggling concerning the dowry, a betrothal was made between his daughter, Elisabeth and Edward.\nThe Edict of Ch\u00e2teaubriant (27 June 1551) called upon the civil and ecclesiastical courts to detect and punish all heretics and placed severe restrictions on Huguenots, including the loss of one-third of their property to informers, and confiscations. The Edict also strictly regulated publications by prohibiting the sale, importation or printing of any unapproved book. It was during the reign of Henry II that Huguenot attempts at establishing a colony in Brazil were made, with the short-lived formation of . In June 1559, with war against the Habsburgs concluded, Henri established in letters patent his desire to task much of the Gendarmerie that had been involved in the foreign wars with the extirpation of domestic heresy.\nItalian War of 1551\u20131559.\nThe Italian War of 1551\u20131559 began when Henry declared war on Holy Roman Emperor Charles V with the intent of recapturing Italy and ensuring French, rather than Habsburg, domination of European affairs. Persecution of Protestants at home did not prevent him from becoming allied with German Protestant princes at the Treaty of Chambord in 1552. Simultaneously, the continuation of his father's Franco-Ottoman alliance allowed him to invade the Rhineland while a Franco-Ottoman fleet defended southern France. Although an attempted 1553 invasion of Tuscany ended with defeat at Marciano, in return for his support in the Second Schmalkaldic War, Henry occupied the Three Bishoprics of Toul, Verdun and Metz, acquisitions secured with victory at Renty in 1554.\nAfter the abdication of Charles V in 1556, the Habsburg empire was split between his son Philip II of Spain and brother Emperor Ferdinand I. The focus of Henry's conflict with the Habsburgs shifted to Flanders, where Philip, in conjunction with Emmanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy, defeated the French at St Quentin. England's entry into the war later that year led to the French capture of Calais, and French armies plundered the Spanish Netherlands. However, in April 1559 lack of money and increasing domestic religious tensions led Henry to agree the Peace of Cateau-Cambr\u00e9sis.\nThe Peace was signed between Henry and Elizabeth I on 2 April and between Henry and Philip of Spain on 3 April 1559 at Le Cateau-Cambr\u00e9sis. Under its terms, France restored Piedmont and Savoy to Emmanuel Philibert, but retained Saluzzo, Calais and the Three Bishoprics. The agreement was reinforced by a marriage between Henry's sister Margaret and Emmanuel Philibert, while his daughter Elisabeth of Valois became Philip's third wife.\nHenry raised the young Mary, Queen of Scots, at his court, hoping to establish a dynastic claim to the Kingdom of Scotland by her marriage to Dauphin Francis on 24 April 1558. Their son would have been King of France and King of Scotland, and also a claimant to the throne of England. Henry had Mary sign secret documents, illegal in Scottish law, that would ensure Valois rule in Scotland even if Mary died without leaving a child by Francis. As it happened, Francis died without issue a year and half after his father, ending the French claim to Scotland.\nPatent innovation.\nHenry II introduced the concept of publishing the description of an invention in the form of a patent. The idea was to require an inventor to disclose his invention in exchange for monopoly rights to the patent. The description is called a patent \"specification\". The first patent specification was submitted by the inventor Abel Foullon for (a type of rangefinder). Publication was delayed until after the patent expired in 1561.\nDeath.\nHenry II was an avid hunter and a participant in jousts and tournaments. On 30 June 1559, a tournament was held near Place des Vosges to celebrate the Peace of Cateau-Cambr\u00e9sis with his longtime enemies, the Habsburgs of Austria, and to celebrate the marriage of his daughter Elisabeth of Valois to King Philip II of Spain. During a jousting match, King Henry, wearing the colours of his mistress Diane de Poitiers, was wounded in the eye by a fragment of the splintered lance of Gabriel Montgomery, captain of the King's Scottish Guard. Despite the efforts of royal surgeons Ambroise Par\u00e9 and Andreas Vesalius, the court doctors ultimately \"advocated a wait-and-see strategy\"; as a result, the king's untreated eye and brain damage led to his death by sepsis on 10 July 1559. His autopsy found that he had a cerebral abscess and the infection that he got through sepsis probably travelled to his brain. He was buried in a cadaver tomb in Saint Denis Basilica. Henry's death played a significant role in the decline of jousting as a sport, particularly in France.\nAs Henry lay dying, Queen Catherine limited access to his bedside and denied Diane de Poitiers permission to see him, even though he repeatedly asked for her. Following his death, Catherine sent Diane into exile, where she lived in comfort on her own properties until her death.\nIt was the practice to enclose the heart of the king in an urn. The Monument to the Heart of Henry II is in the collection of the Louvre, but was originally in the Chapel of Orleans beneath a pyramid. The original bronze urn holding the king's heart was destroyed during the French Revolution and a replica was made in the 19th century. The marble sculpture of the Three Graces holding the urn, executed from a single piece of marble by Germain Pilon, the sculptor to Catherine de' Medici, survives.\nHenry was succeeded by his sickly fifteen-year-old son, Francis II. Francis was married to sixteen-year-old Mary, Queen of Scots, who had been his childhood friend and fianc\u00e9e since her arrival at the French court when she was five. Francis II died in December 1560, and Mary returned to Scotland in August 1561. Francis II was succeeded by his ten-year-old brother Charles IX. His mother, Catherine de' Medici, acted as regent.\nChildren.\nCatherine de' Medici bore ten of Henry's children:\nHenry II also had three illegitimate children:\nPortrayals.\nHenri or Henry has had five notable portrayals onscreen:\nHe was played by a young Roger Moore in the 1956 film \"Diane\", opposite Lana Turner in the title role and Marisa Pavan as Catherine de Medici.\nIn the 1994 film \"Nostradamus\", he is played by Anthony Higgins.\nIn the 1998 film \"Ever After\", the Prince Charming figure, portrayed by Dougray Scott, shares his name with the historical monarch.\nIn the 2013 CW series \"Reign\", he is played by Alan van Sprang.\nIn the premiere of \"The Serpent Queen\" (2022), a young Henri (Alex Heath) is shown meeting and marrying Catherine De Medici, performing consummation of the marriage, jousting, and snuggling in the older Diane's arms. Beginning with the fourth episode, older Henri is portrayed by Lee Ingleby.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75912", "revid": "42723274", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75912", "title": "Time Lord", "text": "Fictional alien species in the Doctor Who universe\nThe Time Lords are a fictional ancient race of extraterrestrial people in the British science fiction television series \"Doctor Who\". In-universe, they hail from the planet Gallifrey and are stated to have invented time travel technology. They have sworn an oath to not interfere in the universe; those who reject this and leave the planet to live in the universe are referred to as \"renegades\". One of their number, the Doctor, fled Gallifrey, stealing one of their time machines known as a TARDIS. In the early days of the series, the Time Lords were not initially referred to, and though the Doctor was stated to be non-human, the character did not clarify beyond that. The Time Lords, as well as the Doctor's affiliation with them, first appeared in the 1969 serial \"The War Games\". Following this appearance, the Time Lords serve as recurring characters, with many individual Time Lords serving either antagonistic or supporting roles in the series. Following the show's 2005 revival, it is revealed the Time Lords had been wiped out in-universe, killed by the Doctor during the events of a war against a species known as the Daleks. Though the Doctor is later able to go back and save the Time Lords in the 2013 episode \"The Day of the Doctor\", they are killed again by the antagonist the Master during the events of the 2020 episode \"Spyfall\".\nThe Time Lords originally did not exist in the series' narrative, though the Doctor referred to not being human. When creating 1969 serial \"The War Games\", the production team needed a way to resolve the narrative of the serial in a satisfying manner. The team decided to have him meet his own people to bring the narrative back to the Doctor's origins. The Time Lords are believed to have been conceived by producer Derrick Sherwin, who initially had assumed they were a pre-existing element in the series. Sherwin discussed and planned out the Time Lords' role with co-writer Terrance Dicks, laying the groundwork for the Time Lords' future appearances in the series. Though the Time Lords were initially portrayed as god-like figures, they were recontextualised significantly by the 1976 serial \"The Deadly Assassin.\" The serial depicted them as having internal political struggles, with Time Lords being hypocritical and corrupt in their nature. The serial also established a distinct visual identity for the Time Lord race, having them wear ceremonial robes and large collars. This depiction of the Time Lords would be maintained throughout the rest of the show's original run. The show's 2005 revival would end up killing the Time Lord race due to showrunner Russell T Davies finding the Time Lords boring, while also wanting to establish them as mythological figures in the series' lore. The following showrunner, Steven Moffat, would bring them back to establish a new character arc for the Doctor, allowing the character to move on from their guilt caused by their actions in destroying them. \nThe Time Lords have been treated with a mixed response, particularly for their depiction in episodes following \"The Deadly Assassin.\" The decision to kill the Time Lords was met with praise by critics, who noted how it helped to expand the Doctor's character as well as the Time Lords' role in the series' wider narrative. The Time Lords have been the subject of scholarly analysis for a variety of subjects.\nIn-universe information.\n\"Doctor Who\" is a long-running British science-fiction television series that began in 1963. It stars its protagonist, the Doctor, an alien who travels through time and space in a ship known as the TARDIS, as well as their travelling companions. When the Doctor dies, they are able to undergo a process known as \"regeneration\", completely changing the Doctor's appearance and personality. Throughout their travels, the Doctor often comes into conflict with various alien species and antagonists.\nCharacteristics.\nThe Time Lords live on a planet known as Gallifrey, a yellow-orange planet. A large city called the Capitol resides on the planet, where a large number of Time Lords live. All Time Lords are part of the species known as Gallifreyans, but not every Gallifreyan is a Time Lord, though many involved with the show have interchangeably referenced the Time Lords being either a race or a species. Time Lord society is largely present within the Capitol, also called the Citadel, with the land outside of the cities being a wasteland. The Capitol contains a location known as the Academy, where young Gallifreyans are raised as Time Lords. Those who drop out of Time Lord society live outside of the Capitol, and are dubbed \"outsiders\", while those who become Time Lords tend to be from \"ruling houses\", which are implied to be at the top Gallifreyan society. Gallifrey is protected by an impenetrable barrier, which prevents most forms of attack. The term \"Time Lord\" tends to refer to a male Time Lord, while \"Time Lady\" is used to refer to a female Time Lord; despite this, the term Time Lord has also often been used as an overarching term to refer to both sexes of Time Lord. Time Lords and human beings look alike, but differ in that they have several physiological differences, with Time Lords having two hearts. Time Lords, upon death, have the ability to \"regenerate\", during which they are healed from their mortal injuries, but have their physical appearances and minds changed in the process. Time Lords are capable of regenerating twelve times, making for a total of thirteen lives in one Time Lord's life. Another process that exists, introduced in 2023 episode \"The Giggle\", is known as bi-generation, in which the Time Lord splits into two copies of the same person when regenerating. Time Lords also have some level of psychic powers, as well as the power of hypnosis and a \"respiratory bypass system\" which allows them to avoid being strangled. Time Lords are also capable of disguising themselves as humans using a device called a Chameleon Arch.\nThe Time Lords were originally members of a species known as the Shobogans who were genetically altered with the DNA of a being known as the Timeless Child, a being that later would become the Doctor. This granted Time Lords the ability to regenerate. Later, a Time Lord named Rassilon would work with another Time Lord named Omega to create the first time travel spaceship, harnessing the power of a star going supernova to fuel the device. Though it succeeded, Omega disappeared during the incident. Rassilon harnessed the nucleus of the resulting black hole to provide the energy that powers time travel, resulting in much of Omega's praise being given to Rassilon, and Rassilon became a defining figure in Time Lord society. Rassilon took control of the Time Lords' home planet Gallifrey as its \"Lord High President\". The Time Lords became an influential race in the universe, becoming important figures during a period known as \"The Dark Times\", waging war with a species known as the Great Vampires. They also established a faction known as the Division to interfere with history when needed, though the Division split off to become separate from the Time Lords entirely, often outsourcing their work to other alien species, such as the Weeping Angels and Lupari. As the universe stabilised, the Time Lords decided to take a vow of non-interference, deciding not to interact with the universe and merely observe it. Though most Time Lords follow this vow of non-intervention, those who leave the planet for one reason or another to act on their own accord in the universe are dubbed \"renegades\" and include recurring characters such as the Doctor, the Master, and the Rani. \nAppearances.\nClassic series.\nThe First Doctor steals a TARDIS, one of the time-travel ships the Time Lords use, and flees Gallifrey with his granddaughter Susan Foreman sometime prior to the events of the series. Subsequently, the Doctor, during his travels, encounters and thwarts many conflicts throughout history. Eventually, in the 1969 serial \"The War Games\", during an incident in which a group known as the War Lords capture humans from throughout time and space, the Second Doctor is forced to contact the Time Lords to resolve the situation. The Time Lords deal with the War Lords, but subsequently put the Doctor on trial for his interference throughout time and space. After showing them how he has stopped evils during his travels, the Time Lords decide to force him to regenerate and exile him to Earth, where the Doctor has spent a significant amount of time during his travels. \nThe Third Doctor is used as an agent by the Time Lords during his exile in the 1971 serial \"Colony in Space\" and the 1972 serials \"The Mutants\" and \"The Curse of Peladon\", in which he is sent off-world to resolve conflicts on the Time Lords' behalf. The Doctor also comes into conflict with another renegade Time Lord, the Master, who repeatedly has his schemes thwarted by the Doctor, and would repeatedly feature as a recurring antagonist. The Time Lords eventually contact the first three incarnations of the Doctor during 1973 serial \"The Three Doctors\" in order to defeat Omega, who has returned to the universe and is attempting to get revenge on the Time Lords for seemingly abandoning him. After Omega is seemingly destroyed, the Time Lords revoke the Third Doctor's exile, allowing him to travel freely again. He is later sent on a mission by the Time Lords during the events of the 1975 serial \"Genesis of the Daleks\", where they request the Doctor to go back in time to the Daleks' creation in an attempt to destroy them.\nThe Fourth Doctor eventually returns to Gallifrey during the events of the 1976 serial \"The Deadly Assassin\", during which he stops a plan by the Master to destroy Gallifrey to gain more regenerations. The Doctor again returns to Gallifrey during the 1978 serial \"The Invasion of Time\", where the Doctor stops a dual Vardan and Sontaran invasion of Gallifrey, and later travels with a Time Lady named Romana, who was sent by the Time Lords to help him in his quest to assemble the Key to Time. The Time Lords again appear in the 1983 serial \"Arc of Infinity\", during which the Fifth Doctor helps stop another attempt by Omega to return to reality. The 1983 anniversary special \"The Five Doctors\" sees the Lord President of Gallifrey, Borusa, capture several incarnations of the Doctor, as well as many of their companions and old enemies, from throughout time and space, using them to break into Rassilon's tomb so Borusa can obtain the secret to immortality. The Time Lords send the Master to help the Doctor in stopping the scheme, though the Master ends up betraying the Time Lords; the Master is eventually knocked unconscious. Borusa arrives in the tomb after the Doctors find their way in, but is turned to stone by a disembodied apparition of Rassilon. Rassilon returns everyone captured by Borusa back to their home times. \nThe Sixth Doctor later encounters a Time Lady who has left the planet, named the Rani, who acts as a recurring enemy. The Time Lords eventually again capture the Doctor and put him on trial in \"The Trial of a Time Lord\". The Sixth Doctor debates against the prosecutor known as the Valeyard, who is revealed to be a dark incarnation of the Doctor from his future. The Valeyard has manipulated the trial to try and get the Doctor's remaining regenerations, and flees into Time Lord information repository the Matrix in an attempt to escape. The Doctor stops both him and the Master, and is released by the Time Lords as thanks for his help in stopping them. \nRevived series.\nSometime following the events depicted in the Classic series but before the revival's first series, the Daleks, realizing the Time Lords attempted to interfere in their creation, become involved in a massive interstellar war fought across time and space against the Time Lords known as the \"Last Great Time War\". Both sides utilised time travel, with the war being fought outside of normal space-time. Many key figures in Time Lord society participated in the war, including Rassilon, who was resurrected from the dead to act as a leader, and the Master, who initially fought in the war before eventually fleeing from it. The Doctor's Eighth incarnation was originally a conscientious objector, working to help those in the cosmos where he could, but eventually, after a young woman named Cass denies him rescuing her from a crashing ship on account of him being a Time Lord, the Doctor chooses to regenerate into a warrior. His subsequent incarnation, the War Doctor, entered the war and actively participated in it, eventually ending the war by using a device called the Moment to seemingly destroy both sides, leaving the Doctor the apparent sole Time Lord left in the universe.\nThough the Master was also revealed to have escaped the war, the Time Lords as a race did not physically re-appear until \"The End of Time\" (2009-2010), in which Rassilon, during the final days of the Time War, attempts to destroy time and space as a whole to make the Time Lords become the final living race in the universe. Though Gallifrey is briefly able to escape the war, the Tenth Doctor stops Rassilon, sending the Time Lords back into the war. \nDuring the 2013 50th anniversary special \"The Day of the Doctor\", the War Doctor meets his future incarnations, the Tenth and Eleventh Doctors, and the three are able to work together to save the Time Lords from the last day of the war, sending the Time Lords and Gallifrey into a pocket universe. The Time Lords attempt to return the universe during the events of the 2013 episode \"The Time of the Doctor\", needing the Doctor to speak his name into a crack in time to know if it's safe to return. Species from across the universe lay siege to the planet Trenzalore to stop the Doctor from speaking his name; though the Eleventh Doctor, on his final regeneration, does not intend to speak his name, he stays to defend the town of Christmas on the planet, as it will be destroyed by the invading forces if he is to leave. After hundreds of years of defending the planet, he is about to die; the Time Lords gift the Doctor more regeneration energy, allowing him to survive and defeat an invading Dalek fleet. The Time Lords subsequently return to the universe, with the Twelfth Doctor eventually making it back to Gallifrey in \"Hell Bent\" (2015), during which the Doctor exiles Rassilon and uses Time Lord technology to pluck his companion Clara Oswald from moments before her death to save her life.\nGallifrey is destroyed again by the Master in the 2020 episode \"Spyfall\", with the Master exterminating all Time Lords in the universe off-screen with a \"genetic explosion\". The Master later converts the Time Lords into mechanical cyborgs known as Cybermen in the 2020 episode \"The Timeless Children\". These Cybermen, dubbed \"Cybermasters\", have the ability to regenerate, unlike regular Cybermen. The Master reveals to the Thirteenth Doctor that she is the Timeless Child. The Doctor is able to rig a \"death particle\" to destroy all organic life on the planet, destroying most of the Cybermasters, though some are implied to escape with the Master. The Cybermasters re-appear during the events of the 2022 special \"The Power of the Doctor\", and are seemingly all killed during the episode. \nThe Doctor also encounters the Division during the events of \"Fugitive of the Judoon\" (2020) in which she and her Fugitive incarnation, who was a former Division operative, defeat a Time Lord operative named Gat. During the events of \"\", the Thirteenth Doctor encounters Tecteun, a Time Lord who adopted the Timeless Child and pioneered regeneration in Time Lords. Following the Doctor learning about the nature of her true identity from the Master, Tecteun attempts to orchestrate a wave of anti-matter known as the Flux to destroy the entire universe, allowing her and the Division to escape to another reality away from the Doctor. Tecteun is killed by Swarm and Azure, enemies of the Division, with the Doctor later defeating them and stopping the Flux wave.\nThe Rani is later revealed to have survived the genetic explosion, and during the events of 2025 episodes \"Wish World\" and \"The Reality War\", attempts to summon Omega so she can revive the Time Lords using DNA from his body. The Rani, who has bi-generated, is eaten by a monstrous Omega, with her other self, dubbed Mrs. Flood, escaping. Omega is blasted with a laser back into his home dimension by the Fifteenth Doctor. \nIn spin-off media.\nMany pieces of spin-off media focus on Gallifrey, particularly in terms of the Doctor's origins on the planet. However, many of these accounts are contradictory and do not align with events portrayed in other media: For example, accounts of the Doctor's true name that they used on Gallifrey are never consistent and often are different between different forms of media. Many of these contradictory elements were explained in canon by various means, but most notably by the introduction of the Time War, which explained narrative inconsistencies by stating that the War's effects caused the events of different pieces of media to be \"cancelled out\". Several elements of the Time Lords' history are present across spin-off media, but are not always present in the main show. One major element was the concept of looms, which are devices used by the Time Lords to reproduce after being rendered infertile. These have been used in multiple forms of media, such as comics and novels. Another is the character of Irving Braxiatel, the Doctor's brother, who acts as a recurring character across multiple spin-off series, including in media focusing on the character of Bernice Summerfield. Other concepts that originate in spin-off media, such as the domed citadel of the Time Lords that debuted in comic strips, would later be adapted and made canon to the television series. \nThe spin-off media crossover event \"Time Lord Victorious\" depicts the Tenth Doctor going back in time to the Dark Times and defeating Death, which has negative consequences for the universe. The crossover event depicts Time Lords during the Dark Times, with the Daleks and many incarnations of the Doctor becoming involved in the conflict. One comic, for example, depicts a conflict between Gallifreyans, before they became Time Lords, fighting in the war against the Great Vampires, and depicts Rassilon as a field commander before they came to power. \"Time Lord Victorious\" was depicted across multiple pieces of spin-off media, including novels, audio dramas, comic strips, and real-world immersive events.\nNovels.\nThe 1997 Virgin New Adventures novel \"Lungbarrow\" depicted an execution of a planned storyline for the Classic series before its cancellation; the novel revealed the Doctor to secretly be a mythical figure in Time Lord society known as the Other. This conflicted with other novels published by BBC Books at the time, which followed the idea of the Doctor being half human. Another concept introduced in \"Lungbarrow\" was that of the Pythia, a being who, in the past of the Time Lords, rendered the Time Lords infertile, resulting in them utilising looms for reproduction. \nLater books published by BBC Books introduced a group known as the Faction Paradox, who opposed Time Lord society and aimed to cause time anomalies for fun. The Faction was revealed to be run by an alternate version of the Doctor dubbed Grandfather Paradox, and though the Doctor stopped Paradox and ended the Faction, Gallifrey was destroyed in the process. Other novels would include the concept of a time war prior to its introduced in the revived series. In various media starring the Eighth Doctor, as well in \"Faction Paradox\" spin-off material, a concept known as the \"War in Heaven\" is introduced, in which the Time Lords are depicted fighting an unidentified \"enemy\" in a massive temporal conflict. The Time Lords are depicted as having more than thirteen regenerations. These Time Lords also have the ability for Time Lord soldiers to adapt their bodies depending on the terrain of the battlefield, with some being mutated into organic weapons of war.\nAudio.\nThe \"Gallifrey\" audio drama series produced by Big Finish Productions depicts Romana returning to Gallifrey and assuming the position of President, working alongside the character Leela to improve Time Lord society for the better while dealing with political drama and terrorist attacks. Later audio dramas would depict the build-up to the Time War depicted on-screen, such as in the \"Dark Eyes\" and \"The Eighth Doctor: The Time War\" spin-off series. Several audio dramas focusing on the War Doctor also reveal more about the events of the Time War, while the audio drama series \"The War Master\" depicts the incarnation of the Master that fought in the war, as well as several of the war's events. Another series, dubbed \"Susan's War\", focuses on Susan's role in the Time War.\nCreation and development.\nClassic series.\nEarly on in the series, the Doctor was identified as a human being; however, their home planet, which from the start of the series is explicitly established as not being Earth, was not named. Regeneration, out of universe, was introduced to replace First Doctor actor William Hartnell, who was falling into poor health. The Doctor's process of regeneration was also not initially specified, with the process being described as \"renewal\" and its origins unclear, not being clearly elaborated until the 1970s. Details of the Doctor's home were never specified, even when encountering another character implied to be of the same species, the Meddling Monk.\nThe Time Lords were created for the 1969 serial \"The War Games\", with the initial idea being brought up by producer Derrick Sherwin, who suggested the Doctor meet his own people. The idea of the Doctor belonging to another species was only vaguely brought up in the series' early days, with Sherwin stating that the inclusion of the Time Lords in this episode would either serve as a good end point if the series was cancelled, or allow the series to progress into a new format if it kept going. Elaborating on this genesis in a 2014 interview in \"Doctor Who Magazine\", Sherwin said of \"The War Games\", \"It was a case of what shall we do, how can we end this? Let's go back to the beginning and say [the Doctor] was a Time Lord, a renegade Time Lord, a pain in the arse for the other Time Lords who stole his TARDIS and buggered off around the universe. So if he's going to be called to book let's bring in the Time Lords.\" In \"The War Games\" DVD commentary, Sherwin mentioned that he recalled hearing about the Time Lords at the beginning of the series, but as no one else remembered this, it \"might have come out of [his] dreams\". In a 2016 interview with \"The Essential Doctor Who\" magazine, Dicks mentioned how when Sherwin and he were discussing \"The War Games\" one day, Sherwin said, \"He belongs to this mysterious race called the Time Lords, doesn't he?\" with \"everything\" ultimately coming from that discussion. In an audio commentary recorded for the 2009 DVD release of \"The War Games,\" the serial's co-writer Terrance Dicks stated he believed Sherwin had created the Time Lords, though Sherwin did not remember himself. A recurring Time Lord enemy, the Master, would be introduced to the series in 1971's \"Terror of the Autons\", serving as a foil and recurring enemy to the Doctor, characterised as the Professor Moriarty to the Doctor's Sherlock Holmes. Dicks, as well as producer Barry Letts, disliked the Doctor's exile to Earth at the hands of the Time Lords, and so used them as a plot device to get the Doctor in adventures off the planet.\nPreviously, for \"Terror of the Autons,\" a Time Lord appeared disguised as a regular city inhabitant to warn the Doctor of the Master's arrival. Toby Hadoke, a person affiliated with the series, has stated that this was an early example of writer Robert Holmes deciding he was disinterested in the god-like concept of the Time Lords. Holmes would later write the 1976 serial \"The Deadly Assassin\", which greatly recontextualised the Time Lords. Whereas before they were characterised as \"austere, god-like beings\", the Time Lords now had internal political struggles, with the Time Lords only becoming powerful due to scientific achievement and not a \"mystical\" power or ability. Holmes wanted to make the Time Lords more \"human\" in how they acted, being unsatisfied with god-like characters. Holmes wished to \"correct the picture\", retconning much of the Time Lords' history to be hypocritical and corrupt; for example, the Time Lords' previous off-world use of the Doctor during his exile was done in-universe so the Time Lords could interfere with galactic affairs despite their oath of non-intervention. Holmes similarly introduced many concepts relating to the Time Lords in this serial. He introduced Rassilon, who usurped the character Omega as being a mystic, founding figure in Time Lord society, and introduced the concept of the Matrix as an information repository for the species. Holmes laid out that regeneration could only be performed twelve times, and also named the Time Lords' home planet, Gallifrey, which had been name-dropped previously in Holmes' 1973-1974 serial \"The Time Warrior\". Gallifrey was originally known as \"Galfrey\", with an extra syllable added during production.\nIn \"The War Games,\" the Time Lords had instead worn simple black and white robes for their costumes. For \"The Deadly Assassin\", the Time Lords instead wore ceremonial robes with large collars, with the collars designed by designer James Acheson. These new costumes from \"The Deadly Assassin\" would be retained and re-used in the Time Lords' subsequent appearances in the series, with many aspects of the design, notably the collar, being adapted into other Time Lord imagery throughout the series. A symbol that had featured in the 1975 serial \"Revenge of the Cybermen\" was re-used and became a symbol associated visually with the Time Lords as the \"Seal of Rassilon\". \nThe return to Gallifrey in 1978 serial \"The Invasion of Time\" was done due to producer Graham Williams wanting to see more of the environment established in \"The Deadly Assassin\". This was also done due to the team being able to cheaply re-use costumes and set pieces from \"The Deadly Assassin\". The serial sought to explore the idea that not all Gallifreyans were Time Lords, and wanted to take a deeper look at those who did not become Time Lords. \"The Invasion of Time\" also saw the return of Borusa, who was previously in a smaller role in \"The Deadly Assassin\" but was now promoted to a higher rank in Time Lord society. Due to frequent appearances by the Time Lords during the 1970s, the Guardians were created to fulfill a role as god-like beings in the sixteenth season of the show. The only Time Lords to feature over the next season barring the Doctor were the Doctor's new companion Romana, a Time Lady designed as a \"perfect foil\" to the Doctor's character due to her acting more like traditional Time Lords, and another Time Lord named Drax who appeared in the 1979 serial \"The Armageddon Factor\" as a supporting character.\nThe subsequent return to Gallifrey in 1983's \"Arc of Infinity\" was done to celebrate the show's twentieth anniversary, with the serial bringing back many past Time Lord characters such as Borusa and Omega. Subsequently, the show's twentieth anniversary special, \"The Five Doctors\", saw a further re-appearance by the Time Lords, with Dicks incorporating Borusa into the role of main antagonist to subvert audience expectations that the Master was behind the episode's events; Rassilon was also incorporated into the narrative. Several Time Lord characters were also re-used from \"Arc of Infinity\".\nThe Time Lords putting the Doctor on trial in 1986's \"The Trial of a Time Lord\" was done symbolically; \"Doctor Who\" was not doing well at the time, and the show was struggling to continue. The trial was representative of how the show was \"on trial for its life\", and also served to reference \"The War Games\" in how the Doctor was tried for interfering with the affairs of the universe. Several new Time Lord characters were introduced, such as the Valeyard, a villainous incarnation of the Doctor, and the Inquisitor, who presides over the trial.\nA planned expansion to the lore of the Time Lords was the introduction of a being known as \"the Other\", a mysterious mythic figure from the Time Lords' past that was a founding figure of Time Lord society alongside Rassilon and Omega. The Other would be revealed as the Doctor. Dubbed the Cartmel Masterplan after then-script editor Andrew Cartmel, hints were dropped toward the Doctor's true identity in the last two seasons of the Classic era, though these ideas would not be enacted upon due to the show's cancelation. Several of these ideas would be used as a baseline for the Virgin New Adventures tie-in novel range, most notably in the 1997 novel \"Lungbarrow\". Another concept planned for a cancelled series of the show was in the planned serial \"Ice Time\", which would have seen a return of the Ice Warriors. The Doctor would have tried to enroll his companion Ace in a Time Lord academy in order to \"shake Time Lord society out of its lethargy\", with Ace being judged for inclusion by Time Lords.\nRevived series.\nWhen the show was revived following its cancellation in 1989, then-showrunner Russell T Davies decided to kill the Time Lords in a large conflict known as the Time War, which removed both them and the Daleks as established forces in the universe. Davies found the Time Lords boring, and even with rewrites to make them more human, he felt that their execution would have de-valued the narrative impact of the Time War. Davies also wished to make the Time Lords more mythological figures, wanting to distance them from being \"figures of continuity\". Davies envisioned the War as being a conflict so horrible that the dead were brought back to life constantly, allowing him to bring back figures like Rassilon who were previously thought dead. The Doctor would experience survivor guilt as a result of surviving the war, and the war would greatly affect the series' universe going forward. For the Time Lords' eventual return in \"The End of Time\" (2009-2010), Davies decided to characterise them as being corrupt figures who had evolved into monsters during the course of the war, justifying why the Doctor would have to stop their return and why he had to end the war by destroying both sides.\nThe return of the Time Lords in \"The Day of the Doctor\" (2013) was done by then-showrunner Steven Moffat, who wanted to write a special episode for the show's fiftieth anniversary that was narratively important to the Doctor's character. Wanting it to focus on a pivotal day in the Doctor's life, Moffat chose to write about the Time War, Gallifrey, and the Time Lords, and their impact on the Doctor's character, with the Doctor's saving of the Time Lords allowing the character to move on from their guilt from the war. This would eventually result in a plot thread in which the Doctor began to seek out Gallifrey following the events of this episode. Moffat eventually had the Doctor return to Gallifrey in \"Hell Bent\" (2015), a story which showed the Doctor at their lowest point. The story would depict not only the return of Rassilon and a character called the General, who had previously appeared in \"The Day of the Doctor\", but also saw an expansion on elements of the Time Lord lore, such as with the introduction of a location known as the Cloisters, a place below the Capitol that was considered dangerous by other Time Lords. \nReception and analysis.\nReception.\nThe initial decision to not make the Time Lords god-like beings in \"The Deadly Assassin\" was controversial among fans of the series at the time, as they did not like the changes made to the Time Lords established nature. The serial would retroactively be considered one of the show's best, however. The book \"Who Is The Doctor 2: The Unofficial Guide to Doctor Who \u2014 The Modern Series\" stated that despite the Time Lords' mythic status within the show, the consistent returns to the planet featured mundane presentation, which the book stated provided Time Lord stories with \"diminishing returns\". Literary critic John Kenneth Muir stated in the book \"A Critical History of Doctor Who on Television\" that by the end of the series, the Time Lords had become the show's biggest villains, more evil than other antagonists due to the hypocrisy of their actions. He stated that while the Time Lords wouldn't be revisited again in the Classic series following the revelation of their villainy, he believed there wasn't much room left for their characters to progress, stating \"Where can you go after exposing the super race as bunch of lying, conspiratorial hypocrites?\". \nWriting for \"Radio Times\", Olivia Garrett positively highlighted the decision to kill the Time Lords for the series' revival, as it allowed for the Doctor to be expanded as a character. Adi Tantimedh, writing for \"Bleeding Cool\", similarly stated that the Time Lords' demise allowed for the Doctor to develop into a \"mythic\" figure on their own, while also allowing for new viewers to jump onto the show without needing to be familiar with the Time Lords' lore. \"Who Is The Doctor 2: The Unofficial Guide to Doctor Who \u2014 The Modern Series\" stated that the decision allowed the Time Lords to never disappoint audiences when they returned due to their lack of heavy involvement in the series' narrative, and that their in-universe disappearance allowed for the Doctor to gain additional emotional sympathy from the audience. Steven Cooper, writing for \"Slant Magazine\", praised the decision to retcon the Doctor's decision to destroy the Time Lords be to also save the universe from them, as it provided greater narrative weight to the Doctor's actions. Lewis Knight, writing for \"Radio Times\", believed the Time Lords should be brought back permanently, as the Time Lords' continued presence in the universe allowed for a greater exploration of the dynamic between them and the Doctor, as well as of Time Lord culture as a whole. \nAnalysis.\nThe book \"Once Upon a Time Lord: The Myths and Stories of Doctor Who\" discussed how the depiction of the Time Lords in \"Doctor Who\" media emphasised how Romantic ideas of traditional society could be warped and distorted, as despite the Time Lords maintaining a vow of non-intervention, they are shown to be a cruel and despotic race not dissimilar from the warmongering Daleks in their actions. The book \"Academia and Higher Learning in Popular Culture\" stated that the Time Lords have a close association between the academy and their teachings of non-interference; these allusions are shown to illustrate how the Time Lords view themselves as being intellectually superior to other races, and how they look down on those below them. The paper \"Doctor Who and Race: Reflections on the Change of Britain's Status in the International System\" stated that the destruction of the Time Lords allowed for the Doctor to be symbolic of how class warfare evolved over time, as the Doctor no longer represented an \"upper-class Englishman\" during the show's revival as they had during the Classic era, with the rest of the Time Lords they opposed being characterised as destructive and power hungry individuals. Similarly, the Fifth Doctor's clashes with Gallifreyan society in the Classic series were considered symbolic of class struggles at the time of those episodes' airings. \nThe book \"Design for Doctor Who: Vision and Revision in Science Fiction Television\" analysed the usage of the Time Lords' ceremonial robes and collars in their iconography; it stated that while the costumes had proven to be cumbersome and not be taken as seriously by modern day audiences, they still continued to be retained due to their importance in the visual identity of the Time Lords, which the book stated helped unify the classic and revived series through this shared element. The paper \"Gallifrey Falls No More: Doctor Who's Ontology of Time\" analysed the Time Lords' role in maintaining time in the \"Doctor Who\" universe, as well as their relation to eternalism. Comparing their role as \"gods\" of time in the series to how eternalism treats all of time equally, the paper stated that the ability for the universe to be changed without the Time Lords' presence showed how all points in time were already set in stone, and thus the show's depiction of time fell within an eternalist perspective. A paper by the \"Scientific American\" analysed how the Time Lords' two hearts could work in real life. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75916", "revid": "10512", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75916", "title": "Athamas (old)", "text": ""}
{"id": "75917", "revid": "49473253", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75917", "title": "Magnet therapy", "text": "Pseudoscientific alternative medicine practice\nMagnetic therapy is a pseudoscientific alternative medicine practice involving the weak static magnetic field produced by a permanent magnet which is placed on the body. It is similar to the alternative medicine practice of electromagnetic therapy, which uses a magnetic field generated by an electrically powered device. Magnet therapy products may include wristbands, jewelry, blankets, and wraps that have magnets incorporated into them.\nPractitioners claim that subjecting certain parts of the body to weak electric or magnetic fields has beneficial health effects. These physical and biological claims are unproven and no effects on health or healing have been established. Although hemoglobin, the blood protein that carries oxygen, is weakly diamagnetic (when oxygenated) or paramagnetic (when deoxygenated), the magnets used in magnetic therapy are many orders of magnitude too weak to have any measurable effect on blood flow.\nThis is not to be confused with transcranial magnetic stimulation, a scientifically valid form of therapy, or with pulsed electromagnetic field therapy.\nMethods of application.\nMagnet therapy involves applying the weak magnetic field of permanent magnets to the body, for purported health benefits. Different effects are assigned to different orientations of the magnet.\nProducts include magnetic bracelets and jewelry; magnetic straps for wrists, ankles, knees, and back; shoe insoles; mattresses; magnetic blankets (blankets with magnets woven into the material); magnetic creams; magnetic supplements; plasters/patches and water that has been \"magnetized\". These products generally use neodymium and ferrite magnets and the application is usually performed by the patient.\nIt is similar to the alternative medicine practice of electromagnetic therapy, which uses the weak electric or magnetic fields as well, but generated by electrically powered devices.\nSuggested mechanisms of action.\nPerhaps the most common suggested mechanism is that magnets might improve blood flow in underlying tissues. The field surrounding magnet therapy devices is far too weak and falls off with distance far too quickly to appreciably affect hemoglobin, other blood components, muscle tissue, bones, blood vessels, or organs. A 1991 study on humans of static field strengths up to 1 T found no effect on local blood flow. Tissue oxygenation is similarly unaffected. Some practitioners claim that the magnets can restore the body's hypothetical \"electromagnetic energy balance\", but no such balance is medically recognized. Even in the magnetic fields used in magnetic resonance imaging, which are many times stronger, none of the claimed effects are observed. If the body were meaningfully affected by the weak magnets used in magnet therapy, MRI would be impractical.\nEfficacy.\nSeveral studies have been conducted in recent years to investigate what role, if any, static magnetic fields may play in health and healing. Unbiased studies of magnetic therapy are problematic, since magnetisation can be easily detected, for instance, by the attraction forces on ferrous (iron-containing) objects; because of this, effective blinding of studies (where neither patients nor assessors know who is receiving treatment versus placebo) is difficult. Incomplete or insufficient blinding tends to exaggerate treatment effects, particularly where any such effects are small. Health claims regarding longevity and cancer treatment are implausible and unsupported by any research. More mundane health claims, most commonly about anecdotal pain relief, also lack any credible proposed mechanism and clinical research is not promising.\nThe American Cancer Society states that \"available scientific evidence does not support these claims\". According to the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health, studies of magnetic jewelry have not shown demonstrable effects on pain, nerve function, cell growth or blood flow.\nA 2008 systematic review of magnet therapy for all indications found insufficient evidence to determine whether magnet therapy is effective for pain relief, as did 2012 reviews focused on osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis. These reviews found that the data was either inconclusive or did not support a significant effect of magnet therapy. They also raised concerns about allocation concealment, small sample sizes, inadequate blinding, and heterogeneity of results, some of which may have biased results.\nSafety.\nThese devices are generally considered safe in themselves, though there can be significant financial and opportunity costs to magnet therapy, especially when treatment or diagnosis are avoided or delayed. Use is not recommended with pacemakers, insulin pumps, and other devices that may be negatively affected by magnetic fields.\nReception.\nThe worldwide magnet therapy industry totals sales of over a billion dollars per year, including $300 million per year in the United States alone.\nA 2002 U.S. National Science Foundation report on public attitudes and understanding of science noted that magnet therapy is \"not at all scientific.\" A number of vendors make unsupported claims about magnet therapy by using pseudoscientific and new-age language. Such claims are unsupported by the results of scientific and clinical studies.\nLegal regulations.\nMarketing of any therapy as effective treatment for any condition is heavily restricted by law in many jurisdictions unless all such claims are scientifically validated. In the United States, for example, U.S. Food and Drug Administration regulations prohibit marketing any magnet therapy product using medical claims, as such claims are unfounded.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75918", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75918", "title": "British public house", "text": ""}
{"id": "75920", "revid": "24097722", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75920", "title": "John Byrne (comics)", "text": "American comic book writer and artist (born 1950)\nJohn Lindley Byrne (; born July 6, 1950) is a British-born American comic book writer and artist of superhero comics. Since the mid-1970s, Byrne has worked on many major superheroes; with noted work on Marvel Comics's \"X-Men\" and \"Fantastic Four\". Byrne also facilitated the 1986 relaunch of DC Comics's \"Superman\" franchise with the limited series \"The Man of Steel\", the first issue of which featured the comics' first variant cover.\nComing into the comics profession as a penciller, inker, letterer, and writer on his earliest work, Byrne began co-plotting the \"X-Men\" comics during his tenure on them, for story arcs including \"Dark Phoenix Saga\" and \"Days of Future Past\", and co-creating characters such as Kitty Pryde, Emma Frost, Sabretooth, Shadow King, and Rachel Summers. Byrne launched his writing career in earnest with \"Fantastic Four\", also serving as penciler and inker, and added She-Hulk onto the team while writing a solo series for The Thing. While working on \"X-Men\", he created the Canadian superhero team Alpha Flight, and later wrote and drew their own series.\nMoving to DC, Byrne established the modern origin for Superman in \"The Man of Steel\" before writing and drawing two monthly titles and various miniseries for the character. Byrne then returned to Marvel, introducing the Great Lakes Avengers, and wrote and drew the humorous fourth wall-breaking series \"The Sensational She-Hulk\". Revisiting \"X-Men\" as a writer, Byrne co-created Bishop and Omega Red. Byrne was the writer and artist of the \"Wonder Woman\" series for three years, during which he created the second Wonder Girl, Cassie Sandsmark.\nDuring the 1990s he produced a number of creator-owned works, including \"Next Men\" and \"Danger Unlimited\", and was one of the founders of the Legend imprint at Dark Horse Comics. He scripted the first issues of Mike Mignola's \"Hellboy\" series and produced several \"Star Trek comics\" for IDW Publishing. In 2010, Byrne revived \"Next Men\" to conclude the series. Hailed as one of the most prolific and influential comic book artists ever, Byrne and his X-Men collaborator Chris Claremont were entered into the Will Eisner Award Hall of Fame in 2015.\nEarly life and career.\nByrne was born on July 6, 1950 in Walsall, Staffordshire, and raised in West Bromwich, also in Staffordshire, where he lived with his parents, Frank and Nelsie, and his maternal grandmother. He was an only child. His father was a town planner and his mother was a homemaker. While living in England, prior to his family emigrating to Canada when Byrne was 8, he was first exposed to comics, saying in 2005,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[M]y 'journey into comics' began with [star] George Reeves' \"[Adventures of] Superman\" series being shown on the BBC in England when I was about 6 years old. Not long after I started watching that series I saw one of the hardcover, black and white 'Annuals' that were being published over there at the time, and soon after found a copy of an Australian reprint called \"Super Comics\" that featured a story each of Superboy, Johnny Quick and Batman. The Batman story hooked me for life. A couple of years later my family emigrated to Canada (for the second time, no less!) and I discovered the vast array of American comics available at the time.\nHis first encounter with Marvel Comics was in 1962 with Stan Lee and Jack Kirby's \"Fantastic Four\" #5. He later commented that \"the book had an 'edge' like nothing DC was putting out at the time\". Jack Kirby's work, in particular, had a strong influence on Byrne and he has worked with many of the characters Kirby created or co-created. Besides Kirby, Byrne was influenced by the naturalistic style of Neal Adams. Byrne has named comic books, \"The Lord of the Rings\", and \"\" as his greatest influences.\nDespite drawing comics as a youth, Byrne intended to have a career as a commercial artist. In 1970, Byrne enrolled at the Alberta College of Art and Design in Calgary. He created the superhero parody \"Gay Guy\" for the college newspaper, which poked fun at the campus stereotype of homosexuality among art students. \"Gay Guy\" is notable for featuring the first gay superhero. While there, he published his first comic book, \"ACA Comix\" #1, featuring \"The Death's Head Knight\".\nByrne left the college in 1973 without graduating. Before finding success with comic books, Byrne spent three years designing billboards for an advertisement company. He broke into comics with a \"Fan Art Gallery\" piece in Marvel's promotional publication \"FOOM\" in early 1974 and by illustrating a two-page story by writer Al Hewetson in Skywald Publications' black-and-white horror magazine \"Nightmare\" #20 (Aug. 1974). He then began freelancing for Charlton Comics, making his color-comics debut with the \"E-Man\" backup feature \"Rog-2000\", starring a robot character he'd created in the mid-1970s that colleagues Roger Stern and Bob Layton named and began using for spot illustrations in their fanzine \"CPL\" (\"Contemporary Pictorial Literature\"). A Rog-2000 story written by Stern, with art by Byrne and Layton, had gotten the attention of Charlton Comics editor Nicola Cuti, who extended Byrne an invitation. Written by Cuti, \"Rog-2000\" became one of several alternating backup features in the Charlton Comics superhero series \"E-Man\", starting with the eight-page \"That Was No Lady\" in issue #6 (Jan. 1975). While that was Byrne's first published color-comics work, \"My first professional comic book sale was to Marvel, a short story called Dark Asylum' ... which languished in a flat file somewhere until it was used as filler in \"Giant-Size Dracula\" #5 [(June 1975)], long after the first Rog story.\" The story was plotted by Tony Isabella and written by David Anthony Kraft.\nAfter the Rog-2000 story, Byrne went on to work on the Charlton books \"Wheelie and the Chopper Bunch\", \"\", and \"Emergency!\", and co-created with writer Joe Gill the post-apocalyptic science-fiction series \"Doomsday + 1\". Byrne additionally drew a cover for the supernatural anthology \"The Many Ghosts of Doctor Graves\" #54 (Dec. 1975).\nMarvel Comics.\nByrne said he broke into Marvel comics after writer Chris Claremont\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...saw [his Charlton] work and began agitating for [him] to draw something he had written. When [artist] Pat Broderick missed a deadline on the 'Iron Fist' series in \"Marvel Premiere\", [production manager] John Verpoorten fired him and offered the book to [Byrne]. ... [Byrne] turned around the first script in time to meet the deadline, and so started getting more work from Marvel, until [he] was able to leave Charlton and focus entirely on the Marvel stuff.\" Byrne soon went on to draw series including \"The Champions\" (#12\u201315, 17 1977\u201378) and \"Marvel Team-Up\" (#53\u201355, 59\u201370, 75, 79, 100). Byrne first drew the X-Men in \"Marvel Team-Up\" #53. For many issues, he was paired with Claremont, with whom he teamed for issue #11 of the black-and-white Marvel magazine \"Marvel Preview\" featuring Star-Lord. The Star-Lord story was inked by Terry Austin and lettered by Tom Orzechowski, both of whom soon afterward teamed with Claremont and Byrne on \"Uncanny\" \"X-Men\".\n\"The Uncanny X-Men\".\nByrne joined Claremont beginning with \"X-Men\" #108 (Dec. 1977), which was later renamed \"The Uncanny X-Men\" with issue #114. Their work together, along with inker Terry Austin, on such classic story arcs as \"Proteus\", \"Dark Phoenix Saga\", and \"Days of Future Past\" would make them both fan favorites. Byrne insisted that the title keep its Canadian character, Wolverine, and contributed a series of story elements to justify Wolverine's presence which eventually made the character among the most popular in Marvel's publishing history. With issue #114, Byrne began co-plotting the series as well as penciling. Claremont recounted that \"at that point in time John and I were, in a very real sense, true collaborators on the book. It was with very few exceptions, difficult, for me, anyway, to tell in the actual gestation of the book where one of us left off and the other began \u2013 because it involved one of us coming up with an idea and bouncing it off the other ...\" The \"Dark Phoenix Saga\" in 1980 is one of the most notable stories in the title's history. Comics writers and historians Roy Thomas and Peter Sanderson observed that \"'The Dark Phoenix Saga' is to Claremont and Byrne what the 'Galactus Trilogy' is to Stan Lee and Jack Kirby. It is a landmark in Marvel history, showcasing its creators' work at the height of their abilities.\" Byrne has repeatedly compared his working relationship with Claremont to Gilbert and Sullivan, and has said that they were \"almost constantly at war over who the characters were.\" Byrne created the characters Alpha Flight, Proteus, and Kitty Pryde/Shadowcat during his run on \"The X-Men\". A new Brotherhood of Evil Mutants, led by Mystique, was introduced in the \"Days of Future Past\" storyline (#141\u2013142, Jan.-Feb. 1981) in which a time-travelling Kitty Pryde tried to avert a dystopian future caused by the Brotherhood assassinating Presidential candidate Senator Robert Kelly. Byrne plotted the story because he wanted to depict the Sentinels as a genuine threat to the existence of the mutant race. Byrne left \"The X-Men\" with #143 (March 1981). During his tenure on the series, \"The X-Men\" was promoted from a bimonthly to a monthly publication schedule as sales steadily increased\u2014a trend that continued long after Byrne left.\nIn the late 1970s, while serving as the regular penciller of \"X-Men\", Byrne began penciling another superhero team title, \"The Avengers\". Working for the most part with writer David Michelinie, he drew issues #164\u2013166 and 181\u2013191. Byrne and Michelinie co-created Scott Lang in \"Avengers\" #181 (March 1979). Byrne's nine-issue run of \"Captain America\", issues #247\u2013255 (July 1980 \u2013 March 1981), with writer Roger Stern, included issue #250, in which the character mulled running for the office of President of the United States.\n\"Fantastic Four\".\nByrne's post-\"X-Men\" body of work at Marvel includes his five-year run on \"Fantastic Four\" (#232\u2013295, July 1981 \u2013 October 1986), which is generally considered a \"second golden age\" for the title. Byrne said his goal was to \"turn the clock back ... get back and see fresh what it was that made the book great at its inception\". He made a number of changes during his tenure: The Thing was temporarily replaced as a member of the quartet by the She-Hulk, while the Thing had adventures in his own comic (#1\u201322 also written by Byrne), and the Thing's longtime girlfriend Alicia Masters left him for his teammate the Human Torch; the Invisible Girl was developed into the most powerful member with the heightened control of her refined powers and the self-confident assertiveness to use it epitomized by her name change to the Invisible Woman; and headquarters the Baxter Building was destroyed and replaced with Four Freedoms Plaza. Byrne has cited multiple reasons for leaving the series, including \"internal office politics\" and that \"it simply started to get old\".\n\"Alpha Flight\".\nIn 1983, while still at the helm of \"Fantastic Four\", Byrne began to write and draw \"Alpha Flight\", starring a Canadian superhero team that had been introduced \"merely to survive a fight with the X-Men.\" The series proved initially very popular, with its first issue selling over half a million copies, and the following issues selling between 400,000 and 500,000 issues each month. However, Byrne has said the title \"was never much fun\" and that he considered the characters two-dimensional. One of Alpha Flight's characters, Northstar, eventually became Marvel's first openly gay superhero. Though Byrne from the beginning intended the character to be gay, Northstar's homosexuality was only hinted at during Byrne's tenure on the series.\n\"Indiana Jones\".\nIn 1983 Byrne co-wrote and penciled issues 1 and 2 of \"The Further Adventures of Indiana Jones,\" a two-part story arc titled \"The Ikons of Ikammanen\". The story involves archaeologist Edith Dunne, a former student-turned-enemy of Jones. Byrne wrote the first issue and Dennis O'Neil wrote the second, while Byrne penciled both issues with Terry Austin as the inker.\n\"Incredible Hulk\".\nIn 1985, after issue #28 of \"Alpha Flight\", Byrne swapped the series with Bill Mantlo, writer of \"The Incredible Hulk\". According to Byrne, he discussed his ideas with editor-in-chief Jim Shooter ahead of time, but once Byrne was on the title, Shooter objected to them. Byrne wrote and drew issues #314\u2013319. The final issue of Byrne's run featured the wedding of Bruce Banner and Betty Ross.\nDC Comics.\n\"The Untold Legend of the Batman\".\nIn early 1980, Byrne did his first work for DC Comics, penciling the first issue of \"The Untold Legend of the Batman\" miniseries. Byrne had always wanted to draw \"Batman\", and had a three-month window of time during which he was not under contract to Marvel. Hearing about the \"Untold Legend\" series, Byrne contacted editor Paul Levitz to express interest. DC took him up on his offer, but it was not until the second month of his three-month window that Byrne received the plot for the first issue. Byrne told Levitz that he would not be able to finish the project due to time constraints despite DC then allegedly offering Byrne double his Marvel pay rate, after initially saying they could not match his Marvel rate. Byrne penciled the first issue, which was inked by Jim Aparo after being intended for Terry Austin. This experience soured Byrne on DC for quite some time.\n\"Superman\".\nNear the end of his time at Marvel, Byrne was hired by DC Comics to revamp its flagship character Superman. This was part of a company-wide restructuring of the history of the DC Universe and all of its characters following the limited series \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\". Byrne's reworking of Superman in particular gained widespread media coverage outside the comic book industry, including articles in \"Time\" and \"The New York Times\". At the time, Byrne said, \"I'm taking Superman back to the basics ... It's basically Siegel and Shuster's Superman meets the Fleischer Superman in 1986.\"\nByrne significantly reduced Superman's powers (though he was still one of the most powerful beings on Earth), eliminated the Fortress of Solitude and super-dog Krypto, and kept Jonathan and Martha Kent alive into Clark's adulthood to enjoy their adopted son's triumphs, as well as to provide him with support, grounding, and advice whenever he needed it. Byrne also used Marv Wolfman's idea of making Lex Luthor a wealthy business owner in addition to a scientific genius with a deadly vendetta against the superhero. Byrne did away with the childhood/teenage career as Superboy; in his revamped history, Clark Kent does not put on a costume and become a super-hero until adulthood. This approach to Kent's path to becoming Superman was later used in the TV series \n\"\" and \"Smallville\", and in the 2005 novel \"It's Superman!\" by Tom De Haven.\nIn the Superman mythos, Byrne wrote Clark Kent as having a more aggressive and extroverted personality than previously depicted, comparing him to Jimmy Breslin, and even making him a top high-school football player. Byrne came up with explanations for how Superman's disguise works, such as the public simply does not realize that he has a secret identity since he is unmasked, that Superman would vibrate his face via his super speed in order to blur his image to photographers, and having Kent keep a weight training set around to explain how the human and presumably weaker Kent could have a frame as massive as Superman's. Byrne described Superman as becoming a \"Super Republican\", seeking to incorporate renewed interest in American patriotism during the presidency of Ronald Reagan. Byrne's Superman felt that his deepest roots were on Earth and that his home planet of \"Krypton is anathema to him\".\nThe origin and early career of Byrne's version of Superman debuted in the six-issue miniseries \"The Man of Steel\" (July\u2013Sept. 1986), the first issue of which was marketed with two different covers illustrated by Byrne, the first use of variant covers by the American comics industry. DC Executive Editor Dick Giordano had been looking for a writer to restart the Superman continuity from scratch, and began talking with Byrne in May 1985 to discuss what Byrne would do with Superman if offered the job. With DC agreeing with 99% of the revision, Byrne was given the go-ahead for what became \"The Man of Steel\".\nComics historian Timothy Callahan argued that Superman in modern media has more in common with Byrne's portrayal of the character than those of Cary Bates, Elliot S. Maggin, Dennis O'Neil, Jerry Siegel, and Edmond Hamilton. Brian Cronin of \"Comic Book Resources\" suggested that, although Byrne made several changes, Byrne's Superman was still more similar to previous depictions of the character than he was not.\nByrne penciled the six-issue DC Universe crossover miniseries \"Legends\" (Nov. 1986 \u2013 May 1987) during this time. He wrote and drew two monthly Superman titles with the hero's present-day adventures: a new \"Superman\" title beginning with issue #1 (January 1987) and \"Action Comics\", in which, beginning with issue #584, Superman teamed up with other DC characters. The original \"Superman\" book was renamed \"The Adventures of Superman\" starting with issue #424 and was initially written by Marv Wolfman and drawn by Jerry Ordway, but the writing chores were taken over by Byrne after a year from issues #436\u2013442 and 444. As 1988 marked the 50th anniversary year of Superman's creation, Byrne did more Superman-related projects while working on the core Superman monthly titles at the same time: he wrote the prestige format graphic novel, \"Superman: The Earth Stealers\" and three separate four-issue miniseries: \"The World of Krypton\", \"The World of Metropolis\", and \"The World of Smallville\". He supplied the cover art for the March 14, 1988, issue of \"Time\" magazine and an interior spread featuring Superman, where his pencils were inked by Ordway.\nAfter his initial run on the Superman titles from 1986 to 1988, Byrne would make a return as a guest inker on \"Adventures of Superman Annual\" #2 (cover) and \"Superman\" #50 in 1990. He would return doing a Superman Elseworlds story as a writer and artist in \"Action Comics\" Annual #6 in 1994. In 2004 \"\", an Elseworlds story, was a collaboration with former Monty Python member John Cleese and Kim Johnson, with art by Byrne and inker Mark Farmer. Byrne returned to draw Superman in \"Action Comics\" #827\u2013835, working with writer Gail Simone, from 2005 to 2006.\nByrne spent about two years on the Superman titles before leaving. His dissatisfaction stemmed from his perception that there was a lack of \"conscious support\" for him at DC. Furthering the rift between the company and the artist was the fact that the version of Superman which DC licensed for merchandising was contrary to Byrne's representation in the comic books.\nReturn to Marvel.\n\"Star Brand\".\nIn 1986, Marvel began publication of a new line of superhero titles created by then-Editor-in-Chief Jim Shooter, which took place in a continuum removed from the Marvel Universe proper, called the New Universe. In 1987, the New Universe line saw a revamp under new Editor-in-Chief Tom DeFalco, and Byrne took over writing and art breakdowns on the line's flagship title, \"Star Brand\" (renamed \"The Star Brand\" during Byrne's term on the book). Byrne's run started with issue #11 and continued until the series' cancellation eight issues later upon Marvel's discontinuation of the New Universe line.\n\"Avengers West Coast\".\nIn 1989, after leaving \"Superman\", Byrne returned to work on a number of titles for Marvel Comics. His work on \"West Coast Avengers\" (issues #42\u201357, soon renamed \"Avengers West Coast\") was contingent on his being allowed to do what he called \"my Vision story\". The Vision was a long-standing Marvel superhero and member of The Avengers, an android originally created by the villain Ultron and constructed with the body of the original Human Torch. The Vision went on to join the team, marry his teammate the Scarlet Witch, and father two children by her. Byrne radically changed this, revealing that Immortus \u2013 who previously had revealed to the Avengers the synthezoid's origin \u2013 lied about the Vision's creation. The android Human Torch was found and joined the WCA. The Vision was disassembled and stripped of his emotions. The couple's twins were revealed to be pieces of the soul of the demon Mephisto. In addition to these changes, Byrne's run is remembered for the introduction of the Great Lakes Avengers, an eclectic group of new superheroes.\n\"The Sensational She-Hulk\".\nDuring She-Hulk's tenure with the Fantastic Four, she appeared in \"Marvel Graphic Novel\" #18 (Nov. 1985) in a story titled \"The Sensational She-Hulk\", which Byrne wrote and illustrated.\nOn the request of editor Mark Gruenwald, Byrne wrote and drew a new series in 1989, \"The Sensational She-Hulk\" (maintaining the 1985 graphic novel's title). Gruenwald directed that it be significantly different from the character's previous series, \"The Savage She-Hulk\". Byrne's take was comedic and the She-Hulk, who was aware she was in a comic book, regularly broke the fourth wall, developing a love-hate relationship with her artist/writer by criticizing his storylines, drawing style, character development, etc. Byrne left the book after writing and drawing the first eight issues. Byrne was asked for input on writer Dwayne McDuffie's \"She-Hulk: Ceremony\" limited series, and according to Byrne, most of his objections to the story and notations of errors were ignored, and his editor, Bobbie Chase, \"was rewriting my stuff to bring it into line with\" the story in \"Ceremony\". Upon complaining to DeFalco, Byrne says he was fired from his series. He later returned to write and draw issues #31\u201350 under new editor Ren\u00e9e Witterstaetter.\n\"Namor, the Sub-Mariner\".\nByrne started a new series, \"Namor, the Sub-Mariner\" in April 1990. Byrne's take on the undersea antihero Namor cast him as the head of a surface company, Oracle, Inc., in order to help keep the ocean unpolluted, and had Namor involved in corporate intrigue. After writing and drawing the book for 25 issues, Byrne told editor Terry Kavanagh that he was starting to feel constrained on the book and thought having a different artist might inspire him to a fresh approach. Kavanagh suggested newcomer Jae Lee, and Byrne continued strictly as the writer of the book up through issue #32. Byrne later said he has great fondness for the title character and was unhappy that circumstances forced him to leave the series.\n\"Iron Man\".\nByrne took over writing \"Iron Man\" for issues #258\u2013277 (July 1990-Feb. 1992), drawn by John Romita Jr. and later by Paul Ryan. Byrne launched a second \"Armor Wars\" story arc, restored the Mandarin as a major Iron Man nemesis, and featured the 1950s \"pre-superhero Marvel\" monster Fin Fang Foom. During the course of his run, Byrne became the first writer to retcon Iron Man's origin, removing explicit ties to the Vietnam War (while maintaining a Southeast Asia setting), and linking Wong-Chu, the man who captured Tony Stark, to the Mandarin.\nCreator-owned works.\nIn the early 1990s, Byrne began creating a series of original, creator-owned works for publisher Dark Horse Comics. This was during a general trend in the industry for established creators working for Marvel and DC to bring their original works to other publishers or create their own companies to publish the works themselves (one prominent example is Image Comics). A number of these creators, including Byrne, Frank Miller, Mike Mignola, and Art Adams, banded together to form the Legend imprint at Dark Horse.\nByrne's first title for Dark Horse was \"Next Men\", a work he considered darker and more realistic than his previous work. The Next Men were five young people who were the product of a secret government experiment. Byrne said, \"I thought I would see what I could do with superheroes in the 'real world'\u00a0\" and \"[e]xplore the impact their existence would have.\" Byrne's other Dark Horse titles were \"Babe\", and \"Danger Unlimited\", an all-age readers book about a team of heroes in the future fighting an alien occupation of Earth.\nThe \"Next Men\" lasted until issue 30 in 1994, when Byrne ended the series, intending to return \"in no more than six months.\" Byrne says he \"did not count on...the virtual collapse of the whole comic book industry, which seemed to occur at just the time I put \"Next Men\" on the shelf...In the present, very depressed marketplace, I don't feel \"Next Men\" would have much chance, so I leave the book hibernating until such time as the market improves.\"\nIDW Publishing revived \"John Byrne's Next Men\" in 2010 following a series of trade paperbacks that collected the first series. The original storyline that had a cliffhanger ending in 1995 was continued.\nLater career.\nIn later years, Byrne has worked on titles for Marvel, DC, and other publishers, including the 1992 prestige format graphic novel \"Green Lantern: Ganthet's Tale\" with science fiction author Larry Niven at DC. In 1989, Byrne wrote \"Batman\" #433\u2013435 (May\u2013July 1989) and in the following year produced a 3-D graphic novel with 3-D effects by Ray Zone. He returned to the \"X-Men\" franchise at Marvel from 1991 to 1992, succeeding longtime writer Chris Claremont, who left after 17 years working on the various \"X-Men\" related titles. Byrne's return as the new writer was brief, as he only scripted \"Uncanny X-Men\" issues #281\u2013285 and 288 with artist Whilce Portacio, and \"\" issues #4\u20135 with artist Jim Lee. In 1995, Byrne wrote and drew the Marvel/DC intercompany crossover \"Darkseid vs. Galactus: The Hunger\", which also featured the Jack Kirby creations the Silver Surfer and the New Gods. In 1996, another Marvel/DC intercompany crossover - \"Batman/Captain America\", one shot homage to Golden Age versions of both heroes.\nHe wrote and drew another of DC's signature series, the long-running \"Wonder Woman,\" from 1995 to 1998. During that time, he elevated the super-heroine to the status of a goddess who then ascended to Mount Olympus as the Goddess of Truth, and created Cassie Sandsmark, the new Wonder Girl. Byrne then spotlighted supporting characters such as Queen Hippolyta in their own adventures but restored the series' \"status quo\" in his last issue. He additionally took over \"New Gods\" vol. 4 at the end of 1996, as writer-artist of issues #12\u201315, continuing with it as the series was rebooted with a new #1 as \"Jack Kirby's Fourth World\". That ran 20 issues from 1997 to 1998. During his tenure on the \"New Gods\", Byrne was writer of the four-issue miniseries crossover \"Genesis\", a storyline published weekly by DC Comics in August 1997. The series was drawn by Ron Wagner and Joe Rubinstein. Byrne wrote a Wonder Woman prose novel, \"Wonder Woman: Gods and Goddesses\" (1997).\nIn the series \"\", Byrne retold some of Spider-Man's earliest adventures, changing some key aspects. In late 1998, Byrne became writer of the flagship series \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" at the end of the series with issue #440, by which time Marvel had decided to relaunch the book. The \"last\" issue of \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" was #441 (November 1998), with Marvel re-initiating the series with a new volume 2, issue #1 (Jan. 1999) with Howard Mackie as writer and Byrne on pencils. Byrne penciled issues #1\u201318 (from 1999 to 2000) and wrote #13\u201314. In 1999, Byrne, working with artist Ron Garney, wrote the first seven issues of a new Hulk series, as well as the summer annual.\nFrom 1999 to 2001, Byrne returned to the X-Men to write and draw \"\" which ran for 22 issues. Byrne explained the title's cancellation by saying, \"I was officially informed yesterday that, despite the fact that they are still profitable, several 'redundant' X-Titles are being axed.\" This disagreement factored in his decision to no longer work for Marvel Comics.\nLike \"X-Men: The Hidden Years\", some other works of this period involved characters and events in time periods other than the present and, in some cases, considered \"skipped over\" ('), or alternate timelines (DC's '); a feature some of these have in common is to have characters who actually age during the course of the series, which is uncommon for characters in ongoing comics.\nIn early 2003, Byrne spent ten weeks as a guest penciler on the syndicated newspaper strip \"Funky Winkerbean\". Byrne did this as a favor for \"Winkerbean\"'s creator, Tom Batiuk, who was recovering from foot surgery. He would later become the final person to draw \"Funky Winkerbean\", taking over illustration duties from artist Chuck Ayers for the strip's concluding week, ending on December 31, 2022.\nMost of his work in the first decade of the new millennium was for DC Comics: \"JLA\" (issues #94\u201399 in 2004, co-writing and illustrating the \"Tenth Circle\" story arc, reuniting with his \"Uncanny X-Men\" writer Chris Claremont and with Jerry Ordway as inker), \"Doom Patrol\", \"Blood of the Demon\", a five-issue arc of \"JLA Classified\". He penciled an issue of \"Hawkman\" (vol. 4) #26 in May 2004. \"\" was a collaboration with former Monty Python member John Cleese and Kim Johnson, with art by Byrne and inker Mark Farmer. Byrne returned to draw Superman in \"Action Comics\" #827\u2013835, working with writer Gail Simone, from 2005 to 2006. Afterward, Simone and Byrne reteamed to launch \"The All-New Atom\" series in 2006, with Byrne pencilling the first three issues.\nFor publisher IDW, Byrne worked on the superhero series \"FX\" #1\u20136, written by Wayne Osborne, starting with the March 2008 issue. His other projects for the publisher include stories for the Star Trek and \"Angel\" franchises. Byrne's \"Star Trek\" work included the final issue of the miniseries \"Star Trek: Alien Spotlight\" (February 2008); \"\" #1\u20135; \"Star Trek: Romulans\" #1\u20132, \"Star Trek: Crew\" (a Christopher Pike-era comic book focusing on the character of \"Number One\") started in March 2009; the final chapter of his Romulans story, a four-issue miniseries, \"Star Trek: Leonard McCoy, Frontier Doctor\", set before \"Star Trek: The Motion Picture\", and the second \"Assignment: Earth\" series. His work on \"Angel\" included \"Angel: Blood and Trenches\" (set during World War I); an \"Angel vs Frankenstein\" one-shot; and an Andy Hallett tribute, \"Angel: Music of the Spheres\" and \"Angel vs Frankenstein II\" in 2008, 2009 and 2010 respectively.\nIn 2011, he worked on \"Jurassic Park: The Devils in the Desert\", and \"Cold War (The Michael Swann Dossier)\". He revived his \"Next Men\" series in 2010\u20132011, with the sequel series \"Aftermath\". Other work for IDW includes the 2012 miniseries \"Trio\" and the 2013 miniseries \"The High Ways\" and \"Doomsday.1\".\nIn 2018, Byrne began \"X-Men Elsewhen\", a fan-fiction comic book exploring how he would've continued the story of the \"X-Men\" after \"The Dark Phoenix Saga\". The series, written and pencilled by Byrne and published on his website, has 32 issues as of December 2022. During San Diego Comic-Con 2025, it was announced that Abrams ComicArts' Marvel line would publish \"X-Men Elsewhen\" as a series of hardcovers beginning in April 2026.\nControversies.\nOver the years, Byrne has gained a reputation as a controversial figure within the community of comic book pros and fans. He has himself noted that \"as the people who have figured me out have said, I just don't suffer fools gladly.\" Gail Simone, who worked with Byrne on \"The All New Atom\" in 2006, described Byrne as \"very opinionated; a lot of artists are opinionated, and I'm okay with that. Actually, I think John Byrne is brilliant and his forceful personality is part of that.\"\nCreator ownership.\nIn 1981, Jack Kirby began speaking publicly about his belief that he had been deprived of fair credit and money while creating the majority of Marvel's top characters. Byrne wrote an editorial declaring himself \"proud\" to be a \"company man\", and arguing that all creators should \"live within the rules while they're around.\" Steve Gerber and Kirby lampooned Byrne's position in \"Destroyer Duck\", drawing him as a character called Booster Cogburn, possessing no genitals, a removable spine, and existing only to serve as a cog in the mammoth corporation that owned him. Byrne later made a story in \"Action Comics\" #592\u2013593 where Big Barda (who is based on Kirby's wife Roz) is brainwashed and almost forced to make a pornographic video with Superman. Erik Larsen created a villain in the 1990s for his \"Savage Dragon\" and the \"Freak Force\" series, Johnny Redbeard / the Creator, who is a parody of Byrne; a massive cranium with atrophied appendages, he can bestow superpowers indiscriminately.\nRegarding the ownership rights for Superman, Byrne has stated: \"And I've always been terribly pragmatic about that kind of stuff. This is where my low BS threshold touched on in the sense that I looked at the story of Siegel and Shuster, for example, and I said, well, that's kind of sad that they created this huge, iconic character and didn't make a hundred bajillion dollars for it. But that's also what the situation was; that was the deal. And everybody understood that was the deal. They weren't cheated. They knew what it was going in.\" In a 2006 interview, Byrne further elaborated on his creator's rights views:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I feel myself to be a company man. When the company is worth supporting, I'll support the company. If the company's honest with me up front, I support the company. I see no reason not to. And I was always campaigning for creator's rights. I was always out there saying, yeah, it would be a good idea if things changed. But too many of my contemporaries\u2014I'm not going to name names here\u2014but too many of my contemporaries sort of had the attitude of, \"Well, I know that this is the way the industry has always been run, but surely that doesn't apply to \"me\".\" And I would say, \"Well, yes, it does. It applies to everybody. So we're going to have to change the rules for \"everybody\", not just say 'Well, this shouldn't apply to me because I'm so special.'\"\nOther comments.\nIn 1982, during a panel discussion at the Dallas Fantasy Fair, Byrne made disparaging comments about longtime comics writer and one-time Marvel Comics editor-in-chief Roy Thomas that were published in \"The Comics Journal\" #75 (Sept. 1982). Thomas threatened a slander suit if Byrne did not apologize. In a letter printed in \"The Comics Journal\" #82 (July 1983), Byrne retracted his statements, saying he was only repeating information from others, writing, \"I acted only in the office of a parrot.\"\nIn 2005, while criticizing portrayals of Superman emphasizing his connection to his home planet, Byrne described immigrants with excessive attachment to their nations of origin as \"ungrateful little shits.\" Similar views were earlier expressed in Byrne's \"The Man of Steel\" (1986), in which Superman was not considered born until after his Kryptonian artificial matrix opened after landing in Kansas, thus making him an American citizen by birth. The miniseries ends with Superman declaring, \"Krypton bred me, but it was Earth that gave me all I am. All that matters.\"\nIn 2015, Byrne received criticism for stating that transgender people are mentally ill and comparing them to pedophiles while discussing Caitlyn Jenner. Byrne stated: \"How will we feel about all those people who, instead of actually helping them, we encouraged in a program of self-mutilation?\"\nArt style.\nByrne has himself called his style a \"collection of influences\". He cites Neal Adams, Jack Kirby, John Buscema, and Steve Ditko as primary influences on his style, but continues to pick up on ideas that he sees and likes while constantly changing his tools and methods.\nByrne is color blind for a narrow range of green and brown tones. During the first year that Byrne illustrated \"Iron Fist\", he believed that the protagonist's costume was brown. While he experimented with his own hand-drawn lettering in the early 1980s, he developed computer fonts for his work in the 1990s, one in particular based on the handwriting of the letterer Jack Morelli.\nPersonal life.\nByrne became a naturalized American citizen in 1988. He was previously a citizen of the UK and Canada, but no longer holds citizenship for those countries.\nHe was married to photographer and actress Andrea Braun Byrne until divorcing. They met at a convention in Chicago. Braun's son from a previous marriage is fellow professional comic book artist Kieron Dwyer, and Byrne became Dwyer's stepfather when the boy was 13 until Byrne divorced his mother. They only lived together for a short time as the young Dwyer soon moved to Los Angeles to live with his father. Byrne encouraged Dwyer's aspirations to be a cartoonist and assisted in landing Dwyer's first professional job drawing \"Batman\" #413 (Nov. 1987).\nByrne described his political views as centre-right, \"There's a political party\u2014or used to be\u2014up in Canada called the Progressive Conservatives. And I always liked the sound of that name. I liked what that imparted, that sort of 'let us go forward carefully' notion. So that's sort of how I've always thought of myself, as a progressive conservative.\"\nByrne has never done drugs and only drinks alcohol very sparingly.\nSince 2015, Byrne no longer attends any conventions regularly and makes rare public appearances. He made an appearance at the 2018 Fan Expo Boston, where he spoke at two events, both titled \"Spotlight on John Byrne\" on August 11 and 12, and an autograph signing with William Shatner.\nAwards.\nByrne received the Favourite Comic Book Artist Eagle Awards in 1978 and 1979, and a 1980 Inkpot Award. In 2008, Byrne was inducted into the Canadian Comic Book Creator Hall of Fame. In 2015, Byrne was inducted into the Will Eisner Hall of Fame, alongside judges' choices Marge (Marjorie Henderson Buell) and Bill Woggon and elected inductees Chris Claremont, Denis Kitchen, and Frank Miller.\nSelected bibliography.\nComic books.\nCharlton Comics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDC Comics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIDW Publishing.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMarvel Comics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75921", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75921", "title": "Dolphin Hotel, Plymouth", "text": "Pub in Plymouth, UK\nThe Dolphin Hotel is a pub on the Barbican in Plymouth, England. The building, which is known as the Dolphin Hotel (never the Dolphin Inn) is a Grade II listed building. It notable as the setting of several of the artist Beryl Cook's paintings.\nThe three storey building was constructed in the early 19th century, although it may contain fabric from an earlier structure. It has a slate mansard roof surrounded by a tall parapet with a moulded cornice. The front has white stucco with plaster reliefs of dolphins. The pub is associated with the Tolpuddle Martyrs, some of whom stayed at the hotel on their return from exile in Australia in 1838, when a Mr Morgan was the landlord.\nIt is a no-frills unmodernised pub famous for its cask ale, draught Bass served straight from the barrel. It is listed in the Campaign for Real Ale (CAMRA)'s \"Good Beer Guide\" and the 2008 Good Pub Guide. The sign on the front of the building has always called the pub the 'Dolphin Hotel'. In 2010 the pub was refurbished, but vandalised in 2014.\nThe pub also provided the setting for the BBC's poorly received animated Janner comedy series \"Bosom Pals\", which was based on some of the characters in Cook's paintings and featured the voices of Dawn French as the lead character Stella, Alison Steadman as her best friend Joan, and Timothy Spall as the Dolphin's real-life landlord Billy Holmes. Billy Holmes has been the landlord of the pub since the 1990s when he took it over from his parents.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75923", "revid": "46469420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75923", "title": "Valois, Pointe-Claire", "text": "Valois () is a neighbourhood in the city of Pointe-Claire, Quebec, Canada. It was once a separate village, many years ago, but was then merged with Pointe-Claire in 1911.\nPopulation (2011):\nThe population of Valois is 4,910, with 70% of the population being residents for over 10 years. 78% of the population are homeowners, higher than the average of both Pointe-Claire and the West Island. 58% of the housing in Valois is detached homes. The Employment Rate of Valois is 68% with an unemployment rate of 5%. the median income of residents aged 15 years and older is $32,841 and the average income is $42,330.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75926", "revid": "6488475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75926", "title": "John II, Duke of Brabant", "text": "13th and 14th-century duke of Brabant\nJohn II (27 September 1275 \u2013 27 October 1312), also called John the Peaceful, was Duke of Brabant, Lothier and Limburg (1294\u20131312). He was the son of John I of Brabant and Margaret of Flanders.\nJohn II succeeded his father in 1294 During the reign of John II, Brabant continued supporting a coalition to stop French expansion. He tried to conquer South Holland (district of medieval Holland) from the pro-French Count John II of Holland, but was not successful.\nIn 1309, the Crusade of the Poor besieged the castle of Genappe in Brabant because it was sheltering Jews. John sent an army that defeated the Crusaders, who incurred heavy losses. According to Chris Harman (2000), during different parts of the XIV century several attacks on Jewish merchants and Christian priests took place, and also awhich, typically, masses of people would march from town to town, looting and being joined by others during their march. Harman quotes the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Armed columns appeared, consisting of miserably poor artisans and labourers with an admixture of nobles who had squandered their wealth. These people begged and pillaged their way through the country, killing Jews but also storming\u2026castles\u2026In the end they attacked the castle of the Duke of Brabant\u2026who three years before had routed an army of insurgent clothworkers and, it is said, buried its leaders alive.\" N. Cohn, \"The Pursuit of the Millennium\". (London, 1970), p.102.\nJohn, who suffered from kidney stones and wanted his duchy to be peacefully handed over to his son upon his death, in 1312 signed the famous Charter of Kortenberg. John died in Tervuren in 1312. He was buried in the Church of St. Michael and St. Gudula (now Brussels' cathedral).\nFamily.\nOn 8 July 1290, John married Margaret of England in Westminster Abbey, London. She was a daughter of King Edward I of England and his first wife, Eleanor of Castile. Only one child was born out of this marriage:\nJohn II had several illegitimate children:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75927", "revid": "1318008953", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75927", "title": "Melicertes", "text": "Greek mythological figure\nIn Greek mythology, Melicertes (, sometimes Melecertes), later called Palaemon or Palaimon (), was a Boeotian prince as the son of King Athamas and Ino, daughter of King Cadmus of Thebes. He was the brother of Learchus.\nMythology.\nIno, pursued by her husband, who had been driven mad by Hera because Ino had brought up the infant Dionysus, threw herself and Melicertes into the sea from a high rock between Megara and Corinth, and both were changed into marine deities: Ino as Leucothea, noted by Homer, Melicertes as Palaemon. The body of the latter was carried by a dolphin to the Isthmus of Corinth and deposited under a pine tree. Here it was found by his uncle Sisyphus, who had it removed to Corinth, and by command of the Nereids instituted the Isthmian Games and sacrifices in his honor.\nIn literature and art.\nPalaemon appears for the first time in Euripides' \"Iphigeneia in Tauris\", where he is already the \"guardian of ships\". The paramount identification in the Latin poets of the Augustan age is with Portunus, the Roman god of safe harbours, memorably in Virgil's \"Georgics\". Ovid twice told the story of Ino's sea-plunge with Melicertes in her arms.\nOvid's treatment in his \"Fasti\" is the earliest to identify the Isthmus of Corinth as the location, though without literally naming it:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A land there is, shrunk within narrow bounds, which repels twin seas, and single in itself, is lashed by two-fold waters.\nIn later Latin poets there are numerous identifications of Palaemon with the sanctuary at the Isthmus, where no archaeological evidence was found for a pre-Augustan cult.\nHyginus states both that Ino cast herself into the sea with her younger son by Athamas, Melicertes, and was made a goddess, and that Ino, daughter of Cadmus, killed her son Melicertes by Athamas, son of Aeolus, when she was fleeing from Athamas.\nIn Greco-Roman views, Palaemon is viewed as a dolphin-riding boy, or a child with a triton tail.\nOrigins.\nNo satisfactory origin of the name Palaemon has been given. The name means the \"wrestler\", and is an epithet of Heracles, with whom Melqart is identified by \"interpretatio graeca\" and referred to as the \"Tyrian Herakles\", but there does not appear to be any traditional connection between Heracles and Palaemon. Melicertes being Phoenician, Palaemon also has been explained as the \"burning lord\" (\"Baal-haman\"), but there seems little in common between a god of the sea and a god of fire. The Romans identified Palaemon with Portunus (the harbour god), and some took the name Palaemon to mean \"the honey eater\".\nCult.\nIn the late 2nd century CE, within the sanctuary of Poseidon at Isthmia, Pausanias saw a temple of Palaemon:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... with images in it of Poseidon, Leucothea, and Palaemon himself. There is also what is called his Holy of Holies, and an underground descent to it, where they say that Palaemon is concealed. Whosoever, whether Corinthian or stranger, swears falsely here, can by no means escape from his oath. There is also an ancient sanctuary called the altar of the Cyclopes, and they sacrifice to the Cyclopes upon it.\nIn company with Leucothea, Melicertes/Palaemon was widely invoked for protection from dangers at sea.\nThere seems considerable doubt whether or not the cult of Melicertes was of foreign, probably Phoenician, origin, and introduced by Phoenician navigators on the coasts and islands of the Aegean and Mediterranean. For the Hellenes he is a native of Boeotia.\nIn 1956, excavations at Isthmia under the direction of Broneer uncovered the small sanctuary of Palaemon, which eventually had a tiny Roman round temple in the Corinthian order, which appeared on coins of Corinth in the 2nd century CE; it was the successor to two previous more modest architectural phases of the sanctuary. The foundations of the temple were found to lie over the starting-line of a late-5th- or early-4th century BCE stadium. Worship was characterized by the dedication of hundreds of wheelmade oil lamps of a distinct type. A cult of Melicertes of great antiquity, possibly based on pre-Hellenic figures of Ino and Melicertes, was posited by Will, just previous to the site's discovery and refuted by Hawthorne in 1958.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75929", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75929", "title": "Charter of Kortenberg", "text": "The Charter of Kortenberg (Dutch: \"Keure van Kortenberg\") is an agreement signed and sealed on September 27, 1312, in the abbey of Kortenberg by John II, Duke of Brabant and representatives of the cities of Brussels, Antwerp, 's-Hertogenbosch, Tienen and Zoutleeuw. Creation of the document is of historical and political importance because it retains agreements between inhabitants of a territory with a ruler who had absolute power. This reflected the start of a current that would later be labeled by historians as Brabant's Constitutionalism because residents without control had claimed rights and powers, and had them recorded in writing, which are somewhat comparable to what have come to be called civil and political rights centuries later. In this process, the first simple rules were created for what would develop into a legal order that is now called democratic rule of law. \nThe charter was valid for the entire duchy of Brabant, for the rich and the poor. From this charter originated an early kind of parliament, the \"Council of Kortenberg\" an assembly of lords. \nThe control organ, a precursor of the later \"Estate assembly\" (namely, the first estate was the clergy, the second estate was the nobility, and the third estate was the municipalities) gathered in the Kortenberg Abbey and elsewhere with ups and downs until 1375.\nFrom 1332 on the council was extended by two more members, so that there were 16 Lords; Antwerp got a second member and the Walloon Brabant town of Nivelles () also got a member. In 1340 documents were sealed with a special seal on which a tree was planted on a small hill. The seal bore the words \"SIGILUM COMMUNE : CONSILII DE CORTENBERGHE\" which was the common seal of the Council of Kortenberg.\nCharter of Kortenberg and \"Magna Carta\".\nAlthough \"Magna Carta\" is commonly regarded as the very first charter giving rise to medieval European constitutionalism, the Charter of Kortenberg appears to have been more democratic in nature. This mainly because the beneficiaries of \"Magna Carta\" were only the barons while the beneficiaries of the Charter of Kortenberg included all citizens, expressly 'the rich and the poor' (\"riken ende armen\").\nReinforcing this view, the composition of the Council of Kortenberg marks a clear difference with the more 'elitist' \"Magna Carta\". Whilst \"Magna Carta\" was to be implemented by a council of 25 barons, the Council of Kortenberg counted four knights and ten townsmen. In the financial commission of August 1314 the nobility were only two with 12 civil representatives of eight towns.\nFollow up.\nA historical line of continuity can be drawn from the Charter of Kortenberg via the Joyous Entries of new Dukes into Flemish and Brabantian towns, the migration of educated citizens in the 16th &amp; 17th century from these towns to the Seven United Provinces as a result of the Eighty Years' War and the stay of some of the Mayflower Pilgrim Fathers in those Provinces, who had fled religious persecution in England for the tolerance of 17th-century Holland in the Netherlands. One group moved to the city of Leiden and was living there for two decades, prior to their departure for America. Some worked or studied at Leiden University.\nCoupled with the enduring influence of New Netherlander society upon early American political life, the emphasis placed by American historians and the general public opinion upon the constitutive nature of \"Magna Carta\" for the American constitution and the American Dream seems too narrow if no mention is made from the Charter of Kortenberg all following Brabantian constitutional charters and the Act of Abjuration (1581), dubbed the Dutch Declaration of Independence.\nModern translation of the charter of Kortenberg.\nWe, duke John II of Brabant, agree\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75931", "revid": "51208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75931", "title": "Fran\u00e7ois II of France", "text": ""}
{"id": "75933", "revid": "45577169", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75933", "title": "Dangerous Liaisons", "text": "1988 film by Stephen Frears\nDangerous Liaisons is a 1988 American period romantic drama film directed by Stephen Frears, from a screenplay by Christopher Hampton based on his 1985 play \"Les Liaisons Dangereuses\", itself adapted from the 1782 French novel by Pierre Choderlos de Laclos. The film depicts schemes of seduction and revenge among aristocrats in 18th century France, and stars Glenn Close, John Malkovich, Michelle Pfeiffer, Uma Thurman, Swoosie Kurtz, Mildred Natwick, Peter Capaldi and Keanu Reeves.\n\"Dangerous Liaisons\" was theatrically released by Warner Bros. Pictures on December 21, 1988. Grossing $34.7 million against its $14 million budget, the film was a modest box-office success. It was nominated for seven awards at the 61st Academy Awards, including Best Picture, winning three: Best Adapted Screenplay, Best Costume Design, and Best Production Design.\nPlot.\nIn pre-Revolution Paris, the Marquise de Merteuil plots revenge against her ex-lover, the Comte de Bastide, who recently ended their relationship. To soothe her wounded pride and embarrass Bastide, she seeks to arrange the seduction and disgrace of his young virgin fianc\u00e9e, C\u00e9cile de Volanges, who has only recently been presented to society after spending her formative years in the shelter of a convent.\nMerteuil calls on the similarly unprincipled Vicomte de Valmont, another ex-lover of hers, to do the deed. Valmont declines as he is plotting to seduce Madame de Tourvel, the devoutly religious wife of a member of Parliament and a current guest of Valmont's aunt, Madame de Rosemonde. Amused and incredulous at Valmont's hubris, Merteuil ups the ante: if Valmont somehow succeeds in seducing Tourvel and can furnish written proof, Merteuil will sleep with him as well. Never one to refuse a challenge, Valmont accepts.\nTourvel rebuffs all of Valmont's advances. Searching for leverage, he instructs his page Azolan to seduce Tourvel's maid, Julie, and gain access to Tourvel's private correspondence. One of the letters intercepted is from C\u00e9cile's mother and Merteuil's cousin, Madame de Volanges, warning Tourvel that Valmont is nefarious and untrustworthy. Valmont resolves to seduce C\u00e9cile as revenge for her mother's accurate denunciation of him.\nAt the opera, C\u00e9cile meets the charming and handsome Chevalier Danceny, who becomes her music teacher. They fall in love with coaxing from Merteuil, who knows that Danceny, as a nobleman of lesser rank, naive, young, and not particularly wealthy, can never qualify as a bona fide suitor.\nValmont gains access to C\u00e9cile's bedchamber on a pretext and sexually assaults her. As she pleads with him to leave, he blackmails her into giving up physical resistance, and the scene ends. On the pretext of illness, C\u00e9cile remains locked in her chambers, refusing all visitors. A concerned Madame de Volanges asks Merteuil to speak to C\u00e9cile; C\u00e9cile confides in Merteuil, naively assuming that she has C\u00e9cile's best interests at heart. Merteuil advises C\u00e9cile to welcome Valmont's advances; she says young women should take advantage of all the lovers they can acquire in a society so repressive and contemptuous of women. The result is a \"student-teacher\" relationship; by day, C\u00e9cile is courted by Danceny, and each night, she receives a sexual \"lesson\" from Valmont. Merteuil begins an affair with Danceny.\nAfter a night in Valmont's bed, C\u00e9cile miscarries her child. Meanwhile, Valmont has won Tourvel's heart, but at a cost: the lifelong bachelor playboy falls in love. In a fit of jealousy, Merteuil mocks Valmont and refuses to honor her end of their agreement unless Valmont breaks up with Tourvel. Valmont abruptly dismisses Tourvel with a terse excuse, suggested by Merteuil: \"It's beyond my control.\" Overwhelmed with grief and shame, Tourvel retreats to a monastery where her health deteriorates rapidly.\nDespite the breakup, Merteuil still refuses to honor the agreement and, provoked to do so by Valmont, declares \"war\". She informs Danceny that Valmont has been sleeping with C\u00e9cile. Danceny challenges Valmont to a duel, ending with the latter voluntarily running into Danceny's sword. With his dying breath, Valmont asks Danceny to communicate to Tourvel his true feelings for her; he also warns Danceny about Meurteuil and gives him his collection of intimate letters from her as proof of the veracity of his warnings. Valmont tells Danceny to circulate them after he has read them.\nAfter hearing Valmont's message from Danceny, Tourvel dies. Meanwhile, following Valmont's death, Merteuil sinks into madness and pain. Later, she attends a show at the opera but leaves after being booed by her former friends and sycophants, implying that all of Paris has learned the full range of her schemes and depredations due to Danceny's circulation of the letters.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\n\"Dangerous Liaisons\" was the first English-language film adaptation of Laclos's novel. The screenplay was based on Christopher Hampton's Olivier Award-winning and Tony Award-nominated theatrical adaptation for the Royal Shakespeare Company, directed by Howard Davies and featuring Lindsay Duncan, Alan Rickman and Juliet Stevenson.\nThe film was shot entirely on location in the \u00cele-de-France region of northern France, and featured historical buildings such as the Ch\u00e2teau de Vincennes in Val-de-Marne, the Ch\u00e2teau de Champs-sur-Marne, the Ch\u00e2teau de Guermantes in Seine-et-Marne, the Ch\u00e2teau du Saussay in Essonne, and the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Montansier in Versailles.\n\"Liaisons\" was the final film appearance of Academy Award and Tony Award-nominated actress Mildred Natwick. Drew Barrymore and Sarah Jessica Parker were considered for the role of C\u00e9cile before it went to Thurman. Annette Bening went through several auditions for the role of the courtesan \u00c9milie, but in the end the role went to Laura Benson. Bening would go on to play the role of the Marquise de Merteuil in Milo\u0161 Forman's adaptation of \"Les Liaisons Dangereuses\", \"Valmont\", a year later.\nDuring production, Malkovich had an affair with Pfeiffer. His six-year marriage to actress Glenne Headly ended shortly thereafter.\nThurman later stated that she agreed to perform a nude scene in the film because she believed it was the right artistic decision at the time, despite feeling nervous. She expressed dissatisfaction with the \"voyeuristic\" nature of the final cut of the scene and decided not to appear nude in future films.\nSoundtrack.\nThe score of \"Dangerous Liaisons\" was written by the British film music composer George Fenton. The soundtrack also includes works by a number of baroque and classical composers, reflecting the story's 18th-Century-French setting; pieces by Antonio Vivaldi, Johann Sebastian Bach, George Frideric Handel and Christoph Willibald Gluck feature prominently, although no French composers are included.\nReception.\nCritical response.\n\"Dangerous Liaisons\" holds a score of 94% on Rotten Tomatoes based on 31 reviews. The site's consensus states: \"Stylish, seductive, and clever, Stephen Frears' adaptation is a wickedly entertaining exploration of sexual politics.\" On Metacritic it has a score of 74 based on 17 reviews, indicating \"generally favorable\" reviews. Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film a grade B+ on scale of A to F.\nPauline Kael in \"The New Yorker\" described it as \"heaven \u2013 alive in a way that movies rarely are.\" Hal Hinson in \"The Washington Post\" wrote that the film's \"wit and immediacy is extraordinarily rare in a period film. Instead of making the action seem far off, the filmmakers put the audience in the room with their characters.\" Roger Ebert called it \"an absorbing and seductive movie, but not compelling.\" \"Variety\" considered it an \"incisive study of sex as an arena for manipulative power games.\" Vincent Canby in \"The New York Times\" hailed it as a \"kind of lethal drawing-room comedy.\"\nThe \"Time Out\" reviewer wrote of Christopher Hampton's screenplay that \"one of the film's enormous strengths is scriptwriter Christopher Hampton's decision to go back to the novel, and save only the best from his play\". James Acheson and Stuart Craig were also praised for their work, with Sheila Benson of the \"Los Angeles Times\" stating that \"the film's details of costuming (by \"The Last Emperor\"'s James Acheson) and production design (by Stuart Craig of \"Gandhi\" and \"The Mission\") are ravishing\". All three would go on to win Academy Awards for their work on this film.\nGlenn Close received considerable praise for her performance; she was lauded by \"The New York Times\" for her \"richness and comic delicacy,\" while Mick LaSalle of the \"San Francisco Chronicle\" wrote that, once she \"finally lets loose and gives way to complete animal despair, Close is horrifying.\" Roger Ebert thought the two lead roles were \"played to perfection by Close and Malkovich... their arch dialogues together turn into exhausting conversational games, tennis matches of the soul.\"\nMichelle Pfeiffer was widely acclaimed for her portrayal, despite playing, in the opinion of \"The Washington Post\", \"the least obvious and the most difficult\" role. \"Nothing is harder to play than virtue, and Pfeiffer is smart enough not to try. Instead, she embodies it.\" The \"New York Times\" called her performance a \"happy surprise.\" Roger Ebert, considering the trajectory of her career, wrote that \"in a year that has seen her in varied assignments such as \"Married to the Mob\" and \"Tequila Sunrise\", the movie is more evidence of her versatility. She is good when she is innocent and superb when she is guilty.\" Pfeiffer would go on to win the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role for her performance.\nThe casting of John Malkovich proved to be a controversial decision that divided critics. \"The New York Times\", while admitting there was the \"shock of seeing him in powdered wigs\", concluded that he was \"unexpectedly fine. The intelligence and strength of the actor shape the audience's response to him\". \"The Washington Post\" was similarly impressed with Malkovich's performance: \"There's a sublime perversity in Frears' casting, especially that of Malkovich... [he] brings a fascinating dimension to his character that would be missing with a more conventionally handsome leading man.\" \"Variety\" was less impressed, stating that while the \"sly actor conveys the character's snaky, premeditated Don Juanism... he lacks the devilish charm and seductiveness one senses Valmont would need to carry off all his conquests\".\nUma Thurman gained recognition from critics and audiences; film critic Roger Ebert found her to be \"well cast\" in her \"tricky\" key role.\nRelated adaptations.\nAlmost 25 years after he played Valmont, John Malkovich directed a French-language version of Hampton's play in Paris, which ran at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de l'Atelier. In December 2012, the production was brought to Lansburgh Theatre by the Shakespeare Theatre Company for a limited run in Washington, D.C.\nIn 1989, the film \"Valmont\" was released starring Colin Firth, Annette Bening and Meg Tilly.\nIn 1999, the film \"Cruel Intentions\" set the same story in present-day America, starring Sarah Michelle Gellar, Ryan Phillippe and Reese Witherspoon.\nIn 2012, a Chinese version was released, starring Jang Dong-gun, Zhang Ziyi and Cecilia Cheung. It is loosely based on the novel itself and is set in 1930s Shanghai.\nIn 2018, the TV series \"The Great Seducer\" was released as a modern-day adaptation set in Korea starring Joy (singer), Moon Ga-young, Kim Min-jae (actor, born 1996) and Woo Do-hwan.\nDawn French and Jennifer Saunders parodied \"Dangerous Liaisons\" on their sketch show French &amp; Saunders, which then inspired their 1999 comedy series \"Let Them Eat Cake\".\nIn 2022, the series \"Dangerous Liaisons\" premiered on premium television provider Starz. According to writer Harriet Warner, the series is loosely inspired by the novel and explores the marquise's life before the events of the play.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75939", "revid": "4568569", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75939", "title": "Fran\u00e7ois I of France", "text": ""}
{"id": "75941", "revid": "3145267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75941", "title": "Block-sorting compression", "text": ""}
{"id": "75942", "revid": "32990417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75942", "title": "Prospect of Whitby", "text": "Pub in London, England\nThe Prospect of Whitby is a historic public house on the northern bank of the River Thames at Wapping, in the East End of London and the London Borough of Tower Hamlets. It lays claim to being on the site of the oldest riverside tavern, dating from around 1520.\nHistory.\nThe tavern was formerly known as The Pelican and, later, as the Devil\u2019s Tavern, on account of its dubious reputation. All that remains from the building's earliest period is the 400-year-old stone floor. The pub features 18th-century panelling and a 19th-century facade. The pub has a pewter-top bar and is decorated with many nautical objects. In former times it was a meeting place for sailors, smugglers, cutthroats and footpads. Sir Hugh Willoughby sailed from here in 1553 in a disastrous attempt to discover the North-East Passage to China.\nAccording to John Stow, it was \"The usual place for hanging of pirates and sea-rovers, at the low-water mark, and there to remain till three tides had overflowed them\". Execution Dock was actually by Wapping Old Stairs and was generally used for pirates. In the eighteenth century, the first fuchsia plant in the United Kingdom was sold at the pub.\nViews from the pub were sketched by both Turner and Whistler.\nFollowing a fire in the early 19th century, the tavern was rebuilt and renamed The Prospect of Whitby, after a Tyne collier that used to berth next to the pub. The ship brought sea coal from Newcastle upon Tyne to London. The Prospect was listed as a Grade II listed building in December 1950. The pub underwent a renovation in 1951 to double the interior space. In January 1953, the pub was raided by armed robbers. The pub has been visited by Princess Margaret and Prince Rainier III of Monaco.\nIn popular culture.\nThere is a scene in the 1956 film \"D-Day the Sixth of June\", starring Robert Taylor and Richard Todd, in which Taylor's character is seen with Dana Wynter's character having drinks in the pub during the Second World War.\nThe video for Gilbert O'Sullivan's 1970 hit \"Nothing Rhymed\" was shot here, as he was living close by in a bedsit when he wrote the song.\nThe pub features briefly in an episode of \"Only Fools And Horses\". When Uncle Albert goes missing in one episode Del Boy and Rodney travel around London looking for him. Nicholas Lyndhurst is shown in one scene walking out of the pub.\nIn the comicbook \"The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen\" Mina Harker pauses in front of the pub and says it brings back memories. She is referring to the beaching of the \"Demeter\" at Whitby in the novel \"Dracula\".\nThe pub is also featured in \"Vercors\"'s novel \"Les Animaux d\u00e9natur\u00e9s\".\nThe pub also appears in \"Whitechapel\", Series 4, Episode 4, in which the body of a victim is discovered on the Thames shoreline. DS Miles briefly explains its history to DI Chandler.\nThe pub features in several of Anna Harrington's Regency-era romance novels, most notably in \"An Unexpected Earl\" and \"An Extraordinary Lord\", both in the \"Lords of the Armory\" series. The recurring comic character Hugh Whitby in Harrington's \"Capturing the Carlisles\" series was named after the pub.\nThe pub also features in several of the Charles Holborne legal crime thrillers by former barrister, Simon Michael, particularly \"Corrupted\", in which the protagonist and his family work as lightermen on the Thames during the Blitz.\nThe pub also serves as the location for the final scenes in \"The Old Guard\" (2020).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75944", "revid": "34765295", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75944", "title": "Dragon Ball (manga)", "text": "Japanese manga series by Akira Toriyama\n&lt;/noinclude&gt;\n is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Akira Toriyama. Originally serialized in Shueisha's manga magazine \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\" from 1984 to 1995, the 519 individual chapters were collected in 42 volumes. \"Dragon Ball\" was inspired by the Chinese novel \"Journey to the West\" and Hong Kong martial arts films. It initially had a comedy focus but later became an action-packed fighting series. The story follows the adventures of Son Goku, from childhood to adulthood, as he trains in martial arts and explores the world in search of the Dragon Balls, seven magical orbs which summon a wish-granting dragon when gathered. Along his journey, Goku makes several friends and battles villains, many of whom also seek the Dragon Balls.\nThe original manga was adapted into two anime series produced by Toei Animation: \"Dragon Ball\" and \"Dragon Ball Z\", which were broadcast in Japan from 1986 to 1996; an anime sequel to \"Dragon Ball Z\", \"Dragon Ball GT\", was broadcast from 1996 to 1997. A media franchise has built up around the series; among the merchandise, there have been both animated and live-action films, collectible trading card games, action figures, collections of soundtracks, and numerous video games. The series was licensed for an English-language release in North America and the United Kingdom by Viz Media, and in Australia and New Zealand by Madman Entertainment. The companies initially split the manga into two parts, \"Dragon Ball\" and \"Dragon Ball Z\" to match the anime series but the most recent edition of the series was released under its original title.\n\"Dragon Ball\" has become one of the most successful manga series of all time. Its initial serialization in \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\" was partly responsible for the magazine reaching its highest circulation of 6.53 million weekly sales. Its collected volumes have over 160 million copies sold in Japan and 260 million sold worldwide, making it one of the best-selling manga series of all time. Reviewers have praised the manga for its comedy, fight scenes, and pacing, while recognizing a coming-of-age theme and its use of cultural references from Chinese mythology and Japanese folktales. Complaints from parents in the United States resulted in English-language releases being edited to remove nudity, racial stereotypes, and other content.\nAlso regarded as one of the most influential manga series, \"Dragon Ball\" has inspired numerous manga artists, including Eiichiro Oda (\"One Piece\"), Masashi Kishimoto (\"Naruto\"), and Tite Kubo (\"Bleach\"). A midquel series, titled \"Dragon Ball Super\", has been published in \"V Jump\" since 2015. It is written by Toriyama and illustrated by Toyotarou.\nPlot summary.\nSon Goku, a monkey-tailed boy, and Bulma, a teenage girl, travel to find the seven Dragon Balls, which summon the dragon Shenlong to grant the user one wish. Their journey leads to the desert bandit Yamcha, who later becomes an ally; Chi-Chi, whom Goku unknowingly agrees to marry; and Pilaf, an impish man who seeks the Dragon Balls to fulfill his desire to rule the world. Goku undergoes rigorous training regimes under the martial arts master Kame-Sen'nin to fight in the . He becomes friends with a monk named Kuririn, his training partner and initial rival. After the tournament, Goku searches for the Dragon Ball his grandfather left him and almost single-handedly defeats the Red Ribbon Army and their hired assassin, Taopaipai. Goku then reunites with his friends to defeat the fortune teller Baba Uranai's fighters and use her to find the last Dragon Ball in order to revive a friend killed by Taopaipai.\nThree years later at the \"Tenkaichi Bud\u014dkai\", Goku and his allies oppose Kame-Sen'nin's rival and Taopaipai's brother, Tsuru-Sen'nin, and his students Tenshinhan and Chaozu. Kuririn is killed after the tournament; Goku tracks down the murderer's leader, Piccolo Daimao, but is defeated. The samurai Yajirobe takes Goku to the hermit Karin, who heals him and gives him a power boost. Meanwhile, Piccolo defeats and kills Kame-Sen'nin and Chaozu before using the Dragon Balls to regain his youth and destroy Shenlong. Goku then kills Piccolo Daimao, who, before dying, spawns his son/reincarnation Piccolo. Karin then directs Goku to Kami, the original creator of the Dragon Balls and Piccolo Daimao's other half, to restore Shenlong and revive his slain friends. Goku trains under Kami for the next three years, once again reuniting with his friends at the \"Tenkaichi Bud\u014dkai\". There, he defeats Piccolo, whose life he spares as it would also kill Kami. Goku leaves with Chi-Chi to keep his promise to marry her.\nFive years later, Goku is a young adult and father to a son, Gohan. A man named Raditz arrives on Earth, identifies Goku as his younger brother Kakarrot, and reveals to him that they are members of a nearly extinct extraterrestrial race called the , who sent Goku to conquer Earth for them; however, Goku had suffered a severe head injury as an infant and lost all memories of his mission. Goku refuses to continue the mission, and sides with Piccolo to kill Raditz at the cost of his own life. In the afterlife, Goku trains under the North Kai\u014d until he is revived by the Dragon Balls to save the Earth from the invading Nappa and Vegeta. In the battle, Yamcha, Chaozu, Tenshinhan, and Piccolo are killed, and the Dragon Balls cease to exist. Kuririn and the galactic tyrant Freeza learn of another set of Dragon Balls on the planet , Piccolo's homeworld. Bulma, Gohan, and Kuririn search for them to revive their friends and restore Earth's Dragon Balls. Their goal leads to several battles with Freeza's minions and Vegeta, the latter standing alongside the heroes to fight the Ginyu Force, a team of mercenaries. The long battle with Freeza ends when Goku transforms into a legendary and defeats him. Barely surviving, Freeza recovers and goes to Earth to take his revenge on Goku; however, he is killed by a Super Saiyan from the future named Trunks.\nThree years later, a group of created by a member of the former Red Ribbon Army, Doctor Gero, appears, seeking revenge against Goku. During this time, an evil life form called Cell also emerges and, after absorbing two of the Androids to achieve his \"perfect form\", holds his own fighting tournament to challenge the protagonists. After Goku sacrifices his own life to no avail, Gohan avenges his father by killing Cell. Seven years later Goku, briefly revived for one day, and his allies are drawn into a fight against Majin Boo. After many battles, including the destruction and re-creation of the Earth, a resurrected Goku destroys Boo with a \"Genki-Dama\" (a sphere of pure energy drawn from all intelligent beings on Earth) and wishes for him to be reincarnated as a \"good person\". Ten years later, at the \"Tenkaichi Bud\u014dkai\", Goku meets Boo's human reincarnation, Oob. After testing his powers, Goku departs with Oob to train him to be the Earth's new guardian.\nProduction.\nWriting.\nWithin roughly six months of creating the popular manga \"Dr. Slump\" in 1980, Akira Toriyama wanted to end the series but his publisher Shueisha would only allow him to do so if he agreed to start another serial for them shortly after. He worked with his editor, Kazuhiko Torishima, on several one-shots but none were successful. Torishima then suggested that, as Toriyama enjoyed kung fu films, he should create a kung fu manga. He was inspired by Hong Kong martial arts films such as Bruce Lee's \"Enter the Dragon\" (1973) and Jackie Chan's \"Drunken Master\" (1978). He was particularly influenced by the fight scenes in Jackie Chan movies, and said he would never have come up with \"Dragon Ball\" if he had not watched \"Drunken Master\", which he enjoyed partly due to its light-hearted tone. This led to the two-part published in the August and October 1983 issues of \"Fresh Jump\". It follows a boy, adept at martial arts, who escorts a princess on a journey back to her home country. \"Dragon Boy\" was very well-received and evolved to become the serial \"Dragon Ball\".\nThe plot and characters of \"Dragon Ball\" were loosely modeled on the classic Chinese novel \"Journey to the West\", with Goku being Sun Wukong (\"Son Goku\" in Japanese), Bulma as Tang Sanzang, Oolong as Zhu Bajie, and Yamcha being Sha Wujing. Toriyama wanted to create a story with the basic theme of \"Journey to the West\", but with \"a little kung fu\" by combining the novel with elements from the kung fu films of Jackie Chan and Bruce Lee. Torishima said he chose the novel largely because it was a free intellectual property, but also because its Chinese setting was not common in manga at the time and would make it both unique and differentiate it from \"Dr. Slump\"'s US West Coast feel.\nHe changed the objective from \"Journey to the West\", where the protagonists travel through the Western Regions (Central Asia) to collect sacred Buddhist texts from the Indian subcontinent, to something simpler, gathering seven orbs which grant a wish. Toriyama added the idea of the Dragon Balls to give the characters a game-like activity of gathering something in order to appeal to its manga magazine audience. His concept of the Dragon Balls was inspired by the epic Japanese novel \"Nans\u014d Satomi Hakkenden\" (1814\u20131842), which involves the heroes collecting eight large Buddhist prayer beads of a necklace from eight different regions of Japan, which Toriyama adapted into finding seven Dragon Balls from seven different locations; he chose the number seven to avoid being the same as the number of beads in \"Hakkenden\". The title \"Dragon Ball\" was inspired by \"Enter the Dragon\" as well as later Bruceploitation knockoff kung fu movies which frequently had the word \"Dragon\" in the title. He originally thought the story would last about a year, or end once the Dragon Balls were collected. Toriyama said that although the stories are purposefully easy to understand, he specifically aimed \"Dragon Ball\" at an older audience than \"Dr. Slump\".\nThe manga was not popular initially. Although he suspected the fighting genre would appeal more to its audience, Toriyama tried to stick to the \"Journey to the West\" adventure aspect which he himself enjoyed, such as having the setting change each chapter, different enemies popping up, and different locations. It was only after he became tired of Torishima nagging about its popularity that Toriyama gave in and developed more battles with the first shown \"Tenkaichi Bud\u014dkai\". Despite his reluctance, the author said it felt good when the series picked up in popularity at that point. However, he said he still tried to resist by returning to the adventure aspect with the Red Ribbon Army arc, and visiting Penguin Village from \"Dr. Slump\" to add comedy. When that did not work out, fighting became the main theme for the manga.\nToriyama said that by the second half of the series, he had become more interested in coming up with the story than drawing it, and that the battles became more intense by him simplifying the lines. He also said he would get letters from readers complaining that the art had become \"too square\", so he intentionally made it more so. Years later he stated that because \"Dragon Ball\" is an action manga the most important aspect is the sense of speed, so he did not draw very elaborately, suggesting that he was not interested in the art. As the manga progressed, Toriyama struggled with the Android and Cell arc, feeling that he could not outdo the Freeza arc. He added time travel, but said he had a hard time with the plot, only being able to think of what to do that week. After Cell's death, Toriyama intended for Gohan to replace Goku as the series' protagonist, but felt the character was not suited for it and changed his mind. Even after the Cell arc, Toriyama felt it could not end there and so continued to the Majin Boo arc. Having resolved it would be the finale, he decided to draw what he wanted and inserted comedy with Gohan's Great Saiyaman persona and the character Gotenks. However, he did not think of an ending until the final chapter. At the time, Toriyama said he gave \"Dragon Ball\" a low-key ending to make it seem as if the story might continue, but he would later say he skipped 10 years ahead in the story to signal that it was truly the end. Wanting to make it even clearer that Goku's battles were over and a new generation was taking over, Toriyama slightly altered the ending for the edition of \"Dragon Ball\", which finished in 2004.\nDevelopment.\nTypically, when creating a manga chapter, an artist draws a rough draft or \"name\", then a more detailed storyboard, and lastly the finalized version. However, Toriyama only draws a storyboard and then the final product simply because it is less work. He did not plan the details of his stories in advance. When he began the serialization of \"Dragon Ball\", he had only prepared storyboards for three chapters. The author said that during its serialization he would wait about two days before his deadline to begin developing the storyboard. Starting around midnight, he would finish it around six in the morning and spend until that night inking, finishing everything in about a day-and-a-half. Unlike other artists, he had only one assistant helping him. Toriyama said that thinking only about the story for each chapter put him in some tight spots, particularly with Trunks' time travel. The only thing he has confidence in is his ability to connect a story back to an earlier aspect, making it seem to have been foreshadowing. The author used suggestions in fan mail he received, though generally doing the opposite of what was suggested. As an example, many fans told him not to kill Vegeta, which is exactly what he did.\nWanting to escape the Western themes that influenced \"Dr. Slump\", Toriyama used Eastern/Oriental scenery in \"Dragon Ball\". In addition to referencing Chinese buildings and scenery, the island where the \"Tenkaichi Bud\u014dkai\" is held is modeled on Bali (in Indonesia), which he visited in 1985. The area around Bobbidi's spaceship was inspired by photos of Africa. When including fights in the manga, Toriyama had the characters go to uninhabited locations to avoid the difficulties of drawing residents and destroyed buildings. Toriyama wanted to set \"Dragon Ball\" in a fictional world largely based on Asia, taking inspiration from several Asian cultures including Japanese, Chinese, South Asian, Central Asian, Arabic, and Indonesian cultures. Toriyama was also inspired by the jinn (genies) from \"The Arabian Nights\". For the training scenes, Jackie Chan's \"Drunken Master\" served as a reference. The author said that Muscle Tower in the Red Ribbon Army storyline was inspired by the beat 'em up video game \"Spartan X\" (called \"Kung-Fu Master\" in the West), in which enemies appear very fast as the player ascends a tower (the game was in turn inspired by Jackie Chan's \"Wheels on Meals\" and Bruce Lee's \"Game of Death\"), and that the fights were similar to the ones in the \"Tenkaichi Bud\u014dkai\", just not in a tournament setting.\nToriyama personally dislikes the idea of naming fighting techniques, joking that in a real fight you would be killed before you could yell their names, but Torishima felt it would be best. Toriyama proceeded to create names for all the techniques, except for the series' signature which his wife came up with when he was indecisive about what it should be called. He even selected them specifically for each character, saying someone like Vegeta would use English names, and using kanji for the more sophisticated like Piccolo.\nIn order to advance the story quickly by having characters travel without inconvenience, he created the flying cloud , then gave most fighters the flying technique , and granted Goku the teleportation ability . While talking to his long-time friend and fellow manga artist Masakazu Katsura about how there was nothing stronger than a Super Saiyan, Katsura suggested having two characters \"fuse\" together, leading to the creation of the technique.\nToriyama enjoyed designing and drawing the distinctive machines of the series. He finds the most fun in designing original mecha, thinking about how a pilot enters and where the engine is. With real world items he would have to look at references, and being off even a little would be noticeable. He goes against whatever is popular at the time, explaining that when he was creating \"Dragon Ball\", most cars were very square, so he drew only round car designs.\nIn 1995, Toriyama detailed the equipment he used for \"Dragon Ball\". He used a G-pen nib by Zebra, usually getting three chapters out of one because he typically does not press down hard. Toriyama used black drawing ink made by Pilot, but his color ink was produced by Luma and applied with a ten-year-old fine point Tensh\u014dd\u014d brush. His whiteout was also made by Luma. He received free Kent paper, similar to Bristol board, from a seller connected to Shueisha, and used a 0.5mm 2B lead mechanical pencil and a wide ruler at least 30\u00a0cm long.\nCharacters.\nWhen creating a character, his process was to draw their face and body type first, and then the clothes, while thinking if the fighters can move around in them. He said that he does not draw \"bad guys\" so unscrupulous that it affects readers psychologically. This is not out of concern for others, but because he does not enjoy drawing such things. Few of his characters have screentone because he found it difficult to use. Toriyama was not concerned about consistency with the color of characters' clothes for the occasional color pages, having sometimes used different ones than he had before. He even specifically asked Torishima to produce as few color pages as possible. Character names are almost always puns sharing a theme with characters related to them, most commonly food. For example, all Saiyans are named after vegetables, being an anagram of the syllables for which means vegetable; such as taken from .\nGoing against the normal convention that the strongest characters should be the largest in terms of physical size, he designed many of \"Dragon Ball\"'s most powerful characters, including Goku, with small statures. Toriyama explained that he had Goku grow up so that drawing fight scenes would be easier, even though Torishima was against it initially because it was rare to have the main character of a manga series change drastically. Torishima later referred to this as his own biggest crisis during the series, with Toriyama threatening to end it if Goku could not grow up. The editor said his concerns were unfounded, as readers accepted the change without complaint.\nHaving created Piccolo Daimao as the first truly evil villain, he said that his part of the series was the most interesting to draw. Freeza was created around the time of the Japanese economic bubble and inspired by real estate speculators, who Toriyama called the \"worst kind of people\". Y\u016b Kond\u014d, Toriyama's second editor, from the Saiyan arc until the appearance of Perfect Cell, and Fuyuto Takeda, his third editor from Perfect Cell until the end of the series, said that \"Dragon Ball\" hit its peak in popularity during the Freeza arc. In a one-thousand ballot popularity poll held in \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\", \"Dragon Ball\" received 815 votes. Finding the escalating enemies difficult, Toriyama created the Ginyu Force to add more balance to the manga.\nWhen Toriyama created the Super Saiyan transformation during the Freeza arc, he gave Goku blond hair because it was easier to draw for Toriyama's assistant, who spent a lot of time blacking in Goku's hair. He also gave him piercing eyes, based on Bruce Lee's paralyzing glare.\nPublication.\nJapanese publication.\n\"Dragon Ball\" was serialized in Shueisha's manga anthology \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\" from November 20, 1984, to May 23, 1995. As the readership of \"Dragon Ball\" grew up, the magazine changed to reflect their changing interests. The 519 individual chapters were collected in 42 volumes by Shueisha from September 10, 1985, through August 4, 1995. These saw any color or partly colored artwork grayscaled. With their predominantly white color and the singular picture that continues across their various spines, Torishima said the covers to these collected volumes were purposely designed to stick out on store bookshelves. For the series' 24th anniversary, the covers were revamped to a design that has been used on all reprints since 2009. Between December 4, 2002, and April 2, 2004, \"Dragon Ball\" was released in a collection of 34 volumes that retain the color artwork from its \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\" run. It received newly drawn cover illustrations by Toriyama, and each volume included a poster of their respective front cover image. These new illustrations were initially drawn in ink, scanned into a computer and colored using Corel Painter. Midway through, Toriyama changed to drawing them on a graphics tablet and coloring them with Adobe Photoshop. UV curing was used to add \"shine\" to the characters, and some characters are in monochrome up until volume 18. The edition was designed by Hideaki Shimada. Although Toriyama had already drafted the first four covers with a vibrant green, Shimada proposed bright red after seeing South Korea compete in the 2002 FIFA World Cup and he agreed. Wanting a \"neater\" look than the , Shimada decided to write \"Dragonball\" in lowercase and in a taller and thinner font. He also asked Toriyama to draw Shenlong with thick lines for use as the inside covers. It was an editor who suggested having a singular picture that continues across the various spines, but unlike the edition, the number of volumes was already determined, so they knew exactly how long it needed to be.\nThe December 2012 (cover date\u00a0February 2013) issue of \"V Jump\" announced that parts of the manga would be fully colored digitally and re-released as \"Dragon Ball Full Color\". 20 volumes, beginning from chapter 195 and grouped by story arcs, were released between February 4, 2013, and July 4, 2014. 12 volumes covering the first 194 chapters were published between January 4 and March 4, 2016. \"Dragon Ball\" was also released in a edition that aims to recreate the manga as it was originally serialized in \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\" in the same size, with the color pages, promotional text, and next chapter previews, in addition to foldout posters. Eighteen volumes of \"Dragon Ball S\u014dsh\u016bhen Ch\u014d G\u014dku Den\" were published between May 13, 2016, and January 13, 2017.\nOn May 10, 2025, Shueisha announced the publication of a new box set comprising the 42 volumes, commemorating the manga's 40th anniversary, set to be released on February 4, 2026. Each volume in the collection will feature double covers showcasing artwork by 42 manga artists; the artworks first appeared in \"Saiky\u014d Jump\" magazine's regular \"\"Dragon Ball\" Super Gallery\" feature from 2021 to 2025.\nEnglish publication.\nThe English language version of the \"Dragon Ball\" manga is licensed for North America by Viz Media. Viz originally published the first 194 chapters as \"Dragon Ball\" and chapters over 195 as \"Dragon Ball Z\" to mimic the names of the anime series, feeling it would reduce the potential for confusion by its readers. They initially released both series simultaneously, chapter by chapter in a monthly comic book format starting in 1998, before stopping in 2000 to switch to a graphic novel format similar to the Japanese . In 2000, while releasing \"Dragon Ball\" in the monthly format, Viz began to censor the manga in response to parental complaints about sexual innuendos. Viz changed their publishing format for the series again in 2003; the first 10 collected volumes of both series were re-released under their \"Shonen Jump\" imprint. They have slightly smaller dimensions. The manga was completed in English with \"Dragon Ball\" in 16 volumes between May 6, 2003, and August 3, 2004, and \"Dragon Ball Z\" in 26 volumes from May 6, 2003, to June 6, 2006. However, when publishing the last few volumes of \"Z\", the company began to censor the series again by changing or removing gun scenes and changing the few sexual references. \"Dragon Ball Z\", from Trunks' appearance to chapter 226, was published in Viz's monthly magazine \"Shonen Jump\" from its debut issue in January 2003 to April 2005.\nViz released both series in a wideban format called \"Viz Big Edition\", which collects three volumes into a single large volume. \"Dragon Ball\" was published in five volumes between June 3, 2008, and August 18, 2009, while \"Dragon Ball Z\" was published in nine volumes between June 3, 2008, and November 9, 2010. Viz published new 3-in-1 volumes of \"Dragon Ball\", similar to their Viz Big Edition, across 14 volumes between June 4, 2013, and September 6, 2016. This version uses some Japanese covers and marks the first time in English that the entire series was released under the \"Dragon Ball\" name, though it is still censored. Viz serialized chapters 195 to 245 of the fully colored version of the manga in their digital anthology \"Weekly Shonen Jump\" from February 2013 to February 2014. They published the Saiyan and Freeza arcs of \"Dragon Ball Full Color Edition\" in large format volumes between February 4, 2014, and January 3, 2017. Although it uses the same translation as their other versions, this release has some slight dialogue changes including censoring any profanity and abbreviating lengthy sentences. It also leaves the Japanese sound effects and word bubbles unaltered.\nThe manga has also been licensed in other English-speaking countries, distributed in the same Viz format separating it into \"Dragon Ball\" and \"Dragon Ball Z\". From August 2005 to November 2007, Gollancz Manga, an imprint of the Orion Publishing Group released the 16 volumes of \"Dragon Ball\" and the first four of \"Dragon Ball Z\" in the United Kingdom. Viz took over the UK license after Gollancz left the manga market. In Australia and New Zealand, Madman Entertainment has released all 16 volumes of \"Dragon Ball\" and the nine \"Viz Big\" volumes of \"Dragon Ball Z\" between 2009 and 2010.\nControversy in the United States.\nThe manga's content has been controversial in the United States. In November 1999, Toys \"R\" Us removed Viz's \"Dragon Ball\" from their stores nationwide when a Dallas parent complained that the series had \"borderline soft porn\" after he bought them for his four-year-old son. Commenting on the issue, manga critic Susan J. Napier determined the ban as a difference in culture due to Japan having tolerance for sexuality in manga while other countries do not. After the ban, Viz reluctantly began to censor the series in 2000 to maintain its wide distribution. Viz made some \"concessions\" as well, and assured readers that all changes were approved by Toriyama and Shueisha. Toriyama made suggestions himself such as obscuring Goku's genitals with objects, rather than \"neuter him.\" A fan petition was created, garnering over 10,000 signatures, and a year later, Viz announced they would stop censoring \"Dragon Ball\" and increased its \"age rating\" to 13 and up instead, reprinting the first three graphic novels. However, they continued to censor several characters' lips by shading them in completely. This avoided racist stereotypes, such as that of Mr. Popo's image. In October 2009, Wicomico County Public Schools in Maryland banned the \"Dragon Ball\" manga from their school district because it \"depicts nudity, sexual contact between children and sexual innuendo among adults and children.\" Esther Keller, Robin Brenner and Eva Volin of \"School Library Journal\" had no opinion on whether or not removing the manga from all schools in that district was right. However, Brenner and Volin criticized the parents who had a problem with the manga for going to a county council member who is involved with politics instead of to the librarian of the school that carried the manga.\nOther publications.\nWhile \"Dragon Ball\" was licensed in the United States by Viz Media, it has been licensed in other countries as well for regional language releases in French by Gl\u00e9nat Editions, in Spanish by Planeta DeAgostini for European versions, and Panini Comics for Latin American versions, in Italian by Star Comics, in German by Carlsen Verlag, in Russian by Comix-ART, in Polish by Japonica Polonica Fantastica, and in Swedish by Bonnier Group.\nSpin-offs and crossovers.\nA special side story, titled , was developed by Toriyama and published together with chapter 386 on August 31, 1992, in issue No. 36/37 of \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\". Toriyama created a short series, \"Neko Majin\", that became a self-parody of \"Dragon Ball\". First appearing in August 1999, the eight-chapter series was released sporadically in \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\" and \"Monthly Sh\u014dnen Jump\" until it was completed in 2005. These chapters were compiled into one volume released on April 4, 2005.\nIn 2006, to celebrate the 30th anniversary of \"Kochira Katsushika-ku Kameari K\u014den-mae Hashutsujo\" (or \"Kochikame\"), a special manga titled was released on September 15. It included characters from the series appearing in special crossover chapters of other well-known manga. The chapter was a \"Dragon Ball\" crossover by Toriyama and \"Kochikame\" author Osamu Akimoto. That same year, Toriyama teamed up with Eiichiro Oda to create a single crossover chapter of \"Dragon Ball\" and \"One Piece\". Entitled \"Cross Epoch\", the chapter was published in the Christmas 2006 issue of \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\" in Japanese and the April 2011 issue of \"Shonen Jump\" in English. The final chapter of Toriyama's 2013 manga series \"Jaco the Galactic Patrolman\" revealed that it is set before \"Dragon Ball\", with several characters making appearances. \"Jaco\"'s collected volume contains a bonus \"Dragon Ball\" chapter revealing Goku's mother. \"Jaco\" and the bonus chapter were both published by Viz in their digital English \"Weekly Shonen Jump\", and later in print.\n\"Dragon Ball SD\" is a colored spin-off manga written and illustrated by Naho \u014cishi was published in Shueisha's \"Saiky\u014d Jump\" magazine in December 2010. It is a condensed retelling of Goku's various adventures, with many details changed, in a super deformed art style, hence the title. After four chapters, the quarterly \"Saiky\u014d Jump\" switched to a monthly schedule. The chapters published after the monthly switch have been collected into five volumes as of February 2, 2018. ' is a three-chapter manga, once again penned by Naho \u014cishi, that was published in the monthly magazine \"V Jump\" from August to October 2011. It is a sequel to the 1990 TV special ' with some key details changed. The manga's story revolves around Bardock, Goku's father, who is featured in a scenario where he did not die at the hands of Freeza and fights his enemy's ancestor as a Super Saiyan.\nOn December 12, 2016, the first chapter of a spin-off manga titled was released in Shueisha's \"Sh\u014dnen Jump+\" digital magazine. Written and illustrated by Dragongarow Lee, it is about a high school boy who wakes up after an accident in the body of Yamcha in the \"Dragon Ball\" manga. Knowing what comes later in the story, he trains as Yamcha to make him the strongest warrior. Utilizing the \"reincarnated in a parallel world\" theme popular in light novels, the series was conceived by \"Sh\u014dnen Jump+\" editor-in-chief Shuhei Hosono. A second chapter was released on May 8, 2017, and the final one on August 14, 2017. A collecting all three chapters was published on November 2, 2017, and has 240,000 copies in print. Viz licensed the series for English publication and released the collected volume on November 6, 2018.\nReception.\nSales.\n\"Dragon Ball\" is one of the most popular manga series of all time. It is credited as one of the main reasons manga circulation was at its highest between the mid-1980s and mid-1990s. During \"Dragon Ball\"'s initial run in \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\", the manga magazine reached an average circulation of 6.53million weekly sales, the highest in its history. During \"Dragon Ball\"'s serialization between 1984 and 1995, \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\" magazine had a total circulation of over 2.9billion copies.\nThe collected volumes of \"Dragon Ball\" have sold in record numbers. By 2000, more than 126million copies had been sold in Japan. By 2008, it had over 150million copies in circulation and was the best-selling manga ever at the time. In 2012, Shueisha announced that \"Dragon Ball\" volume sales had grown to more than 156million, making it the second best-selling \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\" manga of all time, behind \"One Piece\". Two years later, this number had grown to 159.5million copies. By November 2015, the manga had over 230million copies in circulation worldwide, including 140million volumes and 20million volumes in Japan. The total number of \"Dragon Ball\" volumes sold reached 260million copies worldwide by 2022.\nPopularity.\nThe manga is popular overseas, having been translated and released in over 40countries worldwide. For the 10th anniversary of the Japan Media Arts Festival in 2006, close to 79,000 Japanese fans voted \"Dragon Ball\" the third greatest manga of all time. In a 2007 survey of one-thousand people conducted by Oricon, Goku ranked in first place as the \"Strongest Manga Character of All Time\". Coinciding with the 2012 Summer Olympics, Oricon conducted a survey at the international World Cosplay Summit on which manga and anime series attendees considered world class works. \"Dragon Ball\" was overwhelmingly in first place. In November 2014, readers of \"Da Vinci\" magazine voted \"Dragon Ball\" the greatest \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\" manga series of all time. The Portuguese edition of \"Dragon Ball\" won the 2001 Trof\u00e9u HQ Mix for Best Serial. On TV Asahi's Manga S\u014dsenkyo 2021 poll, in which 150,000 people voted for their top 100 manga series, \"Dragon Ball\" ranked fifth.\nIn 2011, manga critic and editor of Viz's editions of the series Jason Thompson said that: \"\"Dragon Ball\" is by far the most influential shonen manga of the last 30 years, and today, almost every \"Sh\u014dnen Jump\" artist lists it as one of their favorites and lifts from it in various ways.\" Explaining its basic formula of \"lots of martial arts, lots of training sequences, [and] a few jokes\" became the model for other series, such as \"Naruto\". Thompson cited the artwork as influential, pointing out that popular manga of the late 1980s and early 1990s had \"manly\" heroes, such as \"City Hunter\" and \"Fist of the North Star\", whereas \"Dragon Ball\" had the cartoonish and small Goku, thus starting a trend that he says still continues. Commenting on \"Dragon Ball\"'s global success nearly two decades after it ended, Toriyama said, \"Frankly, I don't quite understand why it happened. While the manga was being serialized, the only thing I wanted as I kept drawing was to make Japanese boys happy. The role of my manga is to be a work of entertainment through and through. I dare say I don't care even if [my works] have left nothing behind, as long as they have entertained their readers.\"\nCritical reception.\nThe manga has received a mostly positive reception from critics. Jason Thompson commented that \"Dragon Ball\" \"turns from a gag/adventure manga to a nearly-pure fighting manga\". James S. Yadao, author of \"The Rough Guide to Manga\", explains that the first several chapters \"play out much like \"Saiyuki\" (\"Journey to the West\") with \"Dr. Slump\"-like humour built in\" and that \"Dr. Slump\", Toriyama's previous manga, has a clear early influence on the series. He feels the series \"established its unique identity\" after the first time Goku's group disbands and he trains under Kame-Sen'nin. On the second half of the manga, he commented that it developed \"a far more action-packed, sinister tone\" with \"wilder\" battles and aerial and spiritual elements with an increased death count. David Brothers for ComicsAlliance wrote that: \"Like Osamu Tezuka and Jack Kirby before him, Toriyama created a story with his own two hands that seeped deep into the hearts of his readers, creating a love for both the cast and the medium at the same time.\" He said that while the author has \"a sublime combination of \"Looney Tunes\"-style classic humor and dirty jokes,\" the best part of \"Dragon Ball\" is the fight scenes. Brothers explained that while Western superhero comics \"would focus on a series of cool poses or impact shots\" with the reader having to fill in the blanks between panels, \"Dragon Ball\" has a panel dedicated to one action and the next panel features the very next maneuver, making them incredibly easy to follow.\nFusanosuke Natsume says that the theme of disaster and growth in the manga is a reference to \"post-War Japanese manga\" that Osamu Tezuka began in the mid 1940s. He also comments that the violence in the manga has context that children can understand, and is not just there at random. While Toriyama has said that \"Journey to the West\" was an influence on the manga, Xavier M\u00ednguez-L\u00f3pez comments that it is a parody of the Chinese novel, since the stories are similar. He notes that Toriyama uses Chinese mythology and Japanese folktales, the dragon Shenlong who is summoned from the Dragon Balls, as well as characters who are able to come back to life as examples of similarities. Rachel Cantrell says that the manga parodies martial arts very well, and mentions how Toriyama uses panels to a full extent. She notes that the manga has a coming-of-age theme due to how the story captures Goku from a child to an adult. Dr. Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Ducarme compared Goku's backstory to that of Superman, with whom the character has often been compared, but wrote that Goku remains a sportsman throughout the manga, not an avenger or vigilante.\nCarlo Santos of the Anime News Network described \"Dragon Ball\"'s setting as \"a melting pot of sci-fi, fantasy, and folklore\". Santos praised its quick development of new characters and storylines, and claimed that the series' crowning achievement is in its dynamic fight scenes. However, he did not enjoy the clich\u00e9 training and tournament segments, nor its crude humor. His colleague Allen Divers praised the manga's story and humor as being very good at conveying all the characters' personalities. Divers also called Viz's translation one of the best of all the English editions of the series due to its faithfulness to the original Japanese. \"Animerica\" felt the series had \"worldwide appeal,\" using dramatic pacing and over-the-top martial arts action to \"maintain tension levels and keep a crippler crossface hold on the audience's attention spans\". Comic Book Bin's Leroy Douresseaux described Toriyama as a \"super-cartoonist,\" a blend of Carl Barks, Jack Kirby, and Peyo. He gave \"Dragon Ball\" a perfect rating and called it one of the best manga and comic books he has ever read. Ridwan Khan of Animefringe.com commented that the manga had a \"chubby\" art style, but as the series continued the characters became more refined, leaner, and more muscular. He cited one slight problem in Viz's release; the translation uses informal language to capture Goku's country accent, but it ends up feeling \"forced and odd\". Khan prefers the manga over the slow pacing of the anime adaptations. Including it on a list of \"10 Essential Manga That Should Belong in Every Comic Collection\", Matthew Meylikhov of \"Paste\" also praised the manga over the anime as an entirely different and more \"involved experience.\" He wrote that \"You come to know and care for the characters more intimately, and the joy and wonder of watching them fight, learn and grow throughout the series improves tenfold.\" Manga author Nobuhiro Watsuki commented that there was a shift in the traditional portrayal of protagonists and their adversaries engaging in killings in manga after \"Dragon Ball\" started a trend of bringing characters back to life.\nLegacy and cultural impact.\n\"Dragon Ball\" is considered one of the most influential manga of all time. Many manga artists have cited it and Toriyama as inspirations, including \"Fairy Tail\" and \"Rave\" author Hiro Mashima, \"Black Clover\" creator Y\u016bki Tabata, and \"\" illustrator Mikio Ikemoto. Both \"One Piece\" creator Eiichiro Oda and \"Naruto\" creator Masashi Kishimoto have said that Goku inspired their series' main protagonists as well as their structures. For the re-release of \"Dragon Ball\", every odd-numbered volume included a tribute illustration by a popular manga artist who was a child when it was serialized, accompanied with a few words about how the series influenced them. The artists who contributed include: \"Bleach\" creator Tite Kubo, \"Black Cat\" author Kentaro Yabuki, \"The Seven Deadly Sins\" author Nakaba Suzuki, \"Eyeshield 21\" and \"One-Punch Man\" illustrator Yusuke Murata, \"Bobobo-bo Bo-bobo\" creator Yoshio Sawai, \"Pretty Face\" author Yasuhiro Kan\u014d, \"Mr. Fullswing\" author Shinya Suzuki, \"Hellsing\" creator Kouta Hirano, \"Claymore\" author Norihiro Yagi, \"Phantom Thief Jeanne\" and \"Full Moon o Sagashite\" creator Arina Tanemura, \"Excel Saga\" author Rikdo Koshi, \"Dragon Drive\" creator Kenichi Sakura, and \"Happy World!\" author Kenjiro Takeshita. French comics artist Tony Valente cited \"Dragon Ball\" as an influence, especially the adventure aspect of its early portion. The producer of the \"Tekken\" video game series, Katsuhiro Harada, said that \"Dragon Ball\" was one of the first works to visually depict chi and thereby influenced \"Tekken\" and other Japanese games such as \"Street Fighter\". Ian Jones-Quartey, a producer of the American animated series \"Steven Universe\", is a fan of \"Dragon Ball\" and \"Dr. Slump\", and uses Toriyama's vehicle designs as a reference for his own. He also stated that \"We're all big Toriyama fans on [\"Steven Universe\"], which kind of shows a bit.\" French director Pierre Perifel cited Toriyama and \"Dragon Ball\" as influences on his DreamWorks Animation film \"The Bad Guys\".\nAfter searching for a real-life equivalent to the supernaturally nutritious \"Senzu\" seen in \"Dragon Ball\", Mitsuru Izumo founded Euglena Company in 2005 and started making supplements and food products out of \"Euglena\". In 2014, entomologist Enio B. Cano named a new species of beetle \"Ogyges toriyamai\" after Toriyama, and another \"Ogyges mutenroshii\", after the \"Dragon Ball\" character Muten Roshi. In 2025, researchers named a new species of goby \"Vanderhorstia supersaiyan\" after the Super Saiyan transformation seen in \"Dragon Ball\" due to the fish's yellow stripes.\nOn March 27, 2013, the \"Akira Toriyama: The World of Dragon Ball\" exhibit opened at the Takashimaya department store in Nihonbashi, attracting 72,000 visitors in its first nineteen days. The exhibit is separated into seven areas. The first provides a look at the series' history, the second shows the series' 400-plus characters, the third displays Toriyama's manga manuscripts of memorable scenes, the fourth shows special color illustrations, the fifth displays rare \"Dragon Ball\"-related materials, the sixth includes design sketches and animation cels from the anime, and the seventh screens \"Dragon Ball\"-related videos. It remained until April 15 when it moved to Osaka from April 17 to 23, and ended in Toriyama's native Nagoya from July 27 to September 1.\nAn interactive exhibit called was displayed in Nagoya in summer 2014. Installations included an EEG that measured visitors' alpha brain waves to move Goku's flying cloud. The following year it went to Taiwan, then Tokyo from April 29 to May 10, and Osaka between July 18 and August 31. A retrospective exhibit called \"The Beginning of the Legend\" featured \"Dragon Ball\" along with other popular \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\" manga for the 50th anniversary of the magazine in 2018.\nIn 2015, the Japan Anniversary Association officially declared May 9 as . In Japanese the numbers five and nine can be pronounced as \"Go\" and \"Ku\". In October 2016, Shueisha announced they had created a new department on June 21 called the . Headed by \"V Jump\" editor-in-chief Akio Iyoku, it was dedicated solely to \"Dragon Ball\" and optimizing and expanding the brand. To commemorate the 40th anniversary of \"Dragon Ball\", the Japan Mint will release two sets, each containing a medallion and six coins that range in denominations from 1 to 500 yen, in December 2025.\nNobuyuki Sakakibara, the founder of Pride Fighting Championships and Rizin Fighting Federation, noted how Toriyama conceived of a tournament featuring martial artists of various disciplines competing against each other with the \"Tenkaichi Bud\u014dkai\" in 1985, before mixed martial arts was coined or established. Canadian mixed martial artist Carlos Newton dubbed his fighting style \"Dragon Ball jiu-jitsu\" in tribute to the series. Japanese mixed martial artist Itsuki Hirata is nicknamed \"Android 18\" due to her resemblance to the \"Dragon Ball\" character. Japanese kickboxer Panchan Rina took her nickname from the \"Dragon Ball\" character Pan.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75945", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75945", "title": "John I, Duke of Brabant", "text": "Duke of Brabant (1252/53 \u2013 1294)\nJohn I, also called John the Victorious (1252/53\u00a0\u2013 3 May 1294) was Duke of Brabant (1267\u20131294), Lothier and Limburg (1288\u20131294). During the 13th century, John I was venerated as a folk hero. He has been painted as the perfect model of a brave, adventurous and chivalrous feudal prince.\nLife.\nBorn in Leuven, he was the son of Henry III, Duke of Brabant and Aleidis of Burgundy, daughter of Hugh IV, Duke of Burgundy. He was also an older brother of Maria of Brabant, Queen consort of Philip III of France. In 1267 his older brother Henry IV, Duke of Brabant, being mentally deficient, was deposed in his favour.\nJohn's greatest military victory was the Battle of Worringen 1288, by which John I came to reign over the Duchy of Limburg. He was completely outnumbered in forces but led the successful invasion into the Rhineland to defeat the confederacy. In 1288 Limburg was formally attached to Brabant.\nJohn I was said to be a model of feudal prince: brave, adventurous; excelling in every form of active exercise, fond of display, and generous in temper. He was considered one of the most gifted princes of his time. This made him very popular in Middle Ages poetry and literature. Even today there exists an ode to him, so well known that it was a potential candidate to be the North Brabant anthem. John I delighted in tournaments and was always eager to take part in jousts. He was also famous for his many illegitimate children.\nOn 3 May 1294 at some marriage festivities at Bar-le-Duc, John I was mortally wounded in the arm in an encounter by Pierre de Bausner. He was buried in the church of the Order of Friars Minor (Minderbroederskerk) in Brussels, but since the Protestant iconoclasm (\"Beeldenstorm\") in 1566, nothing remains of his tomb.\nFamily and children.\nJohn was married twice. On 5 September 1270, he married Margaret, daughter of Louis IX of France and Margaret of Provence. They had a son, but both mother and child died shortly after his birth.\nIn 1273, John married Margaret (d. 3 July 1285), daughter of Guy, Count of Flanders and had the following children:\nJohn I had several illegitimate children:\nLegacy.\nThe duke is remembered in the folkish song that remains popular. The popular Dutch beer Hertog Jan was named after the duke. Also the beer Primus of the Haacht Brewery is named after John I (Jan Primus).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75946", "revid": "1123", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75946", "title": "Huffman encoding", "text": ""}
{"id": "75948", "revid": "50656843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75948", "title": "Lists of flags", "text": "This is a collection of lists of flags, including the flags of states or territories, groups or movements and individual people.\nThere are also lists of historical flags and military flag galleries. Many of the flag images are on Wikimedia Commons.\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis article includes . &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "75952", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75952", "title": "Saint-Germain-en-Laye", "text": "French commune\n \nSaint-Germain-en-Laye () is a commune in the Yvelines department in the \u00cele-de-France in north-central France. It is located in the western suburbs of Paris, from the centre of Paris.\nInhabitants are called \"Saint-Germanois\" or \"Saint-Germinois\". With its elegant tree-lined streets it is one of the more affluent suburbs of Paris, combining both high-end leisure spots and exclusive residential neighborhoods (see the Golden Triangle of the Yvelines).\nSaint-Germain-en-Laye is a sub-prefecture of the department. Because it includes the National Forest of Saint-Germain-en-Laye, it covers approximately , making it the largest commune in the Yvelines. It occupies a large loop of the Seine. Saint-Germain-en-Laye lies at one of the western termini of Line A of the RER.\nHistory.\nSaint-Germain-en-Laye was founded in 1020 when King Robert the Pious (ruled 996\u20131031) founded a convent on the site of the present Church of Saint-Germain.\nThe H\u00f4tel de Ville is a former private house dating from the second half of the 16th century.\nIn 1688, James II of England exiled himself to the city after being deposed from the throne in what has become known as the Glorious Revolution. He spent the remainder of his days there, and died on 16 September 1701.\nPrior to the French Revolution in 1789, it had been a royal town and the Ch\u00e2teau de Saint-Germain the residence of numerous French monarchs. The old ch\u00e2teau was constructed in 1348 by King Charles V on the foundations of an old castle (\"ch\u00e2teau-fort\") dating from 1238 in the time of Saint Louis. Francis I was responsible for its subsequent restoration. In 1862, Napoleon III set up the \"Mus\u00e9e des Antiquit\u00e9s Nationales\" in the erstwhile royal ch\u00e2teau. This museum has exhibits ranging from Paleolithic to Celtic times. The \"Dame de Brassempouy\" sculpted on a mammoth's ivory tusk around 23,000 years ago is the most famous exhibit in the museum.\nKings Henry IV and Louis XIII left their mark on the town. Louis XIV was born in the ch\u00e2teau (the city's coat of arms consequently shows a cradle and the date of his birth), and established Saint-Germain-en-Laye as his principal residence from 1661 to 1681. Louis XIV turned over the ch\u00e2teau to James VII &amp; II of Scotland and England after his exile from Britain after the Glorious Revolution in 1688. James lived in the Ch\u00e2teau for 13 years, and his daughter Louisa Maria Stuart was born in exile here in 1692. James II is buried in the parish church.\nSaint-Germain-en-Laye is famous for its long stone terrace built by Andr\u00e9 Le N\u00f4tre from 1669 to 1673. The terrace provides a view over the valley of the Seine and, in the distance, Paris. During the French Revolution, the name was changed along with many other places whose names held connotations of religion or royalty. Temporarily, Saint-Germain-en-Laye became Montagne-du-Bon-Air. During his reign, Napoleon established his cavalry officers training school in the Ch\u00e2teau-Vieux.\nThe Treaty of Saint-Germain was signed in 1919 and was applied on 16 July 1920. The treaty officially registered the breakup of the Habsburg empire, which recognized the independence of Czechoslovakia, Poland, Hungary, and the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes (Yugoslavia).\nIn 1880, the town saw the erection of a statue of Adolphe Thiers, responsible for the massacre of the Paris Commune. The following year, this statue was targeted by the Thiers statue bombing, where a \"French Revolutionary Committee\", probably an anarchist group, failed to destroy the statue. However, it was one of the first propaganda by the deed attacks, and the first in France.\nDuring the occupation from 1940 to 1944, the town was the headquarters of the Oberbefehlshaber West, the commander of the German armed forces on the Western Front. It has been called \"the most occupied city in France.\"\nOn 1 January 2019, the former commune Fourqueux was merged into Saint-Germain-en-Laye.\nSaint-Germain parish church.\nThe parish church, which is dedicated to Germain of Paris, was originally constructed in the eleventh century, and the present building (the fourth on the site) was built in the 1820s in a Neoclassical style, with six Tuscan columns supporting a pediment on the main fa\u00e7ade. The church houses the mausoleum of James II of England and was visited by Queen Victoria in 1855.\nThe organ, originally installed in 1698, was rebuilt by Aristide Cavaill\u00e9-Coll in the nineteenth century and refurbished in 1903. The church's organists have included Albert Renaud (1891\u20131924), Albert Alain (1924\u20131971) and Marie-Claire Alain (1971\u20132010).\nPopulation.\nThe population data in the table and graph below refer to the commune of Saint-Germain-en-Laye proper, in its geography at the given years. The population of Fourqueux, absorbed in 2019, is not included.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTransport.\nSaint-Germain-en-Laye is connected to other communes by the R\u00e9salys bus network operated by Transdev. Saint-Germain-en-Laye is served by Saint-Germain-en-Laye station on Paris RER line A.\nIt was also served by two stations on the Grande Ceinture Ouest branch of the Transilien Paris-Saint-Lazare suburban rail line: Saint-Germain-Bel-Air\u2013Fourqueux and Saint-Germain\u2013Grande Ceinture. The branch was in operation from 12 December 2004 to 28 June 2019.\nOn 6 July 2022 the \u00cele-de-France tramway Line 13 Express opened, serving the two former Grande Ceinture Ouest station, as well as two additional stations within Saint-Germain-en-Laye.\nThe Ach\u00e8res\u2013Grand-Cormier station is also situated within the Saint-Germain-en-Laye commune. It is served by the Paris RER line A and the Transilien Paris \u2013 Saint-Lazare suburban rail line. The station is located in the middle of the Forest of Saint-Germain-en-Laye, far from the urbanized part of the commune.\nSport.\nFootball.\nSaint-Germain-en-Laye has a proud footballing history. From 1904 to 1970, it was represented by Stade Saint-Germain, but following a 1970 merger with Paris FC, became Paris Saint-Germain (PSG). PSG is a top-flight football team that is the most successful team in France in terms of trophies.\nSporting facilities.\nThere is one main sporting facility in Saint-Germain-en-Laye: the Stade Municipal Georges Lef\u00e8vre. It covers over 12 hectares and contains:\n\u2013 5 football pitches\n\u2013 3 stands\n\u2013 1 athletic track\n\u2013 22 tennis courts\n\u2013 1 clubhouse\n\u2013 1 multibeach terrain\nEconomy.\nCapcom Entertainment France, a Capcom subsidiary, has its head office in Saint-Germain-en-Laye.\nEducation.\nAs of 2016[ [update]] the schools in this commune had 20,581 students, with 7,300 of them living in Saint-Germain-en-Laye. There is a high ratio of overall students to town inhabitants. The municipal nursery and primary schools have 3,549 students. 1,026 students attend private schools in the commune.\nSchools.\nAs of 2016[ [update]] the municipality operates ten nursery schools and nine primary schools.\nPublic schools include:\nPrivate schools include:\nThe Lyc\u00e9e International de Saint Germain-en-Laye is a hybrid public/private international school. It teaches children from nursery to high school age, who follow both the public French curriculum and an international program. There are 14 language program options, some of which are public and others private.\nSaint-Germain-en-Laye is also home to the Institut d'\u00e9tudes politiques de Saint-Germain-en-Laye. The political science grande \u00e9cole was founded in 2013 and, as of 2023, has a student body of over 800.\nLibraries.\nThere are two libraries:\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nSaint-Germain-en-Laye is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75954", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75954", "title": "1598 BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "75955", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75955", "title": "Henri II of France", "text": ""}
{"id": "75956", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75956", "title": "1610 BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "75957", "revid": "28146993", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75957", "title": "Dolphin (pub)", "text": ""}
{"id": "75958", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75958", "title": "Anthony Wayne", "text": "American statesman and soldier (1745\u20131796)\nAnthony Wayne (January 1, 1745 \u2013 December 15, 1796) was an American soldier, officer, statesman, and a Founding Father of the United States. He adopted a military career at the outset of the American Revolutionary War, where his military exploits and fiery personality quickly earned him a promotion to brigadier general and the nickname \"Mad Anthony\". He later served as the Senior Officer of the Army on the Ohio Country frontier and led the Legion of the United States.\nWayne was born in Chester County, Pennsylvania, and worked as a tanner and surveyor after attending the College of Philadelphia. He was elected to the Pennsylvania General Assembly and helped raise a Pennsylvania militia unit in 1775. During the Revolutionary War, he served in the Invasion of Quebec, the Philadelphia campaign, and the Yorktown campaign. Although his reputation suffered after his defeat in the Battle of Paoli, he won wide praise for his leadership in the 1779 Battle of Stony Point and was awarded the Congressional Gold Medal. Soon after being promoted to major general in 1783, he retired from the Continental Army. Anthony Wayne was a member of the Society of the Cincinnati of the state of Georgia. In 1780, he was elected to the American Philosophical Society.\nAfter the war, Wayne held a brief career in congress and private business. Following St. Clair's defeat, Wayne was recalled by President Washington from civilian life to command of U.S. forces in the Northwest Indian War, where he defeated the Northwestern Confederacy, an alliance of several American Indian tribes. Leading up to the war, Wayne oversaw a major change and reorganization of the entire United States Army. Following the 1794 Battle of Fallen Timbers, he later negotiated the Treaty of Greenville which ended the war and their alliance with the British Empire. In the 21st century, Wayne's legacy has become controversial due to his ownership of slaves and scorched earth tactics against Indian tribes during the Northwest Indian War.\nEarly life.\nWayne was one of four children born to Isaac Wayne, who had immigrated to Easttown, Pennsylvania, from Ireland, and Elizabeth Iddings Wayne. He was part of a Protestant Anglo-Irish family; his grandfather was a veteran of the Battle of the Boyne, where he fought for the Williamite side.\nWayne was born on January 1, 1745, on his family's 500 acre Waynesborough estate. During his upbringing, Wayne clashed with his father's desires that he become a farmer. As a child, his father served as a captain during the French and Indian War, leaving an impression on Wayne who would mimic stories of battles at the time. He was educated as a surveyor at his uncle's private academy in Philadelphia and at the College of Philadelphia for two years. In 1765, Benjamin Franklin sent him and some associates to work for a year surveying land granted in Nova Scotia, where he surveyed 100,000 acres. He assisted with starting a settlement the following year at The Township of Monckton and was involved with preparing the infrastructure to last through winters.\nHe married Mary Penrose in 1763, and they had two children. Their daughter, Margretta, was born in 1770, and their son, Isaac Wayne, was born in 1772. Wayne had romantic relationships with other women throughout his life, including Mary Vining, a wealthy woman in Delaware, eventually causing his wife becoming estranged from him. He later became a U.S. representative from Pennsylvania.\nWayne was an avid reader and often quoted Caesar and Shakespeare at length while serving in the military.\nIn 1767, he returned to work in his father's tannery while continuing work as a surveyor.\nAs discontent with the British grew in the Thirteen Colonies, Wayne stepped into the political limelight locally and was elected chairman of the Chester County Committee of Safety and then to the Pennsylvania Provincial Assembly.\nAmerican Revolution.\nIn 1775, Wayne was nominated to the Pennsylvania Committee of Safety, where he served along with three other Pennsylvania committee members, John Dickinson, Benjamin Franklin, and Robert Morris. Following Great Britain's enactment of the Intolerable Acts, Wayne began to oppose the British and by October 1775, his chairman position for the Chester County Committee of Safety was replaced by a Quaker as citizens described him as a \"radical\" against the British, an accusation Wayne denied. On January 3, 1776, Wayne was nominated as colonel of the 4th Pennsylvania Regiment by the Pennsylvania delegation of the Second Continental Congress. The poor supplies and controversies between his regiment and the Pennsylvania assembly would later influence Wayne to support the centralization of government.\nAmerican Revolutionary War.\nWayne discarded the conventional tactics of line warfare, stating \"the only good lines are those nature made\", and instead focused on maneuver warfare and strict discipline. He and his regiment were part of the Continental Army's unsuccessful invasion of Canada where he was sent to aid Benedict Arnold. Wayne commanded a successful rear-guard action at the Battle of Trois-Rivi\u00e8res and then led the forces on Lake Champlain at Fort Ticonderoga and Mount Independence. His service led to his promotion to brigadier general on February 21, 1777. Some historians claim Wayne's nickname \"Mad Anthony\" came from his bold military tactics from the Battle of Green Spring in Virginia, which his men barely escaped an outnumbered British force with a bold bayonet charge. Others claim it was from his quick temper and what historians label \"off-color language,\" specifically during an incident when he severely punished a skilled informant for being drunk.\nOn September 11, 1777, Wayne commanded the Pennsylvania Line at the Battle of Brandywine, where they held off General Wilhelm von Knyphausen in order to protect the American right flank. The two forces fought for three hours until the American line withdrew and Wayne was ordered to retreat. He was then ordered to harass the British rear in order to slow General William Howe's advance towards Pennsylvania. Wayne's camp was attacked on the night of September 20\u201321 in the Battle of Paoli. General Charles Grey had ordered his men to remove their flints and attack with bayonets in order to keep their assault secret. The battle earned Grey the sobriquet of \"General Flint\", but Wayne's own reputation was tarnished by the significant American losses, and he demanded a formal inquiry in order to clear his name.\nOn October 4, 1777, Wayne again led his forces against the British in the Battle of Germantown. His soldiers pushed ahead of other units, and the British \"pushed on with their Bayonets\u2014and took Ample Vengeance\" as they retreated, according to Wayne's report. Wayne and General John Sullivan advanced too rapidly and became entrapped when they were ahead of other American units. They retreated as Howe arrived to re-form the British line. Wayne was again ordered to hold off the British and cover the rear of the retreating body.\nAfter winter quarters at Valley Forge, Wayne led the attack at the 1778 Battle of Monmouth, where his forces were abandoned by General Charles Lee and were pinned down by a numerically superior British force. Wayne held out until relieved by reinforcements sent by General George Washington. He then re-formed his troops and continued to fight. The body of British Lt. Colonel Henry Monckton was discovered by the 1st Pennsylvania Regiment, and a legend grew that he had died fighting Wayne.\nWayne also set an example for coping with adversity during military operations. In October 1778, Wayne wrote of the brutal cold and lack of appropriate supplies, \"During the very severe storm from Christmas to New Year's, whilst our people lay without any cover except their old tents, and when the drifting of snow prevented the green wood from taking fire.\" Through these tough conditions, Wayne wrote that he sought to keep his soldiers \"well and comfortable.\"\nIn January 1779, Wayne was staying at the home of Abraham Van Neste, owner of the mills at the site of the Battle of Millstone, along with his subordinate soldiers. Following an argument one night between Wayne's Aide-de-camp, Benjamin Fishbourn, and Van Neste, Van Neste was assaulted. Wayne prevented a local constable from serving process on the subordinate. General Washington was brought into the situation by the Governor of New Jersey, William Livingston,to help resolve the situation. \nIn July 1779, Washington named Wayne to command the Corps of Light Infantry, a temporary unit of four regiments of light infantry companies drawn from all the regiments in the main army. His successful attack on British positions in the Battle of Stony Point was the highlight of his Revolutionary War service. On July 16, 1779, he replicated the bold attack used against him at Paoli and personally led a nighttime bayonet attack lasting 30 minutes. His three columns of about 1,500 light infantry stormed and captured British fortifications at Stony Point, a cliff-side redoubt commanding the southern Hudson River. The battle ended with around 550 prisoners taken, with fewer than 100 casualties for Wayne's forces. Wayne was wounded during the attack when an enemy musket ball gashed his scalp. The success of this operation provided a small boost to the morale of the army, which had suffered a series of military defeats, and the Continental Congress awarded him a medal for the victory.\nOn July 21, 1780, Washington sent Wayne with two Pennsylvania brigades and four cannons to destroy a blockhouse at Bulls Ferry opposite New York City in the Battle of Bull's Ferry. Wayne's troops were unable to capture the position, suffering 64 casualties while inflicting 21 casualties on the Loyalist defenders.\nOn January 1, 1781, Wayne served as commanding officer of the Pennsylvania Line of the Continental Army when pay and condition concerns led to the Pennsylvania Line Mutiny, one of the most serious of the war. He successfully resolved the mutiny by dismissing about half the line. He returned the Pennsylvania Line to full strength by May 1781. This delayed his departure to Virginia, however, where he had been sent to assist General Lafayette against British forces operating there. The line's departure was delayed once more when the men complained about being paid in the nearly worthless Continental currency.\nOn July 4, General Charles Cornwallis departed Williamsburg for Jamestown, planning to cross the James River en route to Portsmouth. Lafayette believed he could stage an attack on Cornwallis' rear guard during the crossing. Cornwallis anticipated Lafayette's plan and laid an elaborate trap. Wayne led a small scouting force of 500 in 1781 at the Battle of Green Spring to determine the location of Cornwallis, and they fell into the trap; only a bold bayonet charge against the numerically overwhelming British enabled his forces to retreat. The action reinforced the perception among contemporaries that justified the moniker \"Mad\" to describe Wayne. During the Yorktown campaign, Wayne was shot in the leg; the lead musket ball was never removed from his leg.\nAfter the British under Cornwallis surrendered at Yorktown, Wayne went farther south and disbanded the British alliance with Native American tribes in Georgia. With the goal of establishing peace between settlers and Native Americans, Wayne captured Creek troops early in his time in Georgia, releasing them in order to establish goodwill between the Creek people and the United States.\nAssuming good relations with the Creek soldiers and fearing an attacked from Lt Colonel Thomas Brown from Savannah, Wayne made camp and prepared for a British confrontation. Unbeknownst to him, Brown spent time influencing the Creek and Cherokee, and persuaded them to attack Wayne. The Creek people ambushed his camp at night which woke Wayne. Assuming another bayonet style British ambush, Wayne alerted his soldiers to arm themselves and prepare to die with him. The attack would be repelled. He eventually negotiated peace treaties with both the Creeks and the Cherokees during a bout with malaria, for which Georgia purchased a rice plantation for 4,000 guineas and rewarded it to him. Wayne would suffer from complications related to malaria for the remainder of his life.\nCivilian life.\nBrief retirement and slavery.\nPennsylvania.\nIn 1783, Wayne returned to Pennsylvania and was celebrated as a war hero, deciding to enter politics with other friends at the time. Initially a supporter of more democratic views, Wayne later aligned more with Federalist Party and George Washington after the end of the Revolutionary War had aligned himself with that party as well. Like most federalists, he favored centralization, federalism, modernization, and protectionism. He went on to support Republicanism because Wayne ultimately believed that the United States should have a strong centrally-controlled government, stronger banks, manufacturing, and a standing army and navy.\nEventually Wayne presented himself as a candidate for the Pennsylvania Council of Censors and on election day in October 1783, he gathered troops and approached electoral judges, demanding that they would be allowed to vote. On October 10, 1783, he was promoted to major general. Wayne was elected to serve in the Pennsylvania General Assembly for two years.The Council convened to assess Pennsylvania's governmental operations and ascertain if constitutional reforms were deemed imperative.\nWayne was a member and took an active part of the Constitutional Convention.\nGeorgia.\nWayne's view on slavery was the same as most of the American planters at the time, which is he supported slavery. However, like Washington, Wayne gradually grew to oppose the practice of it. His ownership of slaves was during his brief private career. Letters by Wayne from this time express concern about the economic efficiency of finding and managing slaves and concern about their harsh punishments. He was documented providing refuge for slaves from punishment in Georgia. During the Revolutionary War, Wayne wrote letters expressing how horrified he was by the treatment of slaves while traveling between camps and even urged Governor Martin to recruit blacks to fight with the Patriots.\nHe owned enslaved African Americans after the war; he would eventually take over the family farm and tannery business in Chester County. Wayne inherited a 40-year-old male slave named Toby, who was registered in Chester County as a \"slave for life.\" In 1786, he obtained slaves through the confiscated plantations, Richmond and Kew with a total area of . The 47 slaves were purchased from Adam Tunno, Samuel Potts, and others. He hired a plantation overseer to manage the plantation and direct the actions of his slaves. A record shows 9 boys, 12 girls, 11 women, and 15 men \u2013 from Adam Tunno for 3,300 pounds, paying 990 pounds initially and then 2,310 pounds over a five-year period. Wayne also had a personal slave named \"Caesar\" that he named after his favorite historical figure, Julius Caesar.\nThe plantations, were confiscated and officially given to Wayne in 1786 along with loans from Dutch bankers for repairs. Wayne quickly fell into debt running the plantations. He is also documented neglecting his business, frequently attending out of state political events, social parties, time with former soldiers, time in Pennsylvania, or traveling. His plantations were ultimately unsuccessful because of neglect and acquiring a large amount of debt. He later begged various acquaintances to assist him with making payments before selling the plantations. His contemporaries criticized him and his overseer for having a \"relaxed\" hand.\nReinstatement.\nAfter the war, Wayne spent his time living a retired life between Pennsylvania and Georgia. He had a brief career in private business running his tanner business in Pennsylvania and two rice plantations in Georgia.\nPresident George Washington however called Wayne out of retirement in spring 1792 to command the newly formed Legion of the United States to secure the Northwest Territory for American settlers. Wayne became the senior commander in the U.S Army.\nCongressman.\n He was a delegate to the state convention that ratified the United States Constitution in 1788 and lost elections to the Senate and the House that same year. In late 1790, he was elected into the 2nd United States Congress as a representative of Georgia's 1st congressional district. During his brief political career, he would remain loyal to George Washington with support. While in Congress, Wayne promoted the increased militarization of the United States and warned against future attacks from the British. He supported an act of 5,000 troops entering to secure ceded land in the Northwest Territory.\nWayne's opponent James Jackson accused Wayne's campaign manager Judge Thomas Gibbons of electoral fraud. A House committee determined that electoral fraud had been committed in the 1790 election and Local magistrates would later be implicated and not Wayne himself. A special election was held on July 9, 1792. Wayne attempted to run again, however was disqualified due to failing residency qualifications. John Milledge eventually filled Wayne's vacant seat.\nDuring his time in Georgia, his wife abandoned him after rumors of a relationship between Wayne and General Nathanael Greene's wife Catherine spread. As a civilian, Wayne ultimately found himself bankrupt, abandoned by his wife, and later removed from office.\nLater military career.\nThe Northwest Indian War had been a disaster for the United States, as the British refused to leave the ceded land and continued their influence in Native American politics. Four years after the start of the British-supported Native American military campaign, the Constitution of the United States went into effect; George Washington was sworn in as president, which made him the commander-in-chief of U.S. military forces. Accordingly, Washington directed the United States Army to enforce U.S. sovereignty over the territory. The U.S. Army, mainly consisting of untrained recruits and volunteer militiamen, suffered a series of major significant defeats.\nThe British also sought to make the Ohio River the border with the United States and Native Americans to slow their progress. Many Native Americans in the Northwest Territory had sided with the British in the Revolutionary War, but the British had ceded any sovereignty over the land to the United States in the Treaty of Paris of 1783. The British were known for persuading Native Americans to fight for them and continued to do so. Although the British were reluctant to directly engage the United States, historian Reginald Horsman writes of their involvement in organizing Native American support, \"The Indian Department at Detroit had done all within its power to bolster northwestern Indian resistance to American expansion. The agents had acted as organizers, advisers, and suppliers of the Indians, and they had made it possible for an Indian army to face Wayne.\"\nThe United States formally organized the region in the Land Ordinance of 1785 and negotiated treaties allowing settlement, but the Northwestern Confederacy refused to acknowledge them as they were unaware of the British agreement. The British were determined to make the Ohio River the permanent boundary between the United States and sent war supplies to their Native Allies. People in the area quickly became embroiled in conflicts, and the skirmishes resulted in 1,500 deaths over a period of seven years.\nAfter years of conflict in the region, Lieutenant Colonel James Wilkinson, who had a goal of becoming the next military leader, launched what he thought was a clever raid at the Battle of Kenapacomaqua. Wilkinson killed 9 Wea and Miami, and captured 34 Miami as prisoners, including a daughter of Miami war chief Little Turtle. Many of the confederation leaders were considering terms of peace to present to the United States, but when they received news of Wilkinson's raid, they readied for war. Wilkinson's raid thus had the opposite effect and contributed to St. Clair's defeat. Up until that point, it was \"the most decisive defeat in the history of the American military\" and its largest defeat ever by Native Americans. Wayne's close friend Major General Richard Butler died during St. Clair's defeat. Wayne felt a lack of a well organized military and politics contributed to this defeat. This defeat would leave the United States completely open to attack from the British and their allies without the ability to defend itself. It was also later discovered that the British had a frequent tactic of dressing up as Native Americans to participate in their battles.\nInterested in helping the U.S. Military rebuild, Wayne wrote to President Washington in the spring of 1789 asking to \"organize &amp; discipline a Legionary Corps,\" writing that \"Dignity, wealth, &amp; Power\" in the United States could only be achieved by the military. United States Secretary of War Henry Knox would agree with Wayne in July 1789, writing \"the sword of the Republic only, is adequate to guard a due administration of Justice, and the preservation of the peace,\" believing that treaties with Native Americans were worthless. At a time of his life when Wayne experienced a shameful political and personal status, President Washington recalled Wayne from civilian life to lead an expedition in the British-led Northwest Indian War.\nIn the north In May 1793, Wayne wrote to then Secretary of War Henry Knox, \"Knowing the critical situation of our infant nation and feeling for the honor and reputation of the government which I shall support with my latest breath, you may rest assured that I will not commit the legion unnecessarily.\" Samuel W. Pennypacker, a former governor of Pennsylvania and president of the Historical Society of Pennsylvania, goes on to elaborate on Wayne's perceived importance of American demonstrations of strength, \"Wayne had reached the conclusion that we should never have a permanent peace until the Indians were taught to respect the power of the United States, and until the British were compelled to give up their posts along the shores of the lake.\"\nThe confederacy achieved major victories in 1790 and 1791 under the leadership of Blue Jacket of the Shawnees and Little Turtle of the Miami tribe. The tribes were encouraged to refuse peace treaties and were supported by the British, who refused to evacuate their own fortifications in the region as stipulated in the Treaty of Paris, arguing that the American refusal to pay the debt agreements in the treaty meant that the treaty was not yet in effect.\nAt the same time, Washington was under congressional investigation and needed to raise a larger army to protect the borders against the British and their allied tribes. He felt his best choice was to recruit Wayne to take on this daunting task despite Wayne's recent past. Injured, with swollen legs and recurring malaria, Wayne accepted command of the new Legion of the United States in 1792. Washington also allotted an extraordinary budget for Wayne to triple the size of the army, administering $1 million, about 83% of the federal budget, to establish control of the Northwest territory through 1,280 enlisted soldiers.\nCommand of the Legion of the United States.\nUpon accepting his new position, Wayne said, \"I clearly foresee that it is a command which must inevitably be attended with the most anxious care, fatigue, and difficulty, and from which more may be expected than will be in my power to perform.\" As the new commanding officer for the Legion of the United States, Wayne was first tasked with increasing the number of soldiers in his force. He expanded Fort Hamilton while he began recruiting in the spring of 1792 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Although recruiting proved to be a difficult effort with the failures of past American expeditions still fresh, Wayne eventually was able to successfully boost the number of soldiers in the Legion. He helped create several infantry regiments that still exist today, one of them being the Third United States Infantry, called 1st Sub-Legion at the time and later named Third Regiment of Infantry.\nWayne then established Fort Lafayette on September 4, 1792, as a frontier settlement from Fort Pitt. Based on earlier failures of American generals, it was vital to train new soldiers and prepare them for new conflicts. Wayne established a basic training facility at Legionville to prepare professional soldiers for the reorganized army, stating that the area near Pittsburgh was \"a frontier Gomorrah\" that distracted troops. Using the \"Regulations for the Order and Discipline of the Troops of the United States\" authored by Prussian military officer Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben, Wayne began to train his troops. This was the first attempt to provide basic training for regular Army recruits, and Legionville was the first facility established expressly for this purpose. Wayne set up a well-organized structure of sub-legions led by brigadier generals, seen as forerunners of today's brigade combat teams. Wayne was a strict disciplinarian and executed several troops for offenses. Two soldiers were executed for sleeping at their posts. He required his soldiers to adhere to a sharp dress code, with each sub-legion having a distinctive cap and regimental standards with their unit colors. On April 7, 1793, Wayne's troops moved to Fort Washington in Ohio and continued their intense training while also entrenching themselves to repel potential attacks.\nAlthough some experts today are quick to point to the drawbacks of Wayne's severe disciplinary methods, Major John Brooke finds they also helped build confidence among his troops. Each day, he allowed troops to receive half a gill of whiskey with their rations and an extra one for the best shooters. Barrels of rum, whiskey, wine, flour, and rations were stockpiled at various forts and traveled with Wayne's legion. Brooke goes on to write about Wayne's strong relationship with his soldiers, \"The winter passed drearily at Greeneville. They were almost in the heart of the Indian country, cut off from communication with the outside world, and surrounded by crafty and treacherous foes. Wayne shared the hardships and privations of his men, and personally saw that discipline and instruction were kept up. The sentinel on post might know when to expect the conventional visit from the officer of the day, but he never knew at what hour he might see the form of the commander-in-chief emerge from the wintry gloom.\" Wayne's support of his soldiers builds on his earlier experiences with his soldiers during the Revolutionary War.\nDuring his command of the Legion of the United States, Wayne also encountered domestic problems en route to securing the Northwest Territory. On May 5, 1793, Wayne entered Cincinnati in preparation for future conflict further West. Although Kentucky was a newly independent state after breaking away from Virginia, many citizens still believed that the United States federal government did little to protect their economic interests in the region. Historian Paul David Nelson writes of the local sentiment,\"Thus, a few of Kentucky's citizens continued into 1793 to plot all sorts of schemes, including assisting the French to attack Spanish territory, using Kentucky as a base of operations; taking Kentucky out of the federal union and uniting it with the Spanish Empire; and striking a deal with some Canadian citizens to form a separate nation in the West, free from the control of the United States, Britain, or Spain.\" After learning of a smaller than originally anticipated military force, Wayne had to turn to recruiting local Kentucky citizens with the help of Kentucky Governor, Isaac Shelby. Although Wayne was able to successfully add Kentucky citizens to the Legion, there were still fewer than expected and many joined too late to have a significant impact. Nelson goes on to write about the ineffectiveness of the Kentucky troops during the Northwest Indian War, \"Once the Kentucky soldiers reached Wayne's winter head quarters, moreover, they did not cover themselves with glory. The commander, knowing that the troops were restless and murmuring about returning to their home state, suggested to Scott in late October that the Kentucky Mounted Volunteers be detached for a 'desultory expedition against the Indian Villages at Au Glaize'...To Wayne's utter disgust, one-third of Scott's men \u2014 through no fault of Scott \u2014 simply decamped for home in mid November without order.\"\nOn December 24, 1793, Wayne dispatched a force to Ohio to establish Fort Recovery at the location of St. Clair's defeat as a base of operations. Friendly Native Americans helped Wayne recover a cannon that the attackers had buried nearby, with its redeployment at the fort. The fort became a magnet for military skirmishes in the summer of 1794, with an attack led by Miami chief Little Turtle failing after two days and resulting in Blue Jacket becoming war leader. In response, the British built Fort Miami to block Wayne's advance and to protect Fort Lernoult in Detroit. Wayne's army continued north, building strategically defensive forts ahead of the main force. British officer Alexander McKee provided strategic battle advice to the western confederacy beforehand.\nOn August 3, 1794, a tree fell on Wayne's tent at Fort Adams in northern Mercer County. He was knocked unconscious, but he recovered sufficiently to resume the march the next day to the newly built Fort Defiance on August 8, 1794. After observing Wayne's activities for two years, Little Turtle declared that Wayne was \"the Chief that does not sleep\" and advised fellow Indians to answer calls for peace, though British agents and Blue Jacket were opposed. On August 20, 1794, Wayne mounted an assault on the Indian confederacy at the Battle of Fallen Timbers near modern Maumee, Ohio, which was a decisive victory for the U.S. forces, effectively ending the war. It was later discovered that a British company under Lieutenant Colonel William Caldwell had dressed as Native Americans and participated in the battle. Following the battle, Wayne used Fort Defiance as a base of operations and under the direction of Washington's policies, destroyed their villages and food stocks. Like many wars throughout history, the U.S. military essentially used a common war tactic known as scorched earth tactics in the later part of the campaign, destroying fields and homes of Native Americans as winter approached. Reporting on the progress, Wayne would write \"their future prospects must naturally be gloomy &amp; unpleasant\".\nThe Native American troops attempted to find refuge at their British ally's fort, known as Fort Miami. The British realizing their ally lost the battle, locked the doors and prevented refuge. Wayne then used Fort Deposit as a base of operations because of its proximity to Fort Miami and encamped for three days in sight of Fort Miami. Wayne attempted to provoke the fort's commander, Major William Campbell, by destroying McKee's post as well as Native American crops and villages within sight of Fort Miami before withdrawing. When Campbell asked the meaning of the encampment, Wayne replied that the answer had already been given by the sound of their muskets. The next day, Wayne rode alone to Fort Miami and slowly conducted an inspection of the fort's exterior walls. The British garrison debated whether to engage Wayne, but in the absence of orders and with Britain already being at war with France, Campbell declined to fire the first shot at the United States. Neither Campbell nor Wayne was willing to be the one to start a second war, and the Legion finally departed for Fort Recovery.\nThroughout the campaign, Wayne warned against future British attacks and planned for another large battle while the Legion was at full strength. When Wayne arrived at Kekionga unopposed on September 17, 1794, he razed the Miami capital and then selected it as the site for the new Fort Wayne. Wayne wanted a strong fort, capable of withstanding a possible attack by British artillery from Fort Detroit. Fort Wayne was finished by October 17 and was capable of withstanding 24-pound cannon. Although the British did not attack from the Northwest and Native Americans did not re-form into a large army, small bands continued to harass the Legion's perimeter, scouts, and supply trains.\nWayne then negotiated the Treaty of Greenville between the tribal confederacy \u2014 which had experienced a difficult winter \u2013 and the United States, which was signed on August 3, 1795. The U.S. stated the land was already ceded to the French or British in previous wars. At the meetings, Wayne promised the land of \"Indiana\", the remaining land to the west, to remain Indian forever. Wayne also supplied food and farming supplies as a good faith gesture. Wayne read portions of the Paris Treaty, informing them that the British were encouraging them to fight for land and forts the British already ceded to the United States.\nWhile crops were planted and farmed again, Wayne's promise of land and treaty were left vulnerable after his death. A Spanish spy Wilkinson would take command of his army. Citizens eventually continued to settle beyond the borders and the state of Ohio later entered into the Union in 1803. After Wayne's death, settlers continued moving past the borders and pushing the Native American people who lived there further westward.\nBetrayal by Wilkinson.\nWhen picking a general to lead the Legion of the United States, President Washington considered a few options, most notably Wayne and James Wilkinson. When thinking of his choices, Washington found Wayne to be, \"more active and enterprising than Judicious and cautious,\" and Wilkinson to be lacking experience, \"as he was but a short time in the Service.\" Throughout the campaign, Wayne's second in command, General Wilkinson secretly tried to undermine him. Wilkinson wrote anonymous negative letters to local newspapers about Wayne and spent years writing negative letters to politicians in Washington, D.C. Wayne was unaware as Wilkinson was recorded as being extremely polite to Wayne in person. Wilkinson was also a Spanish spy at the time and even served as an officer. In December 1794, Wilkinson secretly instructed suppliers to delay rations and send just enough to keep the army alive in hopes of preventing progress. Secretary of War Henry Knox eventually alerted Wayne about Wilkinson, and Wayne began an investigation. Eventually, Spanish couriers carrying payments for Wilkinson were intercepted. Wayne's suspicions were confirmed, and he attempted to court-martial Wilkinson for his treachery. However, Wayne developed a stomach ulcer and died on December 15, 1796; there was no court-martial. Instead Wilkinson began his first tenure as Senior Officer of the Army, which lasted for about a year and a half. He continued to pass on intelligence to the Spanish in return for large sums in gold.\nDeath.\nWayne died during a return trip to Pennsylvania from a military post in Detroit. It has been speculated but never proven that Wilkinson had him assassinated by poison. Wilkinson is documented secretly undermining him throughout his later career, benefited from his death, and would replace him as commander after his death.\nWayne was buried at Fort Presque Isle, where the modern Wayne Blockhouse stands. His son, Isaac Wayne, disinterred the body in 1809 and had the corpse boiled to remove the remaining flesh from the bones. He then placed the bones into two saddlebags and relocated them to the family plot in the graveyard of St. David's Episcopal Church in Wayne, Pennsylvania. The other remains were reburied but were rediscovered in 1878, giving Wayne two known grave sites.\nLegacy.\nWayne's army overhaul and build up is considered the first attempt by the United States to provide formalized basic training for regular Army troops. His recruits and Legionville were the first facility established expressly for the purpose of a regular army.\nPresident Theodore Roosevelt later praised Wayne as America's best fighting general. Henry Cabot Lodge mentions with the exception of Washington, and perhaps Greene, that he was the best general the Americans developed in the contest.\nAlong with other Founding Fathers, Wayne's reputation has been scrutinized for slavery and policies under Washington against Native American tribes. Shortly after the Northwest Indian War, Wayne died and his treaty was not enforced.\nHis skills as a military leader received mixed views by his contemporaries, some of whom he had personality clashes with. Historian and author of \"Unlikely General\" Mary Stockwell highlighted his decisive military victories while shedding light on his many personal flaws, being a spendthrift, womanizer, and heavy drinker. Some considered him impulsive, bad-tempered, and aggressive as a military leader with a fiery personality who advocated the tactics of Julius Caesar and Maurice de Saxe.\nSeveral of Wayne's uniforms, ranks, tactics and military legions exist today in the US Army. His legions were renamed regiments. One of them is now known as the Third Regiment of Infantry which is best known for its role in the changing-of-the-guard ceremony at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier at the Arlington National Cemetery.\nIn popular culture.\nWayne has been covered in numerous books, comics, TV shows and articles. In 2017 Wayne was played by Michael J. Burg in the TV series . In 2018, Anthony Wayne was featured on PBS series A Taste of History in episode Remember Paoli! Wayne is one of the main characters in Ann Rinaldi's historical novel, \"A Ride into Morning\". Wayne is a character in Diana Gabaldon's \"Outlander\" series. Batman co-creator and writer Bill Finger named Bruce Wayne after him, and later writers established Bruce Wayne as a fictional descendant of Anthony Wayne. Anthony Wayne was depicted in the comic series as Bruce's direct ancestor. Most recently in 2020, historian and writer Mary Stockwell published a biography with Yale University Press.\nDescendants and relatives.\nWayne's notable relatives and descendants include:\nMemorials and honors.\nA lunette above the door in the United States Senate room 128, designed originally to house the Senate Committee on Military Affairs and Militia, features a fresco by Constantino Brumidi named \"Storming at Stonypoint, General Wayne wounded in the head carried to the fort\". On September 14, 1929, the U.S. Post Office issued a stamp honoring Wayne which commemorated the 135th anniversary of the Battle of Fallen Timbers. The post office issued a series of stamps often referred to as the \"Two Cent Reds\" by collectors, most of them issued to commemorate the 150th anniversaries of the many events that occurred during the American Revolution. The stamp shows Bruce Saville's Battle of Fallen Timbers Monument.\nIn February 2019, the city council Fort Wayne, Indiana, approved the creation of Anthony Wayne Day by a vote of 6\u20133. The approval sparked debate, was criticized by other councilmen, reporters, and the Miami tribe. The Miami tribe, who maintain a strong connection with Fort Wayne as part of their ancestral homeland, objected to many of the facts put forward by supporters to champion Wayne. The Miamis were quoted, \"In a show of respect for Fort Wayne's own sovereignty, the tribal council came to a decision: It would object to the resolution's historical errors and omissions, but not to the honoring of Wayne himself.\"\nThe Wayne National Forest located in southeast Ohio was named in honor of General Wayne. It was established as a National Forest for the public in December 1992.\nLocations named after Anthony Wayne.\nThere are also many townships named after Anthony Wayne, including 21 in Ohio alone.\nReferences.\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "75959", "revid": "13791031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75959", "title": "Tatiana Gutsu", "text": "Soviet gymnast\nTatiana Gutsu, rarely Tetiana Hutsu, (, ; born 5 September 1976, in Odesa, Ukrainian SSR) is a Ukrainian former artistic gymnast from the Soviet Union and the winner of the all-around title in the 1992 Summer Olympics. She was renowned for performing some of the most difficult routines in the sport. She was inducted into the International Gymnastics Hall of Fame in 2022.\nCareer.\nBorn into a Ukrainian family with Moldovan roots, Gutsu started in gymnastics at age 6. She became a member of the national team of the Soviet Union in 1988. Her first major international competition was the 1991 World Artistic Gymnastics Championships in Indianapolis, where she won the team title with the Soviet Union and finished fifth in the individual all-around, while winning silver medals in two individual apparatus finals: the uneven bars and balance beam. Her silver on beam was highly controversial because the winner, Soviet teammate Svetlana Boginskaya, performed a simpler routine.\nGutsu was quickly noticed for the difficulty of her routines. She was one of the few gymnasts during the late 80s/early 90s to perform a double-twisting Yurchenko vault. She also debuted a double layout somersault on floor with split legs in the first salto, a skill that few others have been able to perform. Perhaps most impressively, she ended her floor routine in the team competition with a double layout somersault.\nThe following year, she had a disastrous showing at the 1992 World Championships. She had been expected to contend for gold on three events\u2014uneven bars, balance beam, and floor exercise\u2014but failed to reach the finals on any of them, suffering falls on both the bars and floor. However, at the European Gymnastics Championships that year, she won the all-around, vault, and uneven bars titles, as well as a silver on the balance beam. She was the most successful gymnast of the championship and established herself as one of the favorites for the Olympic all-around title.\n1992 Olympics.\nIn the preliminary round of competition at the Olympics, Gutsu, then 15, fell from the balance beam and was ranked 9th in the all-around. She had been on course to win the optional portion of the team competition and was one of the favourites for the beam gold medal, but the fall meant she did not qualify for the beam final.\nAlthough 36 gymnasts qualified for the all-around, only three competitors from each country were allowed in the final, and because of Gutsu's fall, three other competitors from the Unified Team placed higher in the preliminaries. However, the team coaches felt that Gutsu had a better chance of bringing home all-around gold than her teammates Boginskaya and Rozalia Galiyeva. They considered scratching Boginskaya, but felt that she was too famous and there would be a scandal. As a result, they forced Gutsu's younger teammate Galiyeva to forfeit her place in the final so that Gutsu could compete. Galiyeva was forced to claim a severe knee injury, which was \"verified\" by the team physician.\nIn one of the deepest fields ever for the all-around, Gutsu was in a close race for the gold medal. She had a few balance checks in her difficult beam routine and made an error on her double layout on floor, allowing her rivals to stay in contention with her. With one apparatus to go, Gutsu was tied for first place with Shannon Miller of the United States. Her final performance on vault (a full-twisting layout Yurchenko) was just enough to hold off Miller's challenge. Gutsu won the title by .012, which remains the closest margin of victory ever in an Olympic all-around. She also took home medals in the team competition (gold), uneven bars (silver) and floor exercise (bronze).\nWhat set Gutsu apart from Miller was her difficulty. She was competing during the height of the \"pixie\" era, when the favoured type of gymnast was a small athlete capable of extreme difficulty, and Gutsu exemplified this. She performed the same vault as most other leading gymnasts (except Tatiana Lysenko), but her difficulty on the other three events was high. Her beam routine was especially notable: she competed probably the most difficult dismount sequence of all time, three back handsprings into a tucked full-in, and also performed a standing back somersault with a full twist. On floor, Gutsu opened with a split-leg double layout and closed with a piked full-in. On bars, she dismounted with a double layout. Miller showed less difficulty, particularly on the floor exercise (where she performed a whip to tucked full-in for her mount, a whip to double pike for her middle pass, and a tucked full-in for her dismount), but was impressive on beam with her back handspring to three layouts sequence, her superior form, and a stuck full-in dismount.\nGaliyeva was always angry and bitter about having given up her place in the all-around to Gutsu, feeling that she had had no option but to agree. The two split the prize money between them, but they stopped speaking after the Olympics. The substitution was against the rules (as Galiyeva's injury was not genuine), but such switches were and are common in gymnastics, usually when a gymnast considered to be the best on the team makes a mistake in qualifications and thus finishes behind a teammate who is considered weaker. Other notable examples include the replacement of Alexandra Marinescu with Simona Am\u00e2nar in the 1996 Olympics, and the Soviet coaches' removal of Olga Mostepanova and Irina Baraksanova for Elena Shushunova and Oksana Omelianchik in the 1985 World Championships. On both occasions, the gymnasts substituted in took a medal. Coaches now have the right to make such substitutions without having to falsify injuries.\nAfter retiring from competitive gymnastics, Gutsu moved to the United States, where she is a gymnastics coach in Michigan. She tried for a comeback to compete at the 2003 World Artistic Gymnastics Championships as a three-event specialist (vault, beam, and floor), but was unsuccessful.\nAlleged rape.\nIn October 2017, she accused former Soviet (Belarusian) gymnast Vitaly Scherbo of raping her when she was 15.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75960", "revid": "43249068", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75960", "title": "KPMG", "text": "British multinational professional services and accounting company\nKPMG International Limited is a British multinational professional services network, based in London, United Kingdom. It is one of the Big Four accounting firms, along with Ernst &amp; Young (EY), Deloitte, and PwC. As of December 2024, KPMG comprised 46 firms.\nThe name \"KPMG\" stands for \"Klynveld Peat Marwick Goerdeler\". The initialism was chosen when KMG (Klynveld Main Goerdeler) merged with Peat Marwick in 1987.\nKPMG has three lines of services: financial audit, tax, and consulting. Its tax and advisory services are further divided into various service groups. In the 21st century, various parts of the firm's global network of affiliates have been involved in regulatory actions as well as lawsuits.\nHistory.\nEarly years and mergers.\nIn 1816, Robert Fletcher started working as an accountant, and in 1839 the firm he worked for changed its name to Robert Fletcher &amp; Co. William Barclay Peat joined the firm in 1870 at 17 and became head of the firm in 1891, renamed William Barclay Peat &amp; Co. by then. In 1877, Thomson McLintock founded Thomson McLintock &amp; Co in Glasgow. In 1897, Marwick Mitchell &amp; Co. was founded by James Marwick and Roger Mitchell in New York City. In 1899, Ferdinand William LaFrentz founded the American Audit Company in New York. In 1923, the American Audit Company was renamed FW LaFrentz &amp; Co.\nIn about 1913, Frank Wilber Main founded Main &amp; Co. in Pittsburgh. In March 1917, Piet Klijnveld and Jaap Kraayenhof opened an accounting firm called Klynveld Kraayenhof &amp; Co. in Amsterdam.\nIn 1925, William Barclay Peat &amp; Co. and Marwick Mitchell &amp; Co., merged to form Peat Marwick Mitchell &amp; Co. Peat Marwick Mitchell &amp; Co. was based at No. 11 Ironmonger Lane in London, before moving to Puddle Dock in London in 1976.\nIn 1963, Main LaFrentz &amp; Co was formed by the merger of Main &amp; Co and FW LaFrentz &amp; Co. In 1969, Thomson McLintock and Main LaFrentz merged to form McLintock Main LaFrentz International, and McLintock Main LaFrentz International absorbed the general practice of Grace, Ryland &amp; Co.\nIn 1979, Klynveld Kraayenhof &amp; Co. (Netherlands), McLintock Main LaFrentz (United Kingdom / United States), and Deutsche Treuhand-Gesellschaft (Germany) formed KMG (Klynveld Main Goerdeler) as a grouping of independent national practices to create a strong European-based international firm. Deutsche Treuhand-Gesellschaft CEO Reinhard Goerdeler became the first CEO of KMG. In the United States, Main Lafrentz &amp; Co. merged with Hurdman and Cranstoun to form Main Hurdman &amp; Cranstoun.\nIn 1987, KMG and Peat Marwick joined forces in the first mega-merger of large accounting firms and formed a firm called KPMG in the United States and most of the rest of the world and Peat Marwick McLintock in the United Kingdom. From 1984 Peat Marwick was the first, largest, and for some time the only large corporate customer of the Apple Macintosh, and the combined company retained the computer.\nIn the Netherlands, due to the merger between PMI and KMG in 1988, PMI tax advisors joined Meijburg &amp; Co. (The tax advisory agency Meijburg &amp; Co. was founded by Willem Meijburg, Inspector of National Taxes, in 1939). Today, the Netherlands is the only country with two member firms of KPMG International: KPMG Audit (accountants) and Meijburg &amp; Co (tax consultants).\nIn 1991, the firm was renamed KPMG Peat Marwick, and in 1999, the name was reduced again to KPMG.\nIn October 1997, KPMG and Ernst &amp; Young announced they would merge. However, while the merger to form PwC was granted regulatory approval, the KPMG/Ernst &amp; Young tie-up was later abandoned.\nRecent history.\nIn 2001, KPMG spun off its United States consulting firm through an initial public offering of KPMG Consulting, which was rebranded BearingPoint. In early 2009, BearingPoint filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. The UK and Dutch consulting arms were sold to Atos in 2002.\nIn 2003, KPMG divested itself of its legal arm, Klegal and KPMG sold its Dispute Advisory Services to FTI Consulting.\nKPMG's member firms in the United Kingdom, Germany, Switzerland and Liechtenstein merged to form KPMG Europe LLP in October 2007. These member firms were followed by Spain, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, CIS (Azerbaijan, Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, Armenia and Georgia), Turkey, Norway, and Saudi Arabia. They appointed joint Chairmen, John Griffith-Jones and Ralf Nonnenmacher.\nIn 2008, KPMG was the preferred employer among the Big Four accounting firms according to CollegeGrad.com. It was also ranked No. 4 on the list of \"50 Best Places to Launch a Career\" in 2009 according to \"Bloomberg Businessweek\".\nIn 2020, KPMG International Limited was incorporated in London, England.\nIn February 2021, Bill Michael resigned as chairman of KPMG UK after criticism of remarks made during an internal meeting. Bina Mehta, a senior partner, was appointed acting chair, while Mary O'Connor, head of clients and markets, became acting senior partner and chief executive, making her the first woman to lead the firm in the UK. Two months later, O'Connor left after being passed over for the permanent role, which went to Jon Holt.\nIn November 2021, KPMG UK was reported as having revised its partnership process to introduce five levels of partnership which required partners to inject capital at levels starting at \u00a3150,000 and going up to \u00a3500,000. This, along with the \u00a3115 million proceeds from the sale of its pensions business earlier in 2021, which it seems was not distributed to the partners, was intended to prepare the balance sheet for a potential large fine (up to \u00a31 billion) arising out of the Carillion lawsuit.\nIn April 2022, it was announced that KPMG will acquire 50% of the UK-based venture capital advisory specialist Acceleris subject to approval from the Financial Conduct Authority.\nIn August 2022, KPMG announced plans to downsize its office footprint in New York City in 2025, when it moves its offices in the city from Midtown Manhattan to Two Manhattan West in Hudson Yards.\nIn May 2024, KPMG partners approved the merger of its UK and Switzerland firms, which are working across audit, legal, tax, and advisory, and generating $4.4 billion annually.\nIn November 2024, KPMG announced that it would spend $100 million over the next four years\u00a0to boost its enterprise artificial intelligence services via a partnership with Alphabet's Google Cloud. This is an attempt to leverage Google products in the workplace, develop AI agents and overall make the workforce familiar with the technology.\nIn February 2025, KPMG US removed from its website the diversity reports it had been publishing since 2020 as part of a broader effort to abandon the firm's DEI targets.\nGlobal structure.\nEach national KPMG firm is an independent legal entity and is a member of KPMG International Limited, a UK Limited Company incorporated in London, United Kingdom. KPMG International changed its legal structure from a Swiss Verein to a co-operative under Swiss law in 2003 and to a limited company in 2020.\nThis structure in which the Limited company provides support services only to the member firms is similar to other professional services networks. The member firms provide the services to the client. The purpose is to limit the liability of each independent member.\nKPMG's global chairman is Bill Thomas, former senior partner and CEO of Canadian member firm KPMG LLP.\nSome KPMG member firms are registered as multidisciplinary entities that also provide legal services in certain jurisdictions.\nIn India, where regulations do not permit foreign auditing firms to operate, KPMG is licensed as an investment bank and carries out audits under the name of BSR &amp; Co, an auditing firm KPMG purchased after the 1992 liberalisation of the Indian economy.\nDuring March 2022, in response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, KPMG announced that their Russian and Belarusian firms would leave the KPMG network.\nServices.\nKPMG is organised into the following three service lines that generated $38.4 billion in revenue (the 2024 revenue shares are listed in parentheses):\nTax arrangements relating to tax avoidance and multinational corporations and Luxembourg which were negotiated by KPMG became public in 2014 in the so-called Luxembourg Leaks.\nLawsuits.\nTax shelter fraud.\nIn 2003, the IRS issued summonses to KPMG for information about certain tax shelters and their investors. In February 2004, the US Justice Department commenced a criminal inquiry. The United States member firm, KPMG LLP, was accused by the United States Department of Justice of fraud in marketing abusive tax shelters. KPMG fired or forced the retirement of over a dozen who were involved. KPMG LLP admitted criminal wrongdoing in creating fraudulent tax shelters to help wealthy clients avoid $2.5 billion in taxes between 1996 and 2002, and agreed to pay $456 million in penalties to avoid indictment. Under the deferred prosecution agreement, KPMG LLP would not face criminal prosecution if it complied with the terms of its agreement with the government. On 3 January 2007, the criminal conspiracy charges against KPMG were dropped.\nMicrosoft tax evasion.\nIn 2012, KPMG brokered a deal for Microsoft with the government of Puerto Rico to give them a tax rate of nearly 0%, allowing Microsoft to sell its intellectual property to a 85-person local factory. It took years for the IRS to unravel the scheme, a \"Rube Goldberg machine that channeled at least $39 billion in profits to Puerto Rico\".\nHBOS audit role.\nThe HBOS accounts were published in February 2008 and six months later HBOS had to be rescued by Lloyds Bank. One reason for undertaking an investigation into the audit was that the audit did not reveal the HBOS Reading branch fraud. HBOS, and subsequently Lloyds Bank, accountant Sally Masterton wrote the Project Lord Turnbull Report which described how the Bank and other organizations reacted to the Reading Branch fraud and was highly critical of the firm. However, the audit was investigated by the FRC which concluded, \"there was not a realistic prospect that a tribunal would make an adverse finding against KPMG in respect of the matters within the scope of the investigation\", and \"The firm's work did not fall significantly short of the standards reasonably to be expected of the audit, the test that a tribunal would apply\".\nCarillion audit role.\nIn January 2018, it was announced that KPMG, auditor of collapsed UK construction firm Carillion, would have its role examined by the Financial Reporting Council (FRC), and it was summoned to give evidence before two House of Commons select committees on 22 February 2018. The final report of the Parliamentary inquiry into Carillion's collapse, published on 16 May 2018, criticised KPMG for its \"complicity\" in the company's financial reporting practices. In January 2019, KPMG announced it had suspended the partner that led Carillion's audit and three members of his team; in August 2021, an FRC disciplinary panel was scheduled for 10 January 2022 to hear a formal complaint against KPMG and former KPMG partner Peter Meehan regarding the provision of allegedly false and misleading information concerning the 2016 Carillion audit. \nThe tribunal convened to hear the formal complaint started on 10 January 2022. At the disciplinary hearing, KPMG's UK chief executive Jon Holt said the firm had discovered misconduct by it staff in its own internal investigations, and immediately reported it to the FRC. Following the FRC tribunal, KPMG was fined \u00a314.4m (one of the biggest penalties in UK audit history) for misconduct relating to its audit of Carillion and another firm, and received a \"severe reprimand\" from the regulator. KPMG were also ordered to pay \u00a33.95m in costs. \nThe tribunal heard allegations that KPMG staff created false meeting minutes and retroactively edited spreadsheets before sharing them. A further tribunal will consider penalties for individual KPMG staff, including partner Peter Meehan; the FRC recommended that he be banned for 15 years and fined at least \u00a3400,000. In July 2022, it was announced that he had been fined \u00a3250,000 and banned for ten years; three other former KPMG executives also received fines and lengthy bans. A junior member of KPMG staff, Pratik Paw\u2014who, aged 25, had been the most junior member of the Carillion audit team\u2014faced a \"life changing\" fine of \u00a350,000 and a four-year ban, prompting critics to suggest that accounting firms should enable junior colleagues to challenge their superiors, so that low ranking workers are not blamed for accounting scandals. Ultimately, Paw was not fined or suspended but was severely reprimanded.\nThe FRC opened a second investigation into how KPMG audited Carillion's accounts. The FRC's first report, which found a number of breaches, was delivered to KPMG in September 2020; the FRC was awaiting a KPMG response before deciding whether to take enforcement action. In March 2021, KPMG was reported to be \"inching towards a financial settlement with regulators\" over its auditing of Carillion, with the FRC expected to impose a record fine, possibly around \u00a325m, on KPMG for its failings.\nIn May 2020, the \"FT\" reported that the Official Receiver was preparing to sue KPMG for \u00a3250m over alleged negligence in its audits of Carillion. In May 2021, the liquidator secured funding for its legal action, with speculation that the likely damages claim could be as much as \u00a32 billion. In February 2022, Sky News reported the Official Receiver's claim would be in the range of \u00a31bn-\u00a31.5bn, with one source suggesting around \u00a31.2bn. The OR's negligence claim focuses on the value of major contracts which were not properly accounted for in audits in 2014, 2015 and 2016, resulting in misstatements in excess of \u00a3800m within Carillion's financial reports. KPMG was said to have accepted management explanations for inflated revenue and understated cost positions. The OR had received legal advice that KPMG was answerable to Carillion's creditors for a portion of their losses. KPMG said: \"We believe this claim is without merit and we will robustly defend the case. Responsibility for the failure of Carillion lies solely with the company's board and management, who set the strategy and ran the business.\" The claim, for \u00a31.3 billion (US$1.77 billion), accused KPMG of missing \"red flags\" during audits of Carillion, in one of the largest claims against an audit firm. \nIn November 2022, the OR said KPMG had \"failed to respond\" to Carillion allegations that it had failed to properly audit the accounting of 20 significant construction contracts. KPMG reiterated that Carillion's failure was solely the fault of the company's board and management. In February 2023, \"The Guardian\" reported that KPMG had settled the \u00a31.3bn lawsuit brought by Carillion's liquidators; details of the settlement were not made public.\nIn October 2023, the Financial Reporting Council fined KPMG UK \u00a321 million, saying it had failed to follow \"the most basic and fundamental audit concepts\" and an \"unusually large number of breaches\" had been found. For three years before the collapse Carillion was not subject to reliable audits. KPMG UK will also pay legal costs of about \u00a35.3 million. The previous year a \u00a314.4m penalty had been imposed on KPMG UK for providing misleading information to the regulator.\n2017 South African corruption scandal.\nIn 2017, KPMG was embroiled in related scandals involving the Gupta family. KPMG, whose history in South Africa dated back to 1895, and which had been part of the international organization since its founding in 1979, faced calls for closure, and an uncertain future, as a consequence of the damage done to the South African economy as a result of its activities.\nKPMG had been working with a Gupta family company in the mining sector, Oakbay Resources and Energy, for 15 years prior to the revelations of corruption and collusion in 2016, at which point KPMG resigned. The full impact and financial profit that KPMG received is yet to be determined; however, at least one large company has terminated its services with KPMG due to its relationship with Oakbay.\nIn July 2017, after controversial documents were leaked by the amaBhungane Centre for Investigative Journalism, former chief executive of KPMG South Africa and the former partner that was responsible for audits related to the Gupta family, Moses Kgosana, withdrew from becoming the chairman of Alexander Forbes, a financial services firm.\nIn 2015, KPMG issued a controversial report that implicated former Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan in the creation of an illegal intelligence gathering unit of the South African Revenue Service (SARS). This report was seen by elements of the media to be part of a wider Gupta-linked state capture conspiracy, with the aim of forcing Gordhan out of his post. The report was withdrawn by KPMG in September 2017, earning the ire of the Commissioner of SARS, Tom Moyane.\nAfter an internal investigation that found work done for the Gupta family fell \"considerably short\" of the firm's standards and amid rising political and public backlash, KPMG's senior leadership in South Africa, including its chairman Ahmed Jaffer, CEO Trevor Hoole, COO Steven Louw, and five partners, resigned in September 2017.\nSave South Africa, a civil-society group, accused KPMG and UK PR firm Bell Pottinger of playing a \"central role in facilitating state capture\". Numerous South African companies either fired KPMG in the immediate aftermath of the scandal, or were reconsidering their relationships with the firm with the international chairman of KPMG, John Veihmeyer, apologising for the conduct of the South African arm and the firm pledged to donate fees earned from Gupta businesses, as well as the withdrawn SARS report, to anti-corruption activities.\nOther cases.\nKPMG agreed to pay $125 million and $75 million to settle lawsuits stemming from the firm's audits of Rite Aid and Oxford Health Plans Inc., respectively.\nKPMG agreed to pay $115 million to settle lawsuits stemming from the collapse of software company Lernout &amp; Hauspie Speech Products NV.\nDuring August, KPMG LLP admitted to criminal wrongdoing and agreed to pay US$456 million in fines, restitution, and penalties as part of an agreement to defer prosecution of the firm, according to the US Justice Department and the Internal Revenue Service. In addition to the agreement, nine individuals, including six former KPMG partners and the former deputy chairman of the firm, were to be criminally prosecuted. As alleged in a series of charging documents, the fraud relates to the design, marketing, and implementation of fraudulent tax shelters.\nAmerican real estate financing firm Fannie Mae sued KPMG for malpractice for approving years of erroneous financial statements.\nIn February, KPMG Germany was investigated for ignoring questionable payments in the Siemens bribery case. In November 2008, the Siemens Supervisory Board recommended changing auditors from KPMG to Ernst &amp; Young.\nIn February, KPMG Mauritius was sued by a group of South African pensioners who lost millions when investing in Leaderguard Spot Forex (LSF), a foreign exchange investment scheme backed by KPMG and Denmark-based Saxo Bank. The suit against KPMG was just for the portion lost during their involvement.\nIn March, KPMG was accused of enabling \"improper and imprudent practices\" at New Century Financial, a failed mortgage company, and KPMG agreed to pay $80 million to settle suits from Xerox shareholders over manipulated earnings reports.\nIn December, it was announced that two of Tremont Group's Rye Select funds, audited by KPMG, had $2.37 billion invested with the Madoff \"Ponzi scheme\". Class action suits were filed.\nIn March 2008, KPMG employees in the UK and South Africa were accused of bribing and recruiting employees of commercial structures to collect trade secrets for a monetary reward.\nIn August, it was reported by the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority to the Swedish accountancy regulator after HQ Bank was forced into involuntary liquidation after the Financial Supervisory Authority revoked all its licences for breach of banking regulations.\nIn August, KPMG conducted due diligence work on Hewlett-Packard's $11.1 billion acquisition of the British software company Autonomy. In November 2012 HP announced an $8.8 billion write off due to \"serious accounting improprieties\" committed by Autonomy management prior to the acquisition.\nAccording to an independent panel formed to investigate irregular payments made by Olympus which reported in December, KPMG's affiliate in Japan did not identify fraud at the company.\nIn April, Scott London, a former KPMG LLP partner in charge of KPMG's US Los Angeles-based Pacific Southwest audit practice, admitted passing on stock tips about clients, including Herbalife, Skechers, and other companies, to his friend Bryan Shaw, a California jewelry-store owner. In return Shaw gave London $70,000 as well as gifts that included a $12,000 Rolex watch and concert tickets. On 6 May, Shaw agreed to plead guilty to one count of conspiracy to commit securities fraud. He also agreed to pay around $1.3 million in restitution, and to cooperate with the government as part of a plea deal with federal prosecutors. This scandal led KPMG to resign as auditor for Herbalife and Skechers.\nThe Office of Counter-Terrorism and Financial Intelligence of the US Department of the Treasury accused KMPG, Ernst &amp; Young and PwC of collaborating with British intelligence services to provide analytical information on financial transactions and reports of British organizations operating in the United States with contract agreements with government agencies.\nKPMG was accused by the Canada Revenue Agency of abetting tax evasion schemes: \"The CRA alleges that the KPMG tax structure was in reality a 'sham' that intended to deceive the taxman.\"\nThe Canada Revenue Agency offered an amnesty to KPMG clients caught using an offshore tax-avoidance scheme on the Isle of Man.\nKPMG US terminated five partners in its audit practice, including the head of its audit practice in the US, after an investigation of advanced confidential knowledge of planned audit inspections by its Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB). This followed criticism about KPMG's failure to uncover illegal sales practices at Wells Fargo or potential corruption at FIFA, the governing international body of football. It was reported in 2017 that KPMG had the highest number of deficiencies, among the Big Four, cited by its regulator in the previous two years. This includes two annual inspections that were compromised as a result of advanced access to inspection information. In March 2019, David Middendorf and Jeffrey Wada, co-defendants in the scandal, were convicted.\nThe UK accounting regulator, the Financial Regulation Council (FRC), has opened an investigation into KPMG's audit of the financial statements of British aerospace company Rolls-Royce plc for the year ended December 2010.\nIn August, KPMG US paid a $6.2 million fine to the US Securities and Exchange Commission for inadequacies in its audit of the financial statements of oil and gas company, Miller Energy Resources. It also found KPMG guilty of a long list of violations with regard to its audits, including \"lack of competence\" and \"highly unreasonable conduct.\"\nIn November, 91 partners of KPMG Hong Kong faced contempt proceedings in Hong Kong High Court, as China Medical Technologies (CMED) liquidators investigating a $400 million fraud took action against KPMG with regard to its refusal to honor a February 2016 court order to produce Chinese working papers, correspondence, and records to the liquidators. The liquidators are asking that 91 defendants be held in contempt of court, which could result in criminal penalties, or weekly fines. KPMG had issued written audit reports for CMED from 2003 to 2008, and was replaced by PwC Zhong Tian in August 2009. \"Perhaps locking up 91 KPMG partners over Christmas may spur the firms to find a solution to this problem\", said Professor Paul Gillis of Peking University's Guanghua School of Management.\nIn July, KPMG came under criticism for its role in the bankruptcy of Dubai-based private equity firm Abraaj Group after it was determined that KPMG Lower Gulf Chairman and Chief Executive Vijay Malhotra's son had worked at Abraaj and that an executive named Ashish Dave alternated between stints at KPMG and as Abraaj's chief financial officer, a job he held twice.\nAlso in July, the Financial Reporting Council (FRC) announced an investigation into KPMG\u2019s work for Conviviality, the British drinks supplier that collapsed into administration during April 2018.\nAlso in July, KPMG paid HK$650 million (US$84 million) to settle legal claims after failing to identify fraud at a Chinese timber company, China Forestry. The liquidators of China Forestry claimed KPMG was negligent when it failed to detect serious false accounting by some of the company\u2019s top management ahead of its listing in 2009.\nIn August, Chile's Comision Para El Mercado Financiero (CMF) sanctioned KPMG Auditores Consultores Limitada (KPMG LLP's local affiliate) 3,000 UF (~$114,000), and Joaqu\u00edn Lira Herreros, its partner, for offences incurred in the audit made to the financial statements of the Aurus Insignia Fondo de Inversi\u00f3n, managed by Aurus Capital S.A. Admnistradora General de Fondos Management (AGF), corresponding to the year 2014.\nIn November, the Sultanate of Oman's Capital Market Authority (CMA) suspended KPMG from auditing entities regulated by the CMA for a period of one year after discovering major financial and accounting irregularities in the entities' records.\nIn December, KPMG South Africa published an open apology for its participation in various scandals in South Africa, including publishing a misleading report that led to the resignation of the South African Finance Minister, involvement with the Gupta family who have been implicated in corruption scandal with former President Jacob Zuma, and acting as the auditor of VBS Mutual Bank that collapsed due to fraud. Its top eight staff resigned during 2017 and its workforce shrank from 3,400 to 2,200.\nKPMG were fined \u00a35 million by the Financial Reporting Council for misconduct shortly after the takeover of the Britannia Building Society by The Co-operative Bank, particularly relating to the valuation of Britannia's commercial loans and other liabilities. The takeover led to the near collapse of The Co-operative Bank.\nKPMG was fined $50 million by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission for illicit use of PCAOB data and cheating on training exams.\nIn June 2019, KPMG was fined $50 million for altering its past audit work after receiving stolen data from accounting industry watch dog PCAOB. KPMG admitted to its mistakes and as a part of its settlement, it also agreed to hire an independent consultant to review its internal controls.\nDuring April, KPMG UK was fined \u00a3455,000 and a senior partner, Nicola Quayle, was fined \u00a329,250 by the Financial Reporting Council for failing to challenge what a client was telling them about certain complex supplier arrangements.\nIn June, KPMG resigned from the auditor role of British fashion firm Ted Baker plc after the company admitted accounting errors resulting in overstatement of its inventory by up to \u00a358 million.\nIn February, the liquidators for the South African bank VBS Mutual Bank sued KPMG for 863.5 million rand (~US$59 million) over its audit opinion on the now defunct bank.\nIn March, KPMG US agreed to pay $10 million to settle a 10-year gender discrimination lawsuit in a New York Federal Court that alleged claims by 450 women that its culture was rife with gender discrimination, sexual harassment, and retaliation.\nDuring May, members of the Canadian Parliament's House of Commons finance committee re-launched a probe into offshore tax evasion by interviewing Lucia Iacovelli, managing partner at KPMG.\nKPMG in the UK was sued for more than \u00a36 million (~\u20ac6.9 million, ~US$7.8 million) by property company Mount Anvil which claims it was left with an unexpected tax bill after the firm provided it with negligent advice.\nIn July, the Financial Reporting Council (FRC) criticised KPMG for its \"unacceptable\" failure to meet required standards in its audits of banks for a third year running. Only 61% of KPMG\u2019s audits sampled by the regulator met industry standards.\nThe Government of Malaysia and the state sovereign fund, 1MDB, launched a lawsuit seeking over $5.6 billion in damages from KPMG partners for alleged breaches and negligence linked to a corruption scandal at the fund.\nSouth Africa's largest asset manager, the Public Investment Corporation (PIC), sued KPMG for 144 million rand (~U$9.5 million) it lost when the VBS Mutual Bank went bankrupt as a result of fraud. Its claim is centred on the rights issue and a revolving credit facility it participated in at VBS relying on financial statements audited by KPMG and its former senior partner, Sipho Malaba.\nIn August, a tribunal convened by the FRC fined KPMG \u00a313m and ordered it to pay \u00a32.75m in costs. This was because of its serious misconduct in the sale of bed company Silentnight. The tribunal found that KPMG had helped private equity group H.I.G Capital drive Silentnight into an insolvency process, so that HIG could acquire the company without its \u00a3100m pension scheme. KPMG was severely reprimanded by the tribunal, and was ordered to appoint an independent reviewer to check a sample of previous cases for similar failings. The tribunal ruled that KPMG's involvement with Silentnight was \"deeply troubling\" as it failed to act solely in its client's interests.\nIn September, PCAOB fined KPMG Australia $450,000 after it confessed to a cheating scandal involving over 1,100 (almost 12%) of its employees.\nIn November, the British litigation financing firm Augusta Ventures announced that it would bankroll three $152.4-million lawsuits in Canada against the previous auditor (KPMG LLP), authorized legal adviser (Cassels Brock &amp; Blackwell LLP) and monetary adviser (Canaccord Genuity Corp) of Cash Store Financial Services Inc., a Canadian payday lender that filed for creditor safety in 2014. Bill Aziz, the litigation trustee for Cash Store, said, \"It\u2019s alleged in these lawsuits that KPMG, Cassels Brock and Canaccord triggered over $100-million in damages to Cash Store and its collectors.\"\nAlso in November, KPMG UK was hit with a \u00a315m lawsuit by insurance outsourcer Watchstone\u2014formerly known as Quindell\u2014over allegations it suffered losses because of the audit firm's negligence in 2013.\nAlso in November, two units of Abraaj that are now in liquidation filed a lawsuit in Dubai against KPMG LLP for damages of US$600 million alleging that KPMG accountants \"failed to maintain independence and an appropriate attitude of professional skepticism,\" and breached their duty of care when auditing the private-equity firm.\nIn January, the Malaysian government reported that KPMG's local affiliate had agreed to pay a fine of RM 333 million ($111 million) to settle the case filed against it in connection with the 1MDB funds scandal.\nA group of investors in Airbus, the Dutch foundation Stichting Investor Loss Compensation (SILC), filed a lawsuit against Airbus, KPMG and EY in the Hague District Court alleging they suffered damages worth at least \u20ac300 million (US$340 million) as a result of the company's misleading publications about its involvement in and financial settlements involving corruption, bribery, and other forms of fraud.\nThe UK accounting regulator, the Financial Reporting Council (FRC), fined KPMG \u00a33 million for audit failings at collapsed alcohol retailer Conviviality.\nA settlement agreement between the Financial Reporting Council and a KPMG partner, Stuart Smith, who led the firm\u2019s audit of IT company Regenersis, later renamed as Blancco Technology Group, resulted in a fine of \u00a3150,000 after he admitted misleading its inspectors.\nDuring March, the Financial Reporting Council (FRC) fined KPMG UK \u00a31.3 million for serious failings within their audits of British bar chain, Revolution Bars Group.\nThe US securities regulator, the Securities Exchange Commission, announced an investigation into conflicts of interest at auditors, including KPMG's US branch, KPMG LLP.\nDuring April, the US accounting regulator, PCAOB, fined the former head of KPMG's US audit practice, Scott Marcello, a record US$100,000 for having failed to reasonably supervise senior auditors who engaged in the scheme to improve KPMG\u2019s inspection results.\nDuring May, the Financial Reporting Council confirmed that KPMG would face a \u00a314.4 million (~US$18 million) fine and a severe reprimand over false representations made by KPMG employees to the regulator concerning Carillion. (See 'Carillion audit role' section below).\nIn May, \"The Times\" reported that the FRC was close to finishing its investigation into KPMG UK's audit of the financial statements of Rolls-Royce plc for the year ended December 2010; the investigation was begun in 2017 and the FRC may fine KPMG UK up to \u00a34.5 million (~US$5.6 million) for questionable audit practices.\nIn August, the PCAOB, which reviews audit procedures of foreign firms that audit US-listed entities, fined KPMG South Korea US$500,000 for failing to have proper procedures in place to prevent its auditors from doctoring work papers. It also fined two of its partners and banned them from working for a PCAOB registered audit firm for three years, as they were found to have improperly altered documents and violated auditing standards during the Big Four firm\u2019s 2018 audit of the Korean business of an unnamed US-listed company.\nIn September, a lawsuit was filed in the Hong Kong High Court which accused KPMG of \"appalling\" audit work that allowed a Chinese medical technology company, China Medical Technologies, to commit a US$400 million accounting fraud, and which sought up to US$830 million in damages.\nIn October, Dubai Emirate's financial regulator, Dubai Financial Services Authority, handed provisional fines of US$2 million to KPMG's UAE affiliate (US$1.5 million) and one of its audit employees, Milind Navalkar (US$0.5 million), for failing to follow international audit standards in the audit of the failed Dubai-based private equity firm The Abraaj Group.\nAlso, KPMG affiliate KPMG Lower Gulf's CEO, Nader Haffar, quit consequent to a tumultuous year filled with accusations of nepotism, cronyism and partner discontent. This was a month after Nader had sent a letter to clients in the UAE and Oman in which the firm\u2019s 30 partners said that they remained united.\nIn addition, the PCAOB fined KPMG's Italian, Dutch and Canadian affiliates approximately US$275,000 for concealing the outsourcing of some audit work to unregulated firms in Poland and Romania.\nIn November, KPMG UK agreed to pay \u00a35 million (US$6 million) in settlement of a lawsuit by a former client, insurance software firm Quindell, relating to deficient audit work for Quindell (now known as Watchstone) relating to its 2013 financial statements.\nThe Abu Dhabi Accountability Authority (ADAA), which monitors Abu Dhabi government-owned and related entities, removed KPMG\u2019s Lower Gulf affiliate from its list of authorized auditors that can sign off on financial statements.\nIn December, the PCAOB announced that its inspectors had discovered that hundreds of KPMG employees in the UK and Colombia affiliates cheated on their compliance exams. In addition, inspectors also discovered document alterations to deceive inspectors in KPMG's Colombia affiliate, and blank audit papers signed by an KPMG affiliate audit partner in India. KPMG LLP agreed to pay US$7.7 million in fines. This follows a US$50 million fine in 2019 where KPMG employees were using data stolen from the PCAOB to identify which audits would be reviewed.\nIn February, KPMG UK confidentially settled the \u00a31.3 billion (US$1.6 billion) lawsuit launched in 2022 by the UK's Official Receiver relating to KPMG's audit of the failed construction firm, Carillion, between 2014 - 2018.\nAlso in February, a Disciplinary Tribunal, appointed by the UK's Financial Reporting Council and led by Sir Stanley Burnton, concluded that members of the audit teams deliberately misled the FRC\u2019s Audit Quality Review (AQR) teams about KPMG\u2019s audits of Carillion plc and Regenersis plc by altering existing documents and by creating entirely new documents during the course of the inspection. This showed, the Tribunal found, a clear intention to mislead the regulator.\nIn April, KPMG Lower Gulf was ordered by a Dubai court to pay 850 million United Arab Emirates dirhams (~US$231 million) to a group of investors who claim they lost money because of poor-quality audits of its client, The Abraaj Group.\nAlso in April, KPMG\u2019s Canadian affiliate was sued for Canadian $1.4 billion (~US$1.1 billion) by PriceWaterhouseCoopers, the Receiver winding down defunct financing firm Bridging Finance Inc., for negligently failing to detect and report on misstatements in its financial statements before the firm\u2019s collapse in 2021.\nAlso in April, the Financial Reporting Council fined KPMG's UK affiliate \u00a31 million (~US$1.3 million) for failing to meet audit requirements in the case of the 2020 financial statements of its client, the stationery company TheWorks.co.uk plc, particularly its inventory.\nThe Financial Reporting Council fined KPMG's UK affiliate \u00a3875,000 in April (~US$1.1 million) for failing to meet audit requirements in the case of the 2016 financial statements of its client, lighting company Luceco, particularly with regard to inventory cost errors.\nDuring May, the PCAOB released inspection reports regarding KPMG's China affiliate KPMG Huazhen LLP that Holding Foreign Companies Accountable Act (HFCAA) made possible. It concluded that it discovered \"deficiencies of such significance that PCAOB staff believe the audit firm failed to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence to support its work on the public company\u2019s financial statements or internal control over financial reporting\".\nDuring June, the UK accounting regulator Financial Reporting Council imposed a \u00a3877,000 (~US$1.1 million) fine on KPMG's UK affiliate for not satisfying relevant requirements regarding its 2017 audit of the financial statements of the logistics company Eddie Stobart Group.\nIn July, KPMG Nederland announced that over 100 employees of the Dutch affiliate of KPMG were found to have cheated annually on their exams over the past five years and that its director Marc Hogeboom would also step down as boss of the accounting arm.\nIn August, KPMG Australia was accused by two whistleblowers of submitting inflated invoices and billing the Australian Department of Defence for hours never worked. KPMG has reportedly charged this department A$1.8 billion (~US$1.2 billion) over the past decade.\nAlso in August, the registration authority of the Abu Dhabi Global Market imposed a AED110,000 (~US$30,000) penalty on KPMG Lower Gulf for \u201cineffective systems and controls leading to non-compliance with audit requirements\u201d.\nDuring November, the PCAOB imposed a fine of US$80,000 on KPMG affiliates in Brazil and Argentina for failing to communicate adequately with their client's audit committees, and a US$500,000 fine on its Japanese affiliate for quality control violations.\nKPMG was criticized for its audits of three regional American banks which collapsed in 2023: Signature Bank, First Republic Bank, and Silicon Valley Bank (SVB). The United States Senate\u2019s Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations later released a report which noted the inadequate practices by KPMG, though the firm denies the findings.\nIn late December 2023 an organisation named Collectif Porteurs H2O, that represents 9,000 individual investors in funds managed by French asset manager, H2O, sued its auditor, KPMG's French affiliate, as being jointly liable, along with H2O, its former parent Natixis, and its custodian CACEIS, for the losses of almost \u20ac700 million ($764 million) due to investments in illiquid assets tied to German financier Lars Windhorst. The UK financial regulator, Financial Conduct Authority, in August made H2O compensate investors to the extent of \u20ac250 million ($273 million) and forced H2O to relinquish its UK license. H2O was separately fined \u20ac75 million ($82 million) in 2022 by the French regulator, Autorit\u00e9 des March\u00e9s Financiers (France).\nDuring February, KPMG's South African affiliate is supposed to have entered into a confidential out-of-court settlement of 500 million Rand (~$27 million) with the liquidators of bankrupt South African bank VBS Mutual Bank in response to their lawsuit against KPMG filed in February 2021 for 863.5 million Rand (~$59 million).\nIn March, KPMG's UK affiliate was fined \u00a31.46 million ($1.9 million) by the Financial Reporting Council for 'basic failings' in its audit of the 2018 financial statements of advertising agency M&amp;C Saatchi plc. FRC indicated that KPMG would have been fined \u00a32.25 million ($2.8 million) had it not admitted to the breaches.\nAlso in March, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board sanctioned three partners of KPMG China affiliate KPMG Huazhen LLP for violations of audit standards, and fined it $150,000.\nIn April, the PCAOB fined KPMG's Netherlands affiliate, KPMG Accountants N.V, US$25 million for violations of its rules and quality control standards relating to the firm\u2019s internal training program and monitoring of its system of quality control. The PCAOB found that widespread improper answer sharing occurred at the firm over a five-year period and that the firm made multiple misrepresentations to the PCAOB about its knowledge of the misconduct.\nKPMG has been criticized over its audit for the distressed New York Community Bank (NYCB) in light of its passing audits for three regional banks that failed in 2023.\nDuring August, the National Financial Reporting Authority (NFRA), an independent regulatory body in India that oversees the accounting and auditing of companies, fined KPMG's Indian affiliate, BSR &amp; Associates LLP, 10 crore rupees (~$1.2 million) for lapses in auditing the 2018-19 financial statements of the coffee chain Coffee Day Enterprises and barred two of its partners from audit work for up to ten years. This followed an earlier 2.15 crore rupee (~$0.3 million) fine for similar lapses with a related entity, Coffee Day Global.\nDuring January, the Financial Reporting Council announced that it has opened an investigation into the 2022 audit of the gambling company Entain, which was conducted by KPMG's UK affiliate.\nDuring March, the PCAOB announced nine settled disciplinary orders sanctioning nine firms from KPMG\u2019s global network (Switzerland, Korea, Australia, Canada, Brazil, Italy, Israel, Mexico and UK) for violations of PCAOB rules and standards, including quality control standards. Each firm consented to a PCAOB order that censures the firm and imposes civil money penalties totaling US$3.375 million.\nDuring June, the Financial Reporting Council, announced a fine of \u00a30.69 million (US$0.8 million) on KPMG's UK affiliate as a result of an investigation into auditor independence during the financial audit of UK manufacturing firm Carr\u2019s Group, where KPMG was found to be relying on another firm\u2019s work.\nCultural issues.\nControversies around KPMG Lower Gulf first emerged in July 2022, when staff at the UAE division accused the multinational firm of neglecting multiple complaints filed against the Emirati CEO Nader Haffar. The controversy resurfaced in September 2022, when the global bosses were urged to suspend Haffar, citing \"nepotism, cronyism and a culture of fear\" under his leadership. In an email sent to KPMG International\u2019s top executives, ten capital partners at the firm\u2019s UAE branch asked them to address the \"massive crisis\" in the local company. They also raised concerns over the falling profits, affecting their pay. The average profits per partner fell, and they were not paid bonuses for 2021 due to \"cash flow issues\".\nIn October 2022, the \"Financial Times\" published a report in which dozens of employees said that unethical employment practices at KPMG Saudi Arabia were commonplace and had left expatriate staff fearing for their personal safety and struggling with their mental health. Several former employees witnessed colleagues being fired abruptly for no reason, and put this down to hostility towards westerners from the largely Arab leadership team at KPMG Saudi Arabia. Racial tensions within the firm were also a problem, with xenophobic language being used towards certain nationalities. The FT viewed copies of three whistleblowing reports sent to KPMG International since 2018, alleging issues in the Saudi Arabia practice, including wrongful terminations, failure to pay staff and concerns about personal safety in the region.\nSponsorship.\nThe Swedish member firm was the main sponsor for Swedish biathlete Magdalena Forsberg, six-time world champion and two-time Olympic medalist. Forsberg was working as a tax consultant at the KPMG Sundsvall office parallel to her athletic career.\nIn February 2008, Phil Mickelson, ranked one of the best golfers in the world, signed a three-year global sponsorship deal with KPMG. As part of the agreement, Mickelson was to wear the KPMG logo on his headwear during all golf related appearances. The sponsorship lasted until 22 February 2022, when the two parties mutually split following comments in which Mickelson called Saudi Arabia \"scary\" but said he would overlook the country's human rights controversies in the best interest of the PGA Tour.\nThe Canadian member firm sponsored skier Alexandre Bilodeau, who won the first gold medal for Canada on home soil in the 2010 Vancouver Olympics. Bilodeau's father is a tax partner in the Montreal office.\nIn 2014, KPMG and McLaren Technology Group formed a ten-year strategic alliance to apply McLaren Applied Technologies' predictive analytics and technology to KPMG's audit and advisory services. KPMG's logo was also placed at the engine air intake of the McLaren F1 team's cars. KPMG terminated the partnership in 2017 and McLaren signed a similar partnership with competitor Deloitte.\nSince 2016, KPMG has been a strategic sponsor of Brain Bar, a Budapest-based, annually held festival on the future.\nAwards.\nKPMG ranked in the top two overall in Consultancy Rankings 2009 by OpRisk &amp; Compliance, in recognition of KPMG's experience in risk management.\nIn 2011, the company was ranked second on the World's Best Outsourcing Advisors, in recognition of the firm's depth of experience, global reach and holistic approach. That same year, the company was inducted into Working Mother Hall of Fame after being honored for 15 years as one of Working Mother magazine's 100 Best Companies for Working Mothers. KPMG was ranked number 13 in \"Consulting Magazine\"'s Best Firms to Work for in 2016.\nIn 2017, KPMG was ranked 29th on the \"Fortune\" list of 100 best companies to work for. That same year, KPMG, along with PwC, Deloitte, and PA Consulting Group, were ranked among the UK's 25 top companies to work for.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75961", "revid": "18306572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75961", "title": "Beeldenstorm", "text": "16th century European iconoclastic riots\nBeeldenstorm () in Dutch and Bildersturm in German (roughly translatable from both languages as 'attack on the images or statues') are terms used for outbreaks of destruction of religious images that occurred in Europe in the 16th century, known in English as the Great Iconoclasm or Iconoclastic Fury. During these spates of iconoclasm, Catholic art and many forms of church fittings and decoration were destroyed in unofficial or mob actions by Calvinist Protestant crowds as part of the Protestant Reformation. Most of the destruction was of art in churches and public places.\nThe Dutch term usually specifically refers to the wave of disorderly attacks in the summer of 1566 that spread rapidly through the Low Countries from south to north. Similar outbreaks of iconoclasm took place in other parts of Europe, especially in Switzerland and the Holy Roman Empire in the period between 1522 and 1566, notably Z\u00fcrich (in 1523), Copenhagen (1530), M\u00fcnster (1534), Geneva (1535), and Augsburg (1537), and in Livonia between 1522-1524.\nIn England, there was both government-sponsored removal of images and also spontaneous attacks from 1535 onwards, and in Scotland from 1559. In France, there were several outbreaks as part of the Wars of Religion from 1560 onwards.\nBackground.\nIn France, unofficial episodes of large scale destruction of art in churches by Huguenot Calvinists had begun in 1560; unlike in the Low Countries, they were often physically resisted and repulsed by Catholic crowds, but were to continue throughout the French Wars of Religion. In Anglican England much destruction had already taken place in an organized fashion under orders from the government, while in Northern Europe, groups of Calvinists marched through churches and removed images, a move which \"provoked reactive riots by Lutheran mobs\" in Germany and \"antagonized the neighbouring Eastern Orthodox\" in the Baltic region.\nIn Germany, Switzerland and England, conversion to Protestantism had been enforced on the whole population at the level of a city, principality or kingdom, with varying degrees of discrimination, persecution or expulsion applied to those who insisted on remaining Catholic. The Low Countries were part of the inheritance of Philip II of Spain, who was a devoted Catholic and supporter of the Counter-Reformation; he attempted to suppress Protestantism through his governor-general Margaret of Parma, the illegitimate daughter of Emperor Charles V, who was herself more willing to compromise. Protestants so far represented only a relatively small proportion of the Netherlandish population, but including disproportionate numbers from the nobility and upper bourgeoisie; nevertheless, but the Catholic Church had evidently lost the loyalty of the population, and traditional Catholic anti-clericalism was now dominant.\nThe region affected was perhaps the richest in Europe, but still seethed with economic discontent among parts of the population, and had suffered a poor harvest and hard winter. However, recent historians are generally less inclined to see the movement as prompted by these factors than was the case a few decades ago.\nThe Beeldenstorm grew out of a turn in the behaviour of Low Country Protestants starting around 1560, who became increasingly open in their religion, despite penal sanctions. Catholic preachers were interrupted in sermons, and raids were organized to release Protestant prisoners from jail, who then often fled into exile in France or England. Protestant views were spread by a large movement of \"hedgerow sermons\" or open-air sermons () held outside towns, and therefore out of the jurisdiction of the town authorities. The first took place on the \"Cloostervelt\" near Hondschoote, in what is now the arrondissement of Dunkirk in French Flanders, very close to where the attacks later began, and the first one to be armed against disruption was held near Boeschepe on 12 July 1562, two months after religious war had broken out again over the (then) French border just nearby.\nThese open-air sermons, mostly by Anabaptist or Mennonite preachers, spread through the country, attracting huge crowds, though not necessarily of those leaning to Protestantism, and in many places immediately preceded the iconoclastic attacks of August 1566. Prosecutions for heresy continued, especially in the south, although they were erratic, and in some places clergy of clearly heretical views were appointed to churches. By 1565 the authorities seem to have realized that persecution was not the answer, and the level of prosecutions slackened, and the Protestants became increasingly confident in the open. A letter of 22 July 1566 from local officials to the Regent, warned that \"the scandalous pillage of churches, monasteries and abbeys\" was imminent.\nLow Countries iconoclastic attacks in 1566.\nOn 10 August 1566, the feast-day of Saint Lawrence, at the end of the pilgrimage from Hondschoote to Steenvoorde, the chapel of the \"Sint-Laurensklooster\" (\"Saint Lawrence monastery\") was defaced by a crowd who invaded the building. It has been suggested that the rioters connected the saint especially with Philip II, whose monastery palace of the Escorial near Madrid was dedicated to Lawrence, and was just nearing completion in 1566. Iconoclastic attacks spread rapidly northwards and resulted in the destruction of not only images but all sorts of decoration and fittings in churches and other church or clergy property. However, there was relatively little loss of life, unlike similar outbreaks in France, where the clergy were often killed, and some iconoclasts too.\nThe attacks reached the commercial centre of the Low Countries, Antwerp, on 20 August, and on 22 August Ghent, where the cathedral, eight churches, twenty-five monasteries and convents, ten hospitals and seven chapels were wrecked. From there, it further spread east and north, reaching Amsterdam, then a much smaller town, by 23 August, and continuing in the far north and east into October, although the main towns were mostly attacked in August. Valenciennes (\"Valencijn\" on the map) was the most southerly town attacked. In the east, Maastricht on 20 September and Venlo on 5 October saw attacks, but generally the outbreaks were restricted to more westerly and northern areas. Over 400 churches were attacked in Flanders alone.\nThe eye-witness Richard Clough, a Welsh Protestant merchant then in Antwerp, saw: \"all the churches, chapels and houses of religion utterly defaced, and no kind of thing left whole within them, but broken and utterly destroyed, being done after such order and by so few folks that it is to be marvelled at.\" The Church of Our Lady in Antwerp, later made the cathedral (illustrated at top): \"looked like a hell, with above 10,000 torches burning, and such a noise as if heaven and earth had got together, with falling of images and beating down of costly works, such sort that the spoil was so great that a man could not well pass through the church. So that in fine [short], I cannot write you in x sheets of paper the strange sight I saw there, organs and all destroyed.\"\nNicholas Sanders, an English Catholic exile who was a professor of theology at Louvain University, described the destruction in the same church:\n...\u00a0these fresh followers of this new preaching threw down the graven [sculpted] and defaced the painted images, not only of Our Lady but of all others in the town. They tore the curtains, dashed in pieces the carved work of brass and stone, brake the altars, spoilt the clothes and corporesses, wrested the irons, conveyed away or brake the chalices and vestiments, pulled up the brass of the gravestones, not sparing the glass and seats which were made about the pillars of the church for men to sit in.\u00a0... the Blessed Sacrament of the altar\u00a0... they trod under their feet and (horrible it is to say!) shed their stinking piss upon it\u00a0... these false bretheren burned and rent not only all kind of Church books, but, moreover, destroyed whole libraries of books of all sciences and tongues, yea the Holy Scriptures and the ancient fathers, and tore in pieces the maps and charts of the descriptions of countries.\nSuch details are corroborated by many other sources. Accounts of the actions of the iconoclasts from eyewitnesses and the records of the later trials of many of them make it clear that there was often a considerable element of carnival to the outbreaks, with much mockery of the images and fittings such as fonts recorded as the iconoclasts went about their work. Alcohol features largely in very many accounts, perhaps in some cases because in Netherlandish law being drunk could be regarded as a mitigating factor in criminal sentencing.\nThe destruction frequently included ransacking the priest's house, and sometimes private houses suspected of sheltering church goods. There was much looting of common household goods from clergy houses and monasteries, and some street robberies of women's jewellery by the crowd; after the images were smashed and the property occupied, \"men fed their stomachs in a carnivalesque indulgence of beer, bread, butter and cheese, while women carted off provisions for the kitchen or bedroom\".\nThere are many accounts of rituals of inversion, in which the church sometimes stood for the whole social order. Children sometimes participated enthusiastically, and street games afterwards became play battles between \"papists\" and \"beggars\". One child was killed in Amsterdam by a stone thrown in such a game. Elsewhere the iconoclasts seemed to treat their actions as a job of work; in one city the group waited for the bell rung to mark the start of the working day before beginning their work. The tombs and memorial inscriptions of the patriciate and nobility, and in some cases royalty, were defaced or destroyed in several places, although secular public buildings such as town halls, and the palaces of the nobility, were not attacked. In Ghent, on the one hand the memorial in a church to Charles V's sister Isabel (and so Philip's aunt) was carefully left alone, but a statue in the street of Charles V and the Virgin was destroyed.\nThe actions were controversial among Protestants, some of whom implausibly tried to blame Catholic agent provocateurs, as it became clear that \"the more popular elements of the dissident movement were out of control\". Protestant ministers and activists returning from exile in England and elsewhere played a significant role, and individual wealthy Protestants were widely suspected of hiring men to do the work in some places, especially Antwerp.\nIn some rural areas gangs of iconoclasts moved across country between village churches and monasteries for several days. Elsewhere there were large crowds involved, sometimes locals, and sometimes from outside the area. In some places the nobility gave assistance, ordering the clearing of churches on their estates. Local magistracies were often opposed, but ineffective in stopping the destruction. In many towns the archer's guild, who had a function in controlling public order, took no steps against the crowds.\nIn 1566, unlike the situation after the Eighty Years' War and today, Protestantism in the Low Countries was mainly concentrated in the south (roughly modern Belgium), and much weaker in the north (roughly now the Netherlands). Iconoclasm in the north began later, after news of the events in Antwerp was received, and was more successfully resisted by local authorities in some towns, though still succeeding in most. Once again socially prominent laymen often took the lead. In many places there were, or were later said to have been, false claims of official commissions from some local authority to perform the actions, and by the end of the outbreak some northern towns removed images by order of the local authority, presumably to prevent the disorder that would accompany a mob action.\nAnalysis of the records of the later trials shows a wide range of occupations, covering craftsmen and small tradespeople, especially in the textile trade, and also a variety of church employees, at a fairly low level. Where wealth and property are recorded, it is \"modest at best\". But Weyn Ockers, executed with her maid after their trials in 1568 for their actions on the first day of the Amsterdam outbreak, was the well-off married daughter of a notary, and her husband's house was in an expensive area. Her mother had been executed in the 1530s, after being involved in Anabaptist rioting.\n\"Stille beeldenstorm\" of 1581 in Antwerp.\nAntwerp experienced a further period of iconoclasm in 1581, after a Calvinist city council was elected and purged the city's clergy and guilds of Catholic office-holders. This is known as the \"quiet\" or \"stille\" \"beeldenstorm\", as the removal of images was carried out by the institutions they belonged to, the council itself, churches and the guilds. Some images were sold rather than destroyed, but most seem to have been lost. In the summer of 1584 Antwerp was besieged by the Duke of Parma's Spanish army, falling a year later.\nArtistic losses.\nRarely was any thought given to the artistic heritage of these cities in 1566, though families were sometimes able to protect the church monuments of their ancestors, and in Delft the syndics of the painters' Guild of Saint Luke were able to rescue the altarpiece by Maarten van Heemskerck, which the guild had commissioned only 15 years earlier.\nThe van Eycks' Ghent Altarpiece, then as now famous as a supreme example of Early Netherlandish painting and already a major tourist attraction, just restored in 1550, was saved by dismantling it and hiding it in the cathedral tower. A first attack on 19 August was deterred by a small number of guards. When a larger attack was made at night two days later the iconoclasts had provided themselves with a tree trunk as a battering ram, and succeeded in breaking through the doors.\nBy then the panels had been removed from the frame and hidden, with the guards, on the narrow spiral staircase up the tower, with a locked door at ground level. They were not detected and the crowd left after destroying what else they could find. The panels were then moved to the town hall, and only returned to view in 1569, by which time the elaborate frame had disappeared. The artistic and literary losses were elaborately described by Marcus van Vaernewyck in his journal, preserved in the Ghent University Library.\nDespite militia guards, two of the three main churches in Leiden were attacked; in the Pieterskerk the choirbooks and altarpiece by Lucas van Leyden were preserved. In the Oude Kerk in Amsterdam an altarpiece with a central panel by Jan van Scorel and side panels painted on both sides by Maarten van Heemskerck was lost. The most important works of several painters, especially those like Pieter Aertsen who worked in Antwerp, were all destroyed, leading to a somewhat distorted view of the art history of the period. An altarpiece in Culemborg had been commissioned in 1557 from the painter Jan Dey, was then destroyed in 1566 and in 1570 recommissioned from Dey, apparently as a copy of the first. However the new work was only in place for five years before it was removed when the town went officially Calvinist.\nConsequences.\nOn 23 August Margaret of Parma, the Habsburg Regent or Governor-general, whose capital of Brussels was unaffected by the movement, agreed to an \"Accord\" with the group of aristocratic Protestant leaders known as the \"Compromise\" or \"Geuzen\" (\"Beggars\"), by which freedom of religion was granted, in exchange for allowing Catholics to worship unmolested and an end to the violence. Instead, \"the outbreak of the iconoclastic fury began an almost uninterrupted series of skirmishes, campaigns, plunder, pirate-raids, and other acts of violence. Not all areas suffered violence at the same time or to the same extent, but practically none remained unscathed.\"\nMany elite Protestants were now alarmed by the forces unleashed, and some of the nobility began to shift towards support of the government. Implementing the somewhat vague terms of the agreement led to further tensions, and William of Orange, appointed by Margaret to resolve the situation in Antwerp, tried and failed to produce a wider settlement that all parties could live with. Instead unrest continued and the episode fed into the causes of the Dutch Revolt which was to erupt two years later.\nOn 29 August 1566 Margaret wrote a somewhat panicked letter to Philip, \"claiming that half the population were infected with heresy, and that over 200,000 people were up in arms against her authority\". Philip decided to send the Duke of Alba with an army; he would have led them himself but was kept in Spain by other matters, especially the increasingly evident insanity of his heir, Carlos, Prince of Asturias. When Alba arrived the following year, and soon replaced Margaret as Governor-general, his heavy-handed repression, which included the execution of many convicted of iconoclastic attacks the summer before, only made the situation worse.\nAntwerp was then Europe's largest financial and international trading centre, taking as much as 75 or 80% of English exports of cloth, and the disturbances created serious and well-justified fears that its position as such was under threat. Sir Thomas Gresham, the English financier who arranged Elizabeth I's borrowings, and whose agent in Antwerp was Clough, left London for Antwerp on 23 August, only hearing about the Antwerp attacks \"en route\"; he needed to roll-over 32,000 Flemish pounds and borrow another 20,000 to finance her expenses in Ireland. Dining with William of Orange on his arrival, he was asked if \"the English were minded to depart this town or not\", and wrote to William Cecil, Elizabeth's chief minister, \"in alarm that he \"liked none of their proceedings\" but \"apprehended great mischief\", and urged that the English government \"should do very well in time to consider some other realm and place\" for marketing English products. It was a message that helped shape the course of events.\"\nThe English had found the Antwerp money market short of funds since earlier in the year, and now made use of Cologne and Augsburg as well, but as events unfolded in the next year, and the personal position of some leading lenders became precarious, the English found to their surprise that repayments were no longer pressed for, probably as the lenders were happy to keep their money abroad on loan to a secure borrower. The Dutch Revolt, which from 1585 onwards included a Dutch blockade of the River Scheldt leading to the city, was to finally destroy Antwerp as a major trading centre.\nIn many places there were attempts by Calvinist preachers to take over the ransacked buildings. These were usually repulsed in the period after the attacks. In the months afterwards there were attempted negotiations in many cities, by William of Orange and others, to allocate certain churches to accommodate the local Protestants, often divided into Lutherans and Calvinists. These had mostly failed within a few weeks, not least because Margaret's government rejected them; she had already had an earlier attempt at compromise overruled by Philip a few months earlier, and been embarrassingly forced to retract a decree. Instead there was a wave of building or adapting Calvinist \"temples\", though in the end none of these were to remain in use by the following year, and their layouts, which seem to have echoed early Swiss and Scottish Calvinist designs, are now largely unknown.\nOnce the revolt proper had started, there were many further instances of clearing churches, some still unofficial and disorderly, but as cities became officially Protestant, increasingly undertaken by official order, like the Amsterdam Alteratie (\"Alteration\") of 1578. Altars, to which Calvinists, unlike Lutherans, took strong exception, were typically completely removed, and in some large churches, like Utrecht Cathedral, large tomb monuments put where they stood, partly to make their return more difficult if political conditions changed. As the Eighty Years' War concluded, in the cities and areas that had become Protestant, the old Catholic churches were nearly all taken over by the new established faith, the Calvinist Dutch Reformed Church, while other congregations were left to find their own buildings.\nThe bare and empty state of those churches left in Catholic hands after the hostilities eventually ended prompted a large programme of restocking with Catholic art, which had much to do with the vigour of Northern Mannerism and later Flemish Baroque painting, and many Gothic churches were given Baroque makeovers. In the north, now strongly Protestant, religious art largely disappeared, and Dutch Golden Age painting concentrated on a wide range of secular subjects, such as genre painting, landscape art and still-lifes, with results that might sometimes have surprised the Protestant ministers who initiated the movement. According to one scholar, this \"was not only a dramatic change in the function of art, it was the context in which our present concept of art, what the literary critic M. H. Abrams called \"art as such\", first began to take shape\", replacing a \"construction model\" where art theory concerned itself with how makers created their works, with a \"contemplation model\" concerned with the effect of finished works on a \"lone perceiver\" or viewer.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75962", "revid": "44023641", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75962", "title": "Flags of the world", "text": ""}
{"id": "75963", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75963", "title": "Clare College, Cambridge", "text": "College of the University of Cambridge\nClare College is a constituent college of the University of Cambridge in Cambridge, England. The college was founded in 1326 as University Hall, making it the second-oldest surviving college of the University after Peterhouse. It was refounded in 1338 as Clare Hall by an endowment from Elizabeth de Clare, and took on its current name in 1856. Clare is famous for its chapel choir and for its gardens on the Backs (the rear of the colleges that overlook the River Cam). It is a registered charity.\nHistory.\nThe college was founded in 1326 by the university's chancellor, Richard Badew, and was originally named 'University Hall'. Providing maintenance for only two fellows, it soon hit financial hardship. In 1338, the college was refounded as 'Clare Hall' by an endowment from Elizabeth de Clare, a granddaughter of Edward I, which provided for twenty fellows and ten students.\nThe college was known as Clare Hall until 1856, when it changed its name to 'Clare College'. (A new 'Clare Hall' was founded by Clare College as a postgraduate institution in 1966.)\nWomen were accepted as undergraduates in 1972, one of the first three previously all-male colleges to do so.\nCoat of arms.\nThe coat of arms of Clare College are \"Or, three chevronels gules, impaling Or, a cross gules; all within a bordure sable guttee d'Or.\"\nElizabeth de Clare's first husband was John de Burgh (1286\u20131313). Usually, the arms of the husband appear in the dexter half, the position of greater honour, here occupied by the arms of de Clare. This shield with its bordure of \"gouttes d'or\" (golden droplets) appears on the personal seal of Elizabeth de Clare.\nBuildings.\nOld Court.\nClare's Old Court, a Grade I listed building, was built between 1638 and 1715, with a long interruption for the English Civil War. The period spans the arrival of classicism into the mainstream of British architecture, such that its progress can be traced in the marked differences between the oldest wing to the north, which still has vaulting and other features in the unbroken tradition of English Gothic architecture, and the final southern block, which shows a fully articulated classic style.\nThe college's chapel was built in 1763 and designed by Sir James Burrough, the Master of neighbouring Caius College. Its altarpiece is \"Annunciation\" by Cipriani.\nOld Court frames King's College Chapel in views from the Backs. \nClare Bridge.\nClare has a bridge over the River Cam and is the oldest of Cambridge's current bridges. It was built of stone in 1640 by Thomas Grumbold and restored in 1969, and is a Grade I listed building.\nFourteen stone balls decorate it, one of which has a missing section. A number of apocryphal stories circulate concerning this \u2013 one cited by members of the college is that the original builder of the bridge was not paid the full amount for his work and so removed the segment to balance the difference in payment. A more likely explanation is that a wedge of stone cemented into the ball as part of a repair job became loose and fell out.\nMemorial Court.\nClare Bridge connects Old Court to Memorial Court, which was designed by Giles Gilbert Scott and dedicated in 1926. The new court, west of Queen's Road, was conceived as a memorial to the Clare men who lost their lives in the First World War. The monumental arch which forms the entrance to the court accommodates a large bell and carries the names of Clare alumni who died in both world wars. Memorial Court is Grade II* listed,\nMemorial Court was extended in the 1950s by the construction of Thirkill Court, and was later divided into two parts when the College's Forbes Mellon Library was constructed in the centre of Memorial Court; the new courtyard created in the west was renamed Ashby Court.\nLerner Court.\nA new court, Lerner Court, designed by van Heyningen and Haward Architects, was opened in January 2008. It occupies the last piece of undeveloped land in the central area of the College next to Memorial Court and houses a lecture theatre, catering, fellows offices, residential accommodation and a student laundry.\nCastle Court.\nA detached area of student accommodation, Castle Court, is between Castle Street and Chesterton Lane, on Castle Hill, north of the city centre.\nStudent life.\nIn 1972 Clare College became one of the three male Cambridge colleges to admit female undergraduates (the other two being Churchill and King's).\nClare is known as a musical college in Cambridge. Its choir has performed all over the world. Clare College Music Society is well known, particularly the orchestra. As well as jazz and comedy nights, Clare is known for Clare Ents, a student night held every Friday in term time. The night is popular with students across the university and in the past it has hosted such acts as Tinie Tempah, Bombay Bicycle Club and Chase and Status.\nThe college's student newspaper is called \"Clareification\".\nClare holds an annual May ball on the Monday of May Week in the middle of June.\nClare Boat Club.\nClare Boat Club is the rowing club for current members of Clare College. There is a separate club, De Burgh Boat Club, for alumni. In 2012, Clare Boat Club had the highest membership relative to the size of its student body of any college-affiliated boat club in Cambridge, fielding six men's VIIIs in the May Bumps competition.\nAcademic performance.\nThe undergraduates of Clare College were 12th in the 2024 Tompkins Table, based on degree results.\nClare was in the top ten colleges in the Tompkins Table from 2000 to 2005. However, their performance in the following years (2006\u201309) was poorer, leaving them in 12th in 2006 and 18th in 2009. Their 2010 performance (8th position) however showed an increase of 10 places over their previous year's performance, and in 2011 they reached fourth place. In 2018, Clare placed 16th out of 29 colleges recorded in the table. In 2019, it fell to 24th place. In 2022, it rose to 12th place.\nEntrance into Clare College is competitive, with approximately five applicants per place. However, the high quality of applicants means that many of them are awarded places at other colleges through the Winter Pool. Of applicants in 2007, 151 were given offers by Clare, and a further 75 applicants were made offers at other Cambridge colleges."}
{"id": "75964", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75964", "title": "John III, Duke of Brabant", "text": "14th century sovereign duke in modern-day Belgium\nJohn III (; 1300 \u2013 5 December 1355) was Duke of Brabant, Lothier (1312\u20131355) and Limburg (1312\u20131347 then 1349\u20131355), the last Brabant male to rule them. \nBiography.\nJohn was the son of John II, Duke of Brabant, and Margaret of England. In 1312, he succeeded his father as the duke of Brabant, in no small part due to his father's Charter of Kortenberg. In an attempt to improve relations with France, John married Marie of Evreux.\nJohn and the towns of Brabant.\nThe early fourteenth century, a period of economic boom for Brabant, marks the rise of the duchy's towns, which depended on imports of English wool for their essential cloth industry. During John's minority, the major towns of Brabant had the authority to appoint councillors to direct a regency, under terms of the Charter of Kortenberg granted by his father in the year of his death (1312). The marital alignment with France was tested and failed as early as 1316, when Louis X requested John to cease trade with Flanders; the councillors representing the towns found this impossible, and in reprisal Louis prohibited all French trade with Brabant in February 1316. By 1356 his daughter and son-in-law were forced to accept the famous Joyous Entry, as a condition for their recognition, so powerful had the states of Brabant become.\nThe French alliance, 1332\u20131337.\nAfter his initial period of maintaining independent neutrality from both France and England failed, neighbouring sovereigns in the Low Countries, stimulated as a matter of policy by Philip VI of France, became John's enemies; among the adversaries of John were the Count of Flanders, the prince-bishop of Li\u00e8ge, and counts of Holland and Guelders. In 1332, a crisis with the king of France arose over John's hospitality to Robert, count of Artois, during his journey to eventual asylum at the English court. In response to French pressure John reminded Philip that he did not hold Brabant from him but from God alone. A brief campaign of a coalition of Philip's friends came to a truce, followed by a pact at Compi\u00e8gne by which John received a fief from Philip worth 2000 \"livres\" and declared himself a vassal of France. His oldest son, Jean, was betrothed to Philip's niece, Princess Marie, and it was agreed that the Brabantian heir would complete his education at the French court in Paris and that Robert of Artois would be expelled from Brabant.\nThe support of France strengthened John's hand with his feudal suzerain, the Holy Roman Emperor. Though he was technically the Emperor's feudal vassal, John had been able to ignore Emperor Louis IV's summons to join him in his intended invasion of Lombardy (1327). The separation of Brabant from the Empire was completed by the Burgundian dukes of Brabant in the fifteenth century.\nMeanwhile, the princes of the Low Countries settled their differences and formed a coalition against Brabant with a defensive alliance in June 1333. War was briefly brought to the Duchy of Brabant in the summer of 1334, but resolved by a peace brokered by Philip at Amiens. The French king declared that John had to hand over the town of Tiel and its neighbouring villages Heerewaarden and Zandwijk to the count of Guelders and to betroth his daughter Marie to the count's son, Reinoud.\nThe English alliance, 1337\u20131345.\nWhen Edward III of England decided to press his claim to the crown of France in 1337, John, who was his first cousin, became an ally of England during the first stage of the Hundred Years' War. King Edward's diplomatic offensive to draw Brabant away from France, produced a sympathetic response from Duke John. Disrupting the staple connection between the towns of Flanders and the sources of English wool should divert it to the towns of Brabant, notably the recently established wool exchange. Edward protected Braban\u00e7on merchants in England from arrest or the confiscation of their goods, and he sweetened his offers with a promise of \u00a360,000, an immense sum, and to make good any losses of revenue that might result from penalties by the king of France. The same month of July 1337 John promised Edward 1,200 of his men-at-arms in the event of an English campaign in France, Edward to pay their salary. In August Edward pledged not to negotiate with the king without prior consultation with the duke. The alliance, kept secret at John's insistence, came into the open when Edward landed with his troops at Antwerp July 1338. John received the promised subsidy (March 1339) and agreed in June to betroth John's second daughter, Margaret, to Edward, the Black Prince, heir to the English throne. Two seasons of inconclusive campaigning that ravaged the north of France left Edward penniless at the end of 1341; he returned home, and when he returned to the fray, it was to Brittany: he never returned to the Low Countries.\nThe French alliance, 1345\u20131355.\nThough John was requesting papal dispensation for the marriage of Margaret and the Black Prince in 1343, the alliance with England unravelled as Edward's coffers emptied and his attentions turned elsewhere. In September 1345 representative of France and Brabant met at the Ch\u00e2teau de Saint-Germain-en-Laye to sign preliminary agreements, and by a treaty signed at Saint-Quentin, June 1347, Brabant was retained as an ally by France. Margaret was now to marry Louis of Male, who had inherited the title of count of Flanders, but whose power over the Flemish communes was virtually nil. A point of dispute with the count of Flanders had been the Lordship of Mechelen, a strategic enclave within Brabant: it was agreed that it would now come under full Brabantian control. Despite the diplomacy of Edward, John remained true to his French commitments until his death in December 1355.\nFamily.\nIn 1311, as his father's gesture of \"rapprochement\" with France, John married Marie of \u00c9vreux (1303\u20131335), the daughter of Prince Louis, Count of \u00c9vreux and Margaret of Artois. They had:\nJohn also had a son born from Elisabeth Maria of Huldenberg (d. 1365), who founded the House of Brant: John I Brant, 1st Lord of Ayseau.\nIn 1355, after all of his three legitimate sons had died, John was forced to declare his eldest daughter Joanna his heiress, which provoked a succession crisis after his death. John III was buried in the Cistercian Abbey of Villers, Belgium.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75965", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75965", "title": "The Nutshell", "text": "The Nutshell is a pub in Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, England, that until 2016 claimed to be the smallest pub in Britain, although this claim was challenged by several others, including the Smiths Arms at Godmanstone (since closed) and the Lakeside Inn in Southport.\nThe pub is certainly diminutive so that no more than ten or fifteen customers can drink inside at any one time. The pub measures . In 1984, a record number of 102 people squeezed into the pub.\nThe Nutshell has been trading as a pub since 1867, although the building is much older and formerly had other uses. Inside, the dried body of a black cat is displayed, It is around 400 years old and was discovered in 1935 during building work. In former times, the bodies of cats were often placed inside the structure of buildings to bring good luck to the building and its occupants.\nThe building has been Grade II listed since 1972.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75967", "revid": "32579849", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75967", "title": "Big 4 accounting firm", "text": ""}
{"id": "75968", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75968", "title": "Big 4 accountancy firm", "text": ""}
{"id": "75970", "revid": "13791031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75970", "title": "Simona Am\u00e2nar", "text": "Romanian gymnast (born 1979)\nSimona Am\u00e2nar (; born 7 October 1979) is a Romanian former artistic gymnast. She is the 2000 Olympic all-around champion, and a seven-time Olympic and ten-time World Championship medalist. Am\u00e2nar helped Romania win four consecutive world team titles (1994\u20131999), as well as the 2000 Olympic team title. She has a vault named after her, one of the most difficult in women's gymnastics, and was inducted into the International Gymnastics Hall of Fame in 2007.\nBiography.\nSimona Am\u00e2nar is an ethnic Aromanian.\nCareer.\n1994\u20131995.\nIn 1994, her first year on the senior national team, Am\u00e2nar contributed to Romania's team titles at the World and European Championships.\nAm\u00e2nar began to excel as an individual performer at the 1995 European Cup, placing second in the all-around behind Svetlana Khorkina of Russia and winning gold on both vault and floor exercise. At the 1995 World Championships, she helped Romania secure its second consecutive world team title and became co-champion on vault (with all-around winner Lilia Podkopayeva of Ukraine). Am\u00e2nar's powerful floor routine and vaults put her in the lead after two rotations in the all-around, but she dropped to fourth after an average uneven bars routine and a shaky balance beam routine.\n1996.\nAm\u00e2nar won a silver medal on vault at the 1996 World Championships, behind teammate Gina Gogean and ahead of Cuba's Annia Portuondo-Hatch.\nAt the 1996 Summer Olympics, Am\u00e2nar was one of the front-runners for several individual medals, but her Olympics started inauspiciously when she fell off the beam during the compulsories. Though she later posted the highest all-around score in the optionals (39.387, her lowest score being a 9.800 on the balance beam), her combined compulsory and optionals scores put her fourth among her teammates, and she did not qualify for the final. However, in a scenario similar to the Unified Team's substitution of Tatiana Gutsu for Rozalia Galiyeva at the 1992 Olympics, Am\u00e2nar replaced her teammate Alexandra Marinescu in the all-around final. The Romanian head coach, Octavian Bellu, said that Am\u00e2nar deserved to compete because she had worked harder and was a better athlete than Marinescu. Am\u00e2nar ended up sharing the bronze medal with teammate Lavinia Milo\u015fovici, behind Gogean.\nIn both the 1996 Olympic all-around and the 1995 World Championships all-around, Am\u00e2nar failed to score over 9.800 on the floor exercise despite well-executed and difficult tumbling. In the Olympics, she scored a 9.887 in the team optionals (the highest score of the entire Olympics on any event, for men or women), but only a 9.737 in the all-around. She did not start from a 10.0 in the all-around\u2014despite having the most tumbling bonus points of anyone at the Games\u2014because her tour jet\u00e9 half-turn (Strug), a C element, was not completed. Thus, she did not have enough simple A, B, and C skills, and much of her D- and E-rated tumbling had to count as easier elements to fulfill those requirements. Am\u00e2nar did not perform a double turn in the team optionals or the all-around because it was not necessary as long as she completed her Strug. However, when she failed to complete the Strug, four of her six tenths in D and E elements had to count toward requirements, which left her with only .2 counting toward her bonus. Without the error, Am\u00e2nar would have finished ahead of Gogean and Milo\u015fovici.\nIn the event finals, Am\u00e2nar completed her Strug and added a double turn to fulfill the more stringent Competition III requirements. She earned a 9.850 and the silver medal, behind Podkopayeva and just ahead of Dominique Dawes of the United States. She won the vault final the day before, largely because of her 9.875 score for her double-twisting Yurchenko vault. She left the 1996 Olympics with four medals, including Romania's team bronze.\n1997\u20131999.\nRomania won its third straight team title at the 1997 World Championships. Am\u00e2nar again replaced a higher-scoring Marinescu in the all-around competition and won the silver medal behind Russia's Khorkina, followed by a gold medal on vault.\nIn the 1999 World Championships, Am\u00e2nar led the Romanian team to a fourth consecutive title (there was no Worlds competition in 1998). However, she fell off the bars during the all-around and placed well out of the medals. She also lost her vaulting title to Russia's Elena Zamolodchikova, who dominated that event in the following years due to a more difficult second vault: a double-twisting Tsukahara. Am\u00e2nar won her only medal of the competition on the floor, taking home the silver behind teammate Andreea R\u0103ducan.\n2000.\nAt the 2000 Summer Olympics, the Romanians edged out the Russians to take the team title\u2014their first since 1984 and their first ever in a non-boycotted Olympics.\nIn the all-around, the vaulting horse was set too low by the Olympic organizers, and the favorite for the title, Svetlana Khorkina, fell on her signature vault. Several other gymnasts fell or stumbled because of the same problem. Many went on to make mistakes on their next event, knowing their medal chances were gone, only to be informed later of the error and their chance to vault again. The three Romanian women either managed to perform well on the faulty vault or vaulted after the mistake had been corrected. They swept the medals, with R\u0103ducan winning the gold, Am\u00e2nar the silver, and Maria Olaru the bronze.\nR\u0103ducan was subsequently found to have used a cold medicine containing a banned substance. Although her results in other events were allowed to stand, she was stripped of her all-around gold medal, which went to Am\u00e2nar. Initially, Am\u00e2nar refused to accept the medal, insisting that R\u0103ducan had rightfully earned the title. Olaru took the same stance when the silver was awarded to her. However, they eventually reconsidered and decided to bring the medals home to Romania as symbolic victories of the country. Am\u00e2nar continued to insist, however, that R\u0103ducan was the true Olympic all-around champion. \nIn the event finals, Am\u00e2nar had the opportunity to defend her Olympic vault title from four years earlier. However, she stumbled badly while debuting a new vault (a 2&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 twisting laid-out Yurchenko, which was then named after her), and did not win a medal. She went on to win bronze on floor exercise after losing points for a step out of bounds on her last tumbling pass.\nLegacy.\nAm\u00e2nar ranks highly (117th) on the list of most medal gymnasts in the world, with 10 World and 7 Olympic medals. She played a large role in the four consecutive World team titles and Olympic title that established Romania as the top-ranked women's gymnastics team in the world.\nThe Amanar vault involves a round-off entry onto the vaulting table followed by a laid-out salto with 2&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 twists. Am\u00e2nar first competed this skill at the 2000 Olympics. It has a difficulty score of 6.5, 6.3 and 5.8 in the women's 2009\u20132012, 2013\u20132016 and 2017\u20132020 Code of Points.\nPost-retirement.\nAm\u00e2nar retired in 2000, shortly after the Olympic Games. She married Cosmin Tab\u0103r\u0103, a lawyer, on 9 March 2002, in Timi\u0219oara, and gave birth to a son, Alexandru Iosif, five months later. She is the vice president of the Romanian Gymnastics Federation.\nEponymous skill.\nAm\u00e2nar has one eponymous skill in the Code of Points, the Amanar vault.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75971", "revid": "43237577", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75971", "title": "Sabre", "text": "Type of backsword with curved blade, designed to cut and slash\nA sabre or (American English) saber ( ) is a type of backsword with a curved blade associated with the light cavalry of the early modern and Napoleonic periods. Originally associated with Central European cavalry such as the hussars, the sabre became widespread in Western Europe during the Thirty Years' War. Lighter sabres also became popular with infantry of the early 17th century. In the 19th century, models with less curving blades became common and were also used by heavy cavalry.\nThe military sabre was used as a duelling weapon in academic fencing in the 19th century, giving rise to a discipline of modern sabre fencing (introduced in the 1896 Summer Olympics) loosely based on the characteristics of the historical weapon.\nEtymology.\nThe English \"sabre\" is recorded from the 1670s, as a direct loan from French, where \"sabre\" is an alteration of \"sable\", which was in turn loaned from German \"S\u00e4bel\", \"Sabel\" in the 1630s. The German word is on record from the 15th century, loaned from Polish \"szabla\", which was itself adopted from Hungarian \"szabla\" (14th century, later \"szablya\").\nThe spread of the Hungarian word to neighboring European languages took place in the context of the Ottoman wars in Europe of the 15th to 17th centuries. The spelling \"saber\" became common in American English in the second half of the 19th century.\nThe origin of the Hungarian word is unclear. It may itself be a loan from South Slavic (Serbo-Croatian \"sablja\", Common Slavic \"*sab\u013ea\"), which would ultimately derive from a Turkic source. In a more recent suggestion, the Hungarian word may ultimately derive from a Tungusic source, via Kipchak Turkic \"selebe\", with later metathesis (of \"l-b\" to \"b-l\") and apocope changed to \"*seble\", which would have changed its vocalisation in Hungarian to the recorded \"sabla\", perhaps under the influence of the Hungarian word \"szab-\" \"to crop; cut (into shape)\".\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThough single-edged cutting swords already existed in the Ancient world, such as the ancient Egyptian and Sumerian sickle swords, these (usually forward instead of backward curving) weapons were chopping weapons for foot soldiers. This type of weapon developed into such heavy chopping weapons as the Greek Machaira and Anatolian Drepanon, and it still survives as the heavy Kukri chopping knife of the Gurkhas. However, in ancient China foot soldiers and cavalry often used a straight, single edged sword, and in the sixth century CE a longer, slightly curved cavalry variety of this weapon appeared in southern Siberia. This \"proto-sabre\" (the Turko-Mongol sabre) had developed into the true cavalry sabre by the eight century CE, and by the ninth century, it had become the usual side arm on the Eurasian steppes. The sabre arrived in Europe with the Magyars and the Turkic expansion. These oldest sabres had a slight curve, short, down-turned quillons, the grip facing the opposite direction to the blade and a sharp point with the top third of the reverse edge sharpened.\nEarly modern period.\nThe introduction of the sabre proper in Western Europe, along with the term \"sabre\" itself, dates to the 17th century, via the influence of the \"szabla\" type ultimately derived from these medieval backswords. The adoption of the term is connected to the employment of Hungarian hussar (\"husz\u00e1r\") cavalry by Western European armies at the time. Hungarian hussars were employed as light cavalry, with the role of harassing enemy skirmishers, overrunning artillery positions, and pursuing fleeing troops. In the late 17th and early 18th centuries, many Hungarian hussars fled to other Central and Western European countries and became the core of light cavalry formations created there. The Hungarian term \"szablya\" is ultimately traced to the northwestern Turkic \"selebe\", with contamination from the Hungarian verb \"szab\" \"to cut\".\nThe original type of sabre, or Polish \"szabla\", was used as a cavalry weapon, possibly inspired by Hungarian or wider Turco-Mongol warfare.\nThe \"karabela\" was a type of \"szabla\" popular in the late 17th century, worn by the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth nobility class, the \"szlachta\". While designed as a cavalry weapon, it also came to replace various types of straight-bladed swords used by infantry. The Swiss sabre originated as a regular sword with a single-edged blade in the early 16th century, but by the 17th century began to exhibit specialized hilt types.\nPolish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth.\nIn the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth (16th\u201318th century) a specific type of sabre-like melee weapon, the \"szabla\", was used. Richly decorated sabres were popular among the Polish nobility, who considered it to be one of the most important pieces of men's traditional attire. With time, the design of the sabre greatly evolved in the commonwealth and gave birth to a variety of sabre-like weapons, intended for many tasks. In the following centuries, the ideology of Sarmatism as well as the Polish fascination with Oriental cultures, customs, cuisine and warfare resulted in the \"szabla\" becoming an indispensable part of traditional Polish culture.\nModern use.\nThe sabre saw extensive military use in the early 19th century, particularly in the Napoleonic Wars, during which Napoleon used heavy cavalry charges to great effect against his enemies. Shorter versions of the sabre were also used as sidearms by dismounted units, although these were gradually replaced by fascine knives and sword bayonets as the century went on. Although there was extensive debate over the effectiveness of weapons such as the sabre and lance, the sabre remained the standard weapon of cavalry for mounted action in most armies until World War I and in a few armies until World War II. Thereafter it was gradually relegated to the status of a ceremonial weapon, and most horse cavalry was replaced by armoured cavalry from the 1930s onward.\nWhere horse-mounted cavalry survived into World War II it was generally as mounted infantry without sabres. However the sabre was still carried by German cavalry until after the Polish campaign of 1939, after which this historic weapon was put into storage in 1941.\nRomanian cavalry continued to carry their straight \"thrusting\" sabres on active service until at least 1941.\nNapoleonic era.\nSabres were commonly used by the British in the Napoleonic era for light cavalry and infantry officers, as well as others. The elegant but effective 1803 pattern sword that the British Government authorized for use by infantry officers during the wars against Napoleon featured a curved sabre blade which was often blued and engraved by the owner in accordance with his personal taste, and was based on the famously agile 1796 light cavalry sabre that was renowned for its brutal cutting power. Sabres were commonly used throughout this era by all armies, in much the same way that the British did.\nThe popularity of the sabre had rapidly increased in Britain throughout the 18th century for both infantry and cavalry use. This influence was predominately from southern and eastern Europe, with the Hungarians and Austrians listed as sources of influence for the sword and style of swordsmanship in British sources. The popularity of sabres had spread rapidly through Europe in the 16th and 17th centuries, and finally came to dominance as a military weapon in the British army in the 18th century, though straight blades remained in use by some, such as heavy cavalry units. (These were also replaced by sabres soon after the Napoleonic era.)\nThe introduction of 'pattern' swords in the British army in 1788 led to a brief departure from the sabre in infantry use (though not for light cavalry), in favour of the lighter and straight bladed spadroon. The spadroon was universally unpopular, and many officers began to unofficially purchase and carry sabres once more. In 1799, the army accepted this under regulation for some units, and in 1803, produced a dedicated pattern of sabre for certain infantry officers (flank, rifle and staff officers). The 1803 pattern quickly saw much more widespread use than the regulation intended due to its effectiveness in combat, and fashionable appeal.\nPattern 1796 light cavalry sabre.\nThe most famous British sabre of the Napoleonic era is the 1796 light cavalry model, used by troopers and officers alike (officers' versions can vary a little, but are much the same as the pattern trooper's sword). It was in part designed by the famous John Le Marchant, who worked to improve on the previous (1788) design based on his experience with the Austrians and Hungarians. Le Marchant also developed the first official British military sword exercise manual based on this experience, and his light cavalry sabre, and style of swordsmanship went on to heavily influence the training of the infantry and the navy.\nThe 1796 light cavalry sword was known for its brutal cutting power, easily severing limbs, and leading to the (unsubstantiated) myth that the French put in an official complaint to the British about its ferocity. This sword also saw widespread use with mounted artillery units, and the numerous militia units established in Britain to protect against a potential invasion by Napoleon.\nMameluke swords.\nThough the sabre had already become very popular in Britain, experience in Egypt did lead to a fashion trend for mameluke sword style blades, a type of Middle Eastern scimitar, by some infantry and cavalry officers. These blades differ from the more typical British ones in that they have more extreme curvatures, in that they are usually not fullered, and in that they taper to a finer point. Mameluke swords also gained some popularity in France as well. Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington, himself carried a mameluke-style sword. In 1831, the 'Mameluke' sword became the pattern sword for British generals, as well as officers of the United States Marine Corps; in this last capacity, it is still in such use at the present time.\nUnited States.\nThe American victory over the rebellious forces in the citadel of Tripoli in 1805, during the First Barbary War, led to the presentation of bejewelled examples of these swords to the senior officers of the US Marines. Officers of the US Marine Corps still use a mameluke-pattern dress sword. Although some genuine Turkish \"kilij\" sabres were used by Westerners, most \"mameluke sabres\" were manufactured in Europe; although their hilts were very similar in form to the Ottoman prototype, their blades, even when an expanded \"\" was incorporated, tended to be longer, narrower and less curved than those of the true \"kilij.\"\nIn the American Civil War, the sabre was used infrequently as a weapon, but saw notable deployment in the Battle of Brandy Station and at East Cavalry Field at the Battle of Gettysburg in 1863. Many cavalrymen\u2014particularly on the Confederate side\u2014eventually abandoned the long, heavy weapons in favour of revolvers and carbines.\nThe last sabre issued to US cavalry was the Patton saber of 1913, designed to be mounted to the cavalryman's saddle. The Patton saber is only a saber in name as it is a straight, thrust-centric sword. A US War Department circular dated 18 April 1934 announced that the saber would no longer be issued to cavalry, and that it was to be completely discarded for use as a weapon. Only dress sabers, for use by officers only, and strictly as a badge of rank, were to be retained.\nPolice.\nDuring the 19th and into the early 20th century, sabres were also used by both mounted and dismounted personnel in some European police forces. When the sabre was used by mounted police against crowds, the results could be devastating, as portrayed in a key scene in \"Doctor Zhivago\". The sabre was later phased out in favour of the baton, or nightstick, for both practical and humanitarian reasons. The Gendarmerie of Belgium used them until at least 1950, and the Swedish police forces until 1965.\nDress uniform.\nSwords with sabre blades remain a component of the dress uniforms worn by most national army, navy, air force, marine and coast guard officers. Some militaries also issue ceremonial swords to their highest-ranking non-commissioned officers; this is seen as an honour since, typically, non-commissioned, enlisted/other-rank military service members are instead issued a cutlass blade rather than a sabre. Swords in the modern military are no longer used as weapons, and serve only ornamental or ceremonial functions. One distinctive modern use of sabres is in the sabre arch, performed for servicemen or women getting married.\nModern sport fencing.\nThe modern fencing sabre bears little resemblance to the cavalry sabre, having a thin, long straight blade. Rather, it is based upon the Italian dueling saber of classical fencing. One of the three weapons used in the sport of fencing, it is a very fast-paced weapon with bouts characterized by quick footwork and cutting with the edge. The valid target area is from the waist up excluding the hands.\nThe concept of attacking above the waist only is a 20th-century change to the sport; previously sabreurs used to pad their legs against cutting slashes from their opponents. The reason for the above waist rule is unknown, as the sport of sabre fencing is based on the use of infantry sabres, not cavalry sabres.\nIn recent years, Saber fencing has been developing in Historical European Martial Arts, with blades that closely resemble the historical types, with techniques based on historical records.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75972", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75972", "title": "Backsword", "text": "Type of European sword\nA backsword is a type of sword characterised by having a single-edged blade and a hilt with a single-handed grip. It is so called because the triangular cross section gives a flat back edge opposite the cutting edge. Later examples often have a \"false edge\" on the back near the tip, which was in many cases sharpened to make an actual edge and facilitate thrusting attacks. From around the early 14th century, the backsword became the first type of European sword to be fitted with a knuckle guard.\nThe term \"backsword\" can also refer to the singlestick, which is used to train for fighting with the backsword, or to the sport or art of fighting in this fashion. Backswording was an alternative term for singlesticking tournaments in England.\nBeing easier and cheaper to make than double-edged swords, backswords became the favored sidearm of common infantry, including irregulars such as the Highland Scots, which in Scottish Gaelic were called the \"claidheamh cuil\" (back sword), after one of several terms for the distinct types of weapons they used. Backswords were often the secondary weapons of European cavalrymen beginning in the 17th century.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
