{"id": "7701", "revid": "44883081", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7701", "title": "Cocaine", "text": "Tropane alkaloid and stimulant drug\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCocaine is a central nervous system stimulant and tropane alkaloid derived primarily from the leaves of two coca species native to South America: \"Erythroxylum coca\" and \"E. novogranatense\". Coca leaves are processed into cocaine paste, a crude mix of coca alkaloids from which cocaine base is isolated and converted to cocaine hydrochloride. Cocaine was once a standard topical medication as a local anesthetic with intrinsic vasoconstrictor activity, but its high abuse potential, adverse effects, and cost have limited its use and led to its replacement by other medicines.\nStreet cocaine is commonly snorted, injected, or smoked as crack cocaine, with effects lasting up to 90 minutes depending on the route. Cocaine acts pharmacologically as a serotonin\u2013norepinephrine\u2013dopamine reuptake inhibitor (SNDRI), producing reinforcing effects such as euphoria, increased alertness, concentration, libido, and reduced fatigue and appetite.\nCocaine has numerous adverse effects. Acute use can cause vasoconstriction, tachycardia, hypertension, hyperthermia, or seizures, while overdose may lead to stroke, heart attack, or sudden cardiac death. Cocaine also produces a spectrum of psychiatric symptoms including agitation, paranoia, anxiety, irritability, psychosis, hallucinations, delusions, violence, as well as suicidal and homicidal thinking. Prenatal exposure poses risks to fetal development. Chronic use may result in cocaine dependence, withdrawal symptoms, neurotoxicity, and nasal damage, including cocaine-induced midline destructive lesions.\nCoca cultivation and its subsequent processes occur primarily in Latin America, especially in the Andes of Bolivia, Peru, and Colombia, though cultivation is expanding into Central America, including Honduras, Guatemala, and Belize. Violence linked to the cocaine trade continues to affect Latin America and the Caribbean and is expanding into Western Europe, Asia, and Africa as transnational organized crime groups compete globally. Cocaine remains the world's fastest-growing illicit drug market. Coca chewing dates back at least 8,000 years in South America. Large-scale cultivation occurred in Taiwan and Java prior to World War II. Decades later, the cocaine boom marked a sharp rise in illegal cocaine production and trade, beginning in the late 1970s and peaking in the 1980s. Cocaine is regulated under international drug control conventions, though national laws vary: several countries have decriminalized small quantities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUses.\nCoca leaves have been used by Andean civilizations since ancient times. In ancient Wari culture, Inca culture, and through modern successor indigenous cultures of the Andes Mountains, coca leaves are chewed, taken orally in the form of a tea, or alternatively, prepared in a sachet wrapped around alkaline burnt ashes, and held in the mouth against the inner cheek; it has traditionally been used as an anorectic and to combat the effects of cold and altitude sickness, although its actual effectiveness has never been systematically studied.\nGlobally, in 2019, cocaine was used by an estimated 20 million people (0.4% of adults aged 15 to 64 years). The highest prevalence of cocaine use was in Australia and New Zealand (2.1%), followed by North America (2.1%), Western and Central Europe (1.4%), and South and Central America (1.0%). Since 1961, the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs has required countries to make recreational use of cocaine a crime. In the United States, cocaine is regulated as a Schedule II drug under the Controlled Substances Act, meaning that it has a high potential for abuse but has an accepted medical use. While rarely used medically today, its accepted uses include serving as a topical local anesthetic for the upper respiratory tract and as an antihemorrhagic agent to stop bleeding in the mouth, throat, and nasal cavities.\nTraditional medicine.\nCoca leaves.\nIt is legal for people to use coca leaves in the Andean Community, such as Peru and Bolivia, and Argentina, where they are chewed, consumed in the form of tea, or are sometimes incorporated into food products. Coca leaves are typically mixed with an alkaline substance (such as slaked lime) and chewed into a wad that is retained in the buccal pouch (mouth between gum and cheek, much the same as chewing tobacco is chewed) and sucked of its juices. The juices are absorbed slowly by the mucous membrane of the inner cheek and by the gastrointestinal tract when swallowed.\nCoca tea.\nCoca herbal infusion (also referred to as coca tea) is used in coca-leaf producing countries much as any herbal medicinal infusion would elsewhere in the world. The free and legal commercialization of dried coca leaves under the form of filtration bags to be used as \"coca tea\" has been actively promoted by the governments of Peru and Bolivia for many years as a drink having medicinal powers. In Peru, the National Coca Company, a state-run corporation, sells cocaine-infused teas and other medicinal products and also exports leaves to the U.S. for medicinal use. The effects of drinking coca tea are mild stimulation and mood lift.\nIn 1986 an article in the \"Journal of the American Medical Association\" revealed that U.S. health food stores were selling dried coca leaves to be prepared as an infusion as \"Health Inca Tea\". While the packaging claimed it had been \"decocainized\", no such process had actually taken place. The article stated that drinking two cups of the tea per day gave a mild stimulation, increased heart rate, and mood elevation, and the tea was essentially harmless.\nYpadu.\nYpad\u00fa or ypadu (also known as mamb\u00e9) is an unrefined, unconcentrated powder made from toasted coca leaves and the ash of various other plants. It is traditionally prepared and consumed by indigenous tribes in the Northwest Amazon. Like coca teas consumed in Peru to adapt to sickness induced by high elevation, it has a long ethnobotanical history and cultural associations.\nMedical.\nKarl Koller's groundbreaking discovery of cocaine as a local anesthetic is regarded as the second most significant advance in the history of anesthesia. Although cocaine was once widely preferred for topical anesthesia, the search for replacement agents intensified due to rising costs, strict regulations, and its habit-forming potential. Cocaine is not included on the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines; the list formally excludes \"cocaine and its combinations\" as therapeutic alternatives to ophthalmological preparations.\nToday, the US Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) classifies cocaine as a Schedule II drug, recognizing its high potential for abuse but still permitting its limited use for medical purposes. However, current pharmacoepidemiological trends suggest that cocaine may soon reach the point where, in practical terms, it is no longer used medically in health care as a Schedule II substance. This report may prompt some states (such as North Dakota) and institutions to reconsider whether further efforts to identify alternative agents are needed. As physician boards\u2014but not pharmacy boards\u2014continue to assess knowledge of licit cocaine, attention may shift toward drugs with more contemporary medical use.\nCocaine is rarely prescribed in modern medicine due to its high potential for abuse and significant risk of adverse effects; its use is now almost exclusively limited to health facilities for specific diagnostic procedures or surgeries.\nTopical.\nCocaine is used in medical practice as a topical medication. Because it is not absorbed into the bloodstream in significant amounts when used this way, topical application does not produce the psychoactive effects associated with recreational cocaine use.\nTopical anesthetic.\nCocaine is sometimes used in otorhinolaryngology as a topical anesthetic and vasoconstrictor to help control pain and bleeding during surgery of the nose, mouth, throat, or lacrimal duct. It is also used for topical airway anaesthesia for procedures such as awake fibreoptic bronchoscopy or intubation. Although some absorption and systemic effects may occur, the use of cocaine as a topical anesthetic and vasoconstrictor is generally safe, rarely causing cardiovascular toxicity, glaucoma, and pupil dilation. Occasionally, cocaine is mixed with adrenaline and sodium bicarbonate and used topically for surgery, a formulation called Moffett's solution. It is occasionally used in surgeries involving the pharynx or nasopharynx to reduce pain, bleeding, and vocal cord spasm.\nNasal solution cocaine hydrochloride (Goprelto), an ester used for intranasal application, was approved for medical use in the United States in December 2017, and is indicated for the introduction of topical anesthesia of the mucous membranes for diagnostic procedures and surgeries on or through the nasal cavities of adults. Cocaine hydrochloride (Numbrino) was approved for medical use in the United States in January 2020. Headache and epistaxis are the most frequently reported adverse reactions with Goprelto, while hypertension and tachycardia-including sinus tachycardia-are most common with Numbrino.\nOphthalmological use.\nCocaine eye drops have traditionally been used by neurologists when examining people suspected of having Horner syndrome. In Horner syndrome, sympathetic innervation to the eye is blocked. In a healthy eye, cocaine stimulates the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) by inhibiting norepinephrine reuptake, causing the pupil to dilate. In patients with Horner syndrome, sympathetic innervation to the eye is disrupted, so the affected pupil does not dilate in response to cocaine and remains constricted, or dilates to a lesser extent than the unaffected eye, which also receives the eye drop test. If both eyes dilate equally, the patient does not have Horner syndrome.\nHowever, apraclonidine has largely replaced cocaine as the first-line pharmacologic agent for the diagnosis of Horner syndrome in routine clinical practice.\nRecreational.\nRecreational cocaine is typically not taken by mouth due to its poor bioavailability, instead it is usually snorted or injected. Cocaine hydrochloride can also be chemically converted into its free base form, crack cocaine, which can be vaporized.\nCocaine is a central nervous system stimulant. Its effects can last from 15 minutes to an hour. The duration of cocaine's effects depends on the amount taken and the route of administration. Cocaine can be in the form of fine white powder and has a bitter taste. Crack cocaine is a smokeable form of cocaine made into small \"rocks\" by processing cocaine with sodium bicarbonate (baking soda) and water.\nCocaine use leads to increases in alertness, feelings of well-being and euphoria, increased energy and motor activity, and increased feelings of competence and sexuality.\nAnalysis of the correlation between the use of 18 various psychoactive substances shows that cocaine use correlates with the use of other \"party drugs\" (e.g., MDMA, amphetamine), as well as with heroin and benzodiazepines use, and can be considered as a bridge between the use of different groups of drugs.\nInsufflation.\nNasal insufflation (known colloquially as \"snorting\", \"sniffing\", or \"blowing\") is a common method of ingestion of recreational powdered cocaine. The drug coats and is absorbed through the mucous membranes lining the nasal passages. Cocaine's desired euphoric effects are delayed when snorted through the nose by about five minutes. This occurs because cocaine's absorption is slowed by its constricting effect on the blood vessels of the nose. Insufflation of cocaine also leads to the longest duration of its effects (60\u201390 minutes). When insufflating cocaine, absorption through the nasal membranes is approximately 30\u201360%\nMost banknotes have traces of cocaine on them; this has been confirmed by studies done in several countries. In 1994, the US 9th Circuit Court of Appeals cited findings that in Los Angeles, three out of four banknotes were tainted by cocaine or another illicit drug.\nSnuff spoons, hollowed-out pens, cut straws, pointed ends of keys, long fingernails or artificial nails, and tampon applicators are also used to insufflate cocaine. The cocaine typically is poured onto a flat, hard surface and divided into \"bumps\", \"lines\", or \"rails\", and then insufflated. A 2001 study reported that the sharing of straws used to \"snort\" cocaine can spread blood diseases such as hepatitis C.\nCocaine spoon.\nHistorically, snuff spoons were used for cocaine in the 20th century, hence the names \"cocaine spoon\" and \"coke spoon\". Some local statutes in the US treat spoons that are too small and thus \"unsuited for the typical, lawful uses of a spoon\" as drug paraphernalia.\nInjection.\nSubjective effects not commonly shared with other methods of administration include a ringing in the ears moments after injection (usually when over 120\u00a0milligrams) lasting 2 to 5\u00a0minutes including tinnitus and audio distortion. This is colloquially referred to as a \"bell ringer\". In a study of cocaine users, the average time taken to reach peak subjective effects was 3.1\u00a0minutes. The euphoria passes quickly. Aside from the toxic effects of cocaine, there is also the danger of circulatory emboli from the insoluble substances that may be used to cut the drug. As with all injected illicit substances, there is a risk of the user contracting blood-borne infections if sterile injecting equipment is not available or used.\nInhalation.\nCocaine paste.\nCoca paste (paco, basuco, oxi, pasta) is a crude extract of the coca leaf which contains 40% to 91% cocaine freebase along with companion coca alkaloids and varying quantities of benzoic acid, methanol, and kerosene. The caustic reactions associated with the local application of coca paste prevents its use by oral, intranasal, mucosal, intramuscular, intravenous or subcutaneous routes. Coca paste can only be smoked when combined with a combustible material such as tobacco or cannabis.\nCrude cocaine preparation intermediates are marketed as cheaper alternatives to pure cocaine to local markets while the more expensive end product is exported to United States and European markets. Freebase cocaine paste preparations can be smoked. The psychological and physiological effects of the \"paco\" are quite severe. Media usually report that it is extremely toxic and addictive. According to a study by Intercambios, media appear to exaggerate the effects of \"paco\". These stereotypes create a sense that nothing can be done to help a \"paco\" addict and thus stand in the way of rehabilitation programs.\nCrack cocaine.\nPowder cocaine (cocaine hydrochloride) must be heated to a high temperature to be smoked (about 197\u00a0\u00b0C), and considerable decomposition/burning occurs at these high temperatures. This effectively destroys some of the cocaine and yields a sharp, acrid, and foul-tasting smoke. Cocaine base/crack can be smoked because it vaporizes with little or no decomposition at , which is below the boiling point of water.\nContraindications.\nCocaine should not be used in individuals with a known allergy or hypersensitivity to the drug or any components of its topical formulation. It is also contraindicated in elderly patients and those with a history of hypertension or cardiovascular disease.\nPregnancy.\nPrenatal cocaine exposure (PCE) may occur when a pregnant woman uses cocaine.\nUnder the former FDA pregnancy category system, cocaine was classified as a Category C drug. Its potential to cause harm to the fetus is not fully known, so it should only be administered to pregnant women if clearly necessary.\nCocaine can act as a teratogen, having various effects on the developing fetus. Some common teratogenic defects caused by cocaine include hydronephrosis, cleft palate, polydactyly, and down syndrome. Cocaine as a drug has a low molecular weight and high water and lipid solubility which enables it to cross the placenta and fetal blood-brain barrier. Because cocaine is able to pass through the placenta and enter the fetus, the fetus' circulation can be negatively affected. With restriction of fetal circulation, the development of organs in the fetus can be impacted, even resulting in intestines developing outside of the fetus' body. Cocaine use during pregnancy can also result in obstetric labor complications such as, placental abruption, preterm birth or delivery, uterine rupture, miscarriage, and stillbirth. Prenatal cocaine exposure may cause subtle cognitive deficits and lower the chance of above-average IQ by age 4, but supportive caregiving can significantly improve outcomes.\nBreastfeeding.\nMothers utilizing recreational drugs, such as cocaine, methamphetamines, PCP, and heroin, should not breastfeed.\nThe March of Dimes said \"it is likely that cocaine will reach the baby through breast milk,\" and advises the following regarding cocaine use during pregnancy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAdverse effects.\nCardiac complications.\nCocaine use can cause serious heart problems like sudden death, heart inflammation, arrhythmias, and heart attacks. It triggers coronary artery spasms, increases blood clot risk, and accelerates atherosclerosis, especially with long-term use. The severity of heart disease often relates to how long and how often cocaine is used. It can also become a serious risk at high doses due to cocaine's blocking effect on cardiac sodium channels.\nLevamisole syndromes.\nLevamisole is one of the most common adulterants found in illicit cocaine, with studies showing that between 2009 and 2016, 50\u201370% of all cocaine specimens worldwide contained levamisole, reflecting similar high rates of contamination across North America and Europe. Before trafficking to the United States, the cocaine is frequently adulterated with levamisole. By October 2017, this figure had risen further, with the US Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) reporting that 87% of seized and analyzed cocaine bricks in the United States contained levamisole, making it the most common adulterant in cocaine at that time.\nIn the body, levamisole is converted into aminorex, a substance with amphetamine-like stimulant effects and a long duration of action. Levamisole-adulterated cocaine is associated with cocaine- and levamisole-induced vasculitis (CLIV) and cocaine/levamisole-associated autoimmune syndrome (CLAAS). Reagent testing kits can be used to detect the presence of cocaine and levamisole.\nLevamisole-induced necrosis syndrome.\nLevamisole-induced necrosis syndrome (LINES) is a complication characterized by necrosis resulting from exposure to levamisole, a medication with immunomodulatory properties. While LINES can occur with levamisole use alone, most reported cases are associated with the use of cocaine adulterated with levamisole as a cutting agent. This syndrome is marked by skin necrosis, often affecting areas such as the ears, face, and extremities, and is thought to result from levamisole's effects on blood vessels and the immune system.\nCocaine/levamisole-associated syndromes.\nThe skin necrosis associated with levamisole toxicity ranges from leukocytoclastic vasculitis to occlusive vasculopathy. Several cases of severe agranulocytosis associated with cocaine use have been reported since 2006. With the recently recognized dermal disease, the face and ears are commonly affected, especially the bilateral helices and cheeks. However, there have also been case reports of involvement of the abdomen, chest, lower buttocks and legs.\nDuring the mid-2010s, levamisole was found in most cocaine products available in both the United States and Europe. Levamisole is known to cause an acute condition involving a severe and dangerous lowered white blood cell count, known as agranulocytosis, in cocaine users, and may also accentuate cocaine's effects.\nClinical studies have shown that taking levamisole at doses of 50\u2013200\u00a0mg per day can lead to agranulocytosis in approximately 0.08\u20135% of patients.\nCocaine- and levamisole-induced vasculitis.\nCocaine- and levamisole-induced vasculitis (CLIV) is often used as an umbrella term for the vasculitic and necrotic complications seen with levamisole-adulterated cocaine, including both LINES and CLAAS.\nCocaine and levamisole-adulterated cocaine (LAC) can cause cocaine-induced vasculitis (CIV) that mimics primary anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis (AAV), presenting as cocaine-induced midline destructive lesions, LAC vasculopathy, or CIV. These conditions involve immune activation through NETosis and ANCA formation, leading to tissue damage. Diagnosis is challenging due to symptom overlap and undisclosed drug use, making clinical suspicion and drug history essential for proper management.\nCocaine/levamisole-associated autoimmune syndrome.\nThe broader cocaine/levamisole-associated autoimmune syndrome (CLAAS) includes LINES as a subset and is also common, but LINES is more specifically and frequently cited in the context of street cocaine adulteration.\nLevamisole has become a common additive to illicit cocaine. It is thought to intensify the \"high\" by releasing dopamine in the brain, acts as a bulking agent, and is a difficult adulterant to recognize. Potential risks of levamisole-laced cocaine include autoimmune disease, neutropenia, arthralgias, retiform purpura, skin necrosis, and fever.\nMortality.\nPersons with regular or problematic use of cocaine have a significantly higher mortality rate, and are specifically at higher risk of traumatic deaths and deaths attributable to infectious disease. In 2025, the Liberty House Clinic in the United Kingdom noted that chronic cocaine usage in fact had a higher risk of death than alcoholism.\nNeurotoxicity.\nCocaine is considered neurotoxic due to its damaging effects on the brain and nervous system. Research has shown that both acute and chronic cocaine use can lead to significant reductions in cerebral blood flow, disrupt neurovascular interactions, and impair brain function. These changes are associated with nerve injury, cognitive deficits, and an increased risk of cerebrovascular accidents such as strokes. Brain imaging studies consistently report that individuals who misuse cocaine exhibit structural and functional abnormalities compared to non-users, supporting the classification of cocaine as a neurotoxic substance.\nCocaine use damages gray matter in brain regions critical for memory, attention, and emotion, leading to cognitive and behavioral impairments. It also disrupts dopamine levels and blood flow, accelerating brain aging and causing long-term neurological harm.\nPsychiatric symptoms.\nCocaine produces a spectrum of psychiatric symptoms including agitation, paranoia, anxiety, irritability, psychosis, hallucinations, delusions, violence, as well as suicidal and homicidal thinking.\nA considerable proportion of cocaine addicts exhibit hypomanic personality traits that are ego-syntonic with their pattern of cocaine abuse.\nCocaine intoxication mirrors core traits of narcissism\u2014both involve a dopamine-driven, compulsive drive for reward. Just as cocaine produces a brief high that temporarily enhances the sense of worth, narcissists rely on external admiration to feed an addiction to their self-esteem, resulting in a self-reinforcing feedback cycle.\nThe misuse of cocaine has a high correlation with suicide. In those who use cocaine, the risk is greatest during the withdrawal phase. Cocaine use has been linked to homicide, with up to 31% of homicide victims testing positive for the drug. In 1989 Fulton County, 40% of homicide victims had cocaine metabolites, especially Black and firearm victims.\nA 2020 study found that men with cocaine use disorder have greater difficulty identifying emotional expression in female faces, affecting relationships and suggesting a target for intervention. A 2021 study found that cocaine use disorder impairs emotion recognition, especially for happiness and fear, with improvement after long-term abstinence.\nDepression is modestly linked to current drug use in cocaine users but does not clearly predict treatment participation or future use. For people who use cocaine, stress and craving can make each other worse. This may help explain why stress can lead to relapse in people trying to stop using cocaine.\nPsychosis.\nCocaine has a similar potential to induce temporary psychosis with more than half of cocaine abusers reporting at least some psychotic symptoms at some point. Typical symptoms include paranoid delusions that they are being followed and that their drug use is being watched, accompanied by hallucinations that support the delusional beliefs. Delusional parasitosis with formication ('cocaine bugs') is also a fairly common symptom.\nCocaine-induced psychosis shows sensitization toward the psychotic effects of the drug. This means that psychosis becomes more severe with repeated intermittent use.\nShort-term effects.\nInsufflating (snorting) cocaine commonly causes increased mucus production due to irritation and inflammation of the nasal passages. This irritation leads to symptoms such as a runny nose, nasal congestion, and excessive or thickened mucus.\nAcute exposure to cocaine has many effects on humans, including euphoria, increases in heart rate and blood pressure, and increases in cortisol secretion from the adrenal gland. In humans with acute exposure followed by continuous exposure to cocaine at a constant blood concentration, the acute tolerance to the chronotropic cardiac effects of cocaine begins after about 10 minutes, while acute tolerance to the euphoric effects of cocaine begins after about one hour. With excessive or prolonged use, the drug can cause itching, fast heart rate, and paranoid delusions or sensations of insects crawling on the skin. Cocaine can induce psychosis characterized by paranoia, impaired reality testing, hallucinations, irritability, and physical aggression. Cocaine intoxication can cause hyperawareness, hypervigilance, psychomotor agitation, and delirium. Consumption of large doses of cocaine can cause violent outbursts, especially by those with preexisting psychosis. Acute exposure may induce arrhythmia, including atrial fibrillation, supraventricular tachycardia, ventricular tachycardia, and ventricular fibrillation. Acute exposure may also lead to angina, heart attack, and congestive heart failure. Cocaine overdose may cause seizures, abnormally high body temperature and a marked elevation of blood pressure, which can be life-threatening, abnormal heart rhythms, and death. Anxiety, paranoia, and restlessness can also occur, especially during the comedown. With excessive dosage, tremors, convulsions, and increased body temperature are observed.\nLong-term effects.\nCocaine is highly addictive and has poor bioavailability when taken orally. Individuals often engage in repeated use by either insufflating it intranasally or converting it to crack cocaine for vaporization. Cocaine's effects last longest when insufflated (60\u201390 minutes), but the drug itself has a short biological half-life of about 0.7\u20131.5 hours. Repeated use raises the risk of developing \"cocaine nose,\" referring to severe nasal tissue damage from intranasal use, as well as \"crack lung,\" a condition involving lung tissue damage caused by inhaling crack cocaine.\nCocaine use leads to an increased risk of hemorrhagic and ischemic strokes. Cocaine use also increases the risk of having a heart attack.\nCocaine use also promotes the formation of blood clots. This increase in blood clot formation is attributed to cocaine-associated increases in the activity of plasminogen activator inhibitor, and an increase in the number, activation, and aggregation of platelets.\nCocaine constricts blood vessels, dilates pupils, and increases body temperature, heart rate, and blood pressure. It can also cause headaches and gastrointestinal complications such as abdominal pain and nausea. Chronic users may lose their appetite and experience severe malnutrition, leading to being underweight.\nA 2014 study found that increased cocaine use is linked to greater cognitive impairment, particularly in working memory, while reduced or ceased use can lead to partial or full recovery of cognitive function. These findings suggest that some cocaine-related cognitive deficits are reversible, especially if use begins later in life. A 2018 review found little evidence that chronic cocaine use causes widespread cognitive impairment. Exposure to cocaine may lead to the breakdown of the blood\u2013brain barrier.\nCocaine use is frequently associated with involuntary tooth grinding, known as bruxism, which can cause dental attrition and gingivitis. Additionally, stimulants like cocaine, methamphetamine, and even caffeine cause dehydration and dry mouth.\nAddiction.\nCocaine can induce tolerance after a single dose, and repeated use frequently leads to the development of addiction and prolonged craving. Assessment tools like the Obsessive Compulsive Cocaine Use Scale (OCCUS) may be employed to quantify obsessive and compulsive thoughts related to cocaine consumption.\nWithdrawal symptoms include disrupted sleep, irritability, depression, and reduced ability to experience pleasure (anhedonia). Chronic nasal use may cause destructive damage to the nasal septum, including cocaine-induced midline destructive lesions (CIMDL). Illicit cocaine is frequently adulterated with substances such as fentanyl, levamisole, or local anesthetics, increasing its toxicity. Concurrent use with alcohol produces cocaethylene, a metabolite that significantly increases the risk of sudden death. According to the Global Burden of Disease Study, cocaine use is responsible for approximately 7,300 deaths annually.\nCocaine abuse can trigger addiction-related structural neuroplasticity in the human brain, although the permanence of such changes remains uncertain. Family history is a known risk factor, as relatives of cocaine users have an increased likelihood of developing cocaine addiction.\nA key mechanism involves the overexpression of \u0394FosB in the nucleus accumbens, altering transcriptional regulation and reinforcing drug-seeking behavior. Each dose of cocaine raises \u0394FosB levels without a known saturation point. This elevation leads to increased brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) levels, which in turn enhance dendritic branching and spine density in neurons of the nucleus accumbens and prefrontal cortex, potentially persisting for weeks after drug cessation. In transgenic mice engineered to express \u0394FosB in the nucleus accumbens and dorsal striatum, heightened behavioral sensitization to cocaine has been observed. These mice self-administer cocaine at lower doses and display a greater propensity for relapse after withdrawal \u0394FosB also enhances sensitivity to reward by upregulating the AMPA receptor subunit GluR2 and downregulating the expression of dynorphin.\nCocaine use has also been shown to increase DNA damage in the brains of rodents. During subsequent DNA repair, enduring alterations in chromatin structure may arise, such as DNA methylation and methylation or acetylation of histones at the repair loci. These modifications may result in lasting epigenetic \"scars\", which are believed to contribute to the persistent epigenetic changes observed in cocaine addiction.\nDependence and withdrawal.\nCocaine dependence develops after even brief periods of regular cocaine use.\nAbout 25% of adults with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) use cocaine, and 10% develop a cocaine use disorder during their lifetime. Because cocaine use can worsen health outcomes, adults with ADHD should be screened for cocaine use disorder and referred for treatment if needed.\nCocaine-dependent patients with high neuroticism scores are more likely to experience cocaine-induced psychotic symptoms, regardless of other drug use factors, making personality assessment important for risk identification and patient warning.\nCocaine withdrawal symptoms group into two types: depressive (e.g., depression, craving, insomnia) and somatic (e.g., increased appetite, fatigue). Depressive symptoms are linked to worse outcomes like longer depression, treatment, and risky behaviors.\nTreatment.\nBecause there are no medications with an approved indication for cocaine use disorder, psychosocial treatments are the current standard. Effective approaches include group and individual counseling, cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), and motivational interviewing (MI). Contingency management (CM)\u2014which rewards patients with vouchers for meeting treatment goals\u2014has proven especially effective, particularly for helping patients achieve initial abstinence from cocaine.\nCocaine Anonymous (CA) is a twelve-step program formed in 18 November 1982 for people who seek recovery from drug addiction. It is patterned very closely after Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), although the two groups are unaffiliated. While many CA members have been addicted to cocaine, crack, speed or similar substances, CA accepts all who desire freedom from \"cocaine and all other mind-altering substances\" as members.\nNumerous medications have been investigated for use in cocaine dependence, but as of 2015[ [update]], none of them were considered to be effective. Drugs which help to re-stabilize the glutamate system such as \"N\"-acetylcysteine have been proposed for the treatment of addiction to cocaine, nicotine, and alcohol. However, none have sufficient evidence or regulatory approval for routine clinical use, so psychosocial interventions remain the mainstay of treatment.\nCocaine nose.\n\"Cocaine nose\" or \"coke nose\" are informal terms that refer to nose disorders resulting from repeated or chronic cocaine use.\nAbout 30% of people who had snorted cocaine at least 25 times but less than daily, and 47% of daily users, reported experiencing nasal irritation, crusting or scabbing, and frequent nosebleeds. Cocaine use should be considered as a potential cause of persistent or unexplained rhinitis, including in adolescent patients.\nBecause the nose is a prominent facial feature, such visible damage often leads to embarrassment, stigma, and negative reactions from others. As a result, individuals with cocaine-induced nasal damage frequently withdraw from social activities and relationships, leading to social isolation. In many cases, this isolation is not just likely but almost inevitable, as affected individuals may feel unable to face the outside world due to the noticeable and sometimes severe changes to their appearance.\nNose disorders associated with cocaine nose include:\nCocaine-induced midline destructive lesions.\nCocaine-induced midline destructive lesions (CIMDL) is the progressive destruction of nasal architecture with the erosion of the palate, nasal conchae, and ethmoid sinuses associated with prolonged insufflation, colloquially 'snorting', of cocaine.\nChronic intranasal usage can degrade the cartilage separating the nostrils (the septum nasi), leading eventually to its complete disappearance.\nCauses.\nThe cause of \"cocaine nose\" can be traced to the chemical process that occurs when cocaine hydrochloride is insufflated (snorted). As cocaine is absorbed through the nasal mucosa, the remaining hydrochloride component forms a dilute hydrochloric acid. The short half-life of cocaine, combined with binge use, may expose the nasal tissues to this acidic environment more frequently, increasing the risk of irritation and damage.\nTreatment.\nFor people with cocaine abuse, mild symptoms may resolve completely with total abstinence from cocaine, making early involvement of addiction services essential.\nRepair may involve rhinoplasty, which includes creating a new internal lining with nasolabial flaps and restoring support with costal cartilage grafts.\nIn 2024, Belgian doctors report a rise in patients needing nose reconstruction due to cocaine use, which damages nasal tissue and cartilage; however, few undergo surgery because it requires at least six months of abstinence from cocaine for proper healing.\nSome individuals seek plastic surgery to repair or reconstruct nasal damage caused by cocaine use, although surgical outcomes can be complicated by ongoing tissue loss and poor healing. When nasal damage is too severe for reconstruction, a nose prosthesis may be used to restore appearance and quality of life.\nOverdose.\nAccording to the European Union Drugs Agency, the estimated minimum lethal dose is 1.2 grams. However, sensitive individuals have died from as little as 30 milligrams applied to mucous membranes-an amount that is 40 times less than the minimum lethal dose. In contrast, addicts may tolerate doses as high as 5 grams per day.\nUse of cocaine causes abnormally fast heart rhythms and a marked elevation of blood pressure (hypertension), which can be life-threatening. This can lead to death from acute myocardial infarction, acute respiratory failure (i.e., hypoxemia, with or without hypercapnia), stroke, cerebral hemorrhage, and sudden cardiac arrest. Overdose can also cause acute hepatotoxicity\u2014typically due to toxic metabolites\u2014though most cases resolve quickly; however, fatal outcomes from multiple organ dysfunction syndrome are possible, and there is no specific antidote. Cocaine overdose may result in hyperthermia as stimulation and increased muscular activity cause greater heat production. Heat loss is also inhibited by the cocaine-induced vasoconstriction.\nIn 2024, drug-related deaths in England and Wales reached their highest level in three decades, with a notable increase in fatalities involving cocaine and experts urging urgent government intervention to address the crisis. Martin Powell, from the charity Transform, which campaigns for the legal regulation of drugs, suggested that the recent rise in cocaine-related deaths in the UK may be due to the increased purity of cocaine, leading users to consume it more frequently and alongside other substances.\nInteractions.\nAlcohol.\nAlcohol interacts with cocaine \"in vivo\" to produce cocaethylene, another psychoactive substance which may be substantially more cardiotoxic than either cocaine or alcohol by themselves. In 2024, a systematic review of human studies concluded that, despite some inconsistencies in the findings, the co-use of cocaine and alcohol poses a significantly greater risk of cardiovascular fatalities compared to cocaine use alone. This elevated risk is largely attributed to the formation of cocaethylene, a unique and toxic metabolite produced only when both substances are consumed together. Cocaethylene is associated with an 18- to 25-fold increased risk of sudden death, as well as a higher incidence of myocardial injury and cardiac arrest, underscoring the serious health risks of simultaneous cocaine and alcohol use.\nMAOIs.\nMonoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) should not be combined with other psychoactive substances (antidepressants, painkillers, stimulants, including prescribed, OTC and illegally acquired drugs, etc.) except under expert care.\nOpioids.\nThe opioid epidemic now involves more overdose deaths with both opioids and cocaine, especially among non-Hispanic Blacks who are twice as likely to die from combined opioid-stimulant overdoses compared to non-Hispanic whites. Cocaine-related deaths in Blacks are similar to opioid deaths in whites. Risk factors include young age, education, urban living, mental disorders, and stress. It remains unclear if co-use is intentional. Recent studies expand focus beyond heroin to all opioids, reflecting changing overdose patterns.\nPharmacology.\nPharmacokinetics.\nThe extent of absorption of cocaine into the circulatory system after nasal insufflation is similar to that after oral ingestion. The rate of absorption after nasal insufflation is limited by cocaine-induced vasoconstriction of capillaries in the nasal mucosa. Onset of absorption after oral ingestion is delayed because cocaine is a weak base with a pKa of 8.6, and is thus in an ionized form that is poorly absorbed from the gastric acid and easily absorbed from the alkaline duodenum. The rate and extent of absorption from inhalation of cocaine is similar or greater than with intravenous injection, as inhalation provides access directly to the capillary bed. The delay in absorption after oral ingestion may account for the popular belief that cocaine bioavailability from the stomach is lower than after insufflation. Compared with ingestion, the faster absorption of insufflated cocaine results in quicker attainment of maximum drug effects. Snorting cocaine produces maximum physiological effects within 40\u00a0minutes and maximum psychotropic effects within 20\u00a0minutes. Physiological and psychotropic effects from nasally insufflated cocaine are sustained for approximately 40\u201360\u00a0minutes after the peak effects are attained.\nCocaine crosses the blood\u2013brain barrier via both a proton-coupled organic cation antiporter and (to a lesser extent) via passive diffusion across cell membranes. As of September 2022, the gene or genes encoding the human proton-organic cation antiporter had not been identified.\nCocaine has a short elimination half-life of 0.7\u20131.5 hours and is extensively metabolized by plasma esterases and also by liver cholinesterases, with only about 1% excreted unchanged in the urine. The metabolism is dominated by hydrolytic ester cleavage, so the eliminated metabolites consist mostly of benzoylecgonine (BE), the major metabolite, and other metabolites in lesser amounts such as ecgonine methyl ester (EME) and ecgonine. Further minor metabolites of cocaine include norcocaine, p-hydroxycocaine, m-hydroxycocaine, p-hydroxybenzoylecgonine (pOHBE), and m-hydroxybenzoylecgonine.\nDepending on liver and kidney functions, cocaine metabolites are detectable in urine between three and eight days. Generally speaking benzoylecgonine is eliminated from someone's urine between three and five days. In urine from heavy cocaine users, benzoylecgonine can be detected within four hours after intake and in concentrations greater than 150\u00a0ng/mL for up to eight days later.\nDetection in the body.\nBody fluids.\nCocaine and its major metabolites may be quantified in blood, plasma, or urine to monitor for use, confirm a diagnosis of poisoning, or assist in the forensic investigation of a traffic or other criminal violation or sudden death. Most commercial cocaine immunoassay screening tests cross-react appreciably with the major cocaine metabolites, but chromatographic techniques can easily distinguish and separately measure each of these substances. When interpreting the results of a test, it is important to consider the cocaine usage history of the individual, since a chronic user can develop tolerance to doses that would incapacitate a cocaine-naive individual, and the chronic user often has high baseline values of the metabolites in his system. Cautious interpretation of testing results may allow a distinction between passive or active usage, and between smoking versus other routes of administration.\nHair.\nHair analysis can detect cocaine metabolites in regular users until after the sections of hair grown during the period of cocaine use are cut or fall out.\nPharmacodynamics.\nCocaine acts as a serotonin\u2013norepinephrine\u2013dopamine reuptake inhibitor (SNDRI). Cocaine increases levels of serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine in the synaptic cleft, leading to heightened post-synaptic activation, with dopamine contributing to euphoria and arousal, and the other monoamines enhancing additional effects.\nThe pharmacodynamics of cocaine involve the complex relationships of neurotransmitters (inhibiting monoamine uptake in rats with ratios of about: serotonin:dopamine = 2:3, serotonin:norepinephrine = 2:5). The most extensively studied effect of cocaine on the central nervous system is the blockade of the dopamine transporter protein. Dopamine neurotransmitter released during neural signaling is normally recycled via the transporter; i.e., the transporter binds the transmitter and pumps it out of the synaptic cleft back into the presynaptic neuron, where it is taken up into storage vesicles. Cocaine binds tightly at the dopamine transporter forming a complex that blocks the transporter's function. The dopamine transporter can no longer perform its reuptake function, and thus dopamine accumulates in the synaptic cleft. The increased concentration of dopamine in the synapse activates post-synaptic dopamine receptors, which makes the drug rewarding and promotes the compulsive use of cocaine.\nCocaine affects certain serotonin (5-HT) receptors; in particular, it has been shown to antagonize the 5-HT3 receptor, which is a ligand-gated ion channel. An overabundance of 5-HT3 receptors is reported in cocaine-conditioned rats, though 5-HT3's role is unclear. The 5-HT2 receptor (particularly the subtypes 5-HT2A, 5-HT2B and 5-HT2C) are involved in the locomotor-activating effects of cocaine.\nCocaine has been demonstrated to bind as to directly stabilize the DAT transporter on the open outward-facing conformation. Further, cocaine binds in such a way as to inhibit a hydrogen bond innate to DAT. Cocaine's binding properties are such that it attaches so this hydrogen bond will not form and is blocked from formation due to the tightly locked orientation of the cocaine molecule. Research studies have suggested that the affinity for the transporter is not what is involved in the habituation of the substance so much as the conformation and binding properties to where and how on the transporter the molecule binds.\nConflicting findings have challenged the widely accepted view that cocaine functions solely as a reuptake inhibitor. To induce euphoria an intravenous dose of 0.3-0.6\u00a0mg/kg of cocaine is required, which blocks 66-70% of DAT in the brain. Re-administering cocaine beyond this threshold does not significantly increase DAT occupancy but still results in an increase of euphoria which cannot be explained by reuptake inhibition alone. This discrepancy is not shared with other dopamine reuptake inhibitors like bupropion, sibutramine, mazindol or tesofensine, which have similar or higher potencies than cocaine as dopamine reuptake inhibitors. Furthermore, a similar response-occupancy discrepancy has been observed with methylphenidate, which also stabilizes the dopamine transporter in an open outward-facing conformation. These findings have evoked a hypothesis that cocaine may also function as a so-called \"DAT inverse agonist\" or \"negative allosteric modifier of DAT\" resulting in dopamine transporter reversal, and subsequent dopamine release into the synaptic cleft from the axon terminal in a manner similar to but distinct from amphetamines.\nSigma receptors are affected by cocaine, as cocaine functions as a sigma ligand agonist. Further specific receptors it has been demonstrated to function on are NMDA and the D1 dopamine receptor.\nCocaine also blocks sodium channels, thereby interfering with the propagation of action potentials; thus, like lignocaine and novocaine, it acts as a local anesthetic. It also functions on the binding sites to the dopamine and serotonin sodium dependent transport area as targets as separate mechanisms from its reuptake of those transporters; unique to its local anesthetic value which makes it in a class of functionality different from both its own derived phenyltropanes analogues which have that removed. In addition to this, cocaine has some target binding to the site of the \u03ba-opioid receptor. Cocaine also causes vasoconstriction, thus reducing bleeding during minor surgical procedures. Recent research points to an important role of circadian mechanisms and clock genes in behavioral actions of cocaine.\nCocaine is known to suppress hunger and appetite by increasing co-localization of sigma \u03c31R receptors and ghrelin GHS-R1a cell surface receptors, thereby increasing ghrelin-mediated signaling of satiety and possibly via other effects on appetitive hormones.\nCocaine effects, further, are shown to be potentiated for the user when used in conjunction with new surroundings and stimuli, and otherwise novel environs.\nChemistry.\nForms.\nIn its purest form, cocaine is a white, pearly powder. As a tropane alkaloid, cocaine is a weak base and readily forms salts when combined with acids. The most commonly encountered form is the hydrochloride (HCl) salt, although other salts such as the sulfate (SO42\u2212) and nitrate (NO3\u2212) are occasionally observed. The solubility of these salts varies depending on their polarity; the hydrochloride salt is polar and highly soluble in water.\nSynthesis.\nTotal synthesis.\nThe first structure elucidation and total synthesis of the cocaine molecule was accomplished by Richard Willst\u00e4tter in 1898. Willst\u00e4tter's synthesis involved constructing the cocaine structure from simpler precursors, notably via the intermediate tropinone. Subsequent significant contributions to understanding the synthetic pathway and stereochemistry were made by Robert Robinson and Edward Leete.\nCocaine contains four chiral centers (1\"R\", 2\"R\", 3\"S\", and 5\"S\"), two of which are configurationally dependent, resulting in eight possible stereoisomers. The formation of inactive stereoisomers, along with various synthetic by-products, limits both the yield and purity of the final product.\nAlthough the chemical synthesis of cocaine is technically feasible, it is generally considered impractical due to its high cost, low efficiency, and challenges in stereoselective synthesis compared to extraction from natural plant sources. While domestic clandestine laboratories could theoretically reduce reliance on offshore production and international smuggling\u2014as seen with illicit methamphetamine\u2014manufacture and synthetic production of cocaine remains rare. Large-scale commercial synthesis has not been explored.\nBiosynthesis.\nThe biosynthesis of cocaine is the natural metabolic process by which the coca plant (\"Erythroxylum\" species) produces cocaine, a tropane alkaloid, through a multi-step enzymatically catalyzed pathway beginning with ornithine or arginine and culminating in the formation of the cocaine metabolite benzoylecgonine.\nLarge-scale biosynthesis of cocaine is unexplored.\nThe biosynthesis of cocaine has long attracted the attention of biochemists and organic chemists. This interest is partly motivated by the strong physiological effects of cocaine, but a further incentive was the unusual bicyclic structure of the molecule. The biosynthesis can be viewed as occurring in two phases, one phase leading to the N-methylpyrrolinium ring, which is preserved in the final product. The second phase incorporates a C4 unit with formation of the bicyclic tropane core.\nGMO synthesis.\nIn 2022, a GMO produced \"N. benthamiana\" were discovered that were able to produce 25% of the amount of cocaine found in a coca plant.\nHowever, since \"N. benthamiana\" also naturally contains nicotine, separating the cocaine from nicotine and related alkaloids would be challenging.\nField analysis.\nPersonal cards-including ID cards and driver's licenses-are frequently swabbed by inspectors to detect drug residue, as these items are commonly used to prepare lines of cocaine. Swabbing can reveal traces of cocaine or other illicit substances, providing evidence of recent drug handling or use. This practice may be employed during security checks at border crossings.\nA \"Newsbeat\" investigation found that \"cocaine torches\" used by UK police to detect cocaine use are ineffective on typical street cocaine, as independent lab tests showed they fail to make the drug fluoresce. Experts and drug charities criticized the devices, warning they can give false positives and waste resources, while police forces defended their use as a deterrent. The manufacturer says the torches only work on much purer forms of cocaine than are found on the street.\nCocaine may be detected by law enforcement using the Scott reagent. The test can easily generate false positives for common substances and must be confirmed with a laboratory test.\nApproximate cocaine purity can be determined using 1\u00a0mL 2% cupric sulfate pentahydrate in dilute HCl, 1\u00a0mL 2% potassium thiocyanate and 2\u00a0mL of chloroform. The shade of brown shown by the chloroform is proportional to the cocaine content. This test is not cross sensitive to heroin, methamphetamine, benzocaine, procaine and a number of other drugs but other chemicals could cause false positives.\nSociety and culture.\nBoth the pharmaceutical supply chain and the illicit supply chain obtain cocaine from coca cultivated in Latin America, but they operate under very different controls and oversight. In Peru, for example, legal coca cultivation is monopolized by the state company National Coca Company (ENACO), yet approximately 90% of coca leaves produced in the country are diverted to illegal actors for cocaine manufacturing. As a result, these illicit coca crops are a primary target of ongoing government-led coca eradication efforts.\nCocaine is prohibited in competition for athletes by the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA), which lists it as a stimulant on its International Standard for the Prohibited List.\nStreet names.\nCocaine is sometimes referred to on the street as blow, coca, coke, crank, flake, snow, or soda cot. Slang terms for free base cocaine include crack or rock.\nhttps://, from \"fish\" + \"scale\", is named for its shiny, yellowish flakes that resemble fish scales\u2014distinct from the dull white appearance of standard cocaine powder.\nLegal status.\nThe production, distribution, and sale of cocaine products is restricted (and illegal in most contexts) in most countries as regulated by the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, and the United Nations Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. In the United States the manufacture, importation, possession, and distribution of cocaine are additionally regulated by the 1970 Controlled Substances Act.\nSome countries, such as Bolivia, Colombia, and Peru, permit the cultivation of coca leaf for traditional consumption by the local indigenous population, but nevertheless, prohibit the production, sale, and consumption of cocaine. The provisions as to how much a coca farmer can yield annually is protected by laws such as the Bolivian Cato accord. In addition, some parts of Europe, the United States, and Australia allow processed cocaine for medicinal uses only.\nAustralia.\nCocaine is a Schedule 8 controlled drug in Australia under the Poisons Standard. It is the second most popular illicit recreational drug in Australia behind cannabis.\nIn Western Australia under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1981, 4.0g of cocaine is the amount of prohibited drugs determining a court of trial, 2.0g is the amount of cocaine required for the presumption of intention to sell or supply, and 28.0g is the amount of cocaine required for purposes of drug trafficking.\nUnited States.\nThe US federal government instituted a national drug labelling requirement for cocaine and cocaine-containing products through the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906. The next important federal regulation was the Harrison Narcotics Tax Act of 1914. While this act is often seen as the start of prohibition, the act itself was not actually a prohibition on cocaine, but instead it set up a regulatory and licensing regime. The Harrison Act did not recognize addiction as a treatable condition and therefore the therapeutic use of cocaine, heroin, or morphine to such individuals was outlawed\u00a0\u2013 leading a 1915 editorial in the journal \"American Medicine\" to remark that the addict \"is denied the medical care he urgently needs, open, above-board sources from which he formerly obtained his drug supply are closed to him, and he is driven to the underworld where he can get his drug, but of course, surreptitiously and in violation of the law.\" The Harrison Act left manufacturers of cocaine untouched so long as they met certain purity and labeling standards. Despite that cocaine was typically illegal to sell and legal outlets were rarer, the quantities of legal cocaine produced declined very little. Legal cocaine quantities did not decrease until the Jones\u2013Miller Act of 1922 put serious restrictions on cocaine manufactures.\nBefore the early 1900s, newspapers primarily portrayed addiction (rather than violence or crime) as the main problem caused by cocaine use, and depicted cocaine users as upper or middle class White people. In 1914, The New York Times published an article titled \"Negro Cocaine 'Fiends' Are a New Southern Menace,\" portraying Black people who used cocaine as dangerous and able to withstand wounds that would normally be fatal. The Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 mandated the same prison sentences for distributing 500 grams of powdered cocaine and just 5 grams of crack cocaine. In the National Survey on Drug Use and Health, white respondents reported a higher rate of powdered cocaine use, and Black respondents reported a higher rate of crack cocaine use.\nPrevalence and trends.\nCocaine production, seizures, and use all reached record levels in 2023, making it the world's fastest-growing illicit drug market. Seizures rose by 68% from 2019 to 2023, while the number of users increased from 17 million in 2013 to 25 million in 2023, according to the UNODC World Drug Report 2025.\nThe report further states that Western Europe's cocaine market is rapidly expanding, resulting in increased violence driven by traffickers, including organized criminal groups from the Western Balkans. Concurrently, record levels of cocaine production have enabled traffickers to enter new markets across Asia and Africa, reflecting the expanding global reach of cocaine trafficking.\nThe U.S. is the world's largest consumer of cocaine, while South America, as a continent, ranks third in terms of consumer market size. Europe ranks cocaine as the second most commonly used illicit drug.\nCocaine is among the most widely consumed recreational stimulants worldwide.\nImpact.\nImpact of illicit cocaine.\nImpact on impoverished communities.\nIn countries where cocaine is illicitly produced, an intermediate product known as cocaine paste\u2014often referred to as \"poor man's cocaine\"\u2014is frequently smoked in impoverished communities. This substance is favored in these areas primarily because it is inexpensive and more accessible than refined cocaine. However, the use of cocaine paste poses severe health risks. During its production, various toxic chemicals are used to extract coca alkaloids from the coca leaves. Many of these hazardous substances, such as solvents and acids, remain in the paste after processing. When the paste is smoked, individuals are exposed not only to the addictive effects of the drug itself but also to the dangerous residual chemicals, which can cause significant harm to the lungs, nervous system, and overall health. This combination of affordability, accessibility, and toxicity makes cocaine paste particularly damaging to vulnerable populations in cocaine-producing regions.\nEnvironmental impact.\nMost of the world's cocaine is produced in South America, particularly in the Andean region. The environmental destruction caused by the production of cocaine has been well documented, with reports made the UN and other government bodies. Due to the illegal nature of coca production, farmers make little effort in soil conservation and sustainability practices as seen in the high mobility and short life of coca plots in Colombia.\nOne of the major implications of cocaine production is deforestation as large areas of forest are cleared for coca cultivation. The UNODC approximated that 97,622 hectares of primary forest were cleared for coca cultivation during 2001\u20132004 in the Andean region. This further causes habitat destruction, especially in biodiversity hotspots, areas rich in a variety of species. Such areas are chosen for coca cultivation due to their remote locations, minimising chances of detection. Deforestation impacts soil erosion which further inhibits the survival of native species.\nThe use of pesticides can also severely affect the environment. Farmers are able to use unregulated and highly toxic pesticides due to the clandestine nature of drug production. The use of such pesticides can have both direct and indirect effects on the ecosystem. Where lethal levels of exposure directly cause the death of fauna, which is further carried up the food chain where secondary feeders who consume the poisoned animals are also impacted. Furthermore, non-lethal levels of exposure can also cause weaker immune system development and neurological issues, further increasing mortality rates.\nImpact of illicit cocaine trade.\nCocaine is extremely expensive on the black market, with prices rising sharply at each distribution level\u2014often more than its weight in gold.\nLatin America.\nDrug war policies in Latin America and the Caribbean have led to more violence, higher incarceration rates, health crises, and deeper poverty, while undermining trust in institutions and worsening inequality. There is increasing support for shifting toward drug policies that focus on sustainable development and human rights instead of punitive measures.\nWest Africa.\nCocaine trafficking in West Africa has become closely linked with the activities of several terrorist organizations.\nImpact of enforcement.\nImpact of coca eradication.\nIn December 2000, Dutch journalist Marjon van Royen found that \"because the chemical is sprayed in Colombia from planes on inhabited areas, there have been consistent health complaints [in humans]. Burning eyes, dizziness and respiratory problems being most frequently reported.\" In some areas, 80 percent of the children of the indigenous community fell sick with skin rashes, fever, diarrhoea and eye infections. Because the glyphosate is sprayed from the air, there is a much higher chance of human error when spraying suspected illegal coca plantations. In many cases the wrong fields are sprayed, resulting in not only a total loss of the farmer's crop- but the loss of that field altogether as nothing will grow where the herbicide has been sprayed. Though official documentation of the health effects of glyphosate spraying in Colombia are virtually non-existent, neighbouring Ecuador has conducted studies to determine the cause of mysterious illnesses amongst people living along the border of Colombia and has since demanded that no aerial sprayings occur within 10\u00a0km of the border because of the damages caused to the people, animals and environment in that area. In 2015, Colombia announced a ban on using glyphosate in these programs due to concerns about human toxicity of the chemical.\nImpact of interdiction.\nThe Consolidated Counterdrug Database (CCDB) is a U.S. government dataset created in the 1990s that compiles vetted data on cocaine trafficking and seizures in the Western Hemisphere \"transit zone,\" involving 26 U.S. agencies and 20 foreign partners. It provides a highly reliable, conservative record of cocaine movements and interdiction efforts, revealing that despite large seizures, interdiction captures only a small fraction of trafficking events and has minimal impact on U.S. cocaine prices. The CCDB challenges optimistic views of drug interdiction effectiveness and underscores the need for new policy approaches, yet remains underutilized in research despite being unclassified.\nResearch.\nCocaine haptens are chemically modified derivatives of cocaine that retain key immunogenic features, allowing them to be attached to carrier proteins such as keyhole limpet hemocyanin or bovine serum albumin. This enables the immune system to recognize cocaine and produce anti-cocaine antibodies, which can bind cocaine in the bloodstream and prevent it from reaching the brain, thereby blocking its psychoactive effects.\nThe cocaine esterase enzyme and redesigned versions of it have been studied as a potential treatment for cocaine addiction in humans.\nCoca tea has been explored as a supportive treatment for cocaine dependence. A study in Lima, Peru, found that using coca leaf infusion along with counseling reduced relapse rates and significantly increased the duration of abstinence among addicted individuals, suggesting that this approach may help prevent relapse during treatment.\nRecent research has also examined the use of prescription psychostimulants for cocaine dependence, following the Self-Medication Hypothesis. This hypothesis suggests that some individuals use cocaine to address underlying neurochemical or psychological issues. While some studies indicate that psychostimulant therapy may reduce cocaine use and cravings, the evidence is mixed and further research is needed.\nIn animal studies, nicotine exposure in mice increases the likelihood of later cocaine use, with clear molecular changes in the brain. These findings mirror human epidemiological data showing a link between nicotine use and increased risk of later cannabis and cocaine use, as well as other substances. Similarly, in rats, alcohol consumption raises the probability of later cocaine addiction and is associated with changes in the brain's reward system. Human studies also show that alcohol use increases the risk of transitioning from cocaine use to addiction.\nExperimentally, cocaine injections can be delivered to animals such as fruit flies to study the mechanisms of cocaine addiction.\nCocaine vaccines.\nCalixcoca.\nCalixcoca is an experimental vaccine to treat cocaine and crack cocaine addiction. It has been in development since 2015 by the Federal University of Minas Gerais (UFMG) in Brazil.\nTA-CD.\nTA-CD is a vaccine developed by the Xenova Group and designed to negate the effects of cocaine, making it suitable for use in treatment of addiction. It is created by combining norcocaine with inactivated cholera toxin.\nHistory.\nCoca leaves have been used by indigenous South Americans for thousands of years, both as a stimulant and for medicinal purposes.\nWhen the Spanish arrived in South America, they initially banned coca but soon legalized and taxed it after seeing its importance to local labor. The active ingredient, cocaine, was first isolated in 1855 by Friedrich Gaedcke and later refined by Albert Niemann, who named it \"cocaine.\" In the late 1800s, cocaine became popular in Western medicine as a local anesthetic and was widely used in various products, including drinks and remedies. and James Leonard Corning demonstrated peridural anesthesia. However, due to its toxic effects and potential for abuse, safer alternatives eventually replaced it in medical practice.\nLarge-scale coca cultivation and cocaine production occurred in Taiwan Asia, in Taiwan (then known as Formosa) and Java (today part of Indonesia) before World War II.\nSince the 1980s, the cocaine trade was dominated by centralized, hierarchical drug cartels such as Medell\u00edn and Cali, along with their successors and early FARC factions. By the early 2000s, this model fragmented into a diverse network of global trafficking links, allowing South American cocaine production to easily supply markets in Europe, Africa, Asia, and Oceania through various routes.\nEtymology.\nThe word cocaine derives from fr \" Coca\u00efne\", from es \" coca\", ultimately from que \" k\u00faka\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7705", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7705", "title": "Cartesian coordinates", "text": ""}
{"id": "7706", "revid": "47187980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7706", "title": "Cartesian coordinate system", "text": "Most common coordinate system (geometry)\nIn geometry, a Cartesian coordinate system (, ) in a plane is a coordinate system that specifies each point uniquely by a pair of real numbers called \"coordinates\", which are the signed distances to the point from two fixed perpendicular oriented lines, called \"coordinate lines\", \"coordinate axes\" or just \"axes\" (plural of \"axis\") of the system. The point where the axes meet is called the \"origin\" and has (0, 0) as coordinates. The axes directions represent an orthogonal basis. The combination of origin and basis forms a coordinate frame called the Cartesian frame.\nSimilarly, the position of any point in three-dimensional space can be specified by three \"Cartesian coordinates\", which are the signed distances from the point to three mutually perpendicular planes. More generally, \"n\" Cartesian coordinates specify the point in an \"n\"-dimensional Euclidean space for any dimension \"n\". These coordinates are the signed distances from the point to \"n\" mutually perpendicular fixed hyperplanes.\nCartesian coordinates are named for Ren\u00e9 Descartes, whose invention of them in the 17th century revolutionized mathematics by allowing the expression of problems of geometry in terms of algebra and calculus. Using the Cartesian coordinate system, geometric shapes (such as curves) can be described by equations involving the coordinates of points of the shape. For example, a circle of radius 2, centered at the origin of the plane, may be described as the set of all points whose coordinates \"x\" and \"y\" satisfy the equation \"x\"2 + \"y\"2 = 4; the area, the perimeter and the tangent line at any point can be computed from this equation by using integrals and derivatives, in a way that can be applied to any curve.\nCartesian coordinates are the foundation of analytic geometry, and provide enlightening geometric interpretations for many other branches of mathematics, such as linear algebra, complex analysis, differential geometry, multivariate calculus, group theory and more. A familiar example is the concept of the graph of a function. Cartesian coordinates are also essential tools for most applied disciplines that deal with geometry, including astronomy, physics, engineering and many more. They are the most common coordinate system used in computer graphics, computer-aided geometric design and other geometry-related data processing.\nHistory.\nThe adjective \"Cartesian\" refers to the French mathematician and philosopher Ren\u00e9 Descartes, who published this idea in 1637 while he was resident in the Netherlands. It was independently discovered by Pierre de Fermat, who also worked in three dimensions, although Fermat did not publish the discovery. The French cleric Nicole Oresme used constructions similar to Cartesian coordinates well before the time of Descartes and Fermat.\nBoth Descartes and Fermat used a single axis in their treatments and have a variable length measured in reference to this axis. The concept of using a pair of axes was introduced later, after Descartes' \"La G\u00e9om\u00e9trie\" was translated into Latin in 1649 by Frans van Schooten and his students. These commentators introduced several concepts while trying to clarify the ideas contained in Descartes's work.\nThe development of the Cartesian coordinate system played a fundamental role in the development of the calculus by Isaac Newton and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. The two-coordinate description of the plane was later generalized into the concept of vector spaces.\nMany other coordinate systems have been developed since Descartes, such as the polar coordinates for the plane, and the spherical and cylindrical coordinates for three-dimensional space.\nDescription.\nOne dimension.\nAn affine line with a chosen Cartesian coordinate system is called a \"number line\". Every point on the line has a real-number coordinate, and every real number represents some point on the line.\nThere are two degrees of freedom in the choice of Cartesian coordinate system for a line, which can be specified by choosing two distinct points along the line and assigning them to two distinct real numbers (most commonly zero and one). Other points can then be uniquely assigned to numbers by linear interpolation. Equivalently, one point can be assigned to a specific real number, for instance an \"origin\" point corresponding to zero, and an oriented length along the line can be chosen as a unit, with the orientation indicating the correspondence between directions along the line and positive or negative numbers. Each point corresponds to its signed distance from the origin (a number with an absolute value equal to the distance and a + or \u2212 sign chosen based on direction).\nA geometric transformation of the line can be represented by a function of a real variable, for example translation of the line corresponds to addition, and scaling the line corresponds to multiplication. Any two Cartesian coordinate systems on the line can be related to each-other by a linear function (function of the form formula_1) taking a specific point's coordinate in one system to its coordinate in the other system. Choosing a coordinate system for each of two different lines establishes an affine map from one line to the other taking each point on one line to the point on the other line with the same coordinate.\nTwo dimensions.\nA Cartesian coordinate system in two dimensions (also called a rectangular coordinate system or an orthogonal coordinate system) is defined by an ordered pair of perpendicular lines (axes), a single unit of length for both axes, and an orientation for each axis. The point where the axes meet is taken as the origin for both, thus turning each axis into a number line. For any point \"P\", a line is drawn through \"P\" perpendicular to each axis, and the position where it meets the axis is interpreted as a number. The two numbers, in that chosen order, are the \"Cartesian coordinates\" of \"P\". The reverse construction allows one to determine the point \"P\" given its coordinates.\nThe first and second coordinates are called the \"abscissa\" and the \"ordinate\" of \"P\", respectively; and the point where the axes meet is called the \"origin\" of the coordinate system. The coordinates are usually written as two numbers in parentheses, in that order, separated by a comma, as in (3, \u221210.5). Thus the origin has coordinates (0, 0), and the points on the positive half-axes, one unit away from the origin, have coordinates (1, 0) and (0, 1).\nIn mathematics, physics, and engineering, the first axis is usually defined or depicted as horizontal and oriented to the right, and the second axis is vertical and oriented upwards. (However, in some computer graphics contexts, the ordinate axis may be oriented downwards.) The origin is often labeled \"O\", and the two coordinates are often denoted by the letters \"X\" and \"Y\", or \"x\" and \"y\". The axes may then be referred to as the \"X\"-axis and \"Y\"-axis. The choices of letters come from the original convention, which is to use the latter part of the alphabet to indicate unknown values. The first part of the alphabet was used to designate known values.\nA Euclidean plane with a chosen Cartesian coordinate system is called a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Cartesian plane. In a Cartesian plane, one can define canonical representatives of certain geometric figures, such as the unit circle (with radius equal to the length unit, and center at the origin), the unit square (whose diagonal has endpoints at (0, 0) and (1, 1)), the unit hyperbola, and so on.\nThe two axes divide the plane into four right angles, called \"quadrants\". The quadrants may be named or numbered in various ways, but the quadrant where all coordinates are positive is usually called the \"first quadrant\".\nIf the coordinates of a point are (\"x\", \"y\"), then its distances from the \"X\"-axis and from the \"Y\"-axis are |\"y\"| and |\"x\"|, respectively; where |\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0| denotes the absolute value of a number.\nThree dimensions.\nA Cartesian coordinate system for a three-dimensional space consists of an ordered triplet of lines (the \"axes\") that go through a common point (the \"origin\"), and are pair-wise perpendicular; an orientation for each axis; and a single unit of length for all three axes. As in the two-dimensional case, each axis becomes a number line. For any point \"P\" of space, one considers a plane through \"P\" perpendicular to each coordinate axis, and interprets the point where that plane cuts the axis as a number. The Cartesian coordinates of \"P\" are those three numbers, in the chosen order. The reverse construction determines the point \"P\" given its three coordinates.\nAlternatively, each coordinate of a point \"P\" can be taken as the distance from \"P\" to the plane defined by the other two axes, with the sign determined by the orientation of the corresponding axis.\nEach pair of axes defines a \"coordinate plane\". These planes divide space into eight \"octants\". The octants are:\nformula_2\nThe coordinates are usually written as three numbers (or algebraic formulas) surrounded by parentheses and separated by commas, as in (3, \u22122.5, 1) or (\"t\", \"u\" + \"v\", \"\u03c0\"/2). Thus, the origin has coordinates (0, 0, 0), and the unit points on the three axes are (1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0), and (0, 0, 1).\nStandard names for the coordinates in the three axes are \"abscissa\", \"ordinate\" and \"applicate\". The coordinates are often denoted by the letters \"x\", \"y\", and \"z\". The axes may then be referred to as the \"x\"-axis, \"y\"-axis, and \"z\"-axis, respectively. Then the coordinate planes can be referred to as the \"xy\"-plane, \"yz\"-plane, and \"xz\"-plane.\nIn mathematics, physics, and engineering contexts, the first two axes are often defined or depicted as horizontal, with the third axis pointing up. In that case the third coordinate may be called \"height\" or \"altitude\". The orientation is usually chosen so that the 90-degree angle from the first axis to the second axis looks counter-clockwise when seen from the point (0, 0, 1); a convention that is commonly called \"the right-hand rule\".\nHigher dimensions.\nSince Cartesian coordinates are unique and non-ambiguous, the points of a Cartesian plane can be identified with pairs of real numbers; that is, with the Cartesian product formula_3, where formula_4 is the set of all real numbers. In the same way, the points in any Euclidean space of dimension \"n\" be identified with the tuples (lists) of \"n\" real numbers; that is, with the Cartesian product formula_5.\nGeneralizations.\nThe concept of Cartesian coordinates generalizes to allow axes that are not perpendicular to each other, and/or different units along each axis. In that case, each coordinate is obtained by projecting the point onto one axis along a direction that is parallel to the other axis (or, in general, to the hyperplane defined by all the other axes). In such an \"oblique coordinate system\" the computations of distances and angles must be modified from that in standard Cartesian systems, and many standard formulas (such as the Pythagorean formula for the distance) do not hold (see affine plane).\nNotations and conventions.\nThe Cartesian coordinates of a point are usually written in parentheses and separated by commas, as in (10, 5) or (3, 5, 7). The origin is often labelled with the capital letter \"O\". In analytic geometry, unknown or generic coordinates are often denoted by the letters (\"x\", \"y\") in the plane, and (\"x\", \"y\", \"z\") in three-dimensional space. This custom comes from a convention of algebra, which uses letters near the end of the alphabet for unknown values (such as the coordinates of points in many geometric problems), and letters near the beginning for given quantities.\nThese conventional names are often used in other domains, such as physics and engineering, although other letters may be used. For example, in a graph showing how a pressure varies with time, the graph coordinates may be denoted \"p\" and \"t\". Each axis is usually named after the coordinate which is measured along it; so one says the \"x-axis\", the \"y-axis\", the \"t-axis\", etc.\nAnother common convention for coordinate naming is to use subscripts, as (\"x\"1, \"x\"2, ..., \"x\"\"n\") for the \"n\" coordinates in an \"n\"-dimensional space, especially when \"n\" is greater than 3 or unspecified. Some authors prefer the numbering (\"x\"0, \"x\"1, ..., \"x\"\"n\"\u22121). These notations are especially advantageous in computer programming: by storing the coordinates of a point as an array, instead of a record, the subscript can serve to index the coordinates.\nIn mathematical illustrations of two-dimensional Cartesian systems, the first coordinate (traditionally called the abscissa) is measured along a horizontal axis, oriented from left to right. The second coordinate (the ordinate) is then measured along a vertical axis, usually oriented from bottom to top. Young children learning the Cartesian system commonly learn the order to read the values before cementing the \"x\"-, \"y\"-, and \"z\"-axis concepts, by starting with 2D mnemonics (for example, 'Walk along the hall then up the stairs' akin to straight across the \"x\"-axis then up vertically along the \"y\"-axis).\nComputer graphics and image processing, however, often use a coordinate system with the \"y\"-axis oriented downwards on the computer display. This convention developed in the 1960s (or earlier) from the way that images were originally stored in display buffers.\nFor three-dimensional systems, a convention is to portray the \"xy\"-plane horizontally, with the \"z\"-axis added to represent height (positive up). Furthermore, there is a convention to orient the \"x\"-axis toward the viewer, biased either to the right or left. If a diagram (3D projection or 2D perspective drawing) shows the \"x\"- and \"y\"-axis horizontally and vertically, respectively, then the \"z\"-axis should be shown pointing \"out of the page\" towards the viewer or camera. In such a 2D diagram of a 3D coordinate system, the \"z\"-axis would appear as a line or ray pointing down and to the left or down and to the right, depending on the presumed viewer or camera perspective. In any diagram or display, the orientation of the three axes, as a whole, is arbitrary. However, the orientation of the axes relative to each other should always comply with the right-hand rule, unless specifically stated otherwise. All laws of physics and math assume this right-handedness, which ensures consistency.\nFor 3D diagrams, the names \"abscissa\" and \"ordinate\" are rarely used for \"x\" and \"y\", respectively. When they are, the \"z\"-coordinate is sometimes called the applicate. The words \"abscissa\", \"ordinate\" and \"applicate\" are sometimes used to refer to coordinate axes rather than the coordinate values.\nQuadrants and octants.\nThe axes of a two-dimensional Cartesian system divide the plane into four infinite regions, called \"quadrants\", each bounded by two half-axes. These are often numbered from 1st to 4th and denoted by Roman numerals: I (where the coordinates both have positive signs), II (where the abscissa is negative \u2212 and the ordinate is positive +), III (where both the abscissa and the ordinate are \u2212), and IV (abscissa +, ordinate \u2212). When the axes are drawn according to the mathematical custom, the numbering goes counter-clockwise starting from the upper right (\"north-east\") quadrant.\nSimilarly, a three-dimensional Cartesian system defines a division of space into eight regions or octants, according to the signs of the coordinates of the points. The convention used for naming a specific octant is to list its signs; for example, (+ + +) or (\u2212 + \u2212). The generalization of the quadrant and octant to an arbitrary number of dimensions is the orthant, and a similar naming system applies.\nCartesian formulae for the plane.\nDistance between two points.\nThe Euclidean distance between two points of the plane with Cartesian coordinates formula_6 and formula_7 is\nformula_8\nThis is the Cartesian version of Pythagoras's theorem. In three-dimensional space, the distance between points formula_9 and formula_10 is\nformula_11\nwhich can be obtained by two consecutive applications of Pythagoras' theorem.\nEuclidean transformations.\nThe Euclidean transformations or Euclidean motions are the (bijective) mappings of points of the Euclidean plane to themselves which preserve distances between points. There are four types of these mappings (also called isometries): translations, rotations, reflections and glide reflections.\nTranslation.\nTranslating a set of points of the plane, preserving the distances and directions between them, is equivalent to adding a fixed pair of numbers (\"a\", \"b\") to the Cartesian coordinates of every point in the set. That is, if the original coordinates of a point are (\"x\", \"y\"), after the translation they will be\nformula_12\nRotation.\nTo rotate a figure counterclockwise around the origin by some angle formula_13 is equivalent to replacing every point with coordinates (\"x\",\"y\") by the point with coordinates (\"x'\",\"y'\"), where\nformula_14\nThus:\nformula_15\nReflection.\nIf (\"x\", \"y\") are the Cartesian coordinates of a point, then (\u2212\"x\", \"y\") are the coordinates of its reflection across the second coordinate axis (the y-axis), as if that line were a mirror. Likewise, (\"x\", \u2212\"y\") are the coordinates of its reflection across the first coordinate axis (the x-axis). In more generality, reflection across a line through the origin making an angle formula_13 with the x-axis, is equivalent to replacing every point with coordinates (\"x\", \"y\") by the point with coordinates (\"x\"\u2032,\"y\"\u2032), where\nformula_17\nThus:\nformula_18\nGlide reflection.\nA glide reflection is the composition of a reflection across a line followed by a translation in the direction of that line. It can be seen that the order of these operations does not matter (the translation can come first, followed by the reflection).\nGeneral matrix form of the transformations.\nAll affine transformations of the plane can be described in a uniform way by using matrices. For this purpose, the coordinates formula_19 of a point are commonly represented as the column matrix formula_20 The result formula_21 of applying an affine transformation to a point formula_19 is given by the formula\nformula_23\nwhere\nformula_24\nis a 2\u00d72 matrix and formula_25 is a column matrix. That is,\nformula_26\nAmong the affine transformations, the Euclidean transformations are characterized by the fact that the matrix formula_27 is orthogonal; that is, its columns are orthogonal vectors of Euclidean norm one, or, explicitly,\nformula_28\nand\nformula_29\nThis is equivalent to saying that \"A\" times its transpose is the identity matrix. If these conditions do not hold, the formula describes a more general affine transformation.\nThe transformation is a translation if and only if \"A\" is the identity matrix. The transformation is a rotation around some point if and only if \"A\" is a rotation matrix, meaning that it is orthogonal and\nformula_30\nA reflection or glide reflection is obtained when,\nformula_31\nAssuming that translations are not used (that is, formula_32) transformations can be composed by simply multiplying the associated transformation matrices. In the general case, it is useful to use the augmented matrix of the transformation; that is, to rewrite the transformation formula \nformula_33\nwhere \nformula_34\nWith this trick, the composition of affine transformations is obtained by multiplying the augmented matrices.\nAffine transformation.\nAffine transformations of the Euclidean plane are transformations that map lines to lines, but may change distances and angles. As said in the preceding section, they can be represented with augmented matrices:\nformula_35\nThe Euclidean transformations are the affine transformations such that the 2\u00d72 matrix of the formula_36 is orthogonal.\nThe augmented matrix that represents the composition of two affine transformations is obtained by multiplying their augmented matrices.\nSome affine transformations that are not Euclidean transformations have received specific names.\nScaling.\nAn example of an affine transformation which is not Euclidean is given by scaling. To make a figure larger or smaller is equivalent to multiplying the Cartesian coordinates of every point by the same positive number \"m\". If (\"x\", \"y\") are the coordinates of a point on the original figure, the corresponding point on the scaled figure has coordinates\nformula_37\nIf \"m\" is greater than 1, the figure becomes larger; if \"m\" is between 0 and 1, it becomes smaller.\nShearing.\nA shearing transformation will push the top of a square sideways to form a parallelogram. Horizontal shearing is defined by:\nformula_38\nShearing can also be applied vertically:\nformula_39\nOrientation and handedness.\nIn two dimensions.\nFixing or choosing the \"x\"-axis determines the \"y\"-axis up to direction. Namely, the \"y\"-axis is necessarily the perpendicular to the \"x\"-axis through the point marked 0 on the \"x\"-axis. But there is a choice of which of the two half lines on the perpendicular to designate as positive and which as negative. Each of these two choices determines a different orientation (also called \"handedness\") of the Cartesian plane.\nThe usual way of orienting the plane, with the positive \"x\"-axis pointing right and the positive \"y\"-axis pointing up (and the \"x\"-axis being the \"first\" and the \"y\"-axis the \"second\" axis), is considered the \"positive\" or \"standard\" orientation, also called the \"right-handed\" orientation.\nA commonly used mnemonic for defining the positive orientation is the \"right-hand rule\". Placing a somewhat closed right hand on the plane with the thumb pointing up, the fingers point from the \"x\"-axis to the \"y\"-axis, in a positively oriented coordinate system.\nThe other way of orienting the plane is following the \"left-hand rule\", placing the left hand on the plane with the thumb pointing up.\nWhen pointing the thumb away from the origin along an axis towards positive, the curvature of the fingers indicates a positive rotation along that axis.\nRegardless of the rule used to orient the plane, rotating the coordinate system will preserve the orientation. Switching any one axis will reverse the orientation, but switching both will leave the orientation unchanged.\nIn three dimensions.\nOnce the \"x\"- and \"y\"-axes are specified, they determine the line along which the \"z\"-axis should lie, but there are two possible orientations for this line. The two possible coordinate systems which result are called 'right-handed' and 'left-handed'. The standard orientation, where the \"xy\"-plane is horizontal and the \"z\"-axis points up (and the \"x\"- and the \"y\"-axis form a positively oriented two-dimensional coordinate system in the \"xy\"-plane if observed from \"above\" the \"xy\"-plane) is called right-handed or positive.\nThe name derives from the right-hand rule. If the index finger of the right hand is pointed forward, the middle finger bent inward at a right angle to it, and the thumb placed at a right angle to both, the three fingers indicate the relative orientation of the \"x\"-, \"y\"-, and \"z\"-axes in a \"right-handed\" system. The thumb indicates the \"x\"-axis, the index finger the \"y\"-axis and the middle finger the \"z\"-axis. Conversely, if the same is done with the left hand, a left-handed system results.\nFigure 7 depicts a left and a right-handed coordinate system. Because a three-dimensional object is represented on the two-dimensional screen, distortion and ambiguity result. The axis pointing downward (and to the right) is also meant to point \"towards\" the observer, whereas the \"middle\"-axis is meant to point \"away\" from the observer. The red circle is \"parallel\" to the horizontal \"xy\"-plane and indicates rotation from the \"x\"-axis to the \"y\"-axis (in both cases). Hence the red arrow passes \"in front of\" the \"z\"-axis.\nFigure 8 is another attempt at depicting a right-handed coordinate system. Again, there is an ambiguity caused by projecting the three-dimensional coordinate system into the plane. Many observers see Figure 8 as \"flipping in and out\" between a convex cube and a concave \"corner\". This corresponds to the two possible orientations of the space. Seeing the figure as convex gives a left-handed coordinate system. Thus the \"correct\" way to view Figure 8 is to imagine the \"x\"-axis as pointing \"towards\" the observer and thus seeing a concave corner.\nRepresenting a vector in the standard basis.\nA point in space in a Cartesian coordinate system may also be represented by a position vector, which can be thought of as an arrow pointing from the origin of the coordinate system to the point. If the coordinates represent spatial positions (displacements), it is common to represent the vector from the origin to the point of interest as formula_40. In two dimensions, the vector from the origin to the point with Cartesian coordinates (x, y) can be written as:\nformula_41\nwhere formula_42 and formula_43 are unit vectors in the direction of the \"x\"-axis and \"y\"-axis respectively, generally referred to as the \"standard basis\" (in some application areas these may also be referred to as versors). Similarly, in three dimensions, the vector from the origin to the point with Cartesian coordinates formula_44 can be written as:\nformula_45\nwhere formula_46 formula_47 and formula_48\nThere is no \"natural\" interpretation of multiplying vectors to obtain another vector that works in all dimensions, however there is a way to use complex numbers to provide such a multiplication. In a two-dimensional cartesian plane, identify the point with coordinates (\"x\", \"y\") with the complex number \"z\" = \"x\" + \"iy\". Here, \"i\" is the imaginary unit and is identified with the point with coordinates (0, 1), so it is \"not\" the unit vector in the direction of the \"x\"-axis. Since the complex numbers can be multiplied giving another complex number, this identification provides a means to \"multiply\" vectors. In a three-dimensional cartesian space a similar identification can be made with a subset of the quaternions.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7707", "revid": "12311825", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7707", "title": "Churchill", "text": ""}
{"id": "7708", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7708", "title": "Commandant of the United States Marine Corps", "text": "Senior-most officer and service chief of the United States Marine Corps\nThe commandant of the Marine Corps (CMC) is normally the highest-ranking officer in the United States Marine Corps. It is a four-star general position and a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The CMC reports directly to the secretary of the Navy and is responsible for ensuring the organization, policy, plans, and programs for the Marine Corps as well as advising the president, the secretary of defense, the National Security Council, the Homeland Security Council, and the secretary of the Navy on matters involving the Marine Corps. Under the authority of the secretary of the Navy, the CMC designates Marine personnel and resources to the commanders of unified combatant commands. The commandant performs all other functions prescribed in Section 8043 in Title 10 of the United States Code or delegates those duties and responsibilities to other officers in his administration in his name. As with the other joint chiefs, the commandant is an administrative position and has no operational command authority over United States Marine Corps forces.\nThe commandant is nominated for appointment by the president, for a four-year term of office, and must be confirmed by the Senate. The commandant can be reappointed to serve one additional term, but only during times of war or national emergency declared by Congress. By statute, the commandant is appointed as a four-star general while serving in office. \"The commandant is directly responsible to the Secretary of the Navy for the total performance of the Marine Corps. This includes the administration, discipline, internal organization, training, requirements, efficiency, and readiness of the service. The Commandant is also responsible for the operation of the Marine Corps material support system.\" Since 1806, the official residence of the commandant has been located in the Marine Barracks in Washington, D.C., and his main offices are in Arlington County, Virginia.\nThe 39th and current commandant is General Eric M. Smith.\nResponsibilities.\nThe responsibilities of the commandant are outlined in Title 10, Section 5043, the United States Code and the position is \"subject to the authority, direction, and control of the Secretary of the Navy\". As stated in the U.S. Code, the commandant \"shall preside over the Headquarters, Marine Corps, transmit the plans and recommendations of the Headquarters, Marine Corps, to the Secretary and advise the Secretary with regard to such plans and recommendations, after approval of the plans or recommendations of the Headquarters, Marine Corps, by the Secretary, act as the agent of the Secretary in carrying them into effect, exercise supervision, consistent with the authority assigned to commanders of unified or specified combatant commands under chapter\u00a06 of this title, over such of the members and organizations of the Marine Corps and the Navy as the Secretary determines, perform the duties prescribed for him by section 171 of this title and other provisions of law and perform such other military duties, not otherwise assigned by law, as are assigned to him by the President, the Secretary of Defense, or the Secretary of the Navy\".\nList of commandants.\nThirty-nine men have served as the commandant of the Marine Corps. The first commandant was Samuel Nicholas, who took office as a captain, though there was no office titled \"Commandant\" at the time, and the Second Continental Congress had authorized that the senior-most Marine could take a rank up to Colonel. The longest-serving was Archibald Henderson, sometimes referred to as the \"Grand old man of the Marine Corps\" due to his 39-year tenure. In the history of the United States Marine Corps, only one commandant has ever been fired from the job: Anthony Gale, as a result of a court-martial in 1820.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7710", "revid": "10702891", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7710", "title": "Caltrans", "text": "Executive department of California, US\nThe California Department of Transportation, branded as Caltrans, is an executive department of the U.S. state of California. The department is part of the cabinet-level California State Transportation Agency (CalSTA). Caltrans is headquartered in Sacramento.\nCaltrans manages the state's highway system, which includes the California Freeway and Expressway System, supports public transportation systems throughout the state and provides funding and oversight for three state-supported Amtrak intercity rail routes (\"Capitol Corridor\", \"Pacific Surfliner\" and \"Gold Runner\") which are collectively branded as \"Amtrak California\".\nIn 2015, Caltrans released a new mission statement: \"Provide a safe, sustainable, integrated and efficient transportation system to enhance California's economy and livability.\"\nHistory.\nThe earliest predecessor of Caltrans was the Bureau of Highways, which was created by the California Legislature and signed into law by Governor James Budd in 1895. This agency consisted of three commissioners who were charged with analyzing the roads of the state and making recommendations for their improvement. At the time, there was no state highway system, since roads were purely a local responsibility. California's roads consisted of crude dirt roads maintained by county governments, as well as some paved streets in certain cities, and this ad hoc system was no longer adequate for the needs of the state's rapidly growing population. After the commissioners submitted their report to the governor on November 25, 1896, the legislature replaced the Bureau with the Department of Highways.\nDue to the state's weak fiscal condition and corrupt politics, little progress was made until 1907, when the legislature replaced the Department of Highways with the Department of Engineering, within which there was a Division of Highways. California voters approved an $18 million bond issue for the construction of a state highway system in 1910, and the first California Highway Commission was convened in 1911. On August 7, 1912, the department broke ground on its first construction project, the section of El Camino Real between South San Francisco and Burlingame, which later became part of California State Route 82. The year 1912 also saw the founding of the Transportation Laboratory and the creation of seven administrative divisions, which are the predecessors of the 12 district offices in use . The original seven division headquarters were located in:\nIn 1913, the California State Legislature began requiring vehicle registration and allocated the resulting funds to support regular highway maintenance, which began the next year.\nIn 1921, the state legislature turned the Department of Engineering into the Department of Public Works, which continued to have a Division of Highways. That same year, three additional divisions (now districts) were created, in Stockton, Bishop, and San Bernardino.\nIn 1933, the state legislature enacted an amendment to the State Highway Classification Act of 1927, which added over 6,700 miles of county roads to the state highway system. To help manage all the additional work created by this massive expansion, an eleventh district office was founded that year in San Diego. \nThe enactment of the Collier\u2013Burns Highway Act of 1947 after \"a lengthy and bitter legislative battle\" was a watershed moment in Caltrans history. The act \"placed California highway's program on a sound financial basis\" by doubling vehicle registration fees and raising gasoline and diesel fuel taxes from 3 cents to 4.5 cents per gallon. All these taxes were again raised further in 1953 and 1963. The state also obtained extensive federal funding from the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1956 for the construction of its portion of the Interstate Highway System. Over the next two decades after Collier-Burns, the state \"embarked on a massive highway construction program\" in which nearly all of the now-extant state highway system was either constructed or upgraded. In hindsight, the period from 1940 to 1969 can be characterized as the \"Golden Age\" of California's state highway construction program. \nThe history of Caltrans and its predecessor agencies during the 20th century was marked by many firsts. It was one of the first agencies in the United States to paint centerlines on highways statewide; the first to build a freeway west of the Mississippi River; the first to build a four-level stack interchange; the first to develop and deploy non-reflective raised pavement markers, better known as Botts' dots; and one of the first to implement dedicated freeway-to-freeway connector ramps for high-occupancy vehicle lanes.\nIn 1967, Governor Ronald Reagan formed a Task Force Committee on Transportation to study the state transportation system and recommend major reforms. One of the proposals of the task force was the creation of a State Transportation Board as a permanent advisory board on state transportation policy; the board would later merge into the California Transportation Commission in 1978. In September 1971, the State Transportation Board proposed the creation of a state department of transportation charged with responsibility \"for performing and integrating transportation planning for all modes.\" Governor Reagan mentioned this proposal in his 1972 State of the State address, and Assemblyman Wadie P. Deddeh introduced Assembly Bill 69 to that effect, which was duly passed by the state legislature and signed into law by Reagan later that same year. AB 69 merged three existing departments to create the Department of Transportation, of which the most important was the Department of Public Works and its Division of Highways. The California Department of Transportation began official operations on July 1, 1973. The new agency was organized into six divisions: Highways, Mass Transportation, Aeronautics, Transportation Planning, Legal, and Administrative Services. \nCaltrans went through a difficult period of transformation during the 1970s, as its institutional focus shifted from highway construction to highway maintenance. The agency was forced to contend with declining revenues, increasing construction and maintenance costs (especially the skyrocketing cost of maintaining the vast highway system built over the past three prior decades), widespread freeway revolts, and new environmental laws. In 1970, the enactment of the National Environmental Policy Act and the California Environmental Quality Act forced Caltrans to devote significant time, money, people, and other resources to confronting issues such as \"air and water quality, hazardous waste, archaeology, historic preservation, and noise abatement.\" The devastating 1971 San Fernando earthquake compelled the agency to recognize that its existing design standards had not adequately accounted for earthquake stress and that numerous existing structures needed expensive seismic retrofitting. Maintenance and construction costs grew at twice the inflation rate in this era of high inflation; the reluctance of one governor after another to raise fuel taxes in accordance with inflation meant that California ranked dead last in the United States in per-capita transportation spending by 1983. During the 1980s and 1990s, Caltrans concentrated on \"the upgrading, rehabilitation, and maintenance of the existing system,\" plus occasional gap closure and realignment projects.\nAdministration.\nFor administrative purposes, Caltrans divides the State of California into 12 districts, supervised by district offices. Most districts cover multiple counties; District 12 (Orange County) is the only district with one county. The largest districts by population are District 4 (San Francisco Bay Area) and District 7 (Los Angeles and Ventura counties). Like many state agencies, Caltrans maintains its headquarters in Sacramento, which is covered by District 3.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7712", "revid": "133598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7712", "title": "Continuation War", "text": "Finnish war against the Soviet Union (1941\u201344)\nThe Continuation War, also known as the Second Soviet\u2013Finnish War, was a conflict fought by Finland and Nazi Germany against the Soviet Union during World War II. It began with a Finnish declaration of war on 25 June 1941 and ended on 19 September 1944 with the Moscow Armistice. The Soviet Union and Finland had previously fought the Winter War from 1939 to 1940, which ended with the Soviet failure to conquer Finland and the Moscow Peace Treaty. Numerous reasons have been proposed for the Finnish decision to invade, with regaining territory lost during the Winter War regarded as the most common. Other justifications for the conflict include Finnish President Risto Ryti's vision of a Greater Finland and Commander-in-Chief Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim's desire to annex East Karelia.\nOn 22 June 1941, the Axis invaded the Soviet Union. Three days later, the Soviet Union conducted an air raid on Finnish cities which prompted Finland to declare war and allow German troops in Finland to begin offensive warfare. By September 1941, Finland had regained its post\u2013Winter War concessions to the Soviet Union in Karelia. The Finnish Army continued its offensive past the 1939 border during the invasion of East Karelia and halted it only around from the centre of Leningrad. It participated in besieging the city by cutting the northern supply routes and by digging in until 1944. In Lapland, joint German\u2013Finnish forces failed to capture Murmansk or cut the Kirov (Murmansk) Railway. The Soviet Vyborg\u2013Petrozavodsk offensive in June and August 1944 drove the Finns from most of the territories that they had gained during the war, but the Finnish Army halted the offensive in August 1944.\nHostilities between Finland and the USSR ceased in September 1944 with the signing of the Moscow Armistice in which Finland restored its borders per the 1940 Moscow Peace Treaty and additionally ceded Petsamo and leased the Porkkala Peninsula to the Soviets. Furthermore, Finland was required to pay war reparations to the Soviet Union, accept partial responsibility for the war, and acknowledge that it had been a German ally. Finland was also required by the agreement to expel German troops from Finnish territory, which led to the Lapland War between Finland and Germany. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBackground.\nWinter War.\nOn 23 August 1939, the Soviet Union and Germany signed the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact in which both parties agreed to divide the independent countries of Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, and Romania into spheres of interest, with Finland falling within the Soviet sphere. One week later, Germany invaded Poland, leading to the United Kingdom and France declaring war on Germany. The Soviet Union invaded eastern Poland on 17 September. The Soviet government turned its attention to the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, demanding that they allow Soviet military bases to be established and troops stationed on their soil. The Baltic governments acquiesced to these demands and signed agreements in September and October.\nIn October 1939, the Soviet Union attempted to negotiate with Finland to cede Finnish territory on the Karelian Isthmus and the islands of the Gulf of Finland, and to establish a Soviet military base near the Finnish capital of Helsinki. The Finnish government refused, and the Red Army invaded Finland on 30 November 1939. The same day, Field Marshal C.\u00a0G.\u00a0E.\u00a0Mannerheim, who was chairman of Finland's Defence Council at the time, assumed the position of Commander-in-Chief of the Finnish Defence Forces. The USSR was expelled from the League of Nations and was condemned by the international community for the illegal attack. Foreign support for Finland was promised, but very little actual help materialised, except from Sweden. The Moscow Peace Treaty concluded the 105-day Winter War on 13 March 1940 and started the Interim Peace. By the terms of the treaty, Finland ceded 9% of its national territory and 13% of its economic capacity to the Soviet Union. Some 420,000 evacuees were resettled from the ceded territories. Finland avoided total conquest of the country by the Soviet Union and retained its sovereignty.\nPrior to the war, Finnish foreign policy had been based on multilateral guarantees of support from the League of Nations and Nordic countries, but this policy was considered a failure. After the war, Finnish public opinion favored the reconquest of Finnish Karelia. The government declared national defence to be its first priority, and military expenditure rose to nearly half of public spending. Finland both received donations and purchased war materiel during and immediately after the Winter War. Likewise, the Finnish leadership wanted to preserve the spirit of unanimity that was felt throughout the country during the Winter War. The divisive White Guard tradition of the Finnish Civil War's 16 May victory-day celebration was therefore discontinued.\nThe Soviet Union had received the Hanko Naval Base, on Finland's southern coast near the capital Helsinki, where it deployed over 30,000 Soviet military personnel. Relations between Finland and the Soviet Union remained strained after the signing of the one-sided peace treaty, and there were disputes regarding the implementation of the treaty. Finland sought security against further territorial depredations by the USSR and proposed mutual defence agreements with Norway and Sweden, but these initiatives were quashed by Moscow.\nGerman and Soviet expansion in Europe.\nAfter the Winter War, Germany was viewed with distrust by the Finnish, as it was considered an ally of the Soviet Union. Nonetheless, the Finnish government sought to restore diplomatic relations with Germany, but also continued its Western-orientated policy and negotiated a war trade agreement with the United Kingdom. The agreement was renounced after the German invasion of Denmark and Norway on 9 April 1940 resulted in the UK cutting all trade and traffic communications with the Nordic countries. With the fall of France, a Western orientation was no longer considered a viable option in Finnish foreign policy. On 15 and 16 June, the Soviet Union occupied the Baltic states almost without any resistance and Soviet puppet regimes were installed. Within two months Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania were incorporated into the USSR and by mid\u20131940, the two remaining northern democracies, Finland and Sweden, were encircled by the hostile states of Germany and the Soviet Union.\nOn 23 June, shortly after the Soviet occupation of the Baltic states began, Soviet Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov contacted the Finnish government to demand that a mining licence be issued to the Soviet Union for the nickel mines in Petsamo or, alternatively, permission for the establishment of a joint Soviet-Finnish company to operate there. A licence to mine the deposit had already been granted to a British-Canadian company and so the demand was rejected by Finland. The following month, the Soviets demanded that Finland destroy the fortifications on the \u00c5land Islands and to grant the Soviets the right to use Finnish railways to transport Soviet troops to the newly acquired Soviet base at Hanko. The Finns very reluctantly agreed to those demands. On 24 July, Molotov accused the Finnish government of persecuting the communist Finland\u2013Soviet Union Peace and Friendship Society and soon afterward publicly declared support for the group. The society organised demonstrations in Finland, some of which turned into riots.\nRussian-language sources from the post-Soviet era, such as the study \"Stalin's Missed Chance\", maintain that Soviet policies leading up to the Continuation War were best explained as defensive measures by offensive means. The Soviet division of occupied Poland with Germany, the Soviet occupation of the Baltic states and the Soviet invasion of Finland during the Winter War are described as elements in the Soviet construction of a security zone or buffer region from the perceived threat from the capitalist powers of Western Europe. Other post-Soviet Russian-language sources consider establishment of Soviet satellite states in the Warsaw Pact countries and the Finno-Soviet Treaty of 1948 as the culmination of the Soviet defence plan. Western historians, such as Norman Davies and John Lukacs, dispute this view and describe pre-war Soviet policy as an attempt to stay out of the war and regain the land lost due to the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk after the fall of the Russian Empire.\nRelations between Finland, Germany and Soviet Union.\nOn 31 July 1940, Adolf Hitler gave the order to plan an assault on the Soviet Union, meaning Germany had to reassess its position regarding both Finland and Romania. Until then, Germany had rejected Finnish requests to purchase arms, but with the prospect of an invasion of Russia, that policy was reversed, and in August, the secret sale of weapons to Finland was permitted. Military authorities signed an agreement on 12 September, and an official exchange of diplomatic notes was sent on 22 September. Meanwhile, German troops were allowed to transit through Sweden and Finland. This change in policy meant Germany had effectively redrawn the border of the German and Soviet spheres of influence, in violation of the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact.\nIn response to that new situation, Molotov visited Berlin on 12\u201313 November 1940. He requested for Germany to withdraw its troops from Finland and to stop enabling Finnish anti-Soviet sentiments. He also reminded the Germans of the 1939 pact. Hitler inquired how the Soviets planned to settle the \"Finnish question\" to which Molotov responded that it would mirror the events in Bessarabia and the Baltic states. Hitler rejected that course of action. During the Finnish presidential election in December 1940, Risto Ryti was elected to be president largely due to interference by Molotov in Ryti's favour since he had signed the Moscow Peace Treaty as prime minister.\nOn 18 December 1940, Hitler officially approved Operation Barbarossa, paving the way for the German invasion of the Soviet Union, in which he expected both Finland and Romania to participate. Meanwhile, Finnish Major General Paavo Talvela met with German Colonel General Franz Halder and Reich Marshal Hermann G\u00f6ring in Berlin, the first time that the Germans had advised the Finnish government, in carefully-couched diplomatic terms, that they were preparing for war with the Soviet Union. Outlines of the actual plan were revealed in January 1941 and regular contact between Finnish and German military leaders began in February. Additionally in January 1941, Moscow again demanded Finland relinquish control of the Petsamo mining area to the Soviets, but Finland, emboldened by a rebuilt defence force and German support, rejected the proposition.\nIn the late spring of 1941, the USSR made a number of goodwill gestures to prevent Finland from completely falling under German influence. Ambassador Ivan Stepanovich Zotov was replaced with the more conciliatory and passive Pavel Dmitrievich Orlov. Furthermore, the Soviet government announced that it no longer opposed a rapprochement between Finland and Sweden. Those conciliatory measures, however, did not have any effect on Finnish policy. Finland wished to re-enter the war mainly because of the Soviet invasion of Finland during the Winter War, which the League of Nations and Nordic neutrality had failed to prevent due to lack of outside support. Finland primarily aimed to reverse its territorial losses from the 1940 Moscow Peace Treaty and, depending on the success of the German invasion of the Soviet Union, to possibly expand its borders, especially into East Karelia. Some right-wing groups, such as the Academic Karelia Society, supported a Greater Finland ideology. This ideology of a Greater Finland mostly composed of Soviet territories was augmented by anti-Russian sentiments.\nGerman and Finnish war plans.\nThe details of the Finnish preparations for war are still somewhat opaque. Historian William R. Trotter stated that \"it has so far proven impossible to pinpoint the exact date on which Finland was taken into confidence about Operation Barbarossa\" and that \"neither the Finns nor the Germans were entirely candid with one another as to their national aims and methods. In any case, the step from contingency planning to actual operations, when it came, was little more than a formality\".\nThe inner circle of Finnish leadership, led by Ryti and Mannerheim, actively planned joint operations with Germany under a veil of ambiguous neutrality and without formal agreements after an alliance with Sweden had proved fruitless, according to a meta-analysis by Finnish historian Olli-Pekka Vehvil\u00e4inen. He likewise refuted the so-called \"driftwood theory\" that Finland had been merely a piece of driftwood that was swept uncontrollably in the rapids of great power politics. Even then, most historians conclude that Finland had no realistic alternative to co-operating with Germany. On 20 May, the Germans invited a number of Finnish officers to discuss the coordination of Operation Barbarossa. The participants met on 25\u201328 May in Salzburg and Berlin and continued their meeting in Helsinki from 3 to 6 June. They agreed upon Finnish mobilisation and a general division of operations. They also agreed that the Finnish Army would start mobilisation on 15 June, but the Germans did not reveal the actual date of the assault. The Finnish decisions were made by the inner circle of political and military leaders, without the knowledge of the rest of the government. Due to tensions between Germany and the Soviet Union, the government was not informed until 9 June that mobilisation of reservists would be required.\nFinland's relationship with Germany.\nFinland never signed the Tripartite Pact. The Finnish leadership stated they would fight against the Soviets only to the extent needed to redress the balance of the 1940 treaty, though some historians consider that it had wider territorial goals under the slogan \"shorter borders, longer peace\" (). During the war, the Finnish leadership generally referred to the Germans as \"brothers-in-arms\" but also denied that they were allies of Germany \u2013 instead claiming to be \"co-belligerents\". For Hitler, the distinction was irrelevant since he saw Finland as an ally. The 1947 Paris Peace Treaty signed by Finland described Finland as having been \"an ally of Hitlerite Germany\" during the Continuation War. In a 2008 poll of 28 Finnish historians carried out by \"Helsingin Sanomat\", 16 said that Finland had been an ally of Nazi Germany, six said it had not been and six did not take a position.\nOrder of battle and operational planning.\nSoviet.\nThe Northern Front () of the Leningrad Military District was commanded by Lieutenant General Markian Popov and numbered around 450,000 soldiers in 18 divisions and 40 independent battalions in the Finnish region. During the Interim Peace, the Soviet Military had relaid operational plans to conquer Finland, but with the German attack, Operation Barbarossa, begun on 22 June 1941, the Soviets required its best units and latest materiel to be deployed against the Germans and so abandoned plans for a renewed offensive against Finland.\nThe 23rd Army was deployed in the Karelian Isthmus, the 7th Army to Ladoga Karelia and the 14th Army to the Murmansk\u2013Salla area of Lapland. The Northern Front also commanded eight aviation divisions. As the initial German strike against the Soviet Air Forces had not affected air units located near Finland, the Soviets could deploy around 700 aircraft supported by a number of Soviet Navy wings. The Red Banner Baltic Fleet, which outnumbered the navy of Germany (), comprised 2 battleships, 2 light cruisers, 47 destroyers or large torpedo boats, 75 submarines, over 200 smaller crafts, and 682 aircraft (of which 595 were operational).\nFinnish and German.\nThe Finnish Army () mobilised between 475,000 and 500,000 soldiers in 14 divisions and 3 brigades for the invasion, commanded by Field Marshal () Mannerheim. The army was organised as follows:\nAlthough initially deployed for a static defence, the Finnish Army was to later launch an attack to the south, on both sides of Lake Ladoga, putting pressure on Leningrad and thus supporting the advance of the German Army Group North through the Baltic states towards Leningrad. Finnish intelligence had overestimated the strength of the Red Army, when in fact it was numerically inferior to Finnish forces at various points along the border. The army, especially its artillery, was stronger than it had been during the Winter War but included only one armoured battalion and had a general lack of motorised transportation; the army possessed 1,829 artillery pieces at the beginning of the invasion. The Finnish Air Force () had received large donations from Germany prior to the Continuation War including Curtiss Hawk 75s, Fokker D.XXIs, Dornier Do 22 flying boats, Morane M.S. 406 bombers, and Focke-Wulf Fw 44 Stieglitz trainers; in total the Finnish Air Force had 550 aircraft by June 1941, approximately half being combat. By September 1944, despite considerable German supply of aircraft, the Finns only had 384 planes. Even with the increase in supplied aircraft, the air force was constantly outnumbered by the Soviets.\nThe Army of Norway, or , comprising four divisions totaling 67,000 German soldiers, held the arctic front, which stretched approximately through Finnish Lapland. This army would also be tasked with striking Murmansk and the Kirov (Murmansk) Railway during Operation Silver Fox. The Army of Norway was under the direct command of the German Army High Command () and was organised into Mountain Corps Norway and XXXVI Mountain Corps with the Finnish III Corps and 14th Division attached to it. The German Air Force High Command () assigned 60 aircraft from \"Luftflotte 5\" (Air Fleet 5) to provide air support to the Army of Norway and the Finnish Army, in addition to its main responsibility of defending Norwegian air space. In contrast to the front in Finland, a total of 149 divisions and 3,050,000 soldiers were deployed for the rest of Operation Barbarossa.\nFinnish offensive phase in 1941.\nInitial operations.\nIn the evening of 21 June 1941, German mine-layers hiding in the Archipelago Sea deployed two large minefields across the Gulf of Finland. Later that night, German bombers flew along the gulf to Leningrad, mining the harbour and the river Neva, making a refueling stop at Utti, Finland, on the return leg. In the early hours of 22 June, Finnish forces launched Operation Kilpapurjehdus (\"Regatta\"), deploying troops in the demilitarised \u00c5land Islands. Although the 1921 \u00c5land convention had clauses allowing Finland to defend the islands in the event of an attack, the coordination of this operation with the German invasion and the arrest of the Soviet consulate staff stationed on the islands meant that the deployment was a deliberate violation of the treaty, according to Finnish historian Mauno Jokipii.\nOn the morning of 22 June, Hitler's proclamation read: \"Together with their Finnish comrades in arms the heroes from Narvik stand at the edge of the Arctic Ocean. German troops under command of the conqueror of Norway, and the Finnish freedom fighters under their Marshal's command, are protecting Finnish territory.\"\nFollowing the launch of Operation Barbarossa at around 3:15\u00a0a.m. on 22 June 1941, the Soviet Union sent seven bombers on a retaliatory airstrike into Finland, hitting targets at 6:06\u00a0a.m. Helsinki time as reported by the Finnish coastal defence ship \"V\u00e4in\u00e4m\u00f6inen\". At 7:15 (Moscow time) the People's Commissar of Defense of the USSR sent a directive to the Soviet armed forces, with orders \"Do not carry out raids against Finland and Romania until special instructions.\"\nOn the morning of 25 June, the Soviet Union launched another air offensive, with 460 fighters and bombers targeting 19 airfields in Finland; however, inaccurate intelligence and poor bombing accuracy resulted in several raids hitting Finnish cities, or municipalities, causing considerable damage. 23 Soviet bombers were lost in this strike while the Finnish forces lost no aircraft. Although the USSR claimed that the airstrikes were directed against German targets, particularly airfields in Finland, the Finnish Parliament used the attacks as justification for the approval of a \"defensive war\". According to historian David Kirby, the message was intended more for public opinion in Finland than abroad, where the country was viewed as an ally of the Axis powers.\nFinnish advance in Karelia.\nThe Finnish plans for the offensive in Ladoga Karelia were finalised on 28 June 1941, and the first stages of the operation began on 10 July. By 16 July, the VI Corps had reached the northern shore of Lake Ladoga, dividing the Soviet 7th Army, which had been tasked with defending the area. The USSR struggled to contain the German assault, and soon the Soviet high command, \"Stavka\" (), pulled all available units stationed along the Finnish border into the beleaguered front line. Additional reinforcements were drawn from the 237th Rifle Division and the Soviet 10th Mechanised Corps, excluding the 198th Motorised Division, both of which were stationed in Ladoga Karelia, but this stripped much of the reserve strength of the Soviet units defending that area.\nThe Finnish II Corps started its offensive in the north of the Karelian Isthmus on 31 July. Other Finnish forces reached the shores of Lake Ladoga on 9 August, encircling most of the three defending Soviet divisions on the northwestern coast of the lake in a pocket (); these divisions were later evacuated across the lake. On 22 August, the Finnish IV Corps began its offensive south of II Corps and advanced towards Vyborg (). By 23 August, II Corps had reached the Vuoksi River to the east and encircled the Soviet forces defending Vyborg. Finnish forces captured Vyborg on 29 August.\nThe Soviet order to withdraw from Vyborg came too late, resulting in significant losses in materiel, although most of the troops were later evacuated via the Koivisto Islands. After suffering severe losses, the Soviet 23rd Army was unable to halt the offensive, and by 2 September the Finnish Army had reached the old 1939 border. The advance by Finnish and German forces split the Soviet Northern Front into the Leningrad Front and the Karelian Front on 23 August. On 31 August, Finnish Headquarters ordered II and IV Corps, which had advanced the furthest, to halt their advance along a line that ran from the Gulf of Finland via Beloostrov\u2013Sestra\u2013Okhta\u2013Lembolovo to Lake Ladoga. The line ran past the former 1939 border, and approximately from Leningrad; a defensive position was established along this line. On 30 August, the IV Corps fought the Soviet 23rd Army in the Battle of Porlampi and defeated them on 1 September. Sporadic fighting continued around Beloostrov until the Soviets evicted the Finns on 5 September. The front on the Isthmus stabilised and the siege of Leningrad began on 8 September.\nThe Finnish Army of Karelia started its attack in East Karelia towards Petrozavodsk, Lake Onega and the Svir River on 9 September. German Army Group North advanced from the south of Leningrad towards the Svir River and captured Tikhvin but were forced to retreat to the Volkhov River by Soviet counterattacks. Soviet forces repeatedly attempted to expel the Finns from their bridgehead south of the Svir during October and December but were repulsed; Soviet units attacked the German 163rd Infantry Division in October 1941, which was operating under Finnish command across the Svir, but failed to dislodge it. Despite these failed attacks, the Finnish attack in East Karelia had been blunted and their advance had halted by 6 December. During the five-month campaign, the Finns suffered 75,000 casualties, of whom 26,355 had died, while the Soviets had 230,000 casualties, of whom 50,000 became prisoners of war.\nOperation Silver Fox in Lapland and Lend-Lease to Murmansk.\nThe German objective in Finnish Lapland was to take Murmansk and cut the Kirov (Murmansk) Railway running from Murmansk to Leningrad by capturing Salla and Kandalaksha. Murmansk was the only year-round ice-free port in the north and a threat to the nickel mine at Petsamo. The joint Finnish\u2013German Operation Silver Fox (; ) was started on 29 June 1941 by the German Army of Norway, which had the Finnish 3rd and 6th Divisions under its command, against the defending Soviet 14th Army and 54th Rifle Division. By November, the operation had stalled from the Kirov Railway due to unacclimatised German troops, heavy Soviet resistance, poor terrain, arctic weather and diplomatic pressure by the United States on the Finns regarding the lend-lease deliveries to Murmansk. The offensive and its three sub-operations failed to achieve their objectives. Both sides dug in and the arctic theatre remained stable, excluding minor skirmishes, until the Soviet Petsamo\u2013Kirkenes Offensive in October 1944.\nThe crucial arctic lend-lease convoys from the US and the UK via Murmansk and Kirov Railway to the bulk of the Soviet forces continued throughout World War II. The US supplied almost $11 billion in materials: 400,000 jeeps and trucks; 12,000 armored vehicles (including 7,000 tanks, which could equip some 20 US armoured divisions); 11,400 aircraft; and of food. As a similar example, British shipments of Matilda, Valentine and Tetrarch tanks accounted for only 6% of total Soviet tank production, but over 25% of medium and heavy tanks produced for the Red Army.\nAspirations, war effort and international relations.\nThe \"Wehrmacht\" rapidly advanced deep into Soviet territory early in the Operation Barbarossa campaign, leading the Finnish government to believe that Germany would defeat the Soviet Union quickly. President Ryti envisioned a Greater Finland, where Finns and other Finnic peoples would live inside a \"natural defence borderline\" by incorporating the Kola Peninsula, East Karelia and perhaps even northern Ingria. In public, the proposed frontier was introduced with the slogan \"short border, long peace\". Some members of the Finnish Parliament, such as members of the Social Democratic Party and the Swedish People's Party, opposed the idea, arguing that maintaining the 1939 frontier would be enough. Mannerheim often called the war an anti-Communist crusade, hoping to defeat \"Bolshevism once and for all\". On 10 July, Mannerheim drafted his order of the day, the Sword Scabbard Declaration, in which he pledged to liberate Karelia; in December 1941 in private letters, he made known his doubts of the need to push beyond the previous borders. The Finnish government assured the United States that it was unaware of the order.\nAccording to Vehvil\u00e4inen, most Finns thought that the scope of the new offensive was only to regain what had been taken in the Winter War. He further stated that the term 'Continuation War' was created at the start of the conflict by the Finnish government to justify the invasion to the population as a continuation of the defensive Winter War. The government also wished to emphasise that it was not an official ally of Germany, but a 'co-belligerent' fighting against a common enemy and with purely Finnish aims. Vehvil\u00e4inen wrote that the authenticity of the government's claim changed when the Finnish Army crossed the old frontier of 1939 and began to annex Soviet territory. British author Jonathan Clements asserted that by December 1941, Finnish soldiers had started questioning whether they were fighting a war of national defence or foreign conquest.\nBy the autumn of 1941, the Finnish military leadership started to doubt Germany's capability to finish the war quickly. The Finnish Defence Forces suffered relatively severe losses during their advance and, overall, German victory became uncertain as German troops were halted near Moscow. German troops in northern Finland faced circumstances they were unprepared for and failed to reach their targets. As the front lines stabilised, Finland attempted to start peace negotiations with the USSR. Mannerheim refused to assault Leningrad, which would inextricably tie Finland to Germany; he regarded his objectives for the war to be achieved, a decision that angered the Germans.\nDue to the war effort, the Finnish economy suffered from a lack of labour, as well as food shortages and increased prices. To combat this, the Finnish government demobilised part of the army to prevent industrial and agricultural production from collapsing. In October, Finland informed Germany that it would need of grain to manage until next year's harvest. The German authorities would have rejected the request, but Hitler himself agreed. Annual grain deliveries of equaled almost half of the Finnish domestic crop. On 25 November 1941, Finland signed the Anti-Comintern Pact, a less formal alliance, which the German leadership saw as a \"litmus test of loyalty\".\nFinland maintained good relations with a number of other Western powers. Foreign volunteers from Sweden and Estonia were among the foreigners who joined Finnish ranks. Infantry Regiment 200, called (\"Finnish boys\"), mostly Estonians, and the Swedes mustered the Swedish Volunteer Battalion. The Finnish government stressed that Finland was fighting as a co-belligerent with Germany against the USSR only to protect itself and that it was still the same democratic country as it had been in the Winter War. For example, Finland maintained diplomatic relations with the exiled Norwegian government and more than once criticised German occupation policy in Norway. Relations between Finland and the United States were more complex since the American public was sympathetic to the \"brave little democracy\" and had anticommunist sentiments. At first, the United States sympathised with the Finnish cause, but the situation became problematic after the Finnish Army had crossed the 1939 border. Finnish and German troops were a threat to the Kirov Railway and the northern supply line between the Western Allies and the Soviet Union. On 25 October 1941, the US demanded that Finland cease all hostilities against the USSR and to withdraw behind the 1939 border. In public, President Ryti rejected the demands, but in private, he wrote to Mannerheim on 5 November and asked him to halt the offensive. Mannerheim agreed and secretly instructed General Hjalmar Siilasvuo and his III Corps to end the assault on the Kirov Railway. Nevertheless, the United States never declared war on Finland during the entire conflict.\nBritish declaration of war and action in the Arctic Ocean.\nOn 12 July 1941, the United Kingdom signed an agreement of joint action with the Soviet Union. Under German pressure, Finland closed the British legation in Helsinki and cut diplomatic relations with Britain on 1 August. On 2 August 1941, Britain declared that Finland was under enemy occupation, which ended all economic transactions between Britain and Finland and led to a blockade of Finnish trade. The most sizable British action on Finnish soil was the Raid on Kirkenes and Petsamo, an aircraft-carrier strike on German and Finnish ships on 31 July 1941. The attack accomplished little except the loss of one Norwegian ship and three British aircraft, but it was intended to demonstrate British support for its Soviet ally. From September to October in 1941, a total of 39 Hawker Hurricanes of No. 151 Wing RAF, based at Murmansk, reinforced and provided pilot-training to the Soviet Air Forces during Operation Benedict to protect arctic convoys. On 28 November, the British government presented Finland with an ultimatum demanding for the Finns to cease military operations by 3 December. Unofficially, Finland informed the Allies that Finnish troops would halt their advance in the next few days. The reply did not satisfy London, which declared war on Finland on 6 December. The Commonwealth nations of Canada, Australia, India and New Zealand soon followed suit. In private, British Prime Minister Winston Churchill had sent a letter to Mannerheim on 29 November in which Churchill was \"deeply grieved\" that the British would have to declare war on Finland because of the British alliance with the Soviets. Mannerheim repatriated British volunteers under his command to the United Kingdom via Sweden. According to Clements, the declaration of war was mostly for appearance's sake.\nTrench warfare from 1942 to 1944.\nUnconventional warfare and military operations.\nUnconventional warfare was fought in both the Finnish and Soviet wildernesses. Finnish long-range reconnaissance patrols, organised both by the Intelligence Division's Detached Battalion 4 and by local units, patrolled behind Soviet lines. Soviet partisans, both resistance fighters and regular long-range patrol detachments, conducted a number of operations in Finland and in Eastern Karelia from 1941 to 1944. In summer 1942, the USSR formed the 1st Partisan Brigade. The unit was 'partisan' in name only, as it was essentially 600 men and women on long-range patrol intended to disrupt Finnish operations. The 1st Partisan Brigade was able to infiltrate beyond Finnish patrol lines, but was intercepted, and rendered ineffective, in August 1942 at Lake Segozero. Irregular partisans distributed propaganda newspapers, such as Finnish translations of the official Communist Party paper \"Pravda\" (). Notable Soviet politician Yuri Andropov took part in these partisan guerrilla actions. Finnish sources state that, although Soviet partisan activity in East Karelia disrupted Finnish military supply and communication assets, almost two thirds of the attacks targeted civilians, killing 200 and injuring 50, including children and elderly.\nBetween 1942 and 1943, military operations were limited, although the front did see some action. In January 1942, the Soviet Karelian Front attempted to retake Medvezhyegorsk (), which had been lost to the Finns in late 1941. With the arrival of spring in April, Soviet forces went on the offensive on the Svir River front, in the Kestenga () region further north in Lapland as well as in the far north at Petsamo with the 14th Rifle Division's amphibious landings supported by the Northern Fleet. All Soviet offensives started promisingly, but due either to the Soviets overextending their lines or stubborn defensive resistance, the offensives were repulsed. After Finnish and German counterattacks in Kestenga, the front lines were generally stalemated. In September 1942, the USSR attacked again at Medvezhyegorsk, but despite five days of fighting, the Soviets only managed to push the Finnish lines back on a roughly long stretch of the front. Later that month, a Soviet landing with two battalions in Petsamo was defeated by a German counterattack. In November 1941, Hitler decided to separate the German forces fighting in Lapland from the Army of Norway and create the Army of Lapland, commanded by Colonel General Eduard Dietl. In June 1942, the Army of Lapland was redesignated the 20th Mountain Army.\nSiege of Leningrad and naval warfare.\nIn the early stages of the war, the Finnish Army overran the former 1939 border, but ceased their advance from the center of Leningrad. Multiple authors have stated that Finland participated in the siege of Leningrad (), but the full extent and nature of their participation is debated and a clear consensus has yet to emerge. American historian David Glantz writes that the Finnish Army generally maintained their lines and contributed little to the siege from 1941 to 1944, whereas Russian historian Nikolai Baryshnikov stated in 2002 that Finland tacitly supported Hitler's starvation policy for the city. However, in 2009 British historian Michael Jones disputed Baryshnikov's claim and asserted that the Finnish Army cut off the city's northern supply routes but did not take further military action. In 2006, American author Lisa Kirschenbaum wrote that the siege started \"when German and Finnish troops severed all land routes in and out of Leningrad.\"\nAccording to Clements, Mannerheim personally refused Hitler's request of assaulting Leningrad during their meeting on 4 June 1942. Mannerheim explained to Hitler that \"Finland had every reason to wish to stay out of any further provocation of the Soviet Union.\" In 2014, author Jeff Rutherford described the city as being \"ensnared\" between the German and Finnish armies. British historian John Barber described it as a \"siege by the German and Finnish armies from 8 September 1941 to 27 January 1944 [...]\" in his foreword in 2017. Likewise, in 2017, Alexis Peri wrote that the city was \"completely cut off, save a heavily patrolled water passage over Lake Ladoga\" by \"Hitler's Army Group North and his Finnish allies.\"\nThe 150 speedboats, two minelayers and four steamships of the Finnish Ladoga Naval Detachment, as well as numerous shore batteries, had been stationed on Lake Ladoga since August 1941. Finnish Lieutenant General Paavo Talvela proposed on 17 May 1942 to create a joint Finnish\u2013German\u2013Italian unit on the lake to disrupt Soviet supply convoys to Leningrad. The unit was named Naval Detachment K and comprised four Italian MAS torpedo motorboats of the XII Squadriglia MAS, four German KM-type minelayers and the Finnish torpedo-motorboat \"Sisu\". The detachment began operations in August 1942 and sank numerous smaller Soviet watercraft and flatboats and assaulted enemy bases and beach fronts until it was dissolved in the winter of 1942\u201343. Twenty-three Siebel ferries and nine infantry transports of the German \"Einsatzstab F\u00e4hre Ost\" were also deployed to Lake Ladoga and unsuccessfully assaulted the island of Sukho, which protected the main supply route to Leningrad, in October 1942.\nDespite the siege of the city, the Soviet Baltic Fleet was still able to operate from Leningrad. The Finnish Navy's flagship had been sunk in September 1941 in the gulf by mines during the failed diversionary Operation North Wind in 1941. In early 1942, Soviet forces recaptured the island of Gogland, but lost it and the Bolshoy Tyuters islands to Finnish forces later in spring 1942. During the winter between 1941 and 1942, the Soviet Baltic Fleet decided to use their large submarine fleet in offensive operations. Though initial submarine operations in the summer of 1942 were successful, the and Finnish Navy soon intensified their anti-submarine efforts, making Soviet submarine operations later in 1942 costly. The underwater offensive carried out by the Soviets convinced the Germans to lay anti-submarine nets as well as supporting minefields between Porkkala Peninsula and Naissaar, which proved to be an insurmountable obstacle for Soviet submarines. On the Arctic Ocean, Finnish radio intelligence intercepted Allied messages on supply convoys to Murmansk, such as PQ 17 and PQ 18, and relayed the information to the \"Abwehr\", German intelligence.\nFinnish military administration and concentration camps.\nOn 19 July 1941, the Finns created a military administration in occupied East Karelia with the goal of preparing the region for eventual incorporation into Finland. The Finns aimed to expel the Russian portion of the local population (constituting to about a half), who were deemed \"non-national\", from the area once the war was over, and replace them with Finno-Ugric peoples. Most of the East Karelian population had already been evacuated before the Finnish forces arrived, but about 85,000 people \u2014 mostly elderly, women and children \u2014 were left behind, less than half of whom were Karelians. A significant number of civilians, almost 30% of the remaining Russians, were interned in concentration camps.\nThe winter between 1941 and 1942 was particularly harsh for the Finnish urban population due to poor harvests and a shortage of agricultural labourers. However, conditions were much worse for Russians in Finnish concentration camps. More than 3,500 people died, mostly from starvation, amounting to 13.8% of those detained, while the corresponding figure for the free population of the occupied territories was 2.6%, and 1.4% for Finland. Conditions gradually improved, ethnic discrimination in wage levels and food rations was terminated, and new schools were established for the Russian-speaking population the following year, after Commander-in-Chief Mannerheim called for the International Committee of the Red Cross from Geneva to inspect the camps. By the end of the occupation, mortality rates had dropped to the same levels as in Finland.\nJews in Finland.\nIn 1939, Finland had a small Jewish population of approximately 2,000 people, of whom 300 were refugees from Germany, Austria, and Czechoslovakia. They had full civil rights and fought with other Finns in the ranks of the Finnish Army. The field synagogue in East Karelia was one of the very few functioning synagogues on the Axis side during the war. There were several cases of Jewish officers of the Finnish Army being awarded the German Iron Cross, which they declined. German soldiers were treated by Jewish medical officers\u2014who sometimes saved the soldiers' lives. German command mentioned Finnish Jews at the Wannsee Conference in January 1942, wishing to transport them to the Majdanek concentration camp in occupied Poland. \"SS\" leader Heinrich Himmler also raised the topic of Finnish Jews during his visit in Finland in the summer of 1942; Finnish Prime Minister Jukka Rangell replied that Finland did not have a Jewish question. In November 1942, the Minister of the Interior Toivo Horelli and the head of State Police Arno Anthoni secretly deported eight Jewish refugees to the \"Gestapo\", raising protests among Finnish Social Democrat Party ministers. Only one of the deportees survived. After the incident, the Finnish government refused to transfer any more Jews to German detainment.\nSoviet offensive in 1944.\nAir raids and the Leningrad\u2013Novgorod Offensive.\nFinland began to seek an exit from the war after the German defeat at the Battle of Stalingrad in February 1943. Finnish Prime Minister Edwin Linkomies formed a new cabinet in March 1943 with peace as the top priority. Similarly, the Finns were distressed by the Allied invasion of Sicily in July and the German defeat in the Battle of Kursk in August. Negotiations were conducted intermittently in 1943 and 1944 between Finland, the Western Allies and the Soviets, but no agreement was reached. Stalin decided to force Finland to surrender with a bombing campaign on Helsinki. Starting in February 1944, it included three major air attacks totaling over 6,000 sorties. Finnish anti-aircraft defence repelled the raids, and only 5% of the dropped bombs hit their planned targets. In Helsinki, decoy searchlights and fires were placed outside the city to deceive Soviet bombers into dropping their payloads on unpopulated areas. Major air attacks also hit Oulu and Kotka, but pre-emptive radio intelligence and effective defence kept the number of casualties low.\nThe Soviet Leningrad\u2013Novgorod Offensive finally lifted the siege of Leningrad on 27 January 1944. The Army Group North was pushed to Ida-Viru County on the Estonian border. Stiff German and Estonian defence in Narva from February to August prevented the use of occupied Estonia as a favourable base for Soviet amphibious and air assaults against Helsinki and other Finnish coastal cities in support of a land offensive. Field Marshal Mannerheim had reminded the German command on numerous occasions that if the German troops withdrew from Estonia, Finland would be forced to make peace, even on extremely unfavourable terms. Finland abandoned peace negotiations in April 1944 because of the unfavourable terms the USSR demanded.\nVyborg\u2013Petrozavodsk Offensive and breakthrough.\nOn 9 June 1944, the Soviet Leningrad Front launched an offensive against Finnish positions on the Karelian Isthmus and in the area of Lake Ladoga, timed to coincide with Operation Overlord in Normandy as agreed during the Tehran Conference. Along the -wide breakthrough, the Red Army concentrated 3,000 guns and mortars. In some places, the concentration of artillery pieces exceeded 200 guns for every kilometre of front or one for every . Soviet artillery fired over 80,000 rounds along the front on the Karelian Isthmus. On the second day of the offensive, the artillery barrages and superior number of Soviet forces crushed the main Finnish defence line. The Red Army penetrated the second line of defence, the Vammelsuu\u2013Taipale line (VT line), at Kuuterselk\u00e4 by the sixth day and recaptured Viipuri with insignificant resistance on 20 June. The Soviet breakthrough on the Karelian Isthmus forced the Finns to reinforce the area, thus allowing the concurrent Soviet offensive in East Karelia to meet less resistance and to recapture Petrozavodsk by 28 June 1944.\nOn 25 June, the Red Army reached the third line of defence, the Viipuri\u2013Kuparsaari\u2013Taipale line (VKT line), and the decisive Battle of Tali-Ihantala began, which has been described as the largest battle in Nordic military history. By then, the Finnish Army had retreated around to approximately the same line of defence they had held at the end of the Winter War. Finland especially lacked modern anti-tank weaponry that could stop Soviet heavy armour, such as the KV-1 or IS-2. Thus, German Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop offered German hand-held \"Panzerfaust\" and \"Panzerschreck\" antitank weapons in exchange for a guarantee that Finland would not seek a separate peace with the Soviets. On 26 June, President Risto Ryti gave the guarantee as a personal undertaking that he, Field Marshal Mannerheim and Prime Minister Edwin Linkomies intended to last legally only for the remainder of Ryti's presidency. In addition to delivering thousands of anti-tank weapons, Hitler sent the 122nd Infantry Division and the half-strength 303rd Assault Gun Brigade armed with Sturmgesch\u00fctz III tank destroyers as well as the Luftwaffe's Detachment Kuhlmey to provide temporary support in the most vulnerable sectors. With the new supplies and assistance from Germany, the Finnish Army halted the numerically and materially superior Soviet advance at Tali-Ihantala on 9 July 1944 and stabilised the front.\nMore battles were fought toward the end of the war, the last of which was the Battle of Ilomantsi, fought between 26 July and 13 August 1944 and resulting in a Finnish victory with the destruction of two Soviet divisions. Resisting the Soviet offensive had exhausted Finnish resources. Despite German support under the Ryti\u2013Ribbentrop Agreement, Finland asserted that it was unable to blunt another major offensive. Soviet victories against German Army Groups Center and North during Operation Bagration made the situation even more dire for Finland. With no imminent further Soviet offensives, Finland sought to leave the war. On 1 August, Ryti resigned, and on 4 August, Field Marshal Mannerheim was sworn in as the new president. He annulled the agreement between Ryti and Ribbentrop on 17 August to allow Finland to sue for peace with the Soviets again, and peace terms from Moscow arrived on 29 August.\nCeasefire and peace.\nFinland was required to return to the borders agreed to in the 1940 Moscow Peace Treaty, demobilise its armed forces, fulfill war reparations and cede the municipality of Petsamo. The Finns were also required to end any diplomatic relations with Germany immediately and to expel the from Finnish territory by 15 September 1944; any troops remaining were to be disarmed, arrested and turned over to the Allies. The Finnish Parliament accepted those terms in a secret meeting on 2 September and requested for official negotiations for an armistice to begin. The Finnish Army implemented a ceasefire at 8:00\u00a0a.m. Helsinki time on 4 September. The Red Army followed suit a day later. On 14 September, a delegation led by Finnish Prime Minister Antti Hackzell and Foreign Minister Carl Enckell began negotiating, with the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom, the final terms of the Moscow Armistice, which eventually included additional stipulations from the Soviets. They were presented by Molotov on 18 September and accepted by the Finnish Parliament a day later.\nThe motivations for the Soviet peace agreement with Finland are debated. Several Western historians stated that the original Soviet designs for Finland were no different from those for the Baltic countries. American political scientist Dan Reiter asserted that for Moscow, the control of Finland was necessary. Reiter and the British historian Victor Rothwell quoted Molotov as telling his Lithuanian counterpart in 1940, when the Soviets effectively annexed Lithuania, that minor states such as Finland, \"will be included within the honourable family of Soviet peoples\". Reiter stated that concern over severe losses pushed Stalin into accepting a limited outcome in the war rather than pursuing annexation, although some Soviet documents called for military occupation of Finland. He also wrote that Stalin had described territorial concessions, reparations and military bases as his objective with Finland to representatives from the UK, in December 1941, and the US, in March 1943, as well as the Tehran Conference. He believed that in the end, \"Stalin's desire to crush Hitler quickly and decisively without distraction from the Finnish sideshow\" concluded the war. Red Army officers captured as prisoners of war during the Battle of Tali-Ihantala revealed that their intention was to reach Helsinki, and that they were to be strengthened with reinforcements for this task. This was confirmed by intercepted Soviet radio messages.\nRussian historian Nikolai Baryshnikov disputed the view that the Soviet Union sought to deprive Finland of its independence. He argued that there was no documentary evidence for such claims and that the Soviet government was always open for negotiations. Baryshnikov cited sources like the public information chief of Finnish Headquarters, Major Kalle Lehmus, to show that Finnish leadership had learned of the limited Soviet plans for Finland by at least July 1944 after intelligence revealed that some Soviet divisions were to be transferred to reserve in Leningrad. Finnish historian Heikki Ylikangas stated similar findings in 2009. According to him, the Soviets refocused their efforts in the summer of 1944 from the Finnish Front to defeating Germany, and Mannerheim received intelligence from Colonel Alad\u00e1r Paasonen in June 1944 that the Soviet Union was aiming for peace, not occupation.\nEvidence of the Soviet leadership's intentions for the occupation of Finland has later been uncovered. In 2018, it was revealed that the Soviets' designed and printed (in Goznak) new banknotes for Finland during the closing phases of the war, which were to be put into use after the planned occupation of the country.\nAftermath and casualties.\nFinland and Germany.\nAccording to Finnish historians, the casualties of the Finnish Defence Forces amounted to 63,204 dead or missing and around 158,000 wounded. Officially, the Soviets captured 2,377 Finnish prisoners-of-war, but Finnish researchers estimated the number to be around 3,500 prisoners. A total of 939 Finnish civilians died in air raids and 190 civilians were killed by Soviet partisans. Germany suffered approximately 84,000 casualties in the Finnish front: 16,400 killed, 60,400 wounded and 6,800 missing. In addition to the original peace terms of restoring the 1940 border, Finland was required to pay war reparations to the USSR, conduct domestic war-responsibility trials, cede the municipality of Petsamo and lease the Porkkala Peninsula to the Soviets, as well as ban fascist elements and allow left-wing groups, such as the Communist Party of Finland. A Soviet-led Allied Control Commission was installed to enforce and monitor the peace agreement in Finland. The requirement to disarm or expel any German troops left on Finnish soil by 15 September 1944 eventually escalated into the Lapland War between Finland and Germany and the evacuation of the 200,000-strong 20th Mountain Army to Norway.\nThe Soviet demand for $600 million in war indemnities was reduced to $300 million (equivalent to $ billion in 2024), most likely because of pressure from the US and the UK. After the ceasefire, the Soviets insisted for the payments to be based on 1938 prices, which doubled the de facto amount. The temporary Moscow Armistice was finalised without changes later in the 1947 Paris Peace Treaties. Henrik Lunde noted that Finland survived the war without losing its independence, unlike many of Germany's allies. Likewise, Helsinki, along with Moscow, was the only capital of a combatant nation that was not occupied in Continental Europe. In the longer term, Peter Provis analysed that by following self-censorship and limited appeasement policies as well as by fulfilling the Soviet demands, Finland avoided the fate of other nations that were annexed by the Soviets.\nBecause of Soviet pressure, Finland decided not to accept economic aid from the Marshall Plan.\nOn 6 April 1948, Finland and the Soviet Union agreed to sign the Finno-Soviet Treaty of 1948, which was introduced since Finland wanted more political independence from the USSR and the Soviets sought to prevent Finland from being used by Western powers to invade the USSR. On 19 September 1955, Finland and the Soviet Union agreed to extend the Finno-Soviet Treaty of 1948 and the Soviets also agreed to return the Porkkala Peninsula to Finland. On 14 December 1955, Finland was admitted as a member state of the United Nations, along with Ireland, Italy, Spain, and other countries that had not been part of the Allies. In January 1956, twelve years after the beginning of the lease in 1944, the Soviets withdrew from their naval base on Porkkala and the peninsula was returned to Finnish sovereignty.\nMany civilians who had been displaced after the Winter War had moved back into Karelia during the Continuation War and so had to be evacuated from Karelia again. Of the 260,000 civilians who had returned to Karelia, only 19 chose to remain and become Soviet citizens. Most of the Ingrian Finns, together with Votes and Izhorians living in German-occupied Ingria, had been evacuated to Finland in 1943\u20131944. After the armistice, Finland was forced to return the evacuees. Soviet authorities did not allow the 55,733 returnees to resettle in Ingria and deported the Ingrian Finns to central regions of the Soviet Union.\nSoviet Union.\nThe war is considered a Soviet victory. According to Finnish historians, Soviet casualties in the Continuation War were not accurately recorded and various approximations have arisen. Russian historian Grigori Krivosheev estimated in 1997 that around 250,000 were killed or missing in action while 575,000 were medical casualties (385,000 wounded and 190,000 sick). Finnish author Nenye and others stated in 2016 that at least 305,000 were confirmed dead, or missing, according to the latest research and the number of wounded certainly exceeded 500,000. Of material losses, authors Jowett and Snodgrass state that 697 Soviet tanks were destroyed, 842 field artillery pieces captured, and 1,600 airplanes destroyed by Finnish fighter planes (1,030 by anti-aircraft fire and 75 by the Navy).\nThe number of Soviet prisoners of war in Finland was estimated by Finnish historians to be around 64,000, 56,000 of whom were captured in 1941. Around 2,600 to 2,800 Soviet prisoners of war were rendered to Germany in exchange for roughly 2,200 Finnish prisoners of war. Of the Soviet prisoners, at least 18,318 were documented to have died in Finnish prisoner of war camps. Finnish archival sources indicate that the highest mortality rates were observed in the largest prisoner of war camps, with mortality rates as high as 41%. For small camps, the comparable mortality rate was under 5%. Nearly 85% of the deaths happened between November 1941 and September 1942 with the highest monthly number of deaths, 2,665, recorded in February 1942. For comparison, the amount of deaths in February 1943 was 92. Historian Oula Silvennoinen attributes the amount of Soviet deaths to several factors, which include Finnish unpreparedness to handle unexpectedly large amounts of prisoners resulting in overcrowding, a lack of warm clothing among prisoners captured predominantly during the summer offensive, limited supplies of food (often made worse by camp personnel stealing food for themselves), and disease as a result of the previous factors. According to historian Antti Kujala, approximately 1,200 prisoners were shot, \"most\" of whom illegally.\nThe extent of Finland's participation in the siege of Leningrad, and whether Soviet civilian casualties during the siege should be attributed to the Continuation War, is debated and lacks a consensus (estimates of civilian deaths during the siege range from 632,253 to 1,042,000).\nIn film and literature.\nSeveral literary and cinematic arrangements have been made on the basis of the Continuation War. The best-known story about the Continuation War is V\u00e4in\u00f6 Linna's novel \"The Unknown Soldier\" (), which was the basis for three films in 1955, 1985, and 2017. There is also a 1999 film \"Ambush\", based on a novel by Antti Tuuri on the events in Rukaj\u00e4rvi, Karelia, and a 2007 film \"\", based on the Battle of Tali-Ihantala. The final stages of the Continuation War were the primary focus of Soviet director Yuli Raizman's 1945 documentary entitled \"A Propos of the Truce with Finland\" (). The documentary illustrates the strategic operations that led to the breakthrough on the Karelian Isthmus by the Soviets as well as how Soviet propaganda presented the war overall. The film is titled \"L\u00e4pimurto Kannaksella ja rauhanneuvottelut\" in Finnish.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nEnglish.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFinnish and Russian.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7713", "revid": "14135516", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7713", "title": "Chinese remainder theorem", "text": "About simultaneous modular congruences\nIn mathematics, the Chinese remainder theorem states that if one knows the remainders of the Euclidean division of an integer \"n\" by several integers, then one can determine uniquely the remainder of the division of \"n\" by the product of these integers, under the condition that the divisors are pairwise coprime (no two divisors share a common factor other than 1). \nThe theorem is sometimes called Sunzi's theorem. Both names of the theorem refer to its earliest known statement that appeared in \"Sunzi Suanjing\", a Chinese manuscript written during the 3rd to 5th century CE. This first statement was restricted to the following example:\nIf one knows that the remainder of \"n\" divided by 3 is 2, the remainder of \"n\" divided by 5 is 3, and the remainder of \"n\" divided by 7 is 2, then with no other information, one can determine the remainder of \"n\" divided by 105 (the product of 3, 5, and 7) without knowing the value of \"n\". In this example, the remainder is 23. Moreover, this remainder is the only possible positive value of \"n\" that is less than 105.\nThe Chinese remainder theorem is widely used for computing with large integers, as it allows replacing a computation for which one knows a bound on the size of the result by several similar computations on small integers.\nThe Chinese remainder theorem (expressed in terms of congruences) is true over every principal ideal domain. It has been generalized to any ring, with a formulation involving two-sided ideals.\nHistory.\nThe earliest known statement of the problem appears in the 5th-century book \"Sunzi Suanjing\" by the Chinese mathematician Sunzi:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There are certain things whose number is unknown. If we count them by threes, we have two left over; by fives, we have three left over; and by sevens, two are left over. How many things are there?\nSunzi's work would not be considered a theorem by modern standards; it only gives one particular problem, without showing how to solve it, much less any proof about the general case or a general algorithm for solving it. An algorithm for solving this problem was described by Aryabhata (6th century). Special cases of the Chinese remainder theorem were also known to Brahmagupta (7th century) and appear in Fibonacci's Liber Abaci (1202). The result was later generalized with a complete solution called \"Da-yan-shu\" () in Qin Jiushao's 1247 \"Mathematical Treatise in Nine Sections\" which was translated into English in early 19th century by British missionary Alexander Wylie.\nThe notion of congruences was first introduced and used by Carl Friedrich Gauss in his \"Disquisitiones Arithmeticae\" of 1801. Gauss illustrates the Chinese remainder theorem on a problem involving calendars, namely, \"to find the years that have a certain period number with respect to the solar and lunar cycle and the Roman indiction.\" Gauss introduces a procedure for solving the problem that had already been used by Leonhard Euler but was in fact an ancient method that had appeared several times.\nStatement.\nLet \"n\"1, ..., \"n\"\"k\" be integers greater than 1, which are often called \"moduli\" or \"divisors\". Let us denote by \"N\" the product of the \"n\"\"i\".\nThe Chinese remainder theorem asserts that if the \"n\"\"i\" are pairwise coprime, and if \"a\"1, ..., \"a\"\"k\" are integers such that 0 \u2264 \"a\"\"i\" &lt; \"n\"\"i\" for every \"i\", then there is one and only one integer \"x\", such that 0 \u2264 \"x\" &lt; \"N\" and the remainder of the Euclidean division of \"x\" by \"n\"\"i\" is \"a\"\"i\" for every \"i\".\nThis may be restated as follows in terms of congruences:\nIf the formula_1 are pairwise coprime, and if \"a\"1, ..., \"a\"\"k\" are any integers, then the system\nformula_2\nhas a solution, and any two solutions, say \"x\"1 and \"x\"2, are congruent modulo \"N\", that is, \"x\"1 \u2261 \"x\"2 (mod \"N\"\u200a).\nIn abstract algebra, the theorem is often restated as: if the \"n\"\"i\" are pairwise coprime, the map\nformula_3\ndefines a ring isomorphism\nformula_4\nbetween the ring of integers modulo \"N\" and the direct product of the rings of integers modulo the \"n\"\"i\". This means that for doing a sequence of arithmetic operations in formula_5 one may do the same computation independently in each formula_6 and then get the result by applying the isomorphism (from the right to the left). This may be much faster than the direct computation if \"N\" and the number of operations are large. This is widely used, under the name \"multi-modular computation\", for linear algebra over the integers or the rational numbers.\nThe theorem can also be restated in the language of combinatorics as the fact that the infinite arithmetic progressions of integers form a Helly family.\nProof.\nThe existence and the uniqueness of the solution may be proven independently. However, the first proof of existence, given below, uses this uniqueness.\nUniqueness.\nSuppose that x and y are both solutions to all the congruences. As x and y give the same remainder, when divided by \"ni\", their difference \"x\" \u2212 \"y\" is a multiple of each \"ni\". As the \"ni\" are pairwise coprime, their product \"N\" also divides \"x\" \u2212 \"y\", and thus x and y are congruent modulo \"N\". If x and y are supposed to be non-negative and less than \"N\" (as in the first statement of the theorem), then their difference may be a multiple of \"N\" only if \"x\" = \"y\".\nExistence (first proof).\nThe map\nformula_7\nmaps congruence classes modulo \"N\" to sequences of congruence classes modulo \"ni\". The proof of uniqueness shows that this map is injective. As the domain and the codomain of this map have the same number of elements, the map is also surjective, which proves the existence of the solution.\nThis proof is very simple but does not provide any direct way for computing a solution. Moreover, it cannot be generalized to other situations where the following proof can.\nExistence (constructive proof).\nExistence may be established by an explicit construction of x. This construction may be split into two steps, first solving the problem in the case of two moduli, and then extending this solution to the general case by induction on the number of moduli.\nCase of two moduli.\nWe want to solve the system:\nformula_8\nwhere formula_9 and formula_10 are coprime.\nB\u00e9zout's identity asserts the existence of two integers formula_11 and formula_12 such that \nformula_13\nThe integers formula_11 and formula_12 may be computed by the extended Euclidean algorithm.\nA solution is given by\nformula_16\nIndeed, \nformula_17\nimplying that formula_18 The second congruence is proved similarly, by exchanging the subscripts 1 and 2.\nGeneral case.\nConsider a sequence of congruence equations:\nformula_19\nwhere the formula_1 are pairwise coprime. The two first equations have a solution formula_21 provided by the method of the previous section. The set of the solutions of these two first equations is the set of all solutions of the equation\nformula_22\nAs the other formula_1 are coprime with formula_24 this reduces solving the initial problem of k equations to a similar problem with formula_25 equations. Iterating the process, one gets eventually the solutions of the initial problem.\nExistence (direct construction).\nFor constructing a solution, it is not necessary to make an induction on the number of moduli. However, such a direct construction involves more computation with large numbers, which makes it less efficient and less used. Nevertheless, Lagrange interpolation is a special case of this construction, applied to polynomials instead of integers.\nLet formula_26 be the product of all moduli but one. As the formula_1 are pairwise coprime, formula_28 and formula_1 are coprime. Thus B\u00e9zout's identity applies, and there exist integers formula_30 and formula_31 such that\nformula_32\nA solution of the system of congruences is\nformula_33\nIn fact, as formula_34 is a multiple of formula_1 for formula_36\nwe have\nformula_37\nfor every formula_38\nComputation.\nConsider a system of congruences:\nformula_39\nwhere the formula_1 are pairwise coprime, and let formula_41 In this section several methods are described for computing the unique solution for formula_42, such that formula_43 and these methods are applied on the example\nformula_44\nSeveral methods of computation are presented. The two first ones are useful for small examples, but become very inefficient when the product formula_45 is large. The third one uses the existence proof given in . It is the most convenient when the product formula_45 is large, or for computer computation.\nSystematic search.\nIt is easy to check whether a value of x is a solution: it suffices to compute the remainder of the Euclidean division of x by each \"n\"\"i\". Thus, to find the solution, it suffices to check successively the integers from 0 to N until finding the solution.\nAlthough very simple, this method is very inefficient. For the simple example considered here, 40 integers (including 0) have to be checked for finding the solution, which is 39. This is an exponential time algorithm, as the size of the input is, up to a constant factor, the number of digits of N, and the average number of operations is of the order of N.\nTherefore, this method is rarely used, neither for hand-written computation nor on computers.\nSearch by sieving.\nThe search of the solution may be made dramatically faster by sieving. For this method, we suppose, without loss of generality, that formula_47 (if it were not the case, it would suffice to replace each formula_48 by the remainder of its division by formula_1). This implies that the solution belongs to the arithmetic progression\nformula_50\nBy testing the values of these numbers modulo formula_51 one eventually finds a solution formula_52 of the two first congruences. Then the solution belongs to the arithmetic progression \nformula_53\nTesting the values of these numbers modulo formula_54 and continuing until every modulus has been tested eventually yields the solution.\nThis method is faster if the moduli have been ordered by decreasing value, that is if formula_55 For the example, this gives the following computation. We consider first the numbers that are congruent to 4 modulo 5 (the largest modulus), which are 4, 9 = 4 + 5, 14 = 9 + 5, ... For each of them, compute the remainder by 4 (the second largest modulus) until getting a number congruent to 3 modulo 4. Then one can proceed by adding 20 = 5\u2009\u00d7\u20094 at each step, and computing only the remainders by 3. This gives\n4 mod 4 \u2192 0. Continue\n4 + 5 = 9 mod 4 \u21921. Continue\n9 + 5 = 14 mod 4 \u2192 2. Continue\n14 + 5 = 19 mod 4 \u2192 3. OK, continue by considering remainders modulo 3 and adding 5\u2009\u00d7\u20094 = 20 each time\n19 mod 3 \u2192 1. Continue\n19 + 20 = 39 mod 3 \u2192 0. OK, this is the result.\nThis method works well for hand-written computation with a product of moduli that is not too big. However, it is much slower than other methods, for very large products of moduli. Although dramatically faster than the systematic search, this method also has an exponential time complexity and is therefore not used on computers.\nUsing the existence construction.\nThe constructive existence proof shows that, in the case of two moduli, the solution may be obtained by the computation of the B\u00e9zout coefficients of the moduli, followed by a few multiplications, additions and reductions modulo formula_56 (for getting a result in the interval formula_57). As the B\u00e9zout's coefficients may be computed with the extended Euclidean algorithm, the whole computation, at most, has a quadratic time complexity of formula_58 where formula_59 denotes the number of digits of formula_60\nFor more than two moduli, the method for two moduli allows the replacement of any two congruences by a single congruence modulo the product of the moduli. Iterating this process provides eventually the solution with a complexity, which is quadratic in the number of digits of the product of all moduli. This quadratic time complexity does not depend on the order in which the moduli are regrouped. One may regroup the two first moduli, then regroup the resulting modulus with the next one, and so on. This strategy is the easiest to implement, but it also requires more computation involving large numbers.\nAnother strategy consists in partitioning the moduli in pairs whose product have comparable sizes (as much as possible), applying, in parallel, the method of two moduli to each pair, and iterating with a number of moduli approximatively divided by two. This method allows an easy parallelization of the algorithm. Also, if fast algorithms (that is, algorithms working in quasilinear time) are used for the basic operations, this method provides an algorithm for the whole computation that works in quasilinear time.\nOn the current example (which has only three moduli), both strategies are identical and work as follows.\nB\u00e9zout's identity for 3 and 4 is\nformula_61\nPutting this in the formula given for proving the existence gives \nformula_62\nfor a solution of the two first congruences, the other solutions being obtained by adding to \u22129 any multiple of 3\u2009\u00d7\u20094 = 12. One may continue with any of these solutions, but the solution 3 = \u22129 +12 is smaller (in absolute value) and thus leads probably to an easier computation\nB\u00e9zout identity for 5 and 3\u2009\u00d7\u20094 = 12 is\nformula_63\nApplying the same formula again, we get a solution of the problem:\nformula_64\nThe other solutions are obtained by adding any multiple of 3\u2009\u00d7\u20094\u2009\u00d7\u20095 = 60, and the smallest positive solution is \u221221 + 60 = 39.\nAs a linear Diophantine system.\nThe system of congruences solved by the Chinese remainder theorem may be rewritten as a system of linear Diophantine equations:\nformula_65\nwhere the unknown integers are formula_42 and the formula_67 Therefore, every general method for solving such systems may be used for finding the solution of Chinese remainder theorem, such as the reduction of the matrix of the system to Smith normal form or Hermite normal form. However, as usual when using a general algorithm for a more specific problem, this approach is less efficient than the method of the preceding section, based on a direct use of B\u00e9zout's identity.\nOver principal ideal domains.\nIn , the Chinese remainder theorem has been stated in three different ways: in terms of remainders, of congruences, and of a ring isomorphism. The statement in terms of remainders does not apply, in general, to principal ideal domains, as remainders are not defined in such rings. However, the two other versions make sense over a principal ideal domain \"R\": it suffices to replace \"integer\" by \"element of the domain\" and formula_68 by \"R\". These two versions of the theorem are true in this context, because the proofs (except for the first existence proof), are based on Euclid's lemma and B\u00e9zout's identity, which are true over every principal domain.\nHowever, in general, the theorem is only an existence theorem and does not provide any way for computing the solution, unless one has an algorithm for computing the coefficients of B\u00e9zout's identity.\nOver univariate polynomial rings and Euclidean domains.\nThe statement in terms of remainders given in cannot be generalized to any principal ideal domain, but its generalization to Euclidean domains is straightforward. The univariate polynomials over a field is the typical example of a Euclidean domain which is not the integers. Therefore, we state the theorem for the case of the ring formula_69 for a field formula_70 For getting the theorem for a general Euclidean domain, it suffices to replace the degree by the Euclidean function of the Euclidean domain.\nThe Chinese remainder theorem for polynomials is thus: Let formula_71 (the moduli) be, for formula_72, pairwise coprime polynomials in formula_69. Let formula_74 be the degree of formula_71, and formula_76 be the sum of the formula_77\nIf formula_78 are polynomials such that formula_79 or formula_80 for every \"i\", then, there is one and only one polynomial formula_81, such that formula_82 and the remainder of the Euclidean division of formula_81 by formula_71 is formula_85 for every \"i\".\nThe construction of the solution may be done as in or . However, the latter construction may be simplified by using, as follows, partial fraction decomposition instead of the extended Euclidean algorithm.\nThus, we want to find a polynomial formula_81, which satisfies the congruences\nformula_87\nfor formula_88\nConsider the polynomials\nformula_89\nThe partial fraction decomposition of formula_90 gives k polynomials formula_91 with degrees formula_92 such that\nformula_93\nand thus\nformula_94\nThen a solution of the simultaneous congruence system is given by the polynomial\nformula_95\nIn fact, we have\n formula_96\nfor formula_97\nThis solution may have a degree larger than formula_98 The unique solution of degree less than formula_76 may be deduced by considering the remainder formula_100 of the Euclidean division of formula_101 by formula_102 This solution is \nformula_103\nLagrange interpolation.\nA special case of Chinese remainder theorem for polynomials is Lagrange interpolation. For this, consider k monic polynomials of degree one:\nformula_104\nThey are pairwise coprime if the formula_105 are all different. The remainder of the division by formula_71 of a polynomial formula_81 is formula_108, by the polynomial remainder theorem.\nNow, let formula_109 be constants (polynomials of degree 0) in formula_70 Both Lagrange interpolation and Chinese remainder theorem assert the existence of a unique polynomial formula_111 of degree less than formula_112 such that\nformula_113\nfor every formula_38\nLagrange interpolation formula is exactly the result, in this case, of the above construction of the solution. More precisely, let\nformula_115\nThe partial fraction decomposition of formula_116 is\nformula_117\nIn fact, reducing the right-hand side to a common denominator one gets\nformula_118\nand the numerator is equal to one, as being a polynomial of degree less than formula_119 which takes the value one for formula_112 different values of formula_121\nUsing the above general formula, we get the Lagrange interpolation formula:\nformula_122\nHermite interpolation.\nHermite interpolation is an application of the Chinese remainder theorem for univariate polynomials, which may involve moduli of arbitrary degrees (Lagrange interpolation involves only moduli of degree one).\nThe problem consists of finding a polynomial of the least possible degree, such that the polynomial and its first derivatives take given values at some fixed points.\nMore precisely, let formula_123 be formula_112 elements of the ground field formula_125 and, for formula_126 let formula_127 be the values of the first formula_128 derivatives of the sought polynomial at formula_105 (including the 0th derivative, which is the value of the polynomial itself). The problem is to find a polynomial formula_81 such that its \"j\"\u200ath derivative takes the value formula_131 at formula_132 for formula_133 and formula_134\nConsider the polynomial\nformula_135\nThis is the Taylor polynomial of order formula_136 at formula_105, of the unknown polynomial formula_138 Therefore, we must have\nformula_139\nConversely, any polynomial formula_140 that satisfies these formula_112 congruences, in particular verifies, for any formula_142\nformula_143 \ntherefore formula_71 is its Taylor polynomial of order formula_145 at formula_105, that is, formula_81 solves the initial Hermite interpolation problem.\nThe Chinese remainder theorem asserts that there exists exactly one polynomial of degree less than the sum of the formula_148 which satisfies these formula_112 congruences.\nThere are several ways for computing the solution formula_138 One may use the method described at the beginning of . One may also use the constructions given in or .\nGeneralization to non-coprime moduli.\nThe Chinese remainder theorem can be generalized to non-coprime moduli.\nLet formula_151 be positive integers and let formula_152 be integers.\nThe system of simultaneous congruences\nformula_2\nhas a solution if and only if formula_154 divides formula_155 whenever formula_156\nWhen this condition is satisfied, the set of solutions forms a single congruence class modulo formula_157\nThat is, any two solutions differ by a multiple of formula_158, and adding a multiple of formula_158 to a solution gives another solution.\nTo illustrate this for the case of two congruences,\nlet formula_160 be positive integers and let formula_161 be any integers; let formula_162 and formula_163, and consider the system of congruences:\nformula_164\nIf formula_165, then this system has a unique solution modulo formula_166. Otherwise, it has no solutions.\nIf one uses B\u00e9zout's identity to write formula_167, then a solution is given by\nformula_168\nThis defines an integer, as g divides both m and n.\nGeneralization to arbitrary rings.\nThe Chinese remainder theorem can be generalized to any ring, by using coprime ideals (also called comaximal ideals). Two ideals I and J are coprime if there are elements formula_169 and formula_170 such that formula_171 This relation plays the role of B\u00e9zout's identity in the proofs related to this generalization, which otherwise are very similar. The generalization may be stated as follows.\nLet \"I\"1, ..., \"Ik\" be two-sided ideals of a ring formula_172 and let \"I\" be their intersection. If the ideals are pairwise coprime, we have the isomorphism: \nformula_173\nbetween the quotient ring formula_174 and the direct product of the formula_175\nwhere \"formula_176\" denotes the image of the element formula_42 in the quotient ring defined by the ideal formula_178\nMoreover, if formula_172 is commutative, then the ideal intersection of pairwise coprime ideals is equal to their product; that is\nformula_180\nif Ii and Ij are coprime for all \"i\" \u2260 \"j\".\nInterpretation in terms of idempotents.\nLet formula_181 be pairwise coprime two-sided ideals with formula_182 and \nformula_183\nbe the isomorphism defined above. Let formula_184 be the element of formula_185 whose components are all 0 except the i\u200ath which is 1, and formula_186\nThe formula_187 are central idempotents that are pairwise orthogonal; this means, in particular, that formula_188 and formula_189 for every i and j. Moreover, one has formula_190 and formula_191\nIn summary, this generalized Chinese remainder theorem is the equivalence between giving pairwise coprime two-sided ideals with a zero intersection, and giving central and pairwise orthogonal idempotents that sum to 1.\nApplications.\nSequence numbering.\nThe Chinese remainder theorem has been used to construct a G\u00f6del numbering for sequences, which is involved in the proof of G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorems.\nFast Fourier transform.\nThe prime-factor FFT algorithm (also called Good-Thomas algorithm) uses the Chinese remainder theorem for reducing the computation of a fast Fourier transform of size formula_56 to the computation of two fast Fourier transforms of smaller sizes formula_9 and formula_10 (providing that formula_9 and formula_10 are coprime).\nEncryption.\nMost implementations of RSA use the Chinese remainder theorem during signing of HTTPS certificates and during decryption.\nThe Chinese remainder theorem can also be used in secret sharing, which consists of distributing a set of shares among a group of people who, all together (but no one alone), can recover a certain secret from the given set of shares. Each of the shares is represented in a congruence, and the solution of the system of congruences using the Chinese remainder theorem is the secret to be recovered. Secret sharing using the Chinese remainder theorem uses, along with the Chinese remainder theorem, special sequences of integers that guarantee the impossibility of recovering the secret from a set of shares with less than a certain cardinality.\nRange ambiguity resolution.\nThe range ambiguity resolution techniques used with medium pulse repetition frequency radar can be seen as a special case of the Chinese remainder theorem.\nDecomposition of surjections of finite abelian groups.\nGiven a surjection formula_197 of finite abelian groups, we can use the Chinese remainder theorem to give a complete description of any such map. First of all, the theorem gives isomorphisms\nformula_198\nwhere formula_199. In addition, for any induced map\nformula_200\nfrom the original surjection, we have formula_201 and formula_202 since for a pair of primes formula_203, the only non-zero surjections\nformula_204\ncan be defined if formula_205 and formula_206.\nThese observations are pivotal for constructing the ring of profinite integers, which is given as an inverse limit of all such maps.\nDedekind's theorem.\nDedekind's theorem on the linear independence of characters. Let M be a monoid and k an integral domain, viewed as a monoid by considering the multiplication on k. Then any finite family (\u00a0\"fi\"\u00a0)\"i\"\u2208\"I\" of distinct monoid homomorphisms \u00a0\"fi\" : \"M\" \u2192 \"k\" is linearly independent. In other words, every family (\"\u03b1i\")\"i\"\u2208\"I\" of elements \"\u03b1i\" \u2208 \"k\" satisfying \nformula_207\nmust be equal to the family (0)\"i\"\u2208\"I\".\nProof. First assume that k is a field, otherwise, replace the integral domain k by its quotient field, and nothing will change. We can linearly extend the monoid homomorphisms \u00a0\"fi\" : \"M\" \u2192 \"k\" to k-algebra homomorphisms \"Fi\" : \"k\"[\"M\"] \u2192 \"k\", where \"k\"[\"M\"] is the monoid ring of M over k. Then, by linearity, the condition\nformula_208\nyields\nformula_209\nNext, for \"i\", \"j\" \u2208 \"I\"; \"i\" \u2260 \"j\" the two k-linear maps \"Fi\" : \"k\"[\"M\"] \u2192 \"k\" and \"Fj\" : \"k\"[\"M\"] \u2192 \"k\" are not proportional to each other. Otherwise \u00a0\"fi\"\u00a0 and \u00a0\"fj\"\u00a0 would also be proportional, and thus equal since as monoid homomorphisms they satisfy: \u00a0\"fi\"\u200a(1) \n 1 \n \u00a0\"fj\"\u200a(1), which contradicts the assumption that they are distinct.\nTherefore, the kernels Ker\u2009\"Fi\" and Ker\u2009\"Fj\" are distinct. Since \"k\"[\"M\"]/Ker\u2009\"Fi\" \u2245 \"Fi\"\u200a(\"k\"[\"M\"]) \n \"k\" is a field, Ker \"Fi\" is a maximal ideal of \"k\"[\"M\"] for every i in I. Because they are distinct and maximal the ideals Ker\u2009\"Fi\" and Ker\u2009\"Fj\" are coprime whenever \"i\" \u2260 \"j\". The Chinese Remainder Theorem (for general rings) yields an isomorphism:\nformula_210\nwhere\nformula_211\nConsequently, the map\nformula_212\nis surjective. Under the isomorphisms \"k\"[\"M\"]/Ker\u2009\"Fi\" \u2192 \"Fi\"\u200a(\"k\"[\"M\"]) \n \"k\", the map \u03a6 corresponds to:\nformula_213\nNow,\nformula_214\nyields\nformula_215\nfor every vector (\"ui\")\"i\"\u2208\"I\" in the image of the map \u03c8. Since \u03c8 is surjective, this means that\nformula_215\nfor every vector\nformula_217\nConsequently, (\"\u03b1i\")\"i\"\u2208\"I\" \n (0)\"i\"\u2208\"I\". QED.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7714", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7714", "title": "Cyril Kornbluth", "text": ""}
{"id": "7715", "revid": "5862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7715", "title": "Climate Change 1995", "text": ""}
{"id": "7716", "revid": "45880546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7716", "title": "Cyril M. Kornbluth", "text": "American science fiction author (1923\u20131958)\nCyril M. Kornbluth (July 2, 1923\u00a0\u2013 March 21, 1958) was an American science fiction author and a member of the Futurians. He used a variety of pen-names, including Cecil Corwin, S. D. Gottesman, Edward J. Bellin, Kenneth Falconer, Walter C. Davies, Simon Eisner, Jordan Park, Arthur Cooke, Paul Dennis Lavond, and Scott Mariner. \nEarly life.\nKornbluth was born on July 2, 1923 and grew up in the uptown Manhattan neighborhood of Inwood, in New York. He was of Polish-Jewish descent, the son of a World War I veteran and grandson of a tailor, a Jewish immigrant from Galicia.\nThe \"M\" in Kornbluth's name may have been in tribute to his wife, Mary Byers; Kornbluth's colleague and collaborator Frederik Pohl confirmed Kornbluth's lack of any actual middle name in at least one interview.\nAccording to his widow, Kornbluth was a \"precocious child\", learning to read by the age of three and writing his own stories by the time he was seven. He graduated from high school at thirteen, received a CCNY scholarship at fourteen, and was \"thrown out for leading a student strike\" without graduating.\nAs a teenager, he became a member of the Futurians, an influential group of science fiction fans and writers. While a member of the Futurians, he met and became friends with Frederik Pohl, Donald A. Wollheim, Robert A. W. Lowndes, and his future wife Mary Byers. He also participated in the Fantasy Amateur Press Association.\nKornbluth served in the US Army during World War II (European theatre). He received a Bronze Star for his service in the Battle of the Bulge, where he served as a member of a heavy machine gun crew. Upon his discharge, he returned to finish his education at the University of Chicago under the G.I. Bill. While living in Chicago he also worked at Trans-Radio Press, a news wire service. In 1951 he started writing full-time, returning to the East Coast where he collaborated on novels with his old Futurian friends Frederik Pohl and Judith Merril.\nWork.\nKornbluth began writing at 15. His first solo story, \"The Rocket of 1955\", was published in Richard Wilson's fanzine \"Escape\" (Vol. 1, No 2, August 1939); his first collaboration, \"Stepsons of Mars,\" written with Richard Wilson and published under the name \"Ivar Towers\", appeared in the April 1940 \"Astonishing\". His other short fiction includes \"The Little Black Bag\", \"The Marching Morons\", \"The Altar at Midnight\", \"MS. Found in a Chinese Fortune Cookie\", \"Gomez\" and \"The Advent on Channel Twelve\".\n\"The Little Black Bag\" was first adapted for television live on the television show \"Tales of Tomorrow\" on May 30, 1952. It was later adapted for television by the BBC in 1969 for its \"Out of the Unknown\" series. In 1970, the same story was adapted by Rod Serling for an episode of his \"Night Gallery\" series. This dramatization starred Burgess Meredith as the alcoholic Dr. William Fall, who had long lost his doctor's license and become a homeless alcoholic. He finds a bag containing advanced medical technology from the future, which, after an unsuccessful attempt to pawn it, he uses benevolently.\n\"The Marching Morons\" is a look at a far future in which the world's population consists of five billion idiots and a few million geniuses\u00a0\u2013 the precarious minority of the \"elite\" working desperately to keep things running behind the scenes. In his introduction to \"The Best of C. M. Kornbluth\", Pohl states that \"The Marching Morons\" is a direct sequel to \"The Little Black Bag\": it is easy to miss this, as \"Bag\" is set in the contemporary present while \"Morons\" takes place several centuries from now, and there is no character who appears in both stories. The titular black bag in the first story is actually an artifact from the time period of \"The Marching Morons\": a medical kit filled with self-driven instruments enabling a far-future moron to \"play doctor\". A future Earth similar to \"The Marching Morons\"\u00a0\u2013 a civilisation of morons protected by a small minority of hidden geniuses\u00a0\u2013 is used again in the final stages of Kornbluth &amp; Pohl's \"Search the Sky\".\n\"MS. Found in a Chinese Fortune Cookie\" (1957) is supposedly written by Kornbluth using notes by \"Cecil Corwin\", who has been declared insane and incarcerated, and who smuggles out in fortune cookies the ultimate secret of life. This fate is said to be Kornbluth's response to the unauthorized publication of \"Mask of Demeter\" (as by \"Corwin\" and \"Martin Pearson\" (Donald A. Wollheim)) in Wollheim's anthology \"Prize Science Fiction\" in 1953.\nBiographer Mark Rich describes the 1958 story \"Two Dooms\" as one of several stories which are \"concern[ed] with the ethics of theoretical science\" and which \"explore moral quandaries of the atomic age\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMany of Kornbluth's novels were written as collaborations: either with Judith Merril (using the pseudonym Cyril Judd), or with Frederik Pohl. These include \"Gladiator-At-Law\" and \"The Space Merchants\". \"The Space Merchants\" contributed significantly to the maturing and to the wider academic respectability of the science fiction genre, not only in America but also in Europe. Kornbluth also wrote several novels under his own name, including \"The Syndic\" and \"Not This August\".\nDeath.\nKornbluth suffered from \"essential malignant hypertension\" for many years, causing him to experience tinnitus. He died at age 34 on March 21, 1958 in Levittown, New York. On a day when he was due to meet with Bob Mills in New York City to interview for the position of editor of \"The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction\", he was delayed because he had to shovel snow from his driveway. After running to meet his train following this delay, Kornbluth suffered a fatal heart attack on the platform of the station.\nA number of short stories remained unfinished at Kornbluth's death; these were eventually completed and published by Pohl. One of these stories, \"The Meeting\" (\"The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction\", November 1972), was the co-winner of the 1973 Hugo Award for Best Short Story; it tied with R. A. Lafferty's \"Eurema's Dam.\" Almost all of Kornbluth's solo SF stories have been collected as \"His Share of Glory: The Complete Short Science Fiction of C. M. Kornbluth\" (NESFA Press, 1997).\nPersonality and habits.\nFrederik Pohl, in his autobiography \"The Way the Future Was\", Damon Knight, in his memoir \"The Futurians\", and Isaac Asimov, in his memoirs \"In Memory Yet Green\" and \"I. Asimov: A Memoir\", all give descriptions of Kornbluth as a man of odd personal habits and eccentricities.\nKornbluth, for example, decided to educate himself by reading his way through an entire encyclopedia from A to Z; in the course of this effort, he acquired a great deal of esoteric knowledge that found its way into his stories, in alphabetical order by subject. When Kornbluth wrote a story that mentioned the \"ballista\", an Ancient Roman weapon, Pohl knew that Kornbluth had finished the 'A's and had started on the 'B's.\nAccording to Pohl, Kornbluth never brushed his teeth, and they were literally green. Deeply embarrassed by this, Kornbluth developed the habit of holding his hand in front of his mouth when speaking.\nBibliography.\nCollections.\nSpider Robinson praised this collection, saying \"I haven't enjoyed a book so much in years.\" Mark Rich wrote, \"Critics judging Kornbluth by this anthology, edited by Pohl, have seen a growing bitterness in his later stories. This reflects editorial choice more than reality, because Kornbluth also wrote delightful humor in his last years, in stories not collected here. These tales demonstrate Kornbluth's effective use of everyday individuals from a variety of ethnic backgrounds as well as his well-tuned ear for dialect.\"\nReferences.\nKornbluth is mentioned in Lemony Snicket's \"Series of Unfortunate Events\" as a member of the V.F.D., a secret organization dedicated to the promotion of literacy, classical learning, and crime prevention.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7720", "revid": "50550083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7720", "title": "Coprophagia", "text": "Consumption of feces\nCoprophagia ( ) or coprophagy ( ) is the consumption of feces. The word is derived from the Ancient Greek \"feces\" and \"to eat\". Coprophagy refers to many kinds of feces-eating, including eating feces of other species (heterospecifics), of other individuals (allocoprophagy), or one's own (autocoprophagy). Feces may be already deposited or taken directly from the anus. Some animal species eat feces as a normal behavior, but in most species, coprophagia indicates a pathological condition.\nCoprophagia by plants.\nSome carnivorous plants, such as pitcher plants of the genus \"Nepenthes\", obtain nutrition from the feces of commensal animals. \"Nepenthes lowii\" has evolved interdependence with tree shrews which feed on the plants secretions from the pitcher lid then defecate in the plant's pitchers. In the case of N. Lowii, the pitchers have evolved a toilet like shape to accommodate tree shrews who feed on the sweet, waxy, white substance on the pitcher lid then defecate into the pitchers. \nTwo species of proto-carnivorous plants in the genus Roridula trap and kill insect prey, then rely on a symbiosis with the insect species Pameridea roridulae, a jumping tree bug in the family Miridae.It has a symbiotic relationship with \"Roridula\", where it feeds on trapped insects and its feces are absorbed through the leaves of the \"Roridula\", giving the plant much needed nutrients and nitrogen. Juvenile \"P. roridulae\" also pollinate the plant.\nManure is organic matter, mostly animal feces, that is used as organic fertilizer for plants in agriculture.\nCoprophagia by nonhuman animals.\nBy invertebrates.\nCoprophagous insects consume and redigest the feces of large animals. These feces contain substantial amounts of semidigested food, particularly in the case of herbivores, owing to the inefficiency of the large animals' digestive systems. Thousands of species of coprophagous insects are known, especially among the orders Diptera and Coleoptera. Examples of such flies are \"Scathophaga stercoraria\" and \"Sepsis cynipsea\", dung flies commonly found in Europe around cattle droppings. \nAmong beetles, dung beetles are a diverse lineage, many of which feed on the microorganism-rich liquid component of mammals' dung, and lay their eggs in balls composed mainly of the remaining fibrous material. Group living and aggregation among common earwigs promotes allo-coprophagy (consuming the feces of other members of one's own species) to promote the growth of helpful gut bacteria and provide a food source when food is scarce.\nThrough proctodeal feeding, termites eat one another's feces as a means of obtaining their hindgut protists. Termites and protists have a symbiotic relationship (e.g. with the protozoan that allows the termites to digest the cellulose in their diet). For example, in one group of termites, a three-way symbiotic relationship exists; termites of the family Rhinotermitidae, cellulolytic protists of the genus \"Pseudotrichonympha\" in the guts of these termites, and intracellular bacterial symbionts of the protists.\nBy vertebrates.\nLagomorphs (rabbits, hares, pikas) and some other mammals ferment fiber in their cecums, which is then expelled as cecotropes and eaten from the anus, a process called \"cecotrophy\". Then their food is processed through the gastrointestinal tract a second time, which allows them to absorb more nutrition. While cecotropes are expelled from the anus, they are not feces and thus eating them is not called coprophagia.\nDomesticated and wild mammals are sometimes coprophagic.\nSome dogs may lack critical digestive enzymes when they are only eating processed dried foods, so they gain these from consuming fecal matter. They only consume fecal matter that is less than two days old which supports this theory.\nCattle in the United States are often fed chicken litter. Concerns have arisen that the practice of feeding chicken litter to cattle could lead to bovine spongiform encephalopathy (mad-cow disease) because of the crushed bone meal in chicken feed. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration regulates this practice by attempting to prevent the introduction of any part of cattle brain or spinal cord into livestock feed. Chickens also eat their own feces. Other countries, such as Canada, have banned chicken litter for use as a livestock feed.\nThe young of elephants, giant pandas, koalas, and hippos eat the feces of their mothers or other animals in the herd, to obtain the bacteria required to properly digest vegetation found in their ecosystems. When such animals are born, their intestines are sterile and do not contain these bacteria. Without doing this, they would be unable to obtain any nutritional value from plants. Piglets with access to maternal feces early in life exhibited better performance.\nHamsters, guinea pigs, chinchillas, hedgehogs, and pigs eat their own droppings, which are thought to be a source of vitamins B and K, produced by gut bacteria. Sometimes, there is also the aspect of self-anointment while these creatures eat their droppings. On rare occasions gorillas have been observed consuming their feces, possibly out of boredom, a desire for warm food, or to reingest seeds contained in the feces.\nCoprophagia by humans.\nIn humans, coprophagia has been described since the late 19th century in individuals with mental illnesses and in some sexual acts, such as the practices of anilingus and felching where sex partners insert their tongue into each other's anus and ingest biologically significant amounts of feces. Coprophagia is also done sexually, by coprophiles. \nIn cuisine.\nSeveral beverages are made using the feces of animals, including but not limited to Kopi luwak, insect tea, and Black Ivory Coffee. Casu martzu is a cheese that uses the digestive processes of live maggots to help ferment and break down the cheese's fats.\nAs a cult practice.\nMembers of an unnamed religious cult in Thailand routinely ate the feces and dead skin of their leader, whom they considered to be a holy man with healing powers.\nAs a paraphilia.\nAccording to the DSM-5, coprophilia is a paraphilia where the object of sexual interest is feces. This can involve coprophagia.\nCoprophagia is sometimes depicted in pornography, typically under the term \"scat\" (from scatology), such as in the shock video \"2 Girls 1 Cup\". \"The 120 Days of Sodom\", a 1785 novel by Marquis de Sade, prominently features depictions of erotic sadomasochistic coprophagia. The 1975 film of the same name also contains scenes of coprophilia and coprophagia.\nAs a supposed medical treatment.\nAyurveda and Siddha medicine use animal excreta in various forms, with the most important being the dung and urine of the Zebu.\nDuring the mid 16th century, physicians tasted their patients' feces to better judge their state and condition, according to Fran\u00e7ois Rabelais. Rabelais studied medicine, but was also a writer of satirical and grotesque fiction, so the truth of this statement is unclear.\nElephant caretakers in Xayaboury province, Laos, have been documented using elephant feces primarily as a medicine for gastrointestinal and skin problems.\nAs a symptom.\nCoprophagia has also been observed in some people with schizophrenia and pica.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7721", "revid": "317363", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7721", "title": "C. L. Moore", "text": "American science fiction &amp; fantasy writer (1911\u20131987)\nCatherine Lucille Moore (January 24, 1911 \u2013 April 4, 1987) was an American science fiction and fantasy writer, who first came to prominence in the 1930s writing as C. L. Moore. She was among the first women to write in the science fiction and fantasy genres (though earlier woman writers in these genres include Clare Winger Harris, Greye La Spina, and Francis Stevens, among others). Moore's work paved the way for many other female speculative fiction writers.\nMoore married her first husband Henry Kuttner in 1940, and most of her work from 1940 to 1958 (Kuttner's death) was written by the couple collaboratively. They were prolific co-authors under their own names, although more often under any one of several pseudonyms.\nAs \"Catherine Kuttner\", she had a brief career as a television scriptwriter from 1958 to 1962. She retired from writing in 1963.\nEarly life.\nMoore was born on January 24, 1911, in Indianapolis, Indiana, to Maude Estelle Moore, whose father Levi N. Jones had been a Methodist minister, and Otto Newman Moore. Otto \"operated a large shop designing and manufacturing tools and machinery\"; his own father was the doctor Henry Moore. C. L. Moore was chronically ill as a child and spent much of her time reading literature of the fantastic. In 1929, she began a degree in English at Indiana University's Bloomington campus, but the financial pressures on her family caused by the Great Depression meant that she had to switch to a business college during her second year to learn to be a secretary. She gained work as a secretary at the Fletcher Trust Company in Indianapolis.\nBy 1936, Moore was engaged to one Herbert Ernest Lewis, who also worked at Fletcher Trust. However, he died by a gunshot wound on 13 February 1936. Moore herself, and the newspapers, reported the death as accidental, but according to the pulp fiction scholar Bobby Derie, \"the death certificate lists it as a suicide\".\nEarly career.\nMoore's first publication appears to have been a poem called \"Song of the Spirit of St. Louis\", published in \"The Indianapolis Star\" on 7 October 1928. In 1930\u201331, \"The Vagabond\", a student-run magazine at Indiana University, published three of her stories: \"Happily Ever After\", \"Semira\", and \"Two Fantasies\". Her first professional sales appeared in pulp magazines beginning in 1933. Her decision to publish under the name \"C. L. Moore\" stemmed not from a desire to hide her gender, but to keep her employers at Fletcher Trust from knowing that she was working as a writer on the side.\nHer early work included two significant series in \"Weird Tales\", then edited by Farnsworth Wright. One features the rogue and adventurer Northwest Smith wandering through the Solar System; the other features the swordswoman/warrior Jirel of Joiry, one of the first female protagonists in sword-and-sorcery fiction. Both series are sometimes named for their lead characters. One of the Northwest Smith stories, \"Nymph of Darkness\", published in 1936, was written in collaboration with Forrest J Ackerman.\nThe most famous Northwest Smith story is \"Shambleau\", which was also Moore's first professional sale. It originally appeared in the November 1933 issue of \"Weird Tales\", netting her $100, and later becoming a popular anthology reprint. Her most famous Jirel story is also the first one, \"Black God's Kiss\", which was the cover story in the October 1934 issue of \"Weird Tales\", subtitled \"the weirdest story ever told\" (see figure). Moore's early stories were notable for their emphasis on the senses and emotions, which was unusual in genre fiction at the time. Having encountered Moore's work in \"Weird Tales\", H. P. Lovecraft corresponded with her from March 1935 until February 1937, shortly before his death.\nMoore's work also appeared in \"Astounding Science Fiction\" magazine throughout the 1940s. Several stories written for that magazine were later collected in her first published book, \"Judgment Night\" (1952) One of them, the novella \"No Woman Born\" (1944), was to be included in more than 10 different science fiction anthologies including \"The Best of C. L. Moore\".\nIncluded in that collection were \"Judgment Night\" (first published in August and September 1943), the lush rendering of a future galactic empire with a sober meditation on the nature of power and its inevitable loss; \"The Code\" (July 1945), an homage to the classic Faust with modern theories and Lovecraftian dread; \"Promised Land\" (February 1950) and \"Heir Apparent\" (July 1950), both documenting the grim twisting that mankind must undergo in order to spread into the Solar System; and \"Paradise Street\" (September 1950), a futuristic take on the Old West conflict between lone hunter and wilderness-taming settlers.\nMarriage to Henry Kuttner and literary collaborations.\nMoore met Henry Kuttner, also a science fiction writer, in 1936 when he wrote her a fan letter under the impression that \"C. L. Moore\" was a man.31 They soon collaborated on a story that combined Moore's signature characters, Northwest Smith and Jirel of Joiry: \"Quest of the Starstone\" (1937).\nMoore and Kuttner married in 1940 and thereafter wrote many of their stories in collaboration, sometimes under their own names, but more often using the joint pseudonyms C. H. Liddell, Lawrence O'Donnell, or Lewis Padgett \u2014 most commonly the latter, a combination of their mothers' maiden names. Moore still occasionally wrote solo work during this period, including the frequently anthologized \"No Woman Born\" (1944). A selection of Moore's solo short fiction work from 1942 through 1950 was collected in 1952's \"Judgement Night\". Moore's only solo novel, \"Doomsday Morning\", appeared in 1957.\nThe vast majority of Moore's work in the period, though, was written as part of a very prolific partnership. Working together, the couple managed to combine Moore's style with Kuttner's more cerebral storytelling. They continued to work in science fiction and fantasy, and their works include two frequently anthologized sci-fi classics: \"Mimsy Were the Borogoves\" (February 1943), the basis for the film \"The Last Mimzy\" (2007), and \"Vintage Season\" (September 1946), the basis for the film \"Timescape\" (1992). As \"Lewis Padgett\" they also penned two mystery novels: \"The Brass Ring\" (1946) and \"The Day He Died\" (1947).\nLater career.\nFrom 1950 to 1956, Moore took a BA in English at the University of Southern California, completing a master's degree there in 1964. After Kuttner's death in 1958, Moore continued teaching his writing course at the University of Southern California until 1961, but permanently retired from writing any further literary fiction. Instead, working as \"Catherine Kuttner\", she carved out a short-lived career as a scriptwriter for Warner Bros. television, writing episodes of the westerns \"Sugarfoot\", \"Maverick\", and \"The Alaskans\", as well as the detective series \"77 Sunset Strip\", all between 1958 and 1962. However, upon marrying Thomas Reggie (who was not a writer) in 1963, she ceased writing fiction entirely.\nMoore was the author guest of honor at Kansas City, Missouri's fantasy and science fiction convention BYOB-Con 6, held over the U.S. Memorial Day weekend in May 1976. She was a pro guest of honor at Denvention II (the 39th World Science Fiction Convention) in 1981.\nIn a 1979 interview, she said that she and a writer friend were collaborating on a fantasy story, and how it could possibly form the basis of a new series. But nothing was ever published.\nIn 1981, Moore received two annual awards for her career in fantasy literature: the World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement, chosen by a panel of judges at the World Fantasy Convention, and the Gandalf Grand Master Award, chosen by vote of participants in the World Science Fiction Convention. (Thus she became the eighth and final Grand Master of Fantasy, sponsored by the Swordsmen and Sorcerers' Guild of America, in partial analogy to the Grand Master of Science Fiction sponsored by the Science Fiction Writers of America.)\nMoore was an active member of the Tom and Terri Pinckard Science Fiction literary salon and a frequent contributor to literary discussions with the regular membership, including Robert Bloch, George Clayton Johnson, Larry Niven, Jerry Pournelle, Norman Spinrad, A. E. van Vogt, and others, as well as many visiting writers and speakers.\nLater life.\nMoore developed Alzheimer's disease, but that was not obvious for several years. She had ceased to attend the meetings when she was nominated to be the first woman Grand Master of the Science Fiction Writers of America; the nomination was withdrawn at the request of her husband, Thomas Reggie, who said the award and ceremony would be at best confusing and likely upsetting to her, given the progress of her disease. She died on April 4, 1987, at her home in Hollywood, California.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7722", "revid": "1333933", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7722", "title": "Compactron", "text": "Type of vacuum tube\nCompactrons are a type of vacuum tube, which contain multiple electrode structures packed into a single enclosure. They were designed to compete with early transistor electronics and were used in televisions, radios, and similar roles.\nHistory.\nThe Compactron was a trade name applied to multi-electrode structure tubes specifically constructed on a 12-pin Duodecar base. This vacuum tube family was introduced in 1961 by General Electric in Owensboro, Kentucky to compete with transistorized electronics during the solid state transition. Television sets were a primary application. The idea of multi-electrode tubes itself was far from new and indeed the Loewe company of Germany was producing multi-electrode tubes as far back as 1926, and they even included all of the required passive components as well.\nUse was prevalent in televisions because transistors were slow to achieve the high power and frequency capabilities needed particularly in color television sets. The first portable color television, the General Electric Porta-Color, was designed using 13 tubes, 10 of which were Compactrons. Even before the compactron design was unveiled, nearly all tube based electronic equipment used multi-electrode tubes of one type or another. Virtually every AM/FM radio receiver of the 1950s and 60's used a 6AK8 (EABC80) tube (or equivalent) consisting of three diodes and a triode which was designed in 1954.\nCompactron's integrated valve design helped lower power consumption and heat generation (they were to tubes what integrated circuits were to transistors). Compactrons were also used in a few high end Hi-Fi stereos. They were also used by Ampeg and Fender in some of their guitar amplifiers. No modern tube based Hi-Fi systems are known to use this tube type, as simpler and more readily available tubes have again filled this niche. One tube, the 7868, is used in some Hi-Fi systems made today. This tube is a Novar tube. It has the same physical dimensions as the compactron, but a 9 pin base. The exhaust tip is on the top or bottom of the tube, depending on the manufacturer's preference. It is currently in production by Electro-Harmonix.(The new power amp, Linear Tube Audio's Ultralinear, uses 4 17JN6 compactron tubes as the power tube in the amp.) The amp generates 20 watts of power with these inexpensive TV tubes.\nNotable features.\nA distinguishing feature of most Compactrons is the placement of the evacuation tip on the bottom end, rather than the top end as was customary with \"miniature\" tubes, and a characteristic 3/4\" diameter circle pin pattern.\nExamples.\nExamples of Compactrons type types include:\nDue to their specific applications in television circuits, many different Compactron types were produced. Almost all were assigned using standard US tube numbers.\nTechnological obsolescence.\nIntegrated circuits (of the analogue and digital type) gradually took over all of the functions that the Compactron was designed for. \"Hybrid\" television sets produced in the early to mid-1970s made use of a combination of tubes (typically Compactrons), transistors, and integrated circuits in the same set. By the mid-1980s this type of tube was functionally obsolete. Compactrons simply don't exist in any TV sets designed after 1986. Other specialist uses of the tube declined in parallel with the television set manufacture. Manufacture of Compactrons ceased in the early 1990s. New old stock replacements for almost all Compactron types produced are easily found for sale on the Internet.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7723", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7723", "title": "Carmichael number", "text": "Composite number in number theory\nIn number theory, a Carmichael number is a composite number &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; which in modular arithmetic satisfies the congruence relation:\n formula_1\nfor all integers &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The relation may also be expressed in the form:\n formula_2\nfor all integers formula_3 that are relatively prime to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. They are infinite in number.\nThey constitute the comparatively rare instances where the strict converse of Fermat's Little Theorem does not hold. This fact precludes the use of that theorem as an absolute test of primality.\nThe Carmichael numbers form the subset \"K\"1 of the Kn\u00f6del numbers.\nThe Carmichael numbers were named after the American mathematician Robert Carmichael by Nicolaas Beeger, in 1950. \u00d8ystein Ore had referred to them in 1948 as numbers with the \"Fermat property\", or \"\"F\" numbers\" for short.\nOverview.\nFermat's little theorem states that if formula_4 is a prime number, then for any integer &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the number formula_5 is an integer multiple of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Carmichael numbers are composite numbers which have the same property. Carmichael numbers are also called Fermat pseudoprimes or absolute Fermat pseudoprimes. A Carmichael number will pass a Fermat primality test to every base formula_3 relatively prime to the number, even though it is not actually prime.\nThis makes tests based on Fermat's Little Theorem less effective than strong probable prime tests such as the Baillie\u2013PSW primality test and the Miller\u2013Rabin primality test.\nHowever, no Carmichael number is either an Euler\u2013Jacobi pseudoprime or a strong pseudoprime to every base relatively prime to it\nso, in theory, either an Euler or a strong probable prime test could prove that a Carmichael number is, in fact, composite.\nArnault\ngives a 397-digit Carmichael number formula_7 that is a \"strong\" pseudoprime to all \"prime\" bases less than 307:\n formula_8\nwhere\n formula_9\u200a2\u200a9674495668\u200a6855105501\u200a5417464290\u200a5332730771\u200a9917998530\u200a4335099507\u200a5531276838\u200a7531717701\u200a9959423859\u200a6428121188\u200a0336647542\u200a1834556249\u200a3168782883\nis a 131-digit prime. formula_4 is the smallest prime factor of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, so this Carmichael number is also a (not necessarily strong) pseudoprime to all bases less than &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nAs numbers become larger, Carmichael numbers become increasingly rare. For example, there are 20,138,200 Carmichael numbers between 1 and 1021 (approximately one in 50 trillion (5\u00b71013) numbers).\nKorselt's criterion.\nAn alternative and equivalent definition of Carmichael numbers is given by Korselt's criterion.\n Theorem (A. Korselt 1899): A positive composite integer formula_11 is a Carmichael number if and only if formula_11 is square-free, and for all prime divisors formula_4 of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, it is true that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nIt follows from this theorem that all Carmichael numbers are odd, since any even composite number that is square-free (and hence has only one prime factor of two) will have at least one odd prime factor, and thus formula_14 results in an even dividing an odd, a contradiction. (The oddness of Carmichael numbers also follows from the fact that formula_15 is a Fermat witness for any even composite number.)\nFrom the criterion it also follows that Carmichael numbers are cyclic. Additionally, it follows that there are no Carmichael numbers with exactly two prime divisors.\nDiscovery.\nThe first seven Carmichael numbers, from 561 to 8911, were all found by the Czech mathematician V\u00e1clav \u0160imerka in 1885 (thus preceding not just Carmichael but also Korselt, although \u0160imerka did not find anything like Korselt's criterion). His work, published in Czech scientific journal \"\u010casopis pro p\u011bstov\u00e1n\u00ed matematiky a fysiky\", however, remained unnoticed.\nKorselt was the first who observed the basic properties of Carmichael numbers, but he did not give any examples.\nThat 561 is a Carmichael number can be seen with Korselt's criterion. Indeed, formula_16 is square-free and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, formula_17 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nThe next six Carmichael numbers are (sequence in the OEIS):\n formula_18\n formula_19\n formula_20\n formula_21\n formula_22\n formula_23\nIn 1910, Carmichael himself also published the smallest such number, 561, and the numbers were later named after him.\nJack Chernick proved a theorem in 1939 which can be used to construct a subset of Carmichael numbers. The number formula_24 is a Carmichael number if its three factors are all prime. Whether this formula produces an infinite quantity of Carmichael numbers is an open question (though it is implied by Dickson's conjecture).\nPaul Erd\u0151s heuristically argued there should be infinitely many Carmichael numbers. In 1994 W. R. (Red) Alford, Andrew Granville and Carl Pomerance used a bound on Olson's constant to show that there really do exist infinitely many Carmichael numbers. Specifically, they showed that for sufficiently large formula_11, there are at least formula_26 Carmichael numbers between 1 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nThomas Wright proved that if formula_27 and formula_28 are relatively prime,\nthen there are infinitely many Carmichael numbers in the arithmetic progression &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;,\nwhere &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nL\u00f6h and Niebuhr in 1992 found some very large Carmichael numbers, including one with 1,101,518 factors and over 16 million digits.\nThis has been improved to 10,333,229,505 prime factors and 295,486,761,787 digits, so the largest known Carmichael number is much greater than the largest known prime.\nProperties.\nFactorizations.\nCarmichael numbers have at least three positive prime factors. The first Carmichael numbers with formula_29 prime factors are (sequence in the OEIS):\nThe first Carmichael numbers with 4 prime factors are (sequence in the OEIS):\nThe second Carmichael number (1105) can be expressed as the sum of two squares in more ways than any smaller number. The third Carmichael number (1729) is the Hardy-Ramanujan Number: the smallest number that can be expressed as the sum of two cubes (of positive numbers) in two different ways.\nDistribution.\nLet formula_30 denote the number of Carmichael numbers less than or equal to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The distribution of Carmichael numbers by powers of 10 (sequence in the OEIS):\nIn 1953, Kn\u00f6del proved the upper bound:\n formula_31\nfor some constant &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nIn 1956, Erd\u0151s improved the bound to\n formula_32\nfor some constant &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. He further gave a heuristic argument suggesting that this upper bound should be close to the true growth rate of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nIn the other direction, Alford, Granville and Pomerance proved in 1994 that for sufficiently large \"X\",\n formula_33\nIn 2005, this bound was further improved by Harman to\n formula_34\nwho subsequently improved the exponent to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nRegarding the asymptotic distribution of Carmichael numbers, there have been several conjectures. In 1956, Erd\u0151s conjectured that there were formula_35 Carmichael numbers for \"X\" sufficiently large. In 1981, Pomerance sharpened Erd\u0151s' heuristic arguments to conjecture that there are at least\n formula_36\nCarmichael numbers up to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, where &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;.\nHowever, inside current computational ranges (such as the count of Carmichael numbers performed by Goutier(sequence in the OEIS) up to 1022), these conjectures are not yet borne out by the data; empirically, the exponent is formula_37 for the highest available count (C(X)=49679870 for X= 1022).\nIn 2021, Daniel Larsen proved an analogue of Bertrand's postulate for Carmichael numbers first conjectured by Alford, Granville, and Pomerance in 1994. Using techniques developed by Yitang Zhang and James Maynard to establish results concerning small gaps between primes, his work yielded the much stronger statement that, for any formula_38 and sufficiently large formula_39 in terms of formula_40, there will always be at least \n formula_41\nCarmichael numbers between formula_39 and\n formula_43\nGeneralizations.\nThe notion of Carmichael number generalizes to a Carmichael ideal in any number field &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. For any nonzero prime ideal formula_44 in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, we have formula_45 for all formula_46 in {{tmath|1= {\\mathcal O}_K }}, where formula_47 is the norm of the ideal {{tmath|1= \\mathfrak p }}. (This generalizes Fermat's little theorem, that formula_48 for all integers {{tmath|1= m }} when {{tmath|1= p }} is prime.) Call a nonzero ideal formula_49 in formula_50 Carmichael if it is not a prime ideal and formula_51 for all {{tmath|1= \\alpha \\in {\\mathcal O}_K }}, where formula_52 is the norm of the ideal {{tmath|1= \\mathfrak a }}. When {{tmath|1= K }} is {{tmath|1= \\mathbf Q }}, the ideal formula_49 is principal, and if we let {{tmath|1= a }} be its positive generator then the ideal formula_54 is Carmichael exactly when {{tmath|1= a }} is a Carmichael number in the usual sense.\nWhen {{tmath|1= K }} is larger than the rationals it is easy to write down Carmichael ideals in {{tmath|1= {\\mathcal O}_K }}: for any prime number {{tmath|1= p }} that splits completely in {{tmath|1= K }}, the principal ideal formula_55 is a Carmichael ideal. Since infinitely many prime numbers split completely in any number field, there are infinitely many Carmichael ideals in {{tmath|1= {\\mathcal O}_K }}. For example, if {{tmath|1= p }} is any prime number that is 1 mod 4, the ideal {{tmath|1= (p) }} in the Gaussian integers formula_56 is a Carmichael ideal.\nBoth prime and Carmichael numbers satisfy the following equality:\n formula_57\nLucas\u2013Carmichael number.\nA positive composite integer formula_11 is a Lucas\u2013Carmichael number if and only if formula_11 is square-free, and for all prime divisors formula_4 of {{tmath|1= n }}, it is true that {{tmath|1= p + 1 \\mid n + 1 }}. The first Lucas\u2013Carmichael numbers are:\n 399, 935, 2015, 2915, 4991, 5719, 7055, 8855, 12719, 18095, 20705, 20999, 22847, 29315, 31535, 46079, 51359, 60059, 63503, 67199, 73535, 76751, 80189, 81719, 88559, 90287, ... {{OEIS|A006972}}\nQuasi\u2013Carmichael number.\nQuasi\u2013Carmichael numbers are squarefree composite numbers {{tmath|1= n }} with the property that for every prime factor {{tmath|1= p }} of {{tmath|1= n }}, {{tmath|1= p + b }} divides {{tmath|1= n + b }} positively with {{tmath|1= b }} being any integer besides 0. If {{tmath|1= b = -1 }}, these are Carmichael numbers, and if {{tmath|1= b = 1}}, these are Lucas\u2013Carmichael numbers. The first Quasi\u2013Carmichael numbers are:\n 35, 77, 143, 165, 187, 209, 221, 231, 247, 273, 299, 323, 357, 391, 399, 437, 493, 527, 561, 589, 598, 713, 715, 899, 935, 943, 989, 1015, 1073, 1105, 1147, 1189, 1247, 1271, 1295, 1333, 1517, 1537, 1547, 1591, 1595, 1705, 1729, ... {{OEIS|A257750}}\nKn\u00f6del number.\nAn \"n\"-Kn\u00f6del number for a given positive integer \"n\" is a composite number \"m\" with the property that each {{tmath|1= i &lt; m }} coprime to \"m\" satisfies {{tmath|1= i^{m - n} \\equiv 1 \\pmod{m} }}. The {{tmath|1= n = 1 }} case are Carmichael numbers.\nHigher-order Carmichael numbers.\nCarmichael numbers can be generalized using concepts of abstract algebra.\nThe above definition states that a composite integer \"n\" is Carmichael\nprecisely when the \"n\"th-power-raising function \"p\"\"n\" from the ring Z\"n\" of integers modulo \"n\" to itself is the identity function. The identity is the only Z\"n\"-algebra endomorphism on Z\"n\" so we can restate the definition as asking that \"p\"\"n\" be an algebra endomorphism of Z\"n\".\nAs above, \"p\"\"n\" satisfies the same property whenever \"n\" is prime.\nThe \"n\"th-power-raising function \"p\"\"n\" is also defined on any Z\"n\"-algebra A. A theorem states that \"n\" is prime if and only if all such functions \"p\"\"n\" are algebra endomorphisms.\nIn-between these two conditions lies the definition of Carmichael number of order m for any positive integer \"m\" as any composite number \"n\" such that \"p\"\"n\" is an endomorphism on every Z\"n\"-algebra that can be generated as Z\"n\"-module by \"m\" elements. Carmichael numbers of order 1 are just the ordinary Carmichael numbers.\nAn order-2 Carmichael number.\nAccording to Howe, 17 \u00b7 31 \u00b7 41 \u00b7 43 \u00b7 89 \u00b7 97 \u00b7 167 \u00b7 331 is an order 2 Carmichael number. This product is equal to 443,372,888,629,441.\nProperties.\nKorselt's criterion can be generalized to higher-order Carmichael numbers, as shown by Howe.\nA heuristic argument, given in the same paper, appears to suggest that there are infinitely many Carmichael numbers of order \"m\", for any \"m\". However, not a single Carmichael number of order 3 or above is known."}
{"id": "7724", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7724", "title": "Contrapositive", "text": ""}
{"id": "7725", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7725", "title": "Chinese Remainder Theorem", "text": ""}
{"id": "7726", "revid": "4", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7726", "title": "Cow story", "text": ""}
{"id": "7727", "revid": "13549925", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7727", "title": "Controlled Substances Act", "text": "United States drug-regulating law\nThe Controlled Substances Act (CSA) is the statute establishing federal U.S. drug policy under which the manufacture, importation, possession, use, and distribution of certain substances is regulated. It was passed by the 91st United States Congress as Title II of the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 and signed into law by President Richard Nixon. The Act also served as the national implementing legislation for the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.\nThe legislation created five schedules (classifications), with varying qualifications for a substance to be included in each. Two federal agencies, the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), determine which substances are added to or removed from the various schedules, although the statute passed by Congress created the initial listing. Congress has sometimes scheduled other substances through legislation such as the Hillory J. Farias and Samantha Reid Date-Rape Prevention Act of 2000, which placed gamma hydroxybutyrate (GHB) in Schedule I and sodium oxybate (the isolated sodium salt in GHB) in Schedule III when used under an FDA New Drug Application (NDA) or Investigational New Drug (IND). Classification decisions are required to be made on criteria including potential for abuse (an undefined term), currently accepted medical use in treatment in the United States, and international treaties.\nHistory.\nThe nation first outlawed addictive drugs in the early 1900s and the International Opium Convention helped lead international agreements regulating trade. The Pure Food and Drug Act (1906) was the beginning of over 200 laws concerning public health and consumer protections. Others were the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (1938), and the Kefauver Harris Amendment of 1962.\nIn 1969, President Richard Nixon announced that the Attorney General, John N. Mitchell, was preparing a comprehensive new measure to more effectively meet the narcotic and dangerous drug problems at the federal level by combining all existing federal laws into a single new statute. With the help of White House Counsel head, John Dean; the executive director of the Shafer Commission, Michael Sonnenreich; and the Director of the BNDD, John Ingersoll creating and writing the legislation, Mitchell was able to present Nixon with the bill.\nThe CSA not only combined existing federal drug laws and expanded their scope, but it also changed the nature of federal drug law policies and expanded federal law enforcement pertaining to controlled substances.\nTitle II, Part F of the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 established the National Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse\u2014known as the Shafer Commission after its chairman, Raymond P. Shafer\u2014to study cannabis abuse in the United States. During his presentation of the commission's First Report to Congress, Sonnenreich and Shafer recommended the decriminalization of marijuana in small amounts, with Shafer stating,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[T]he criminal law is too harsh a tool to apply to personal possession even in the effort to discourage use. It implies an overwhelming indictment of the behavior which we believe is not appropriate. The actual and potential harm of use of the drug is not great enough to justify intrusion by the criminal law into private behavior, a step which our society takes only with the greatest reluctance.\nRufus King notes that this stratagem was similar to that used by Harry Anslinger when he consolidated the previous anti-drug treaties into the Single Convention and took the opportunity to add new provisions that otherwise might have been unpalatable to the international community. According to David T. Courtwright, \"the Act was part of an omnibus reform package designed to rationalize, and in some respects to liberalize, American drug policy.\" (Courtwright noted that the Act became, not libertarian, but instead repressionistic to the point of tyrannical in its intent; a cruel and/or arbitrary exercise of power). It eliminated mandatory minimum sentences and provided support for drug treatment and research.\nKing notes that the rehabilitation clauses were added as a compromise to Senator Harold Hughes, who favored a moderate approach. The bill, as introduced by Senator Everett Dirksen, ran to 91 pages. While it was being drafted, the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, to be passed by state legislatures, was also being drafted by the Department of Justice; its wording closely mirrored the Controlled Substances Act.\nAmendments, 1970\u20132018.\nSince its enactment in 1970, the Act has been amended numerous times:\nStatute content.\nThe Controlled Substances Act consists of two subchapters. Subchapter I defines Schedules I\u2013V, lists chemicals used in the manufacture of controlled substances, and differentiates lawful and unlawful manufacturing, distribution, and possession of controlled substances, including possession of Schedule I drugs for personal use; this subchapter also specifies the dollar amounts of fines and durations of prison terms for violations. Subchapter II describes the laws for exportation and importation of controlled substances, again specifying fines and prison terms for violations.\nEnforcement authority.\nThe Drug Enforcement Administration was established in 1973, combining the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs (BNDD) and Customs' drug agents. Proceedings to add, delete, or change the schedule of a drug or other substance may be initiated by the DEA, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), or by petition from any interested party, including the manufacturer of a drug, a medical society or association, a pharmacy association, a public interest group concerned with drug abuse, a state or local government agency, or an individual citizen. When a petition is received by the DEA, the agency begins its own investigation of the drug.\nThe DEA may begin an investigation of a drug at any time based upon information received from laboratories, state and local law enforcement and regulatory agencies, or other sources of information. Once the DEA has collected the necessary data, the Deputy Administrator of DEA, requests from HHS a scientific and medical evaluation and recommendation as to whether the drug or other substance should be controlled or removed from control.\nThis request is sent to the Assistant Secretary of Health of HHS. Then, HHS solicits information from the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration and evaluations and recommendations from the National Institute on Drug Abuse and, on occasion, from the scientific and medical community at large. The Assistant Secretary, by authority of the Secretary, compiles the information and transmits back to the DEA a medical and scientific evaluation regarding the drug or other substance, a recommendation as to whether the drug should be controlled, and in what schedule it should be placed.\nThe HHS recommendation on scheduling is binding to the extent that if HHS recommends, based on its medical and scientific evaluation, that the substance not be controlled, then the DEA may not control the substance. Once the DEA has received the scientific and medical evaluation from HHS, the DEA Administrator evaluates all available data and makes a final decision whether to propose that a drug or other substance be controlled and into which schedule it should be placed. Under certain circumstances, the Government may temporarily schedule a drug without following the normal procedure.\nAn example is when international treaties require control of a substance. \u00a0https:// allows the Attorney General to temporarily place a substance in Schedule I \"to avoid an imminent hazard to the public safety\". Thirty days' notice is required before the order can be issued, and the scheduling expires after a year. The period may be extended six months if rulemaking proceedings to permanently schedule the drug are in progress. In any case, once these proceedings are complete, the temporary order is automatically vacated. Unlike ordinary scheduling proceedings, such temporary orders are not subject to judicial review.\nThe CSA creates a closed system of distribution for those authorized to handle controlled substances. The cornerstone of this system is the registration of all those authorized by the DEA to handle controlled substances. All individuals and firms that are registered are required to maintain complete and accurate inventories and records of all transactions involving controlled substances, as well as security for the storage of controlled substances.\nTreaty obligations.\nThe Congressional findings in 21 USC \u00a7\u00a7 https://, https://, and https:// state that a major purpose of the CSA is to \"enable the United States to meet all of its obligations\" under international treaties. The CSA bears many resemblances to these Conventions. Both the CSA and the treaties set out a system for classifying controlled substances in several schedules in accordance with the binding scientific and medical findings of a public health authority. Under \u00a0https:// of the CSA, that authority is the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS). Under Article 3 of the Single Convention and Article 2 of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances, the World Health Organization is that authority.\nThe domestic and international legal nature of these treaty obligations must be considered in light of the supremacy of the United States Constitution over treaties or acts and the equality of treaties and Congressional acts. In \"Reid v. Covert\" the Supreme Court of the United States addressed both these issues directly and clearly holding:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n[N]o agreement with a foreign nation can confer power on the Congress, or on any other branch of Government, which is free from the restraints of the Constitution.\nArticle VI, the Supremacy Clause of the Constitution, declares:\n\"This Constitution, and the Laws of the United States which shall be made in Pursuance thereof, and all Treaties made, or which shall be made, under the Authority of the United States, shall be the supreme Law of the Land; ...\"\nThere is nothing in this language which intimates that treaties and laws enacted pursuant to them do not have to comply with the provisions of the Constitution. Nor is there anything in the debates which accompanied the drafting and ratification of the Constitution which even suggests such a result. These debates, as well as the history that surrounds the adoption of the treaty provision in Article VI, make it clear that the reason treaties were not limited to those made in \"pursuance\" of the Constitution was so that agreements made by the United States under the Articles of Confederation, including the important peace treaties which concluded the Revolutionary War, would remain in effect. It would be manifestly contrary to the objectives of those who created the Constitution, as well as those who were responsible for the Bill of Rights\u2014let alone alien to our entire constitutional history and tradition\u2014to construe Article VI as permitting the United States to exercise power under an international agreement without observing constitutional prohibitions. In effect, such construction would permit amendment of that document in a manner not sanctioned by Article V. The prohibitions of the Constitution were designed to apply to all branches of the National Government, and they cannot be nullified by the Executive or by the Executive and the Senate combined.\nThere is nothing new or unique about what we say here. This Court has regularly and uniformly recognized the supremacy of the Constitution over a treaty. For example, in \"Geofroy v. Riggs\", 133 U. S. 258, 133 U. S. 267, it declared:\n\"The treaty power, as expressed in the Constitution, is in terms unlimited except by those restraints which are found in that instrument against the action of the government or of its departments, and those arising from the nature of the government itself and of that of the States. It would not be contended that it extends so far as to authorize what the Constitution forbids, or a change in the character of the government, or in that of one of the States, or a cession of any portion of the territory of the latter, without its consent.\"\nThis Court has repeatedly taken the position that an Act of Congress, which must comply with the Constitution, is on a full parity with a treaty, and that, when a statute which is subsequent in time is inconsistent with a treaty, the statute to the extent of conflict renders the treaty null. It would be completely anomalous to say that a treaty need not comply with the Constitution when such an agreement can be overridden by a statute that must conform to that instrument.\nAccording to the Cato Institute, these treaties only bind (legally obligate) the United States to comply with them as long as that nation agrees to remain a state party to these treaties. The U.S. Congress and the President of the United States have the absolute sovereign right to withdraw from or abrogate at any time these two instruments, in accordance with said nation's Constitution, at which point these treaties will cease to bind that nation in any way, shape, or form.\nA provision for automatic compliance with treaty obligations is found at \u00a0https://, which also establishes mechanisms for amending international drug control regulations to correspond with HHS findings on scientific and medical issues. If control of a substance is mandated by the Single Convention, the Attorney General is required to \"issue an order controlling such drug under the schedule he deems most appropriate to carry out such obligations,\" without regard to the normal scheduling procedure or the findings of the HHS Secretary. However, the Secretary has great influence over any drug scheduling proposal under the Single Convention, because \u00a0https:// requires the Secretary the power to \"evaluate the proposal and furnish a recommendation to the Secretary of State which shall be binding on the representative of the United States in discussions and negotiations relating to the proposal.\"\nSimilarly, if the United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs adds or transfers a substance to a schedule established by the Convention on Psychotropic Substances, so that current U.S. regulations on the drug do not meet the treaty's requirements, the Secretary is required to issue a recommendation on how the substance should be scheduled under the CSA. If the Secretary agrees with the commission's scheduling decision, he can recommend that the Attorney General initiate proceedings to reschedule the drug accordingly.\nIf the HHS Secretary disagrees with the UN controls, the Attorney General must temporarily place the drug in Schedule IV or V (whichever meets the minimum requirements of the treaty) and exclude the substance from any regulations not mandated by the treaty. The Secretary is required to request that the Secretary of State take action, through the commission or the UN Economic and Social Council, to remove the drug from international control or transfer it to a different schedule under the convention. The temporary scheduling expires as soon as control is no longer needed to meet international treaty obligations.\nThis provision was invoked in 1984 to place Rohypnol (flunitrazepam) in Schedule IV. The drug did not then meet the Controlled Substances Act's criteria for scheduling; however, control was required by the Convention on Psychotropic Substances. In 1999, an FDA official explained to Congress:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Rohypnol is not approved or available for medical use in the United States, but it is temporarily controlled in Schedule IV pursuant to a treaty obligation under the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances. At the time flunitrazepam was placed temporarily in Schedule IV (November 5, 1984), there was no evidence of abuse or trafficking of the drug in the United States.\nThe Cato Institute's \"Handbook for Congress\" calls for repealing the CSA, an action that would likely bring the United States into conflict with international law, were the United States not to exercise its sovereign right to withdraw from and/or abrogate the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs and/or the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances prior to repealing the Controlled Substances Act. The exception would be if the U.S. were to claim that the treaty obligations violate the United States Constitution. Many articles in these treaties\u2014such as Article 35 and Article 36 of the Single Convention\u2014are prefaced with phrases such as \"Having due regard to their constitutional, legal and administrative systems, the Parties shall ...\" or \"Subject to its constitutional limitations, each Party shall ...\" According to former United Nations Drug Control Programme Chief of Demand Reduction Cindy Fazey, \"This has been used by the USA not to implement part of article 3 of the 1988 Convention, which prevents inciting others to use narcotic or psychotropic drugs, on the basis that this would be in contravention of their constitutional amendment guaranteeing freedom of speech\".\nSchedules of controlled substances.\nThere are five different schedules of controlled substances, numbered I\u2013V. The CSA describes the different schedules based on three factors:\nThe following table gives a summary of the different schedules.\nPlacing a drug or other substance in a certain schedule or removing it from a certain schedule is primarily based on 21 USC \u00a7\u00a7 https://, https://, https://, https://, https://, https://, and https://. Every schedule otherwise requires finding and specifying the \"potential for abuse\" before a substance can be placed in that schedule. The specific classification of any given drug or other substance is usually a source of controversy, as is the purpose and effectiveness of the entire regulatory scheme.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The term \"controlled substance\" means a drug or other substance, or immediate precursor, included in schedule I, II, III, IV, or V of part B of this subchapter. The term does not include distilled spirits, wine, absinthe, malt beverages, nicotine or tobacco, as those terms are defined or used in subtitle E of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.\nSome have argued that this is an important exemption, since alcohol and tobacco are two of the most widely used drugs in the United States.\nSchedule I.\nSchedule I substances are described as those that have all of the following findings:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNo prescriptions may be written for Schedule I substances, and such substances are subject to production quotas which the DEA imposes.\nUnder the DEA's interpretation of the CSA, a drug does not necessarily have to have the same \"high potential for abuse\" as heroin, for example, to merit placement in Schedule I:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[W]hen it comes to a drug that is currently listed in schedule I, if it is undisputed that such drug has no currently accepted medical use in treatment in the United States and a lack of accepted safety for use under medical supervision, and it is further undisputed that the drug has \"at least some potential for abuse sufficient to warrant control under the CSA\", the drug must remain in schedule I. In such circumstances, placement of the drug in schedules II through V would conflict with the CSA since such drug would not meet the criterion of \"a currently accepted medical use in treatment in the United States.\" 21 USC 812(b). (emphasis added)\u2014\u200a\nDrugs listed in this control schedule include:\nIn addition to the named substance, usually all possible ethers, esters, salts and stereoisomers of these substances are also controlled and also 'analogues', which are chemically similar.\nSchedule II.\nSchedule II substances are those that have the following findings:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExcept when dispensed directly to an ultimate user by a practitioner other than a pharmacist, no controlled substance in Schedule II, which is a prescription drug as determined under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 USC 301 \"et seq.\"), may be dispensed without the written or electronically transmitted (21 CFR 1306.08) prescription of a practitioner, except that in emergency situations, as prescribed by the Secretary by regulation after consultation with the Attorney General, such drug may be dispensed upon oral prescription in accordance with section 503(b) of that Act (21 USC 353 (b)). With exceptions, an original prescription is always required even though faxing in a prescription in advance to a pharmacy by a prescriber is allowed. Prescriptions shall be retained in conformity with the requirements of section 827 of this title. No prescription for a controlled substance in Schedule II may be refilled.\nThese drugs vary in potency: for example fentanyl is about 80 times as potent as morphine (heroin is roughly two times as potent). More significantly, they vary in nature. Pharmacology and CSA scheduling have a weak relationship.\nBecause refills of prescriptions for Schedule II substances are not allowed, it can be burdensome to both the practitioner and the patient if the substances are to be used on a long-term basis. To provide relief, in 2007, https:// was amended (at 72 FR ) to allow practitioners to write up to three prescriptions at once, to provide up to a 90-day supply, specifying on each the earliest date on which it may be filled.\nDrugs in this schedule include:\nSchedule III.\nSchedule III substances are those that have the following findings:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExcept when dispensed directly by a practitioner, other than a pharmacist, to an ultimate user, no controlled substance in Schedule III or IV, which is a prescription drug as determined under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 USC 301 \"et seq.\"), may be dispensed without a written, electronically transmitted, or oral prescription in conformity with section 503(b) of that Act (21 USC 353 (b)). Such prescriptions may not be filled or refilled more than six months after the date thereof or be refilled more than five times after the date of the prescription unless renewed by the practitioner.\nA prescription for controlled substances in Schedules III, IV, and V issued by a practitioner, may be communicated either orally, in writing, electronically transmitted or by facsimile to the pharmacist, and may be refilled if so authorized on the prescription or by call-in. Control of wholesale distribution is somewhat less stringent than Schedule II drugs. Provisions for emergency situations are less restrictive within the \"closed system\" of the Controlled Substances Act than for Schedule II though no schedule has provisions to address circumstances where the closed system is unavailable, nonfunctioning or otherwise inadequate.\nDrugs in this schedule include:\nSchedule IV.\nPlacement on schedules; findings required\nSchedule IV substances are those that have the following findings:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nControl measures are similar to Schedule III. Prescriptions for Schedule IV drugs may be refilled up to five times within a six-month period. A prescription for controlled substances in Schedules III, IV, and V issued by a practitioner, may be communicated either orally, in writing, electronically transmitted or by facsimile to the pharmacist, and may be refilled if so authorized on the prescription or by call-in.\nDrugs in this schedule include:\nSchedule V.\nSchedule V substances are those that have the following findings:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNo controlled substance in Schedule V which is a drug may be distributed or dispensed other than for a medical purpose. A prescription for controlled substances in Schedules III, IV, and V issued by a practitioner, may be communicated either orally, in writing, electronically transmitted or by facsimile to the pharmacist, and may be refilled if so authorized on the prescription or by call-in.\nDrugs in this schedule include:\nControlled by other federal laws for legal recreational use.\nThese psychoactive drugs are not controlled by the act, and are also allowed for sale intended for recreational use at the federal level (others are allowed for sale as dietary supplements, but not specifically regulated or intended for recreational use):\nRegulation of precursors.\nThe Controlled Substances Act also provides for federal regulation of precursors used to manufacture some of the controlled substances. The DEA list of chemicals is actually modified when the United States Attorney General determines that illegal manufacturing processes have changed.\nIn addition to the CSA, due to pseudoephedrine (PSE) and ephedrine being widely used in the manufacture of methamphetamine, the U.S. Congress passed the Methamphetamine Precursor Control Act which places restrictions on the sale of any medicine containing pseudoephedrine. That bill was then superseded by the Combat Methamphetamine Epidemic Act of 2005, which was passed as an amendment to the Patriot Act renewal and included wider and more comprehensive restrictions on the sale of PSE-containing products. This law requires customer signature of a \"log-book\" and presentation of valid photo ID in order to purchase PSE-containing products from all retailers.\nAdditionally, the law restricts an individual to the retail purchase of no more than three packages or 3.6 grams of such product per day per purchase \u2013 and no more than 9 grams in a single month. A violation of this statute constitutes a misdemeanor. Retailers now commonly require PSE-containing products to be sold behind the pharmacy or service counter. This affects many preparations which were previously available over-the-counter without restriction, such as Actifed and its generic equivalents.\nResearch exemptions.\nA common misunderstanding amongst researchers is that most national laws (including the Controlled Substance Act) allows the supply/use of small amounts of a controlled substance for non-clinical / non-in vivo research without licenses. A typical use case might be having a few milligrams or microlitres of a controlled substance within larger chemical collections (often tens of thousands of chemicals) for in vitro screening or sale. Researchers often believe that there is some form of \"research exemption\" for such small amounts. This incorrect view may be further re-enforced by R&amp;D chemical suppliers often stating and asking scientists to confirm that anything bought is for research use only.\nA further misconception is that the Controlled Substances Act simply lists a few hundred substances (e.g. MDMA, Fentanyl, Amphetamine, etc.) and compliance can be achieved via checking a CAS number, chemical name or similar identifier. However, the reality is that in most cases all ethers, esters, salts and stereoisomers are also controlled and it is impossible to simply list all of these. The act contains several \"generic statements\" or \"chemical space\" laws, which aim to control all chemicals similar to the \"named\" substance, these provide detailed descriptions similar to Markushes, these include ones for https:// and also https://.\nDue to this complexity in legislation, the identification of controlled chemicals in research or chemical supply is often carried out computationally on the chemical structure, either by in-house systems maintained a company or by the use of commercial software solutions. Automated systems are often required as many research operations can have collections of 10,000\u2013100,000 different substances at the 1\u20135 milligram scale, which are likely to include controlled substances, especially within medicinal chemistry research, even if the core focus of the company is not narcotic or psychotropic drugs. These may not have been controlled when created, but they have subsequently been declared controlled, or fall within chemical space close to known controlled substances, or are used as tool compounds, precursors or synthetic intermediates to a controlled substance.\nAnalogues vs Markush descriptions.\nHistorically, in an attempt to prevent psychoactive chemicals which are chemically similar to controlled substance, but not specifically controlled by it, the CSA also controls \"analogues\" of many listed controlled substances. The definition of what \"analogue\" means is kept deliberately vague, presumably to make it harder to circumvent this rule, as it's not clear what is / is not controlled, thus placing an element of risk and deterrent in those performing the supply. It is up to the courts to then decide whether a specific chemical is an analogue, often via a \"battle of experts\" for the defense and prosecution which can lead to extended and more uncertain prosecutions. The use of the\u00a0\"analogue\" definition also make it more difficult for companies involved in the legitimate supply of chemicals for research and industrial purposes to know whether a chemical is regulated under the CSA\nStarting in 2012, with the Synthetic Drug Abuse Prevention Act, and later an amendment to the CSA in 2018 https://, the CSA started to use Markush descriptions to clearly define what analogues or chemical space is controlled. These chemical space, chemical family, generic statements or markush statements (depending on the legislation terminology) have been used for many years by other countries, notably the UK in the Misuse of Drugs Act. \u00a0\nThese have the advantage of clearly defining what is controlled, making prosecutions easier and compliance by legitimate companies simpler. However the downside is that these tend to be harder to understand for non-chemists and also give those wishing to supply for illegitimate reasons something to \"aim\" for in terms of non-controlled chemical space. For both Markush and analogue type approaches, typically computational systems are used to flag likely regulated chemicals.\nCriticism.\nThe CSA does not include a definition of \"drug abuse\". Research shows certain substances on Schedule I, for drugs which have no accepted medical uses and high potential for abuse, actually have accepted medical uses, have low potential for abuse, or both. One of those substances is cannabis, which is legal for medical use in 40 states, legal for recreation in 24 states, and decriminalized in 8 states, one of which being North Carolina which has neither medical or recreational cannabis legalized.\nSee also.\nSimilar legislation outside of the United States:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7728", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7728", "title": "Claude Piron", "text": "Swiss translator and Esperantist (1931\u20132008)\nClaude Piron, also known by the pseudonym Joh\u00e1n Valano, was a Swiss psychologist, Esperantist, translator, and writer. He worked as a translator for the United Nations from 1956 to 1961 and then for the World Health Organization.\nHe was a prolific author of Esperanto works. He spoke Esperanto from childhood and used it in Japan, China, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, in Africa and Latin America, and in nearly all the countries of Europe.\nLife.\nPiron was a psychotherapist and taught from 1973 to 1994 in the psychology department at the University of Geneva in Switzerland. His French-language book \"Le d\u00e9fi des langues \u2013 Du g\u00e2chis au bon sens\" (The Language Challenge: From Chaos to Common Sense, 1994) is a kind of psychoanalysis of international communication. A Portuguese version, \"O desafio das linguas\", was published in 2002 (Campinas, S\u00e3o Paulo, Pontes).\nIn a lecture on the current system of international communication Piron argued that \"Esperanto relies entirely on innate reflexes\" and \"differs from all other languages in that you can always trust your natural tendency to generalize patterns... The same neuropsychological law...\u2014called by Jean Piaget \"generalizing assimilation\"\u2014applies to word formation as well as to grammar.\"\nHis diverse Esperanto writings include instructional books, books for beginners, novels, short stories, poems, articles and non-fiction books. His most famous works are \"Gerda malaperis!\" and \"La Bona Lingvo\" (The Good Language).\n\"Gerda malaperis!\" is a novella which uses basic grammar and vocabulary in the first chapter and builds up to expert Esperanto by the end, including word lists so that beginners may easily follow along.\nIn \"La Bona Lingvo\", Piron captures the basic linguistic and social aspects of Esperanto. He argues strongly for imaginative use of the basic Esperanto morpheme inventory and word-formation techniques, and against unnecessary importation of neologisms from European languages. He also presents the idea that, once one has learned enough vocabulary to express himself, it is easier to think clearly in Esperanto than in many other languages.\nPiron is the author of a book in French, \"Le bonheur cl\u00e9s en main\" (The Keys to Happiness), which distinguishes among pleasure, happiness and joy. He showed how one may avoid contributing to his own \"anti-happiness\" (\"l'anti-bonheur\") and how one may expand the areas of happiness in his life. Piron's view was that, while one may desire happiness, desire is not enough. He said that just as people must do certain things in order to become physically stronger, they must do certain things in order to become happier.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "7729", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7729", "title": "Captain America", "text": "Marvel Comics superhero\nCaptain America is a superhero created by Joe Simon and Jack Kirby who appears in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. The character first appeared in \"Captain America Comics\" #1, published on December 20, 1940, by Timely Comics, a corporate predecessor to Marvel. Captain America's civilian identity is Steven \"Steve\" Rogers, a frail man enhanced to the peak of human physical perfection by an experimental \"super-soldier serum\" after joining the United States Army to aid the country's efforts in World War II. Equipped with an American flag\u2013inspired costume and a virtually indestructible shield, Captain America and his sidekick Bucky Barnes clashed frequently with the villainous Red Skull and other members of the Axis powers. In the war's final days, an accident left Captain America frozen in a state of suspended animation until he was revived in modern times. He resumes his exploits as a costumed hero and becomes the leader of the superhero team the Avengers, but frequently struggles as a \"man out of time\" to adjust to the new era.\nThe character quickly emerged as Timely's most popular and commercially successful wartime creation upon his original publication, though the popularity of superheroes declined in the post-war period and \"Captain America Comics\" was discontinued in 1950. The character saw a short-lived revival in 1953 before returning to comics in 1964 and has since remained in continuous publication. Captain America's creation as an explicitly anti-Nazi figure was a deliberately political undertaking: Simon and Kirby were stridently opposed to the actions of Nazi Germany and supporters of U.S. intervention in World War II, with Simon conceiving of the character specifically in response to the American non-interventionism movement. Political messages have subsequently remained a defining feature of Captain America stories, with writers regularly using the character to comment on the state of American society and government.\nHaving appeared in more than ten thousand stories, Captain America is one of the most popular and recognized Marvel Comics characters, and has been described as an icon of American popular culture. Though Captain America was not the first United States\u2013themed superhero, he would become the most popular and enduring of the many patriotic American superheroes created during World War II. Captain America was the first Marvel character to appear in a medium outside of comic books, in the 1944 serial film \"Captain America\"; the character has subsequently appeared in a variety of films and other media, including the Marvel Cinematic Universe, where he was portrayed by actor Chris Evans from the character's first appearance in ' (2011) to his final appearance in ' (2019).\nPublication history.\nCreation and development.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"It was a time of deep passion. Hitler was grabbing all of Europe, we had Nazis in America, Nazis holding mass meetings in Madison Square Garden. [...] Captain America was created in that atmosphere, he was a natural outgrowth of the passionate mood of the country.\"\n \u2013 Jack Kirby\nIn 1940, Timely Comics publisher Martin Goodman responded to the growing popularity of superhero comics \u2013 particularly Superman at rival publisher National Comics Publications, the corporate predecessor to DC Comics \u2013 by hiring freelancer Joe Simon to create a new superhero for the company. Simon began to develop the character by determining who their nemesis could be, noting that the most successful superheroes were defined by their relationship with a compelling villain, and eventually settled on Adolf Hitler. He rationalized that Hitler was the \"best villain of them all\" as he was \"hated by everyone in the free world\", and that it would be a unique approach for a superhero to face a real-life adversary rather than a fictional one.\nThis approach was also intentionally political. Simon was stridently opposed to the actions of Nazi Germany and supported U.S. intervention in World War II, and intended the hero to be a response to the American non-interventionism movement. Simon initially considered \"Super American\" for the hero's name, but felt there were already multiple comic book characters with \"super\" in their names. He worked out the details of the character, who was eventually named \"Captain America\", after he completed sketches in consultation with Goodman. The hero's civilian name \"Steve Rogers\" was derived from the telegraphy term \"roger\", meaning \"message received\".\nGoodman elected to launch Captain America with his own self-titled comic book, making him the first Timely character to debut with his own ongoing series without having first appeared in an anthology. Simon sought to have Jack Kirby be the primary artist on the series: the two developed a working relationship and friendship in the late 1930s after working together at Fox Feature Syndicate, and had previously developed characters for Timely together. Kirby also shared Simon's pro-intervention views, and was particularly drawn to the character in this regard. Goodman, conversely, wanted a team of artists on the series. It was ultimately determined that Kirby would serve as penciller, with Al Avison and Al Gabriele assisting as inkers; Simon additionally negotiated for himself and Kirby to receive 25 percent of the profits from the comic. Simon regards Kirby as a co-creator of Captain America, stating that \"if Kirby hadn't drawn it, it might not have been much of anything.\"\nDebut and early success (early 1940s).\n\"Captain America Comics\" #1 was published on December 20, 1940, with a cover date of March 1941. While the front cover of the issue featured Captain America punching Hitler, the comic itself established the Red Skull as Captain America's primary adversary, and also introduced Bucky Barnes as Captain America's teenaged sidekick. Simon stated that he personally regarded Captain America's origin story, in which the frail Steve Rogers becomes a supersoldier after receiving an experimental serum, as \"the weakest part of the character\", and that he and Kirby \"didn't put too much thought into the origin. We just wanted to get to the action.\" Kirby designed the series' action scenes with an emphasis on a sense of continuity across panels, saying that he \"choreographed\" the sequences as one would a ballet, with a focus on exaggerated character movement. Kirby's layouts in \"Captain America Comics\" are characterized by their distorted perspectives, irregularly shaped panels, and the heavy use of speed lines.\nThe first issue of \"Captain America Comics\" sold out in a matter of days, and the second issue's print run was set at over one million copies. Captain America quickly became Timely's most popular character, with the publisher creating an official Captain America fan club called the \"Sentinels of Liberty\". Circulation figures remained close to a million copies per month after the debut issue, which outstripped even the circulation of news magazines such as \"Time\" during the same period. \"Captain America Comics\" was additionally one of 189 periodicals that the US Department of War deemed appropriate to distribute to its soldiers without prior screening. The character would also make appearances in several of Timely's other comic titles, including \"All Winners Comics\", \"Marvel Mystery Comics\", \"U.S.A. Comics\", and \"All Select Comics\".\nThough Captain America was not the first United States-themed superhero \u2013 a distinction that belongs to The Shield at MLJ Comics \u2013 he would become the most popular patriotic American superhero of those created during World War II. Captain America's popularity drew a complaint from MLJ that the character's triangular heater shield too closely resembled the chest symbol of The Shield. This prompted Goodman to direct Simon and Kirby to change the design beginning with \"Captain America Comics\" #2. The revised round shield went on to become an iconic element of the character; its use as a discus-like throwing weapon originated in a short prose story in \"Captain America Comics\" #3, written by Stan Lee in his professional debut as a writer. Timely's publication of \"Captain America Comics\" led the company to be targeted with threatening letters and phone calls from the German American Bund, an American Nazi organization. When members began loitering on the streets outside the company's office, police protection was posted and New York mayor Fiorello La Guardia personally contacted Simon and Kirby to guarantee the safety of the publisher's employees.\nSimon wrote the first two issues of \"Captain America Comics\" before becoming the editor for the series; they were the only Captain America stories he would ever directly write. While Captain America generated acclaim and industry fame for Simon and Kirby, the pair believed that Goodman was withholding the promised percentage of profits for the series, prompting Simon to seek employment for himself and Kirby at National Comics Publications. When Goodman learned of Simon and Kirby's intentions, he effectively fired them from Timely Comics, telling them they were to leave the company after they completed work on \"Captain America Comics\" #10. The authorship of \"Captain America Comics\" was subsequently assumed by a variety of individuals, including Otto Binder, Bill Finger, and Manly Wade Wellman as writers, and Al Avison, Vince Alascia, and Syd Shores as pencilers.\nDecline in popularity (mid-1940s and 1950s).\nSuperhero comics began to decline in popularity in the post-war period. This prompted a variety of attempts to reposition Captain America, including having the character fight gangsters rather than wartime enemies in \"Captain America Comics\" #42 (October 1944), appearing as a high school teacher in \"Captain America Comics\" #59 (August 1946), and joining Timely's first superhero team, the All-Winners Squad, in \"All Winners Comics\" #19 (Fall 1946). The series nevertheless continued to face dwindling sales, and \"Captain America Comics\" ended with its 75th issue in February 1950. Horror comics were ascendant as a popular comic genre during this period; in keeping with the trend, the final two issues of \"Captain America Comics\" were published under the title \"Captain America's Weird Tales\".\nTimely's corporate successor Atlas Comics relaunched the character in 1953 in \"Young Men\" #24, where Captain America appears alongside the wartime heroes Human Torch and Toro, which was followed by a revival of \"Captain America Comics\" in 1954 written by Stan Lee and drawn by John Romita. In the spirit of the Cold War and McCarthyism, the character was billed as \"Captain America, Commie Smasher\" and faced enemies associated with the Soviet Union. The series was a commercial failure, and was cancelled after just three issues. Romita attributed the series' failure to the changing political climate, particularly the public opposition to the Korean War; the character subsequently fell out of active publication for nearly a decade, with Romita noting that \"for a while, 'Captain America' was a dirty word\".\nReturn to comics (1960s).\nCaptain America made his ostensible return in the anthology \"Strange Tales\" #114 (November 1963), published by Atlas' corporate successor Marvel Comics. In an 18-page story written by Lee and illustrated by Kirby, Captain America reemerges following years of apparent retirement, though he is revealed as an impostor who is defeated by Human Torch of the Fantastic Four. A caption in the final panel indicates that the story was a \"test\" to gauge interest in a potential return for Captain America; the reader response to the story was enthusiastic, and the character was formally reintroduced in \"The Avengers\" #4 (March 1964).\n\"The Avengers\" #4 retroactively established that Captain America had fallen into the Atlantic Ocean in the final days of World War II, where he spent decades frozen in ice in a state of suspended animation before being found and recovered. Captain America solo stories written by Lee with Kirby as the primary penciller were published in the anthology \"Tales of Suspense\" alongside solo stories focused on fellow Avengers member Iron Man beginning in November 1964; the character also appeared in Lee and Kirby's World War II-set \"Sgt. Fury and his Howling Commandos\" beginning in December same year. These runs introduced and retroactively established several new companions of Captain America, including Nick Fury, Peggy Carter, and Sharon Carter.\nIn 1966, Joe Simon sued Marvel Comics, asserting that he was legally entitled to renew the copyright on the character upon the expiration of the original 28-year term. The two parties settled out of court, with Simon agreeing to a statement that the character had been created under terms of employment by the publisher, and was therefore work for hire owned by the company. Captain America's self-titled ongoing series was relaunched in April 1968, with Lee as writer and Kirby as penciller; Kirby later departed the series, and was replaced by Gene Colan. In 1969, writer and artist Jim Steranko authored a three-issue run of \"Captain America\". Despite the brevity of Steranko's time on the series, his contributions significantly influenced how Captain America was represented in post-war comics, reestablishing the character's secret identity and introducing a more experimental art style to the series.\nPolitical shifts (1970s).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"This was the '70s \u2013 prime anti-war years \u2013 and here was a guy with a flag on his chest who was supposed to represent what most people distrusted. No one knew what to do with him.\"\n \u2013 Steve Englehart\nIn contrast to the character's enthusiastic participation in World War II, comics featuring Captain America rarely broached the topic of the Vietnam War, though the subject of Captain America's potential participation was frequently debated by readers in the letters to the editor section in \"Captain America\". Marvel maintained a position of neutrality on Vietnam; in 1971, Stan Lee wrote in an editorial that a poll indicated that a majority of readers did not want Captain America to be involved in Vietnam, adding that he believed the character \"simply doesn't lend himself to the John Wayne-type character he once was\" and that he could not \"see any of our characters taking on a role of super-patriotism in the world as it is today\".\nCaptain America stories in the 1970s began to increasingly focus on domestic American political issues, such as poverty, racism, pollution, and political corruption. \"Captain America\" #117 (September 1969) introduced The Falcon as the first African-American superhero in mainstream comic books and who would become Captain America's partner; the series was cover titled as \"Captain America and the Falcon\" beginning February 1971, which it would maintain for the next seven and a half years. These political shifts were significantly shaped by comics created by writer Steve Englehart and artist Sal Buscema, who joined the series in 1972. In a 1974 storyline written by Englehart directly inspired by the Watergate scandal, Captain America is framed for murder by the fascistic Secret Empire, whose leader is ultimately revealed to be the president of the United States. The incident causes a disillusioned Steve Rogers to briefly drop the moniker of Captain America to become \"Nomad, the man without a country\", though he later vowed to \"reclaim the ideals of America, which its leaders have trampled upon\" and again assumed the role of Captain America. Englehart and Buscema's run was highly acclaimed, bringing \"Captain America\" from one of Marvel's lowest-selling titles to its top-selling comic, and the conflict between America as it idealizes itself to be and America in reality would recur frequently as a theme in \"Captain America\" comics in the subsequent decades.\nIn 1975, Roy Thomas created the comic book series \"The Invaders\". Set during World War II, the comic focuses on a superhero team composed of Timely's wartime-era superheroes, with Captain America as its leader; Thomas, a fan of stories from the Golden Age of Comic Books, drew inspiration for the series from Timely's All-Winners Squad. Jack Kirby wrote and illustrated run on \"Captain America and the Falcon\" from 1975 to 1977. This was followed by issues authored by a number of writers and artists, including Roy Thomas, Donald F. Glut, Roger McKenzie, and Sal Buscema; the series was also re-titled \"Captain America\" beginning with issue 223 in 1978.\nPost-Vietnam and \"Heroes Reborn\" (1980s and 1990s).\nOwing to the series' lack of a regular writer, \"Captain America\" editor Roger Stern and artist John Byrne authored the series from 1980 to 1981. Their run that saw a storyline in which Captain America declines an offer to run for president of the United States. Following Stern and Byrne, \"Captain America\" was authored by writer J.M. DeMatteis and artist Mike Zeck from 1981 to 1984. Their run featured a year-long storyline in which Captain America faced a crisis of confidence in the face of what DeMatteis described as \"Reagan Cold War rhetoric\". The story was originally planned culminate in \"Captain America\" #300 with Captain America renouncing violence to become a pacifist; when that ending was rejected by Marvel editor-in-chief Jim Shooter, DeMatteis resigned from \"Captain America\" in protest.\nWriter Mark Gruenwald, editor of \"Captain America\" from 1982 to 1985, served as writer on the series from 1985 to 1995. Various artists illustrated the series over the course of Gruenwald's decade-long run, including Paul Neary from 1985 to 1987, and Kieron Dwyer from 1988 to 1990. In contrast to DeMatteis, Gruenwald placed less emphasis on Steve Rogers' life as a civilian, wishing to show \"that Steve Rogers is Captain America first [...] he has no greater needs than being Captain America.\" Among the most significant storylines appearing in Gruenwald's run was \"\" in 1987, in which Steve Rogers renounces the identity of Captain America to briefly become simply \"The Captain\" after the United States government orders him to continue his superheroic activities directly under their control.\nAfter Gruenwald departed the series, writer Mark Waid and artist Ron Garney began to author \"Captain America\" in 1995. Despite early acclaim, including the reintroduction of Captain America's love interest Sharon Carter, their run was terminated after ten issues as a result of Marvel's \"Heroes Reborn\" rebranding in 1996. The rebrand saw artists Jim Lee and Rob Liefeld, who had left the company in the early 1990s to establish Image Comics, return to Marvel to re-imagine several of the company's characters. Marvel faced various financial difficulties in the 1990s, culminating in the company filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in 1996, and \"Heroes Reborn\" was introduced as part of an effort to increase sales. As part of the rebrand, Liefeld illustrated and co-wrote with Jeph Loeb a run on \"Captain America\" that was ultimately cancelled after six issues. Marvel stated that the series was cancelled due to low sales, though Liefeld has contended that he was fired after he refused to take a lower pay rate amid Marvel's bankruptcy proceedings. Waid would return to \"Captain America\" in 1998, initially with Garney as artist and later with Andy Kubert.\nIn 1999, Joe Simon filed to claim the copyright to Captain America under a provision of the Copyright Act of 1976 that allows the original creators of works that have been sold to corporations to reclaim them after the original 56-year copyright term has expired. Marvel challenged the claim, arguing that Simon's 1966 settlement made the character ineligible for copyright transfer. Simon and Marvel settled out of court in 2003, in a deal that paid Simon royalties for merchandising and licensing of the character.\nModern era (2000s to present).\nWriter and artist Dan Jurgens took over \"Captain America\" from Waid in 2000, positioning the character in a world he described as \"more cynical [...] in terms of how we view our government, our politicians and people's motives in general\". In the wake of the September 11 attacks, a new \"Captain America\" series written by John Ney Rieber with artwork by John Cassaday was published under the Marvel Knights imprint from 2002 to 2003. The series received criticism for its depiction of Captain America fighting terrorists modelled after Al-Qaeda, though Cassady contended that the aim of the series was to depict \"the emotions this hero was going through\" in the wake of 9/11, and the \"guilt and anger a man in his position would feel\".\nIn 2005, Marvel relaunched \"Captain America\" in a new volume written by Ed Brubaker and illustrated by Steve Epting. The run saw the publication of \"The Winter Soldier\", which reintroduced Captain America's previously deceased partner Bucky Barnes as a brainwashed cybernetic assassin. Contemporaneously, Captain America was a central character in the 2006 crossover storyline \"Civil War\", written by Mark Millar and penciled by Steve McNiven, which saw the character come into conflict with fellow Avengers member Iron Man over government efforts to regulate superheroes. The character was killed in the 2007 storyline \"The Death of Captain America\" written by Brubaker, which was accompanied by the miniseries ' written by Jeph Loeb; the character was later revived in the 2009 limited series '. Brubaker's run on \"Captain America\", which ran across various titles until 2012, was critically and commercially acclaimed; \"Captain America\" #25 (which contains the character's death) was the best-selling comic of 2007, and Brubaker won the Harvey Award for Best Writer for the series in 2006.\nAfter Brubaker's run on \"Captain America\" ended in 2012, a new volume of the series written by Rick Remender was published as part of the Marvel Now rebranding initiative, which saw Sam Wilson assume the mantle of Captain America in 2014. This was followed by a run written by Nick Spencer beginning in 2016, in which Captain America was replaced by a version of himself later known as \"Hydra Supreme\", loyal to the villainous organization Hydra, culminating in the 2017 crossover event \"Secret Empire\". As part of Marvel's Fresh Start rebrand in 2018, a new \"Captain America\" series written by Ta-Nehisi Coates with art by Leinil Francis Yu was published from 2018 to 2021. A volume of \"Captain America\" written by J. Michael Straczynski was published from September 2023 to December 2024, followed by a new volume written by Chip Zdarsky in July 2025.\nCharacterization.\nFictional character biography.\nAs of 2015[ [update]], Captain America has appeared in more than ten thousand stories, including over 5,000 comic books, books, trade publications and other media formats. The character's origin story has been retold and revised multiple times throughout his editorial history, though its broad details have remained generally consistent. Steven \"Steve\" Rogers was born in the 1920s to an impoverished family on the Lower East Side of New York City. The frail and infirm Rogers attempts to join the U.S. Army in order to fight in the Second World War, but is rejected after being deemed unfit for military service. His resolve is nevertheless noticed by the military, and he is recruited as the first test subject for \"Project Rebirth\", a secret government program that seeks to create super soldiers through the development of the \"Super-Soldier Serum\". Though the serum successfully enhances Rogers to the peak to human physical perfection, a Nazi spy posing as a military observer destroys the remaining supply of the serum and assassinates its inventor, foiling plans to produce additional super soldiers. Rogers is given a patriotic uniform and shield by the American government and becomes the costumed superhero Captain America. He goes on to fight the villainous Red Skull and other members of the Axis powers both domestically and abroad, alongside his sidekick Bucky Barnes and as a member of the Invaders. In the final days of the war, Rogers and Barnes seemingly perish after falling from an experimental drone plane into the northern Atlantic Ocean.\nRogers is found decades later by the superhero team the Avengers, the Super-Soldier Serum having allowed him to survive frozen in a block of ice in a state of suspended animation. Reawakened in modern times, Rogers resumes activities as a costumed hero, joining and later becoming leader of the Avengers. Many of his exploits involve missions undertaken for the Avengers or for S.H.I.E.L.D., an espionage and international law enforcement agency operated by his former war comrade Nick Fury. Through Fury, Rogers befriends Sharon Carter, a S.H.I.E.L.D. agent with whom he eventually begins a partnership and an on-again off-again romance. He meets and trains Sam Wilson, who becomes the superhero Falcon, and they establish an enduring friendship and partnership. After a conspiracy hatched by the Secret Empire to discredit Rogers is revealed to have been personally orchestrated by the President of the United States, a disillusioned Rogers abandons the mantle of Captain America and assumes the title of \"Nomad\", the \"man without a country\". He eventually re-assumes the title, and later declines an offer from the \"New Populist Party\" to run for president himself. He again abandons the mantle of Captain America to briefly assume the alias of \"\" when a government commission orders him to work directly for the U.S. government.\nIn the aftermath of the September 11 attacks, Rogers reveals his secret identity to the world. Following the disbandment of the Avengers, he discovers that Bucky is still alive, having been brainwashed by the Soviets to become the Winter Soldier. Later, in reaction to government efforts to regulate superheroes, Rogers becomes the leader of an underground anti-registration movement that clashes with a pro-registration faction led by fellow Avengers member Iron Man. After significant rancor, he voluntarily surrenders and submits to arrest. At his trial, he is shot and killed by Sharon Carter, whose actions are manipulated by the villainous Dr. Faustus; in his absence, a recovered Bucky assumes the title of Captain America. It is eventually revealed that , but became displaced in space and time; he is ultimately able to return to the present. He resumes his exploits as a superhero, though his public identity is briefly supplanted by a sleeper agent from the terrorist organization Hydra.\nPersonality and motivations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"Rogers' transformation into Captain America is underwritten by the military. But, perhaps haunted by his own roots in powerlessness, he is a dissident just as likely to be feuding with his superiors in civilian and military governance as he is to be fighting with the supervillain Red Skull. [...] He is 'a man out of time,' a walking emblem of greatest-generation propaganda brought to life in this splintered postmodern time.\"\n \u2013 Ta-Nehisi Coates\nSteve Rogers' personality has shifted across his editorial history, a fact that media scholar J. Richard Stevens sees as a natural consequence of the character being written and re-interpreted by many writers over the span of multiple decades. However, Stevens identifies two aspects of the character's personality that have remained consistent across expressions: his \"uncompromising purity\" and \"his ability to judge the character in others\". Early Captain America stories typically paid little attention to Rogers' civilian identity; in his 1970 book \"The Steranko History of Comics\", Jim Steranko notes that the character was often criticized for being two-dimensional as a result. He argues that this was an intentional device, writing that these critics \"failed to grasp the true implication of his being. Steve Rogers never existed, except perhaps as an abstract device for the convenience of storytelling. Captain America was not an embodiment of human characteristics but a pure idea.\"\nFollowing the character's return to comics in the 1960s, many stories gave increased focus to Rogers' civilian identity, particularly his struggles as a \"man out of time\" attempting to adjust to the modern era. Often, stories depict a brooding or melancholic Rogers as he faces both a physical struggle as Captain America, and an ideological struggle as Steve Rogers to reconcile his social values with modern times. The character is frequently conflicted by his World War II-era \"good war\" morality being challenged and made anachronistic by the compromising demands of the post-war era.\nPrior to Bucky Barnes' return to comics in the 2000s, many Captain America stories centered on Rogers' sense of guilt over Barnes' death. Culture scholar Robert G. Weiner argues that these stories mirror the post-traumatic stress disorder and survivor guilt held by many war veterans, and that this trauma distinguishes the character from other well-known superheroes such as Batman and Spider-Man: while those characters became heroes because of a traumatic incident, Rogers carries on as a hero in spite of a traumatic incident, with Weiner asserting that this reinforces the nobility of the character.\nPolitical themes.\nThough Marvel has historically trended away from making overt partisan statements in the post-war period, writers have nevertheless used Captain America to comment on the state of American society and government at particular moments in history. For example, the conspiracy storyline of \"Secret Empire\" reflected what writer Steve Englehart saw as broad disillusionment with American institutions in the wake of the Vietnam War and the Watergate scandal, the \"Streets of Poison\" storyline by Mark Gruenwald in the 1990s was intended to address anxieties around the drug trade and debates on the war on drugs, and \"Civil War\" by Mark Millar was widely interpreted as an allegory for the Patriot Act and post-9/11 debates on the balance between national security and civil liberties. While the ideological orientation of Captain America stories has shifted in response to changing social and political attitudes, Stevens notes how a central component of Captain America's mythology is that the character himself does not change: when the character's attitudes have shifted, it is consistently framed as an evolution or a new understanding of his previously held ideals. Stevens argues that the character's seeming paradoxical steadfastness is reflective of \"the language of comics, where continuity is continually updated to fit the needs of the serialized present.\"\nDespite his status as patriotic superhero, Captain America is rarely depicted as an overtly jingoistic figure. Stevens writes that the character's \"patriotism is more focused on the universal rights of man as expressed through the American Dream\" rather than \"a position championing the specific cultural or political goals of the United States.\" Weiner similarly concurs that the character \"embodies what America strives to be, not what it sometimes is\". Dittmer agrees that while the character sees himself \"as the living embodiment of the American Dream (rather than a tool of the state)\", his status as a patriotic superhero nevertheless tethers him to American foreign policy and hegemony. He argues that Captain America tends to skew away from interventionist actions at moments where the United States is undertaking policies that its critics deem imperialist, specifically citing the character's non-participation in the Vietnam and Iraq wars, and argues that the character's inconsistent position on the use of deadly force across his editorial history \"is perhaps a tacit acknowledgment of the violence, or the threat of violence, at the heart of American hegemony.\"\nPowers, abilities, and equipment.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Cap is one of the hardest hero characters to write, because the writer cannot use some exotic super-power to make his episodes seem colorful. [...] All he has to serve him are his extraordinary combat skills, his shield, and his unquenchable love for freedom and justice.\"\n \u2013 Stan Lee\nThe Super-Soldier Serum has enhanced Captain America's strength, speed, agility, endurance, intelligence, reflexes, reaction time, and natural self-healing ability to the peak of human physical perfection. His physical conditioning surpasses that of any Olympic athlete in history, including even the most highly trained elite competitors. Additionally, he is a master tactician and field commander, and a master of numerous forms of martial arts. His primary fighting styles include boxing, judo, and his own unique acrobatic hand-to-hand combat style, though he is not limited to these. Combined with his physical prowess, gymnastic ability, and endurance, he is the ultimate human combatant and one of the greatest martial artists in the Marvel Universe. The precise parameters of Captain America's physical prowess vary across stories due to editorial dictates and artistic license taken by authors; Steve Englehart was given an editorial order to give the character superhuman strength in the 1970s, but the change did not remain permanent and was soon forgotten. Steve Rogers is also a skilled visual artist, having worked as a commercial illustrator prior to joining the military, and several storylines have depicted the character working as a freelance artist.\nThe basic design of Captain America's costume has remained largely consistent from its original incarnation in the 1940s. Designed by Joe Simon, the costume is based on the United States flag, with Simon likening the character's appearance to that of \"a modern-day crusader\": chain mail armor, and a helmet adorned with wings in reference to the Roman god Mercury. Steve Rogers has worn other costumes when he has adopted alternate superhero alter egos: as Nomad he wears a domino mask and a black and gold suit that is cut to expose his bare chest and stomach, and as The Captain he wears a modified version of the Captain America suit with a red, white, and black design.\nCaptain America's shield is the character's primary piece of equipment. It is a round shield with a design featuring a white star on a blue circle surrounded by red and white rings. First appearing in \"Captain America Comics\" #1 as a triangular heater shield, beginning in \"Captain America Comics\" #2 it was changed to its current circular design due to a complaint from MLJ Comics that the original design too closely resembled the chest symbol of their superhero The Shield. The shield is depicted as constructed from an alloy of vibranium and adamantium, two highly resilient fictional metals appearing in Marvel comic books. It is portrayed as both a virtually indestructible defensive object and a highly aerodynamic offensive weapon: when thrown, it is capable of ricocheting off multiple surfaces and returning to the original thrower.\nSupporting cast.\nSidekicks and partners.\nCaptain America's first sidekick was Bucky Barnes, introduced in \"Captain America Comics\" #1 as the teenaged \"mascot\" of Steve Rogers' regiment. He is made Captain America's partner in that same issue after accidentally discovering the character's secret identity. Joe Simon described Bucky's creation as being largely motivated by a need to give Captain America \"someone to talk to\" and avoid the overuse of dialogue delivered through internal monologue, noting that \"Bucky was brought in as a way of eliminating too many thought balloons.\" Bucky was retroactively established as having been killed in the same accident that left Captain America frozen in suspended animation; the character remained deceased for many decades, contrasting the typically ephemeral nature of comic book deaths, until he returned in 2005 as the Winter Soldier. Initially introduced as a brainwashed assassin and antagonist to Captain America, Bucky's memories and personality were later restored, and he was re-established as an ally to Steve Rogers. Rick Jones briefly assumed the role of Captain America's sidekick and the public identity of Bucky following Captain America's return to comics in the 1960s.\nIn 1969, Sam Wilson was introduced as the superhero Falcon and later became Captain America's sidekick, making the characters the first interracial superhero duo in American comic books. Possessing the power to communicate with birds, Wilson is initially depicted as a former social worker living in Harlem, though this identity is revealed to be the result of memories implanted by the Red Skull. He later receives a winged suit from the superhero Black Panther that enables him to fly. Other characters who have served as Rogers' sidekick include Golden Girl (Betsy Ross), Demolition Man (Dennis Dunphy), Jack Flag (Jack Harrison), and Free Spirit (Cathy Webster).\nEnemies.\nOver the course of several decades, writers and artists have established a rogues' gallery of supervillains to face Captain America. The character's primary archenemy is the Red Skull, introduced from the character's origins as an apprentice to Adolf Hitler. Just as Red Skull represents Nazism, many of Captain America's villains represent specific ideologies or political formations: for example, the Serpent Society represents labor unionism, and Flag-Smasher represents anti-nationalism. The political character of Captain America's enemies has shifted over time: the character fought enemies associated with communism during his brief revival in the 1950s before shifting back to Nazi antagonists in the mid-1960s, while comics since 9/11 have frequently depicted the character facing terrorist villains.\nRomantic interests.\nSteve Rogers' first love interest was Betsy Ross, introduced in his World War II-era comics as a member of the Women's Army Corps who later became the costumed superhero Golden Girl. Peggy Carter, an American member of the French Resistance, was retroactively established in comics published in the 1960s as another of Rogers' wartime lovers. When Rogers is revived in the post-war era, he begins a partnership and on-again off-again relationship with S.H.I.E.L.D. agent Sharon Carter; introduced as Peggy's younger sister, she was later retconned as Peggy's grandniece to reflect Marvel's floating timeline. In comics published in the 1980s, Rogers dated and became engaged to civilian Bernie Rosenthal, though they ended their relationship amicably after Bernie left New York to attend law school. In the 1990s, Rogers had a romantic entanglement with the alternately villainous and antiheroic Diamondback, a member of the Serpent Society.\nAlternate versions of Captain America.\nThe title of \"Captain America\" has been used by other characters in the Marvel Universe in addition to Steve Rogers, including William Naslund, Jeffrey Mace, and William Burnside. John Walker, also known as U.S. Agent, was introduced as a villainous Captain America in 1988, and Isaiah Bradley was established in the 2003 limited series \"\" as an African American man who acquired superpowers after being used as a test subject for the Super-Soldier Serum. Rogers' sidekicks Bucky Barnes and Sam Wilson have also alternately held the title of Captain America: Barnes in 2008 following Rogers' death in 2007, and Wilson during Marvel's 2012 rebranding campaign Marvel Now!, following Rogers\u2019 loss of the Super Soldier serum. Within the multiverse of parallel universes that compose the Marvel Universe, there are many variations of Steve Rogers and Captain America; this includes Marvel's Ultimate Comics universe, which possesses its own version of Steve Rogers that is more overtly politically conservative.\nCultural influence and legacy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Over the years, Captain America's story has accurately reflected U.S. attitudes, as our country moved from the self-confidence of the early Cold War to the guilt-ridden angst of the 1970s to the revival of national pride that characterized the Reagan 1980s.\"\n \u2013 Jacob Heilbrun, \"The Los Angeles Times\"\nCaptain America is one of the most popular and widely recognized Marvel Comics characters, and has been described as an icon of American popular culture. He is the most well-known and enduring of the United States-themed superheroes to emerge from the Second World War and inspired a proliferation of patriotic-themed superheroes in American comic books during the 1940s. This included the American Crusader, the Spirit of '76, Yank &amp; Doodle, Captain Flag, and Captain Courageous, among numerous others. Though none would achieve Captain America's commercial success, the volume of Captain America imitators was such that three months after the character's debut, Timely published a statement indicating that \"there is only one Captain America\" and warning that they would take legal action against publishers that infringed on the character. After being dismissed from Timely, Joe Simon and Jack Kirby would themselves create a new patriotic superhero, the Fighting American, for Prize Comics in 1954; the character became the subject of a lawsuit from Marvel in the 1990s after Rob Liefeld attempted to revive the character following his own departure from Marvel.\nWhen the character was killed in 2007, he was eulogized in numerous mainstream media outlets, including \"The New York Times\" and \"The Los Angeles Times\", with the former describing him as a \"national hero\". In 2011, Captain America placed sixth on IGN's \"Top 100 Comic Book Heroes of All Time\", and second in their 2012 list of \"The Top 50 Avengers\". \"Gizmodo\" and \"Entertainment Weekly\" respectively ranked Captain America first and second in their 2015 rankings of Avengers characters. \"Empire\" ranked Captain America as the 21st greatest comic book character of all time.\nIn other media.\nCaptain America has appeared in a variety of adapted, spin-off, and licensed media, including films, cartoons, video games, toys, clothing, and books. The first appearance of Captain America in a medium outside of comic books was in the 1944 serial film \"Captain America\", which was also the first piece of non-comics media to feature a Marvel Comics character. The character later appeared in two made-for-TV films in 1979, \"Captain America\" and ', and a self-titled feature-length film in 1990. A trilogy of Captain America films starring Chris Evans as the title character were produced as part of the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) in the 2010s: ' (2011), ' (2014), and ' (2016). The character also appeared in the ensemble films \"The Avengers\" (2012), ' (2015), ' (2018), and \"\" (2019).\nThe first appearance of Captain America on television was in the 1966 Grantray-Lawrence Animation series \"The Marvel Super Heroes\". The character would make minor appearances in several Marvel animated series in the subsequent decades, including \"Spider-Man and His Amazing Friends\" (1981\u20131983), ' (1992\u20131997), and ' (1999\u20132000). Buoyed by increased popularity from the character's appearances in the MCU, Captain America began appearing in television series in more prominent roles beginning in the 2010s, such as \"\" (2010\u20132012). Captain America was the first Marvel character to be adapted into a novel with \"Captain America: The Great Gold Steal\" by Ted White, published in 1968.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7730", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7730", "title": "Cyclops (disambiguation)", "text": "A Cyclops is a one-eyed monster in Greek mythology.\nCyclops or The Cyclops may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "7731", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7731", "title": "Christian countercult movement", "text": "Social movement opposing certain religious sects\nThe Christian countercult movement, or the Christian anti-cult movement, is a social movement among certain Protestant evangelical, fundamentalist, Christian ministries (\"discernment ministries\"), and individual activists who oppose religious sects that they consider cults.\nOverview.\nChristian countercult activism mainly stems from evangelicalism or fundamentalism. The countercult movement asserts that particular Christian sects are erroneous because their beliefs are not in accordance with the teachings of the Bible as understood by the countercult group. It also states that a religious sect can be considered a cult if its beliefs involve a denial of any of what the countercult group consideres essential Christian teachings (such as salvation, the Trinity, Jesus himself as a person, the ministry and miracles of Jesus, his crucifixion, his resurrection, the Second Coming and the Rapture).\nWithin evangelical Protestantism, countercult ministries often evaluate groups whose teachings are considered to diverge from orthodox Christian doctrine, including organizations that self\u2011identify as Christian as well as certain non\u2011Christian traditions; commonly discussed targets in countercult literature include The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Jehovah's Witnesses, Christian Science, the Unification Church, and, in some treatments, Seventh-day Adventism, alongside critiques of Islam, Buddhism, Hinduism, and New Age movements.\nCountercult literature usually expresses specific doctrinal or theological concerns, often with a missionary or apologetic purpose. It presents a rebuttal by emphasizing the teachings of the Bible as understood by the countercult group against the beliefs of what they consider non-fundamental Christian sects. Christian countercult activist writers also emphasize the need for Christians to evangelize to followers of cults. Some Christians also share concerns similar to those of the secular anti-cult movement.\nThe movement publishes its views through a variety of media, including books, magazines, and newsletters, radio broadcasting, audio and video cassette production, direct-mail appeals, proactive evangelistic encounters, professional and avocational websites, as well as lecture series, training workshops and counter-cult conferences.\nHistory.\nPrecursors and pioneers.\nChristians have applied theological criteria to assess the teachings of perceived non\u2011orthodox movements throughout church history. The Apostles themselves were involved in challenging the doctrines and claims of various teachers. The Apostle Paul\u2019s Galatians confronts teachers urging Gentile believers to adopt circumcision and/or other aspects of the Mosaic Law, a dispute also reflected in the Jerusalem Council narrative (cf. Acts 15; Galatians 1:6\u201310). Many interpreters read the First Epistle of John as responding to early docetic or proto\u2011Gnostic teachings that denied Jesus\u2019 coming in the flesh, reflected in the letter\u2019s tests of christological confession and appeals to eyewitness testimony (1 John 1:1; 1 John 2:22; 1 John 4:2).\u201d\nThe early Church in the post-apostolic period was much more involved in \"defending its frontiers against alternative soteriologies\u2014either by defining its own position with greater and greater exactness, or by attacking other religions, and particularly the Hellenistic mysteries.\" Much of the early Christian literature is devoted to the exposure and refutation of perceived unorthodox theology, mystery religions and Gnostic groups. Irenaeus, Tertullian and Hippolytus of Rome were some of the early Christian apologists who engaged in critical analyses of unorthodox theology, Greco-Roman pagan religions, and Gnostic groups.\nIn the Protestant tradition, some of the earliest writings opposing perceived unorthodox groups (such as the Swedenborgians) can be traced back to John Wesley, Alexander Campbell, and Princeton Theological Seminary theologians like Charles Hodge and B. B. Warfield. The first known usage of the term \"cult\" by a Protestant apologist to denote a group as heretical or unorthodox is in \"Anti-Christian Cults\" by A. H. Barrington, published in 1898.\nQuite a few of the pioneering apologists were Baptist pastors, like I. M. Haldeman, or Plymouth Brethren, such as William C. Irvine and Sydney Watson. Watson wrote a series of didactic novels like \"Escaped from the Snare: Christian Science\", \"Bewitched by Spiritualism\", and \"The Gilded Lie (Millennial Dawnism)\", as warnings of the dangers posed by what he considered cultic groups. Watson's use of fiction to counter these perceived cults has been repeated by later novelists like Frank E. Peretti.\nEarly twentieth-century Protestant apologists generally applied the words \"heresy\" and \"sects\" to groups like the Christadelphians, Mormons, Jehovah's Witnesses, Spiritualists, and Theosophists. This was reflected in several chapters contributed to the multi-volume work released in 1915 \"The Fundamentals\", where apologists criticized the teachings of Charles Taze Russell, Mary Baker Eddy, the Mormons and Spiritualists.\nMid-twentieth-century apologists.\nSince the 1940s, the approach of Protestant Christians was to apply the meaning of \"cult\" such that it included those religious groups who use other scriptures beside the Bible or have teachings and practices deviating from Protestant Christian teachings and practices. Some examples of sources (with published dates where known) that documented this approach are:\nOne of the first prominent countercult apologists was Jan Karel van Baalen (1890\u20131968), an ordained minister in the Christian Reformed Church in North America. His book \"The Chaos of Cults\", which was first published in 1938, became a classic among Protestant as it was repeatedly revised and updated until 1962.\nWalter Ralston Martin.\nHistorically, one of the most important protagonists of the movement was Walter Martin (1928\u20131989), whose numerous books include the 1955 \"The Rise of the Cults: An Introductory Guide to the Non-Christian Cults\" and the 1965 \"The Kingdom of the Cults: An Analysis of Major Cult Systems in the Present Christian Era\", which continues to be influential. He became well known in conservative Christian circles through a radio program, \"The Bible Answer Man\", currently hosted by Hank Hanegraaff.\nIn \"The Rise of the Cults\", Martin gave the following definition of a cult:\nBy cultism we mean the adherence to doctrines which are pointedly contradictory to orthodox Christianity and which yet claim the distinction of either tracing their origin to orthodox sources or of being in essential harmony with those sources. Cultism, in short, is any major deviation from orthodox Christianity relative to the cardinal doctrines of the Christian faith.\nAs Martin's definition suggests, the countercult ministries concentrate on non-traditional groups that claim to be Christian, so chief targets have been, Jehovah's Witnesses, Armstrongism, Christian Science, and the Unification Church, but also smaller groups like the Swedenborgian Church. He defines Christian cults as groups that follow the personal interpretation of an individual, rather than the understanding of the Bible accepted by Nicene Christianity, providing the examples of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Christian Science, Jehovah's Witnesses, and the Unity Church. Martin examines a large number of new religious movements; included are major groups such as Christian Science, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Jehovah's Witnesses, Armstrongism, Theosophy, the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, Unitarian Universalism, Scientology, as well as minor groups including various New Age and groups based on Eastern religions. The beliefs of other world religions such as Islam and Buddhism are also discussed. He covers each group's history and teachings, and contrasts them with those of mainstream Christianity.\nVarious other Christian leaders\u2014among them John Ankerberg and Norman Geisler\u2014have emphasized themes similar to Martin's. Perhaps more importantly, numerous other well-known Christian leaders and pastors have accepted Martin's definition of a cult as well as his understanding of the groups to which he gave that label. Dave Breese summed up this kind of definition in these words:\nA cult is a religious perversion. It is a belief and practice in the world of religion which calls for devotion to a religious view or leader centered in false doctrine. It is an organized heresy. A cult may take many forms but it is basically a religious movement which distorts or warps orthodox faith to the point where truth becomes perverted into a lie. A cult is impossible to define except against the absolute standard of the teaching of Holy Scripture.\nDiscernment blogging.\nKenne \"Ken\" Silva is said by other discernment bloggers to have pioneered online discernment ministry. Ken was a Baptist pastor who ran the discernment blog \"Apprising\". Silva wrote many blog articles about the Emerging Church, the Word of Faith Movement, the Jehovah's Witnesses, the Gay Christian Movement, and many other groups. He started his blog in 2005 and wrote there until his death in 2014.\nSilva's work paved the way for other internet discernment ministries such as 'Pirate Christian Radio', a group of blogs and podcasts founded by Lutheran pastor Chris Rosebrough in 2008, and 'Pulpit &amp; Pen', a discernment blog founded by Baptist pastor and polemicist J. D. Hall.\nOther technical terminology.\nSince the 1980s, the term \"new religions\" or \"new religious movements\" has slowly entered into Evangelical usage alongside the word \"cult\". Some book titles use both terms.\nThe acceptance of these alternatives to the word \"cult\" in evangelicalism reflects, in part, the wider usage of such language in the sociology of religion.\nApologetics.\nThe term \"countercult apologetics\" first appeared in Protestant Evangelical literature as a self-designation in the late 1970s and early 1980s in articles by Ronald Enroth and David Fetcho, and by Walter Martin in \"Martin Speaks Out on the Cults\". A mid-1980s debate about apologetic methodology between Ronald Enroth and J. Gordon Melton, led the latter to place more emphasis in his publications on differentiating the Christian countercult from the secular anti-cult. Eric Pement urged Melton to adopt the label \"Christian countercult\", and since the early 1990s the terms has entered into popular usage and is recognized by sociologists such as Douglas Cowan.\nThe only existing umbrella organization within the countercult movement in the United States is the Evangelical Ministries to New Religions (EMNR), founded in 1982 by Martin, Enroth, Gordon Lewis, and James Bjornstad.\nWorldwide organizations.\nWhile the greatest number of countercult ministries are found in the United States, ministries exist in Australia, Brazil, Canada, Denmark Ethiopia, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Mexico, New Zealand, Philippines, Romania, Russia, Sweden, and Ukraine. A comparison between the methods employed in the United States and other nations discloses some similarities in emphasis, but also other nuances in emphasis. The similarities are that globally these ministries share a common concern about the evangelization of people in perceived cults and new religions. There is also often a common thread of comparing orthodox doctrines and biblical passages with the teachings of the groups under examination. In some of the European and southern hemisphere contexts, however, confrontational methods of engagement are not always relied on, and dialogical approaches are sometimes advocated.\nA group of organizations that originated within the context of established religion is working in more general fields of \"cult awareness,\" especially in Europe. Their leaders are theologians, and they are often social ministries affiliated to big churches.\nContextual missiology.\nThe phenomena of cults has also entered into the discourses of Christian missions and theology of religions. An initial step in this direction occurred in 1980 when the Lausanne Committee for World Evangelization convened a mini-consultation in Thailand. From that consultation a position paper was produced. The issue was revisited at the Lausanne Forum in 2004 with another paper. The latter paper adopts a different methodology to that advocated in 1980.\nIn the 1990s, discussions in academic missions and theological journals indicate that another trajectory is emerging that reflects the influence of contextual missions theory. Advocates of this approach maintain that apologetics as a tool needs to be retained, but do not favor a confrontational style of engagement.\nVariations and models.\nCountercult apologetics has several variations and methods employed in analyzing and responding to cults. The different nuances in countercult apologetics have been discussed by John A. Saliba and Philip Johnson.\nThe dominant method is the emphasis on detecting unorthodox or heretical doctrines and contrasting those with orthodox interpretations of the Bible and early creedal documents. Some apologists, such as Francis J. Beckwith, have emphasized a philosophical approach, pointing out logical, epistemological and metaphysical problems within the teachings of a particular group. Another approach involves former members of cultic groups recounting their spiritual autobiographies, which highlight experiences of disenchantment with the group, unanswered questions and doubts about commitment to the group, culminating in the person's conversion to Evangelical Christianity.\nApologists like Dave Hunt in \"Peace, Prosperity and the Coming Holocaust\" and Hal Lindsey in \"The Terminal Generation\" have tended to interpret the phenomena of cults as part of the burgeoning evidence of signs that Christ's Second Advent is close at hand. Both Hunt and Constance Cumbey have applied a conspiracy model to interpreting the emergence of New Age spirituality and linking that to speculations about fulfilled prophecies heralding Christ's reappearance.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory and critical assessments.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7732", "revid": "275202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7732", "title": "Professor X", "text": "Comic book character\nProfessor X (Prof. Charles Francis Xavier) is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. Created by writer Stan Lee and artist/co-writer Jack Kirby, the character first appeared in \"The X-Men\" #1 (September 1963). The character is depicted as the founder and occasional leader of the X-Men.\nXavier is a member of a subspecies of humans known as mutants, who are born with superhuman abilities. He is an exceptionally powerful telepath, who can read and control the minds of others. To both shelter and train mutants from around the world, he runs a private school in the X-Mansion in Salem Center, located in Westchester County, New York. Xavier also strives to serve the greater good by promoting peaceful coexistence and equality between humans and mutants in a world where zealous anti-mutant bigotry is widespread. However, he later abandons his dream in favor of establishing a mutant nation in Krakoa.\nThroughout much of the character's history, Xavier has been depicted with paraplegia and uses a wheelchair. One of the world's most powerful mutant telepaths, Xavier is a scientific genius and a leading authority in genetics. He has devised Cerebro and other equipment to enhance psionic powers and detect and track people with the mutant gene.\nXavier's pacifist and assimilationist ideology and actions have often been contrasted with that of Magneto, a mutant leader (initially characterized as a supervillain and later as a complex antihero) with whom Xavier has a complicated relationship. Fans and commentators often compare Xavier and Magneto to Martin Luther King Jr. and Malcolm X respectively, though the amount of authorial intent supporting this comparison is disputed. Writer Chris Claremont, who originated Magneto's backstory, compared the politics of Xavier to David Ben-Gurion and that of Magneto to Menachem Begin. Later writers have additionally emphasized secretive, ruthless, and manipulative aspects of Xavier, while the later \"Krakoan Age\" storyline sees him align with Magneto to establish a sovereign mutant nation.\nPatrick Stewart portrayed the character in the first three films in the 20th Century Fox \"X-Men\" film series and in various video games, and James McAvoy portrayed a younger version of the character in the 2011 prequel '. Both actors reprised the role in the film '. Stewart would reprise the role in the film \"Logan\" (2017), while McAvoy would further appear as his younger iteration of the character in \"\" (2016), \"Deadpool 2\" (2018), and \"Dark Phoenix\" (2019). Harry Lloyd portrayed the character in the third season of the television series \"Legion\". Stewart returned to the role again, portraying an alternate version of the character in the 2022 Marvel Cinematic Universe film \"Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness\".\nPublication history.\nCreated by writer Stan Lee and artist/co-writer Jack Kirby, Professor X first appeared in \"X-Men\" #1 (September 1963).\nCreation and influences.\nStan Lee has stated that the physical inspiration of Professor Xavier was from Academy Award-winning actor Yul Brynner.\nWriter Scott Lobdell established Xavier's middle name to be \"Francis\" in \"Uncanny X-Men\" #309 (February 1994).\nCharacter.\nXavier's goals are to promote the peaceful affirmation of mutant rights, to mediate the co-existence of mutants and humans, to protect mutants from violent humans, and to protect society from antagonistic mutants, including his old friend, Magneto. To achieve these aims, he founded Xavier's School for Gifted Youngsters (later named the Xavier Institute) to teach mutants to explore and control their powers. Its first group of students was the original X-Men (Cyclops, Iceman, Marvel Girl, Angel, and Beast). Xavier's students consider him a visionary and often refer to their mission as \"Xavier's dream\". He is highly regarded by others in the Marvel Universe, respected by various governments, and trusted by several other superhero teams, including the Avengers and the Fantastic Four. However, he also has a manipulative streak which has resulted in several significant fallings-out with allies and students.\nHe often acts as a public advocate for mutant rights and is the authority most of the Marvel superhero community turns to for advice on mutants. Despite this, his status as a mutant himself and originator of the X-Men only became public during the 2001 story \"E Is for Extinction\". He also appears in almost all of the X-Men animated series and in many video games, although usually as a non-playable character. Patrick Stewart plays him in the 2000s \"X-Men\" film series, as well as providing his voice in some of the X-Men video games (including some not connected to the film series).\nAccording to \"BusinessWeek\", Charles Xavier is listed as one of the top ten most intelligent fictional characters in American comics.\nIn a number of comics, Xavier is shown to have a dark side, a part of himself that he struggles to suppress. Perhaps the most notable appearance of this character element is in the Onslaught storyline, in which the crossover event's antagonist is a physical manifestation of that dark side. Also, Onslaught is created in the most violent act Xavier claims to have done: erasing the mind of Magneto. In \"X-Men\" #106 (August 1977), the new X-Men fight images of the original team, which have been created by what Xavier says is his \"evil self ... who would use his powers for personal gain and conquest\", which he says he is normally able to keep in check. In the 1984 four-part series titled \"The X-Men and the Micronauts\", Xavier's dark desires manifest themselves as the Entity and threaten to destroy the Micronauts' universe.\nIn other instances, Xavier is shown to be secretive and manipulative. During the Onslaught storyline, the X-Men find Xavier's files, the \"Xavier Protocols\", which detail how to kill many of the characters, including Xavier himself, should the need ever arise, such as if they went rogue. \"Astonishing X-Men\" vol. 3, #12 (August 2005) reveals that when Xavier realizes that the Danger Room has become sentient, he keeps it trapped and experiments on it for years, an act that Cyclops calls \"the oppression of a new life\" and equates to humanity's treatment of mutants (however, \"X-Men Legacy\" #220 - 224 reveals that Xavier did not intend for the Danger Room to become sentient: it was an accident, and Xavier sought a way to free Danger, but was unable to find a way to accomplish this without deleting her sentience as well).\nFictional character biography.\nCharles Francis Xavier was born in New York City to the wealthy Dr. Brian Xavier, a well-respected nuclear scientist, and Sharon Xavier. The family lives in a grand mansion estate in Westchester County because of the wealth his father's nuclear research has brought. Crucially, as he enters late adolescence, Xavier inherits the mansion he was raised in, enabling him to turn it in to Xavier's School for Gifted Youngsters, which he begins together with the first of the X-Men.\nBrian, his father, dies in an accident when Xavier is very young, and Brian's science partner Kurt Marko comforts and marries the grieving Sharon. When Xavier's telepathic mutant powers emerge, he discovers Marko cares only about his mother's money. Kurt moves in with the Xaviers, with his son Cain. Kurt becomes neglectful of Sharon, driving her to alcoholism, and abuses Charles and Cain. Cain takes out his frustrations and insecurities on his stepbrother. Charles' telepathic powers sense Cain's mind and psychological damage, which only leads to Cain becoming more aggressive and the young Xavier feeling Cain's pain firsthand. Sharon dies, and a fight erupts between Cain and Charles that causes some of Kurt's lab equipment to explode. Mortally wounded, Kurt drags the children out before dying, and admits he was partly responsible for Brian's death.\nWith help from his superhuman powers and natural genius, Xavier becomes an excellent student and athlete, though he gives up the latter, believing his powers give him an unfair advantage. Due to his powers, by the time he graduates from high school, Charles loses all his hair. He enters Bard College aged 16 and graduates with his bachelor's degree in biology in only two years. In graduate studies, he receives Ph.D.s in Genetics, Biophysics, Psychology, and Anthropology with a two-year residence at Pembroke College, University of Oxford. He receives an M.D. in Psychiatry while spending several years in London. He is appointed adjunct professor at Columbia University. \"Origins of Marvel Comics: X-Men\" #1 (2010) presents a different version of events, suggesting a scholarship to Oxford rescued him from his abusive home, after which he \"never looked back\", suggesting he began his academic career as a very young man at Oxford.\nAt graduate school, he meets a Scottish girl named Moira Kinross, a fellow genetics student with whom he falls in love. They agree to get married, but soon, Xavier is drafted into the Korean War. He carves himself a niche as a soldier in search and rescue missions alongside Shadowcat's father, Carmen Pryde, and witnesses Cain's transformation into Juggernaut when he touches a ruby with an inscription on it. Xavier receives a letter from Moira breaking up with him. He later discovers that Moira married her old boyfriend Joseph MacTaggert, who abuses her.\nDepressed when Moira broke off their engagement without explanation, Xavier began traveling around the world as an adventurer after leaving the army. In Cairo, he meets a young girl named Ororo Munroe, a pickpocket, and the Shadow King, a powerful mutant who is posing as Egyptian crime lord Amahl Farouk. Xavier defeats the Shadow King. This encounter leads to Xavier's decision to devote his life to protecting humanity from evil mutants and safeguarding innocent mutants from human oppression.\nXavier visits his friend Daniel Shomron, who runs a clinic for traumatized Holocaust victims in Haifa, Israel. There, he meets a man going by the name of Magnus (who becomes Magneto), a Holocaust survivor who works as a volunteer, and Gabrielle Haller, a woman driven into a catatonic coma by the trauma she experienced. Xavier uses his mental powers to break her out of her catatonia and they fall in love. Xavier and Magneto become friends, though neither immediately reveals to the other that he is a mutant. They have debates hypothesizing what will happen if humanity is faced with a new super-powered race of humans. While Xavier is optimistic, Magneto's experiences in the Holocaust lead him to believe humanity will ultimately oppress the new race as they have done with other minorities. The two friends reveal their powers to each other when they fight Nazi Baron Wolfgang von Strucker and his Hydra agents, who kidnap Gabrielle because she knows the location of their secret cache of gold. Magneto attempts to kill Strucker but Xavier stops him. Realizing his and Xavier's views on mutant-human relations are incompatible, Magneto leaves with the gold. Charles stays in Israel for some time, but he and Gabrielle separate on good terms, neither knowing that she is pregnant with his son, who grows up to become the mutant Legion.\nIn a strange town near the Himalayas, Xavier encounters an alien called Lucifer, the advance scout for an invasion by his race, and foils his plans. In retaliation, Lucifer drops a stone block on Xavier, paralyzing his legs. After Lucifer leaves, a woman named Sage hears Xavier's telepathic cries for help and rescues him, beginning a long alliance between them.\nIn a hospital in India, he is brought to a nurse, Amelia Voght, who looks after him and they fall in love. They move into an apartment in Bombay. Amelia is troubled to find Charles studying mutation, as she is a mutant and unsettled by it, though she feels better when he reveals himself to be a mutant. They move to the United States, living on Xavier's family estate. But the night Scott Summers moves into Xavier's mansion, Amelia leaves him, believing Charles would have changed his view and that mutants should lie low. Yet he is recruiting them to what she believes is a lost cause. Charles tries to force her to stay with his mental powers, but immediately ashamed by this, lets her go. She later becomes a disciple of Magneto.\nOver the years, Charles makes a name for himself as geneticist and psychologist, apparently renowned enough that the Greys were referred to him when no other expert could help their catatonic daughter, Jean. Xavier trains her in the use of her telekinesis, while inhibiting her telepathic abilities until she matures. Around this time, he also starts working with fellow mutation expert Karl Lykos as well as Moira MacTaggert again, who built a mutant research station on Muir Island. Apparently, Charles had gotten over Moira in his travels to the Greek island of Kirinos. Xavier discusses his candidates for recruitment to his personal strike force, the X-Men, with Moira, including those he passes over, which are Kurt Wagner, Piotr Rasputin, Pietro and Wanda Maximoff, and Ororo Munroe. Xavier also trains Tessa to spy on Sebastian Shaw.\nXavier founded Xavier's School for Gifted Youngsters, which provides a safe haven for mutants and teaches them to master their abilities. In addition, he seeks to foster mutant-human relations by providing his superhero team, the X-Men, as an example of mutants acting in good faith, as he told FBI agent Fred Duncan. With his inherited fortune, he uses his ancestral mansion at 1407 Graymalkin Lane in Salem Center, Westchester County, New York as a base of operations with technologically advanced facilities, including the Danger Room \u2013 later, Fantomex mentions that Xavier is a billionaire with a net worth of $3.5 billion. Presenting the image of a stern teacher, Xavier makes his students endure a rigorous training regime.\nXavier's first five students are Cyclops, Iceman, Angel, Beast, and Marvel Girl who become the original X-Men. After he completes recruiting the original team of X-Men, he sends them into battle with Magneto.\nThroughout most of his time with the team, Xavier uses his telepathic powers to keep in constant contact with his students and provides instructions and advice when needed. In addition, he uses a special machine called Cerebro, which enhances his ability to detect mutants and to allow the team to find new students in need of the school.\nAmong the obstacles Xavier faces is his old friend, Magneto, who has grown into an advocate of mutant superiority since their last encounter and who believes the only solution to mutant persecution is domination over humanity.\nWhen anthropologist Bolivar Trask resurfaces the \"mutant problem\", Xavier counters him in a televised debate, however, he appears arrogant and Trask sends his mutant-hunting robot Sentinels to terrorize mutants. The X-Men dispatch them, but Trask sees the error in his ways too late as he is killed by his creations.\nAt one point, Xavier seemingly dies during the X-Men's battle with the sub-human Grotesk, but it is later revealed that Xavier arranged for a reformed former villain named Changeling to impersonate him while he went into hiding to plan a defense against an invasion by the extraterrestrial Z'Nox, imparting a portion of his telepathic abilities to the Changeling to complete the disguise.\nWhen the X-Men are captured by the sentient island Krakoa, Xavier assembles a new team to rescue them, including Cyclops' and Havok's long-lost brother Vulcan, along with Darwin, Petra, and Sway. This new team, composed of students of Moira MacTaggert, was sent to rescue the original X-Men from Krakoa. However, after rescuing Cyclops, McTaggert's former students were seemingly killed. Upon Cyclops' return, Xavier removed Cyclops' memories of the death of Vulcan and his teammates; and began assembling yet another team of X-Men.\nXavier's subsequent rescue team consists of Banshee, Colossus, Sunfire, Nightcrawler, Storm, Wolverine, and Thunderbird. After the mission, the older team of X-Men, except for Cyclops, leave the school, believing they no longer belong there, and Xavier mentors the new X-Men.\nXavier forms a psychic bond across galaxies with Princess Lilandra Neramani of the Shi'ar empire. When they finally meet, it is love at first sight. She implores the professor to stop her mad brother, Shi'ar Emperor D'Ken, and he instantly aids her by deploying his X-Men. When Jean Grey returns from the Savage Land to tell him that all the X-Men are dead, he shuts down the school and travels with Lilandra to her kingdom, where she is crowned Empress and he is treated like a child or a trophy husband.\nXavier senses the changes taking place in Jean Grey, and returns to Earth to help and resume leadership of the X-Men. Shortly thereafter he battles his pupil after she becomes Dark Phoenix and destroys a populated planet in the Shi'ar empire. It hurts Xavier to be on the opposite side of Lilandra, but he has no other choice but to challenge the Shi'ar Imperial Guard to a duel over the fate of the Phoenix. Xavier would have lost against the greater power of the Dark Phoenix, but thanks to the help Jean Grey gives him (fighting her Phoenix persona), Xavier emerges victorious; she later commits suicide to prevent herself from endangering more innocent lives.\nWhen the X-Men fight members of the extraterrestrial race known as the Brood, Xavier is captured by them, and implanted with a Brood egg, which places Xavier under the Brood's control. During this time, Xavier assembles a team of younger mutants called the New Mutants, secretly intended to be prime hosts for reproduction of the aliens. The X-Men discover this and return to free Xavier, but they are too late to prevent his body from being destroyed with a Brood Queen in its place; however, his soul remains intact. The X-Men and Starjammers subdue this monstrous creature containing Xavier's essence, but the only way to restore him is to clone a new body using tissue samples he donated to the Starjammers and transfer his consciousness into the clone body. This new body possesses functional legs, though the psychosomatic pain Xavier experienced after living so long as a paraplegic takes some time to subside. Subsequently, he even joins the X-Men in the field, but later decides not to continue this practice after realizing that his place is at the school, as the teacher of the New Mutants.\nAfter taking a teaching position at Columbia University in \"Uncanny X-Men\" #192, Xavier is severely injured and left for dead as the victim of a hate crime. Callisto and her Morlocks, a group of underground-dwelling mutants, get him to safety. One of the Morlocks partially restores Xavier's health, but Callisto warns Xavier that he is not fully healed and that he must spend more time recuperating and restrain himself from exerting his full strength or powers, or his health might fail again. Xavier hides his injuries from the others and resumes his life.\nCharles meets with former lover Gabrielle Haller on Muir Isle and discovers that they had a child. The boy, David, has autism and dissociative identity disorder. Furthermore, he has vast psionic powers like his father. After helping him and his team to escape from David's mind, Xavier promises he will always be there for him.\nA reformed Magneto is arrested and put on trial. Xavier attends the trial to defend his friend. Andrea and Andreas Strucker, the children of presumed dead Baron von Strucker, crash the courtroom to attack Magneto and Xavier. Xavier is seriously injured. Dying, he asks a shocked Magneto to look after the X-Men for him. Lilandra, who has a psychic bond with Xavier, feels that he is in great danger and heads to Earth. There, she and Corsair take Xavier with them so Shi'ar advanced technology can heal him.\nXavier leaves Magneto in charge of the school, but some of the X-Men are unwilling to forgive their former enemy. Cyclops loses a duel for the leadership of the X-Men against Storm, then leaves them and joins the other four original X-Men to form a new team called X-Factor.\nIn the meantime, Charles becomes stranded in space with the Starjammers, but he is reunited with his lover Lilandra and relishes his carefree lifestyle. He serves as a member of the Starjammers aboard the starship \"Starjammer\", mobile in the Shi'ar Galaxy. He becomes consort to the Princess-Majestrix Lilandra while in exile, and when she later resumes her throne he takes up residence with her in the Imperial palace on the Shi'ar homeworld. Xavier joins Lilandra in her cause to overthrow her sister Deathbird, taking on the powers of Phoenix temporarily wherein he is named Bald Phoenix by Corsair, but sees that he must return to help the X-Men.\nXavier eventually becomes imprisoned by the Skrulls during their attempted invasion of the Shi'ar empire. Xavier breaks free from imprisonment by Warskrull Prime, and is reunited with the X-Men. A healthy Xavier returns from the Shi'ar empire and is reunited with both the current and original X-Men teams, and resumes his leadership responsibilities of the united teams. In a battle with his old foe, the Shadow King, in the \"Muir Island Saga\", Xavier's spine is shattered, returning him to his former paraplegic state, while his son David is seemingly killed. In the following months, Xavier rebuilds the mansion, which previously was rebuilt with Shi'ar technology, and restructures the X-Men into two teams.\nWhile holding a mutant rights speech, Xavier is nearly assassinated by Stryfe in the guise of Cable, being infected with a fatal techno-organic virus. For reasons of his own, the villain Apocalypse saves him. As a temporary side-effect, he gains full use of his legs and devotes his precious time to the youngest recruit on his team, Jubilee.\nIn the \"Age of Apocalypse\" series, an alternate reality is described in which Charles Xavier was killed when he sacrificed himself to save Erik Lensherr from his own future son, David Haller (Legion), who had gone back in time to eliminate Magneto in the belief that his father would thus be there for him and succeed in his dream without Magneto to 'hinder' his efforts. As a result, Magneto founded the X-Men and sought human/mutant co-existence in Xavier's name- even naming his new son with Rogue 'Charles' after his friend- but Haller's rampage also prompted Apocalypse to awaken decades before the world was ready for him, resulting in Apocalypse conquering North America and most of the world, eventually forcing Magneto's X-Men to attempt a daring mission to gain the power necessary to go back in time and save Xavier from Haller as they recognised how vital Xavier was to the future.\nWith all his students now highly trained adults, Professor Xavier renames his school the Xavier Institute For Higher Learning. Also, he assumes control of a private institution, the Massachusetts Academy, making it a new School for Gifted Youngsters. Another group of young mutants is trained here, Generation X, with Banshee and Emma Frost as headmaster and headmistress, respectively.\nProfessor X is for a time the unknowing host of the evil psionic entity Onslaught, the result of a previous battle with Magneto. In that battle, Magneto uses his powers to rip out the adamantium bonded to Wolverine's skeleton, and a furious Xavier wipes Magneto's mind, leaving him in a coma. From the psychic trauma of Xavier using his powers so violently and the mixing of Magneto's and Xavier's repressed anger, Onslaught is born. Onslaught wreaks havoc, destroying much of Manhattan, until many of Marvel's superheroes\u2014including the Avengers, the Fantastic Four and the Hulk\u2014destroy him. Xavier is left without his telepathy and, overcome with guilt, leaves the X-Men and is incarcerated for his actions. He later returns to the X-Men after \"\", in which he is shocked by the cruel act of being turned over to the mutant-hating Bastion, following a clash with the sentient Cerebro and a team of impostor X-Men.\nXavier questions his dream again and Magneto shortly thereafter is confronted by the X-Men. After the battle, the UN concedes Genosha to Magnus, and Wolverine is angered by Xavier stopping him from getting his revenge on Magneto. Charles and Logan are later trapped in a dimension with different laws of physics, wherein they have to coordinate their moves together and, in the process, gain a better understanding of the other's views.\nApocalypse kidnaps the fabled \"Twelve\" special mutants (Xavier included) whose combined energies would grant him omnipotence. After Apocalypse's defeat with the help of Skrull mutants, Xavier goes with the young Skrulls known as Cadre K to train them and free them from their oppressors, and eventually returns to aid in Legacy Virus research.\nMystique and her Brotherhood start a deadly assault on Muir Isle by releasing an altered form of the Legacy Virus, all in retaliation against the election campaign of Robert Kelly, a seeming mutant-hater. Mystique blows up Moira MacTaggert's laboratory complex, fatally wounding her. Charles goes to the astral plane to meet with her and retrieve information on the cure to the Legacy Virus, but after gathering the information does not want to leave her alone. If not for Jean and Cable talking him down and pulling him back, the professor would have died with his first love, who states she has no regrets.\nAs Beast cures the Legacy Virus, many infected Genoshan mutants recover overnight, providing Magneto, the current ruler of Genosha, with an army to start the third World War. He demands Earth's governments accept him as their leader, and abducts and crucifies Xavier in Magda Square for all to see. A loyal member of Magneto's Acolytes, Amelia Voght, cannot stand to see her former lover punished in such a manner and sets him free. Jean Grey and rather untrained newcomers, as most of the team are elsewhere, distract Magneto and Wolverine guts him. Xavier is too late to intervene.\nXavier's evil twin Cassandra Nova, whom Xavier attempted to kill while they were both in their mother's womb, orders a group of rogue Sentinels to destroy the independent mutant nation of Genosha. Magneto, who is Genosha's leader, appears to die along with the vast majority of the nation's inhabitants. Nova then takes over Xavier's body. Posing as Xavier, she reveals his mutation to the world, something he needed to do but did not want to sully his reputation over, before going into space and crippling the Shi'ar empire. The X-Men restore Xavier, but Lilandra, believing that too much disaster has come from the Shi'ar's involvement with the X-Men, annuls her marriage to Xavier. Lilandra previously had gone insane and tried to assassinate Charles on a trip to Mumbai. During this period, a mutant named Xorn joins the X-Men. Xorn uses his healing power to restore Xavier's use of his legs.\nWhen the X-Men receive a distress call from a Scottish island, they are surprised to find Juggernaut with nowhere to go, as the island was destroyed by his further-mutated partner in crime, Black Tom Cassidy, who died. Xavier reaches out to his stepbrother and offers him a place in his mansion, with Cain reluctantly accepting. The Juggernaut redeems himself over the next few weeks and joins the X-Men. Xavier finds out that Cain's father preferred him to his own flesh and blood and that they both thought they deserved the abuse they incurred by Kurt; Cain believed this because his father loved someone else's child more than him, and Charles felt guilty about getting in the way. That it is why neither of them stopped Kurt Marko with their powers.\nNow outed as a mutant, Xavier makes speeches to the public about mutant tolerance. He also founds the X-Corporation, or X-Corp (not to be confused with the X-Corps), with offices all over the world. The purpose of the X-Corp is to watch over mutant rights and help mutants in need. As a result of being out, the school no longer hides the fact that it is a school for mutants and it opens its doors for more mutant (and even human) students to come in. A student named Quentin Quire and members of his gang start a riot at the Xavier Institute during an open house at the school. As a result, Quire and two other students are killed. Uncertain about his dream's validity, Xavier announces that he will step down as headmaster and be succeeded by Jean Grey. Afterwards, Xorn reveals himself to be Magneto, having apparently not died in the Sentinel raid on Genosha. Magneto undoes the restoration of Xavier's ability to walk, kidnaps him, and destroys the X-Mansion (killing several of the students). Then Xorn/Magneto assaults New York, where Cyclops, Fantomex and a few students confront him. After the rest of the X-Men arrive, Xorn/Magneto kills Jean Grey with an electromagnetically induced stroke, and Wolverine decapitates him. With Jean dead, Xavier leaves the school to Cyclops and Emma Frost, to bury Xorn/Magneto in Genosha. In a retcon of Grant Morrison's storyline, there Xavier meets the \"real\" Magneto, who mysteriously survived Cassandra Nova's assault. The two resolve their differences and attempt to restore their friendship, leading a team of mutants, the Genoshan Excalibur, to rebuild and restore order to the destroyed island nation.\nAt the mansion, the Danger Room (the X-Men's simulated reality training chamber) gains sentience, christens itself \"Danger\", assumes a humanoid form, and attacks the X-Men before leaving to kill Xavier. With Magneto's help, Xavier holds off Danger until the X-Men arrive. Danger flees, but not before revealing to Colossus that Xavier has known it to be sentient ever since he upgraded it. Colossus is especially offended by this because he had been held captive and experimented upon by Danger's ally Ord. Ashamed, Xavier tries to explain to them that by the time he realized what was happening, he could see no other course. The disgusted X-Men leave.\nHouse of M.\nIn a prelude to \"House of M\", Magneto's daughter Scarlet Witch has a mental breakdown and causes the death of several Avengers. Magneto brings her to Xavier and asks him to use his mental powers to help her. Although aided by Doctor Strange and the appearance of Cassandra Nova, Xavier is unsuccessful. Xavier orders a meeting of the X-Men and Avengers to decide Wanda's fate. Her brother Quicksilver, believing the heroes plan to kill her, speeds off to Genosha and convinces Wanda that she could right the wrongs she inflicted by using her powers to alter reality.\nQuicksilver somehow forces a tearful Wanda to reveal to him her heart's desires of Magneto, the assembled New Avengers, and the X-Men, and then uses her powers to make them all real. Thanks to Magneto, though, this re-imagined world is a place where a much more numerous mutant-kind are the dominant species, humans a disenfranchised and oppressed 'silent majority', and Magneto himself rules supreme. In this reality, the only proof that Charles Xavier ever existed is a secret monument in Magneto's palace garden, with the engraved message \"He died so Genosha could live\".\nAfter mutant Layla Miller restores the memories of some of the X-Men and Avengers, they head to Genosha where they discover that Magneto has erected a memorial garden for Xavier commemorating his death. Emma is horrified until Cloak fades into the grave and discovers there is no body inside. After a battle, Scarlet Witch again uses her powers to restore reality and, as a slight against her father, causes a large majority mutants to lose their powers, leaving the mutant race on the brink of extinction and causing the lost powers to become an energy mass, the Collective. With reality restored, Xavier is still missing and the X-Men are unable to detect him with Cerebro.\nDeadly Genesis.\nXavier returns when Cyclops' and Havok's long-lost brother, Vulcan, is revived by the Collective energy released as a result of the \"House of M\" incident. Vulcan then attacks the X-Men. Xavier, now depowered but able to walk in the wake of \"House of M\", reveals that he had gathered and trained another team of X-Men (this one composed of students of Dr. Moira MacTaggert) sometime between the original team and the new X-Men team introduced in \"Giant Size X-Men\" #1. This team included Vulcan as a member. Like the \"Giant Size\" X-Men team, McTaggert's former students were sent to rescue the original X-Men from Krakoa, the living island. However, after rescuing Cyclops, McTaggert's former students were seemingly killed. Upon Cyclops' return, Xavier removed Cyclops' memories of the death of Vulcan and his teammates and began assembling the \"Giant Size\" X-Men. Vulcan skirmishes with the X-Men and eventually flees into space.\nIn spite of Cyclops' feelings, Xavier forms a new team including Havok and Darwin, the lone other survivors of Moira's students. Xavier seeks to confront Vulcan before he can enact his vengeance against the Shi'ar empire, which killed Vulcan's mother. While en route to the Shi'ar homeworld, Xavier is abducted and is later thrown into the M'Kraan Crystal by Vulcan. Darwin follows Xavier into the crystal and pulls Xavier out. This somehow restores Xavier's lost telepathy. With help from his longtime lover, Lilandra, Xavier escapes back to Earth with several of his X-Men.\nUpon Xavier's return to Earth, as seen in the \"World War Hulk\" storyline, he begins to search for lost mutants such as Magneto. Charles' search for more mutants is interrupted by the Hulk, who was sent into extraterrestrial exile by the Illuminati, a group of powerful superbeings to which Xavier belongs. Xavier had no part in (and did not know of) the Hulk exile decision, but Xavier admits to Hulk that he would have concurred to a temporary exile so Bruce Banner could be cured of transforming into the Hulk. However, he also tells the Hulk he would not have agreed to permanent exile. Xavier attempts to surrender to the Hulk, but after viewing the X-Mansion's large graveyard dedicated to post-M-Day mutant deaths, The Hulk concludes the mutants have suffered enough and leaves the Mansion grounds on his own accord. While the X-Men tend to the wounded, Cyclops finally forgives Professor X.\nMessiah Complex.\nWhile using Cerebra and talking to Beast during the \"\" storyline, Charles detects a new mutant so powerful it fries Cerebra's system. He asks Cyclops to send out a team to find out about the mutant. Once the team has come back empty handed, he argues with Scott for not telling him about the team he deployed to find former Acolytes. Scott tells him outright that he does not need him to run the X-Men anymore. This upsets Charles and annoys him later on when he overhears Cyclops briefing X-Factor on the situation. He also approaches the New X-Men in an attempt to help them figure out a non-violent way to help against the Purifiers, but is quickly rebuked by Surge, who questions where he was when they were getting attacked the first time, and that they did not need to learn from him. Charles questions Cyclops' decision to send X-Force to hunt down his own son, Cable, in front of the students. Cyclops then tells Xavier that he is a distraction that will keep getting in the way and that he must leave the mansion. Xavier is contacted by Cable, who lost the mutant newborn to the traitorous actions of Bishop, who in turn lost the child to the Marauders, and tells him that he is the only one who can help Cable save the future. In the final fight, Xavier is accidentally shot in the head by Bishop. Immediately afterward Xavier's body disappears and Cyclops declares that there are no more X-Men.\nProfessor Xavier survives Bishop's gunshot but falls into a coma. Xavier is kidnapped by Exodus, Tempo, and Karima Shapandar. Exodus tries to heal Xavier, Xavier mentally fights Exodus. Exodus finally approaches Magneto, who is apparently still depowered, for help. Magneto and Karima Shapandar are able to stir Xavier's memories and coax him out of his coma, though Xavier remains slightly confused and partly amnesiac. Later, Exodus confronts Magneto about Joanna Cargill's injury (Magneto was forced to shoot a laser through her eyeball to prevent her attempted an assassination of Xavier). Exodus nearly kills Magneto, and Xavier drags Exodus onto the Astral Plane, putting Xavier's own newly restored mind at stake. Xavier defeats Exodus after a harrowing psionic battle, and Exodus reveals the reason he abducted Xavier and to restore his mind: Exodus wants Xavier to lead the Acolytes and find the mutant messiah child (now under the guardianship of Cable) to indoctrinate the child into their cause. Xavier refuses. Emma Frost's telepathy picks up on the psychic fight, and Emma informs Cyclops that Xavier is alive. Xavier parts company with Magneto and Karima to try to regain his lost memories by visiting people from his past.\nThe first person Charles visits is Carter Ryking, who had gone insane after losing his powers. Charles reads Carter's memories and discovers that when the two were children they were used as test subjects by Nathan Milbury of the Black Womb Project, with the approval of Charles' father, Doctor Brian Xavier. Xavier makes the connection Milbury and X-Men villain, Mister Sinister, who has apparently long been manipulating Charles' life in addition to other X-Men. Afterwards, he discovers he has been targeted by assassins.\nCharles eventually discovers Mister Sinister had set up Charles, Sebastian Shaw, Juggernaut, and Ryking (Hazard) as potential new hosts for Sinister's mind. Bleeding slowly to death, he apparently gives in to Sinister becoming the new Mister Sinister. But in reality, Xavier is still battling Sinister for control of his body. As Sebastian Shaw and Gambit destroy Sinister's Cronus Machine, the device that he used to transfer his consciousness into new hosts, Xavier drives Sinister out of his body permanently. Xavier thanks Shaw and Gambit for their help and declares he must go and see Cyclops immediately. Professor X returns to the X-Mansion to find it destroyed after recent events. Afterwards, Xavier leaves the ruins of the X-Mansion to secretly meet up Cyclops by psychically coercing his former student for the visit. Xavier explains to Cyclops about the recent events with Mr. Sinister and tries to explain to Cyclops how Sinister has been manipulating Scott's and Jean's lives since when they were children. Xavier attempts to have Scott give him permission to scan Scott's mind for traces of Sinister's influences, but instead, Scott turns the tables on Xavier by revealing that he has secretly invited Emma Frost into their entire meeting and also into Xavier's mind.\nWhile in his mind, Emma forces Xavier to relive each of his morally ambiguous decisions under altruistic pretenses. As the issue continues, Charles realizes his human arrogance and that while some of his decisions were morally wrong, he must move forward with his life and deal with the consequences. Emma ends her incursion into Xavier's mind by reminding him of Moira MacTaggert's last words. As he reflects on Moira's words, Xavier gives Cyclops his blessing to lead the X-Men and leaves to find his own path. Following his encounter with Wolverine (in the \"Original Sin\" Arc) Professor Xavier seeks out his step-brother, the unstoppable Juggernaut in an attempt to reform him. After a conversation about the meaning of the word \"Juggernaut\" and a review of Juggernaut and Xavier's shared history Xavier offers Cain an empty box as a gift. Confused by Xavier's gift Cain attempts to kill the Professor bringing an entire sports bar down over their heads in the process. Later Cain battles the X-Men in his full Juggernaut armor and conquers the planet. Just as everything appears to be under the Juggernaut's control Xavier reappears and informs him that everything that has just taken place except for Juggernaut destroying the bar took place in Cain's mind. A baffled Cain demands to know how Xavier managed to overcome his psychically shielded helmet to which the Professor replies that he decided to visit Cain in his sleep. Professor Xavier then informs him that he now understands Cain as a person and that he will not attempt to get in his way or reform him again. But Xavier also warns Cain that if he gets in the way of the Professor's path to redemption Xavier will stop him permanently. Following his encounter with Cain it has been revealed that Xavier is now searching for Rogue.\nAfter his bruising encounter with Cyclops and Emma Frost, Professor X is forced to revisit the biggest challenge and the biggest failure of his career, Wolverine, when the feral mutant asks for Charles' help in freeing his son from the clutches of the Hellfire Club. As the two search for Daken, Wolverine reveals that when he first joined the X-Men he attempted to assassinate Xavier due to some unknown programming. In response, the Professor broke Logan's mind and rebuilt it so that any and all programming he received was forgotten. Logan also revealed that the real reason Xavier asked him to join the X-Men was that Charles \"needed a weapon\". Eventually Professor Xavier and Wolverine locate Sebastian Shaw's mansion and attack his minions, just as they are about to enter a bomb explodes from within catching them both off guard. From the wreckage emerges an angry Sebastian who immobilizes Wolverine. Meanwhile, Miss Sinister knocks Daken unconscious and has him taken to the med lab in the mansion's basement. As Shaw prepares to deliver a killing blow to Xavier, Wolverine recovers and stops him telling Xavier to rescue his son. Professor Xavier locates the med lab and after a quick psychic battle with Miss Sinister enters Daken's fractured mind. While in Daken's mind Xavier discovers Romulus's psychic tampering and comments that Daken's mind is even more broken than Wolverine's was. Before Xavier can heal Daken a psychic bomb explodes causing Xavier to become comatose and Daken to wake up. Miss Sinister arrives and attempts to manipulate Daken who reveals that the psychic bomb in his head restored his memories and stabs Miss Sinister in the chest. Meanwhile, Wolverine defeats Shaw and enters the mansion to find Daken standing over an unconscious Xavier preparing to kill him. Wolverine tells Daken that he will not let him hurt Xavier and the two fight. Overcome with guilt over what happened to Daken and Itsu, Wolverine allows himself to be beaten. Just as Daken appears to have won Xavier pulls both of them onto the astral plane revealing that the psychic bomb had little effect on him because his psyche was already shattered. Xavier then explains to Wolverine and Daken that Romulus is solely responsible for Itsu's death and that he lied to Daken about everything because he wanted Wolverine to become his weapon. As the three converse, Daken returns to the physical plane and prevents Shaw from killing Xavier. With the truth revealed Wolverine and Daken decide to kill Romulus. As the two depart Wolverine tells Xavier that he forgives him for all of the dark moments in their history. Wolverine acknowledges that Professor Xavier allowed him to become a hero. Wolverine then tells the Professor that he hopes he will one day be able to forgive him for choosing to kill Romulus.\nProfessor Xavier recruits Gambit to go with him to Australia to find and help Rogue who is currently staying at the X-Men's old base in the Outback; unaware Danger is using Rogue as a conduit for her revenge against him.\nIn a prelude to the \"Secret Invasion\" storyline, Professor X was at the meeting of the Illuminati when it came to the discussion about the Skrulls planning an invasion by taking out Earth's heroes and posing as them. He claims he was unable to distinguish that Black Bolt had been replaced by a Skrull, and his powers were tested quickly by the Black Bolt Skrull. Professor X leaves after learning even he can no longer trust the others, yet appears to have severely restricted the number of people he informs of the forthcoming alien invasion, as the X-Men were not prepared for the Skrulls, at least at first. Xavier has not seen again during the events of \"Secret Invasion\", though his X-Men in San Francisco are successful at repelling the invaders there through the use of the modified Legacy Virus.\nDark Reign.\nDuring the \"Dark Reign\" storyline, Professor X convinces Exodus to disband the Acolytes. A H.A.M.M.E.R. helicopter arrives and from inside appears Norman Osborn, who wants to talk to him. During the Dark Avengers' arrival in San Francisco to enforce martial law and squelch the anti-mutant riots occurring in the city, Xavier appears (back in his wheelchair) in the company of Norman Osborn and publicly denounces Cyclops' actions and urges him to turn himself in. However, this Xavier was revealed to be Mystique who Osborn found to impersonate Xavier in public. The real Xavier is shown in prison on Alcatraz and slowly being stripped of his telepathic powers while in psionic contact with Beast, who was arrested earlier for his part in the anti-mutant riots. It was also revealed by Emma Frost that she and Professor X are both Omega Class Telepaths when she manages to detect the real Professor X. Professor X helps Emma Frost enter Sentry's mind. However, as Emma frees him of the Void's influence, a minute sliver of the entity itself remains in her mind. Xavier quickly tells her to remain in her diamond armor state to prevent the Void from gaining access to her psi-powers. Professor X is later seen with Emma Frost where Beast is recuperating.\nAfter what happened at \"Utopia\", Xavier has come to live on the risen Asteroid M, rechristened Utopia, along with the rest of the X-Men, X-Club, and mutant refugees and is also allowed to join the Utopia lead council (Cyclops, Storm, Namor, Iceman, Beast, Wolverine and Emma Frost). While he no longer continues to openly question every move that Cyclops makes, he is still concerned about some of his leadership decisions. Xavier had wanted to return to the mainland to clear his name, but in the aftermath of Osborn declaring Utopia as a mutant detention area, Cyclops refused to let him leave, stating that it would be a tactical advantage to have him as an ace in the hole in case the need arose. To that end, he has kept Xavier out of the field and instead relied on Emma Frost, Psylocke and the Stepford Cuckoos respectively for their own psionic talents. While attending the funeral of Yuriko Takiguchi, Magneto arrives at Utopia, apparently under peaceful motives. Xavier does not believe it, and attacks Magneto telepathically, causing Cyclops to force him to stand down. He later apologizes to Magneto for acting out of his old passions from their complicated relationship, which Magneto accepts.\nSecond Coming.\nDuring the \"\" storyline, Professor Xavier is seen on Utopia delivering a eulogy at Nightcrawler's funeral. Like the other X-Men, he is deeply saddened by Kurt's death and anxious about the arrival of Cable and Hope. Xavier is seen using his powers to help his son Legion control his many personalities and battle the Nimrods. At the conclusion of Second Coming Professor X is seen surveying the aftermath of the battle from a helicopter. As Hope descends to the ground and cradles Cable's lifeless arm, Xavier reflects on everything that has transpired and states that, while he feels that Hope has indeed come to save mutant kind and revive his dream, she is still only a young woman and will have a long and difficult journey before she can truly achieve her potential.\nAvengers vs. X-Men.\nDuring the \"Avengers vs. X-Men\" storyline, the Phoenix Force is split into five pieces and bonded with Cyclops, Emma Frost, Namor, Colossus and Magik (who become known as the Phoenix Five). Eventually, Cyclops and Frost come to possess the full Phoenix Force, and Professor X is instrumental in confronting them both, and dies in the ensuing battle with Cyclops. The Phoenix Force is subsequently forced to abandon Cyclops as a host by the efforts of both Hope Summers and the Scarlet Witch.\nXavier's body is later stolen by the Red Skull's S-Men while the group also captures Rogue and Scarlet Witch. Xavier's brain is removed and fused to the brain of the Red Skull. After Rogue and Scarlet Witch snapped out of the fight they were in, they find the lobotomized body of Professor X. Red Skull uses the new powers conferred upon him by Professor X's brain to provoke anti-mutant riots. His plans are foiled by the Avengers and the X-Men, and the Skull escapes.\nProfessor X's spirit is later seen in the Heaven dimension along with Nightcrawler's spirit at the time when Azazel invades Heaven.\nDuring the \"AXIS\" storyline, a fragment of Professor X's psyche (which had escaped the scrubbing of his memories) still existed in Red Skull's mind preventing him from unleashing the full potential of Professor X's powers. During a fight with the Stark Sentinels, Doctor Strange and Scarlet Witch attempt to cast a spell to invert the axis of Red Skull's brain and bring out the fragment of Professor X to defeat Onslaught. Doctor Strange was targeted and captured by the Sentinels before they could cast the spell. When Magneto arrived with his supervillain allies, Doctor Doom and Scarlet Witch attempted to cast the inversion spell again and Red Onslaught was knocked unconscious and reverted to his Red Skull form. Although they did not know whether Professor X was now in control, the Avengers decided to be cautious and take Red Skull to Stark Tower. It was later revealed that the spell had actually caused all the heroes and villains present to undergo a \"moral inversion\" rather than simply bringing out Professor X in the Skull, with the result that the Skull and other villains became heroic while the Avengers and X-Men present became villainous. Eventually, the inversion was undone.\nAfter the Skull mounts a telepathic assault that nearly allows him to take control of the Avengers, he is defeated when Deadpool places Magneto's old helmet on Rogue, allowing her to knock out the Skull and take him to Beast. Beast is subsequently able to perform brain surgery on the Skull, extracting the part of Xavier's brain that was grafted onto the villain's own brain without causing any apparent damage to the Skull. Rogers attempts to claim the fragment for himself, but Rogue flies up and incinerates the fragment with the aid of the Human Torch, the two expressing hope that Xavier will rest in peace.\nResurrection.\nThe astral form of Professor Xavier has since been revealed to be imprisoned in the Astral Plane after Shadow King somehow acquired it upon Professor X's death. After what appeared to be years in the Astral Plane, Professor X is able to trick Shadow King into playing him in a 'game' that lures Rogue, Mystique and Fantomex onto the Astral Plane, while turning others into carriers for the Shadow King's 'contagious' psychic essence. With the Shadow King certain of his victory, he fails to realize that Xavier's apparent 'surrender' to his game was really just him biding his time until the Shadow King's influence was distracted long enough for him to drop his already-subtly-weakened guard long enough for Xavier to break his bonds, luring in the three aforementioned X-Men as their identities were already fundamentally malleable. With the Shadow King defeated, Xavier is apparently returned to the real world in the body of Fantomex, Fantomex reasoning that nobody really knows who he is as an individual beyond his status as one of the X-Men whereas this act of sacrifice will ensure that he is remembered for a great deed.\nProteus has spent years trapped in a psionic hellscape of the Astral Plane, where The Shadow King reigned supreme, only to escape last issue. Part of the reason that he could was the escape of Charles Xavier (who now chooses to go by X, since he is now in a younger body after escaping), and now X leads the X-Men directly into an ambush, as Proteus has warped an entire village with his powers, leading to a mind-to-mind battle that leaves X on the receiving end of a psychic beatdown.\nProteus has started his garden and his seeds are planted all over the world. Psylocke is in command and has a plan which mainly consists of Archangel using metal and Mystique morphing into his mother. Once they drain him, Rogue and Bishop convert his energy and release him back to the universe. Whilst this all went down Psylocke and X combined forces to burn out the seeds across the planet. As they are working on it they discover they are not enough to accomplish the task. X mentions the network of psychics the Shadow King was using and that Betsy who is in control should tap into it. She agrees and does so yet unbeknownst to her X was possessed by the Shadow King who violently erupts from X's head.\nFollowing X's apparent death after the Shadow King exploded from his skull, the psychic villain tears the X-Men apart until X literally pulls himself back together (a feat he later refuses to explain), and he and Psylocke team up to harness the power of all of Earth's psychics to destroy the Shadow King. As Psylocke says she feels no psychic trace of him anywhere, X implants comforting post-hypnotic psychic suggestions in his allies and then erases their memories (including allowing Warren Worthington to switch between his identities at will). Only Psylocke's memory is left intact, with X telling her she will be the one to \"keep him honest\" while he embarks on a new mission.\nDawn of X.\nX has since made his presence known to his former students and reveals his new plan for all mutantkind. Now clad in a Cerebro-like helmet, Xavier has apparently abandoned his dream for peaceful coexistence, and had turned Krakoa into a sovereign nation state for mutants as well as use it to apparently heal the X-Men from their ordeals during the showdown against the forces of O.N.E. He then leads the X-Men into planting in seeds in strategic locations around the world and Mars, which, overnight, grow into massive plantlike \"Habitats\". As it turns out, these \"Habitats\" \u2013 and the plants that grew them \u2013 are extensions of Krakoa. Through the advancement of mutant technology combined with Krakoa's unique abilities as a living mutant island, Professor X and the X-Men have embassies around the world. Also through this combination of technology and mutant power, Xavier have developed three drugs that could change human life \u2013 a pill that extends human life by five years, an adaptable universal antibiotic, and a pill that cures \"diseases of the mind, in humans\".\u201d In exchange for recognizing the sovereignty of Krakoa, Professor X will give these drugs to mankind, with mutants living in peace on the island.\nXavier and Magneto later meet with Mystique inside his sanctum. The two mutant leaders both greatly pleased with the success of her mission as she presents what they'ed petitioned her to steal. A mysterious USB tab containing sensitive information stolen from Damage Control, Mystique would inquire for her payment as she had met their demands. However, Xavier mentions that he still had more demands that needed to be met as they were building their protected future of Homo Sapiens Superior, seeming to psychokinetically beckon the contents of her theft into his hands while Mystique questions how much more needed to be done for his ultimate pet project.\nXavier and Magneto reveal the contents of the USB drive to Cyclops, which are shown to be information on Orchis, an organization dedicated to responding to a large-scale mutant threat and the plans of a Mother Mold. They believe that the creation of the Mother Mold will herald a new generation of Sentinels and along with it, Nimrod. They task Cyclops with assembling a team to destroy the Mother Mold station. Although the team (composed of Cyclops, Marvel Girl, Wolverine, Nightcrawler, Husk, Mystique, Archangel, and Monet) is successfully, they are all killed in the process. X mourns them, vowing \"No more.\"\nXavier is revealed to have upgraded Cerebro with the help of Forge, which is now able to copy and store the minds of mutants in a database. After the Five (Hope Summers, Goldballs, Elixir, Proteus, and Tempus) are able to grow the bodies of deceased mutants, Xavier is able to copy the minds back in these empty shells. Thus, he is able to resurrect Cyclops's team, thanking them for what they did. At the U.N., Xavier, Beast, and Emma celebrate with other ambassadors for the recognition of Krakoa as a sovereign nation. Xavier telepathically converses with Emma, revealing that he knows that she manipulated the Russian ambassador to abstain from the vote, before thanking her for her service. Two days after the U.N. vote, Xavier, Magneto, and Wolverine are in Krakoa waiting besides several portals. While Wolverine expresses his misgivings about the upcoming event, Xavier and Magneto assure him all will be alright. Soon after, several villainous mutants, including Mister Sinister, Sebastian Shaw, Exodus, Selene, and Apocalypse arrive through the portals. Apocalypse in particular expresses satisfaction at arriving and Krakoa responds in the same way. Magneto and Xavier reveal that they have invited all mutants, even those who have fought against them in the past, to Krakoa, to form a society. The assembled villainous mutants agree to their terms, and Xavier shakes Apocalypse's hand, welcoming him and the others to their home.\"\nWhile peace reigns on Krakoa, a mysterious team of assassins HALO drops into the island and assassinates Xavier, destroying his Cerebro helmet in the process. The Quiet Council hides Xavier's death from the rest of the world, and through the activation of a Cerebro backup, and the efforts of The Five, Xavier is reborn once more. Soon after, he partakes in a global conference alongside Magneto and Apocalypse, professing that he still loves humanity, whilst subtly warning them in regards to his previous assassination - and his knowledge of an ongoing assassination attempt at the forum itself, foiled by Cyclops and Gorgon.\nPowers and abilities.\nProfessor X is a mutant who possesses vast telepathic powers, and is among the strongest and most powerful telepaths in the Marvel Universe. He is able to perceive the thoughts of others or project his own thoughts within a radius of approximately . Xavier's telepathy once covered the entire world; although following this, Magneto altered the Earth's electromagnetic field to restrict Xavier's telepathic range. While not on Earth, Xavier's natural telepathic abilities have reached across space to make universal mental contact with multiple alien races. With extreme effort, he can also greatly extend the range of his telepathy. He can learn foreign languages by reading the language centers of the brain of someone adept, and alternately \"teach\" languages to others in the same manner. As side effect of his telepathy, Xavier possesses an eidetic memory and his brain can assimilate and process impossibly huge amounts of raw data in an astonishingly short amount of time.\nXavier's vast psionic powers enable him to manipulate the minds of others, warp perceptions to make himself seem invisible, project mental illusions, cause loss of particular memories or total amnesia, and induce pain or temporary mental and/or physical paralysis in others. Xavier once trained a new group of mutants mentally, subjectively making them experience months of training together, while only hours passed in the real world. Within close range, he can manipulate almost any number of minds for such simple feats. However, he can only take full possession of one other mind at a time, and must strictly be within that person's physical presence. He is one of the few telepaths skilled enough to communicate with animals and even share their perceptions. He can also telepathically take away or control people's natural bodily functions and senses, such as sight, hearing, smell, taste, or even mutant powers. He has displayed telepathic prowess sufficient to confront Ego the Living Planet (while aided by Cadre K) as well as narrowly defeat Exodus. However, he cannot permanently \"reprogram\" human minds to believe what he might want them to believe even if he wanted to do so, explaining that the mind is an organism that would always recall the steps necessary for it to reach the present and thus 'rewrite' itself to its original setting if he tried to change it. However, his initial reprogramming of Wolverine lasted several years, despite Wolverine overcoming the reprogramming much faster than an ordinary human because of his healing factor.\nHe is able to project from his mind 'bolts' composed of psychic energy, enabling him to stun the mind of another person into unconsciousness, inflict mental trauma, or even cause death. These 'bolts' inflict damage only upon other minds, having a negligible effect on non-mental beings, if any. The manner in which Xavier's powers function indicates that his telepathy is physical in some way, as it can be enhanced by physical means (for example, Cerebro), but can also be disrupted by physical means (for example, Magneto's alteration of the Earth's magnetic field).\nXavier can perceive the distinct mental presence/brain waves of other superhuman mutants within a small radius of himself. To detect mutants to a wider area beyond this radius, he must amplify his powers through Cerebro and subsequently Cerebra, computer devices of his own design which are sensitive to the psychic/physical energies produced by the mind.\nProfessor X can project his astral form into a psychic dimension known as the astral plane. There, he can use his powers to create objects, control his surroundings, and even control and destroy the astral forms of others. He cannot project this form over long distances.\n\"Uncanny X-Men\" writer Ed Brubaker has claimed that, after being de-powered by the Scarlet Witch, and then re-powered by the M'Kraan Crystal, Charles' telepathy is more powerful than was previously known. However, the extent of this enhancement is unknown. Years prior to initial publishing, Charles Xavier had an undefined level of telekinesis. This aspect of his powers were potent enough to cause catastrophic system disruption in computerized appliances. Such an attribute has faded, however. His evil counterpart Cassandra Nova Xavier would possess this ability, indicating he still possessed the potential for them. This potential was proven true after his death and resurgence within the younger, stronger body of Charlie Cluster 7. The Professor, using the moniker X, fashioned a Cerebro like a helmet which acts as a focusing device for his psionic powers and used it to galvanize latent aspects of his X-Gene to stimulate some dormant properties, seemingly using telekinesis to will a flash drive on Mystique's person into his hand.\nCharles Xavier is a genius with multiple doctorates. He is a world-renowned geneticist, a leading expert in mutation, possesses considerable knowledge of various life sciences, and is the inventor of Cerebro. He possesses Ph.D.s in Genetics, Biophysics, Psychology, and Anthropology, and an M.D. in Psychiatry. He is highly talented in devising equipment for utilizing and enhancing psionic powers. He is also a great tactician and strategist, effectively evaluating situations and devising swift responses.\nDuring his travels in Asia, Xavier learned martial arts, acquiring \"refined combat skills\" according to Magneto. When these skills are coordinated in tandem with his telepathic abilities, Xavier is a dangerous unarmed combatant, capable of sensing the intentions of others and countering them with superhuman efficiency. He also has extensive knowledge of pressure points.\nCharles Xavier was also given possession of the Mind Gem. It allows the user to boost mental power and access the thoughts and dreams of other beings. Backed by the Power Gem, it is possible to access all minds in existence simultaneously. Like all other former Illuminati members, Xavier has sworn to never use the gem and to keep its location hidden.\nXavier Protocols.\nThe Xavier Protocols are a set of doomsday plans created by Professor X. The protocols detail the best way to kill many powerful mutant characters, including the X-Men and Xavier himself, should they become too large of a danger. The Xavier Protocols are first mentioned during the \"Onslaught\" crossover and first seen in \"Excalibur\" #100 in Moira MacTaggert's lab. Charles Xavier compiled a list of the Earth's most powerful mutants and plans on how to defeat them if they become a threat to the world. They are first used after Onslaught grows too powerful. Only parts of the actual protocols are ever shown. In the \"\" crossover Bastion obtains an encrypted copy of the protocols, intending to use them against the X-Men. However, Cable infiltrates the X-Mansion and secures all encrypted files before Bastion has a chance to decrypt them. Due to the tampering of Bastion and his Sentinels, the X-Mansion computer system Cerebro gains autonomy and seeks to destroy the X-Men by employing its knowledge of the Xavier Protocols. In a virtual environment created by Professor X, Cerebro executes the Xavier Protocols against the X-Men.\nEach protocol is activated by the presence of a different combination of X-Men and were written by Xavier himself :\nOther X-Men who have faced their Xavier Protocols are Colossus, Rogue, Shadowcat, Nightcrawler, Storm, and Gambit.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7734", "revid": "794857", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7734", "title": "Central Pacific Railroad", "text": "U.S. company that built western leg of the first transcontinental railroad\nThe Central Pacific Railroad (CPRR) was a rail company chartered by U.S. Congress in 1862 to build a railroad eastwards from Sacramento, California, to complete most of the western part of the \"First transcontinental railroad\" in North America. Incorporated in 1861, CPRR ceased independent operations in 1885 when the railroad was leased to the Southern Pacific Railroad Company. Its assets were formally merged into Southern Pacific in 1959.\nFollowing the completion of the Pacific Railroad Surveys in 1855, several national proposals to build a transcontinental railroad failed because of political disputes over slavery. With the secession of the South in 1861, the modernizers in the Republican Party controlled the US Congress. They passed legislation in 1862 authorizing the central rail route with financing in the form of land grants and government railroad bond, which were all eventually repaid with interest. The government and the railroads both shared in the increased value of the land grants, which the railroads developed. The construction of the railroad also secured for the government the economical \"safe and speedy transportation of the mails, troops, munitions of war, and public stores\".\nHistory.\nAuthorization and construction.\nIn the fall of 1860, Charles Marsh, a surveyor, civil engineer and water company owner, met with Theodore Judah, a civil engineer, who had recently built the Sacramento Valley Railroad from Sacramento to Folsom, California and was working on the California Central Railroad to extend the former from Folsom to Marysville. Marsh, who had already surveyed a potential railroad route between Sacramento and Nevada City, California, a decade earlier, went with Judah into the Sierra Nevada Mountains. There they examined the Henness Pass Turnpike Company's route (Marsh was a founding director of that company). They measured elevations and distances, and discussed the possibility of a transcontinental railroad. Both were convinced that it could be done.\nIn December 1860 or early January 1861, Marsh met with Judah and Daniel Strong in Strong's drug store in Dutch Flat, California, to discuss the project, which they called the Central Pacific Railroad of California. James Bailey, a friend of Judah, told Leland Stanford that Judah had a feasible route for a railroad across the Sierras, and urged Stanford to meet with Judah. In early 1861, Marsh, Judah and Strong met with Collis P. Huntington, Leland Stanford, Mark Hopkins Jr. and Charles Crocker to obtain financial backing. Papers were filed to incorporate the new company, and on April 30, 1861, the eight of them, along with Lucius Anson Booth, became the first board of directors of the Central Pacific Railroad.\nPlanned by Judah, the Central Pacific Railroad was promoted by Congress by the Pacific Railway Act of 1862 which authorized the issuance of government bonds and land grants for each mile that was constructed. Stanford served as president (at the same time he was elected governor of California), Huntington served as vice-president in charge of fundraising and purchasing, Hopkins was treasurer and Crocker was in charge of construction. They called themselves \"The Associates\", but became known as \"The Big Four\". Construction began in 1863 when the first rails were laid in Sacramento.\nConstruction proceeded in earnest in 1865 when James Harvey Strobridge, the head of the construction work force, hired the first Cantonese emigrant workers at Crocker's suggestion. The construction crew grew to include 12,000 Chinese laborers by 1868, when they breached Donner summit and constituted eighty percent of the entire work force. The \"Golden spike\", connecting the western railroad to the Union Pacific Railroad at Promontory, Utah, was hammered on May 10, 1869. Coast-to-coast train travel in eight days became possible, replacing months-long sea voyages and lengthy, hazardous travel by wagon trains.\nIn 1885 the Central Pacific Railroad was acquired by the Southern Pacific Company as a leased line. Technically the CPRR remained a corporate entity until 1959, when it was formally merged into Southern Pacific. (It was reorganized in 1899 as the Central Pacific \"Railway\".) The original right-of-way is now controlled by the Union Pacific, which bought Southern Pacific in 1996.\nThe Union Pacific-Central Pacific (Southern Pacific) main line followed the historic Overland Route from Omaha, Nebraska, to San Francisco Bay.\nChinese labor was the most vital source for constructing the railroad. Most of the railroad workers in the west were Chinese, as they could be hired at a lower cost to do the difficult work. Fifty Cantonese emigrant workers were hired by the Central Pacific Railroad in February 1865 on a trial basis, and soon more and more Cantonese emigrants were hired. Working conditions were harsh, and Chinese were compensated less than their white counterparts, leading to far less white workers being hired. Chinese laborers were paid thirty-one dollars each month &amp;lpar;&amp;dollar;\u00a0in &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;), and while white workers were paid the same, they were also given room and board. In time, CPRR came to see the advantage of good workers employed at low wages: \"Chinese labor proved to be Central Pacific's salvation.\"\nThe difficulties faced by the Central Pacific in the Sierra Nevada \u2013 particularly the extensive tunneling required \u2013 were far more formidable than those encountered by the Union Pacific Railroad in the Rocky Mountains. The story that Chinese workers were suspended in wicker baskets over vertical granite cliffs at Cape Horn, California, to drill and blast a ledge for the Central Pacific has been repeated and exaggerated by uncritical historians.\nThere is reliable, primary-source evidence stating that surveyors used safety ropes while staking out the route, but nothing about construction workers using ropes. Digging the cut was done downward from the top, and from each horizontal end of the cut. It is conceivable that a safety rope would have been useful when digging an initial footpath, that could then be enlarged into a shelf, but there was no reason to be suspended by ropes to dig or drill into the face of the cut. It wasn't done that way. And, most of the Chinese labor was not hired until later. So, the gangs that did the digging at Cape Horn may have been Irish.\nCentral Pacific Director Charles Marsh had extensive civil engineering experience in projects of this nature, both from planning an earlier proposed railroad into the Sierras, and from building ditches and flumes through those mountains for his water company.\nFinancing.\nConstruction of the road was financed primarily by 30-year, 6% U.S. government bonds authorized by Sec. 5 of the Pacific Railroad Act of 1862. They were issued at the rate of $16,000 ($265,000 in 2017 dollars) per mile of tracked grade completed east of the designated base of the Sierra Nevada range near Roseville, CA where California state geologist Josiah Whitney had determined were the geologic start of the Sierras' foothills. Sec. 11 of the Act also provided that the issuance of bonds \"shall be treble the number per mile\" (to $48,000) for tracked grade completed over and within the two mountain ranges (but limited to a total of at this rate), and \"doubled\" (to $32,000) per mile of completed grade laid between the two mountain ranges. The U.S. Government Bonds, which constituted a lien upon the railroads and all their fixtures, were repaid in full (and with interest) by the company as and when they became due.\nSec. 10 of the 1864 amending Pacific Railroad Act (13 Statutes at Large, 356) additionally authorized the company to issue its own \"First Mortgage Bonds\" in total amounts up to (but not exceeding) that of the bonds issued by the United States. Such company-issued securities had priority over the original Government Bonds. (Local and state governments also aided the financing, although the City and County of San Francisco did not do so willingly. This materially slowed early construction efforts.) Sec. 3 of the 1862 Act granted the railroads of public land for every mile laid, except where railroads ran through cities and crossed rivers. This grant was apportioned in 5 sections on alternating sides of the railroad, with each section measuring by . These grants were later doubled to per mile of grade by the 1864 Act.\nAlthough the Pacific Railroad eventually benefited the Bay Area, the City and County of San Francisco obstructed financing it during the early years of 1863\u20131865. When Stanford was Governor of California, the Legislature passed on April 22, 1863, \"An Act to Authorize the Board of Supervisors of the City and County of San Francisco to take and subscribe One Million Dollars to the Capital Stock of the Western Pacific Rail Road Company and the Central Pacific Rail Road Company of California and to provide for the payment of the same and other matters relating thereto\" (which was later amended by Section Five of the \"Compromise Act\" of April 4, 1864). On May 19, 1863, the electors of the City and County of San Francisco passed this bond by a vote of 6,329 to 3,116, in a highly controversial Special Election.\nThe City and County's financing of the investment through the issuance and delivery of Bonds was delayed for two years, when Mayor Henry P. Coon, and the County Clerk, Wilhelm Loewy, each refused to countersign the Bonds. It took legal actions to force them to do so: in 1864 the Supreme Court of the State of California ordered them under Writs of Mandamus (\"The People of the State of California \"ex rel\" the Central Pacific Railroad Company vs. Henry P. Coon, Mayor; Henry M. Hale, Auditor; and Joseph S. Paxson, Treasurer, of the City and County of San Francisco.\" 25 Cal. 635) and in 1865, a legal judgment against Loewy (\"The People \"ex rel\" The Central Pacific Railroad Company of California vs. The Board of Supervisors of the City and County of San Francisco, and Wilhelm Lowey, Clerk\" 27 Cal. 655) directing that the Bonds be countersigned and delivered.\nIn 1863 the State legislature's forcing of City and County action became known as the \"Dutch Flat Swindle\". Critics claimed the CPRR's Big Four intended to build a railroad only as far as Dutch Flat, California, to connect to the Dutch Flat-Donner Pass Wagon Road to monopolize the lucrative mining traffic, and not push the track east of Dutch Flat into the more challenging and expensive High Sierra effort. CPRR's chief engineer, Theodore Judah, also argued against such a road and hence against the Big Four, fearing that its construction would siphon money from CPRR's paramount trans-Sierra railroad effort. Despite Judah's strong objection, the Big Four incorporated in August 1863 the Dutch Flat-Donner Lake Wagon Road Company. Frustrated, Judah headed off for New York via Panama to raise funds to buy out the Big Four from CPRR and build his trans-Sierra railroad. Unfortunately, Judah contracted yellow fever in Panama and died in New York in November 1863.\nMuseums and archives.\nA replica of the Sacramento, California, Central Pacific Railroad passenger station is part of the California State Railroad Museum, located in the Old Sacramento State Historic Park.\nMost of Collis P. Huntington's correspondence is preserved at Syracuse University, as part of the Collis Huntington Papers collection. It has been released on microfilm (133 reels) and is available at numerous other academic institutions across the country. Additional collections of manuscript letters are held at Stanford University and the Mariners' Museum at Newport News, Virginia. Alfred A. Hart was the official photographer of the CPRR construction.\nLocomotives.\nThe Central Pacific's first three locomotives were of the then common 4-4-0 type, although with the American Civil War raging in the east, they had difficulty acquiring engines from eastern builders, who at times only had smaller 4-2-4 or 4-2-2 types available. Until the completion of the Transcontinental rail link and the railroad's opening of its own shops, all locomotives had to be purchased from builders in the northeastern U.S. The engines had to be dismantled, loaded on a ship, which would embark on a four-month journey that went around South America's Cape Horn until arriving in Sacramento where the locomotives would be unloaded, re-assembled, and placed in service.\nLocomotives at the time came from many manufacturers, such as Cooke, Schenectady, Mason, Rogers, Danforth, Norris, Booth, and McKay &amp; Aldus, among others. The railroad had been on rather unfriendly terms with the Baldwin Locomotive Works, one of the more well-known firms. It is not clear as to the cause of this dispute, though some attribute it to the builder insisting on cash payment (though this has yet to be verified). Consequently, the railroad refused to buy engines from Baldwin, and three former Western Pacific Railroad (which the CP had absorbed in 1870) engines were the only Baldwin engines owned by the Central Pacific. The Central Pacific's dispute with Baldwin remained unresolved until well after the road had been acquired by the Southern Pacific.\nIn the 1870s, the road opened up its own locomotive construction facilities in Sacramento. Central Pacific's 173 was rebuilt by these shops and served as the basis for CP's engine construction. The locomotives built before the 1870s were given names as well as numbers. By the 1870s, it was decided to eliminate the names and as each engine was sent to the shops for service, their names would be removed. However, one engine that was built in the 1880s did receive a name: the El Gobernador.\nPreserved locomotives.\nThe following CP engines have been preserved:\nTimeline.\n1861\n1862\n1863\n1864\n1865\n1866\n1867\n1868\n1869\n1870\n1876\n1877\n1883\n1885\n1888\n1899\n1959\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7737", "revid": "42601261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7737", "title": "Clairvoyance", "text": "Claimed form of extrasensory perception \nClairvoyance (; from fr\u00a0'clear'\u00a0'vision') is the claimed ability to acquire information that would be considered impossible to get through scientifically proven sensations, thus classified as extrasensory perception, or \"sixth sense\". Any person who is claimed to have such ability is said to be a clairvoyant () ('one who sees clearly').\nClaims for the existence of paranormal and psychic abilities such as clairvoyance have not been supported by scientific evidence. Parapsychology explores this possibility, but the existence of the paranormal is not accepted by the scientific community. The scientific community widely considers parapsychology, including the study of clairvoyance, a pseudoscience.\nUsage.\nPertaining to the ability of clear-sightedness, clairvoyance refers to the paranormal ability to see persons and events that are distant in time or space. It can be divided into roughly three classes: precognition, the ability to perceive or predict future events, retrocognition, the ability to see past events, and remote viewing, the perception of contemporary events happening outside the range of normal perception.\nIn history and religion.\nThroughout history, there have been numerous places and times in which people have claimed themselves, or others, to be clairvoyant. In several religions, stories of certain individuals being able to see things far removed from their immediate sensory perception are commonplace, especially within pagan religions where oracles were used. Prophecy often involved some degree of clairvoyance, especially when future events were predicted. This ability is sometimes attributed to a higher power rather than the person performing it.\nChristianity.\nA number of Christian saints were said to be able to see or know things that were far removed from their immediate sensory perception as a kind of gift from God, including Charbel Makhlouf, Padre Pio, and Anne Catherine Emmerich in Catholicism and Gabriel Urgebadze, Paisios Eznepidis and John Maximovitch in Eastern Orthodoxy. Jesus in the Gospels is also recorded as being able to know things far removed from his immediate human perception. Some Christians today also share the same claim.\nJainism.\nIn Jainism, clairvoyance is regarded as one of the five kinds of knowledge. The beings of hell and heaven (devas) are said to possess clairvoyance by birth. According to Jain text Sarv\u0101rthasiddhi, \"this kind of knowledge has been called \"avadhi\" as it ascertains matter in downward range or knows objects within limits\".\nAnthroposophy.\nRudolf Steiner, famous as a clairvoyant himself, claimed that it is easy for a clairvoyant to confuse their own emotional and spiritual being with the objective spiritual world.\nParapsychology.\nEarly research.\nThe earliest record of somnambulist clairvoyance is credited to the Marquis de Puys\u00e9gur, a follower of Franz Mesmer, who in 1784 was treating a local dull-witted peasant named Victor Race. During treatment, Race reportedly went into a trance and underwent a personality change, becoming fluent and articulate, and giving diagnosis and prescription for his own disease as well as those of others. Clairvoyance was a reported ability of some mediums during the spiritualist period of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and psychics of many descriptions have claimed clairvoyant ability up to the present day.\nEarly researchers of clairvoyance included William Gregory, Gustav Pagenstecher, and Rudolf Tischner. Clairvoyance experiments were reported in 1884 by Charles Richet. Playing cards were enclosed in envelopes and a subject under hypnosis attempted to identify them. The subject was reported to have been successful in a series of 133 trials but the results dropped to chance level when performed before a group of scientists in Cambridge. J. M. Peirce and E. C. Pickering reported a similar experiment in which they tested 36 subjects over 23,384 trials. They did not find above chance scores.\nIvor Lloyd Tuckett (1911) and Joseph McCabe (1920) analyzed early cases of clairvoyance and concluded they were best explained by coincidence or fraud. In 1919, the magician P. T. Selbit staged a s\u00e9ance at his flat in Bloomsbury. The spiritualist Arthur Conan Doyle attended and declared the clairvoyance manifestations genuine.\nA significant development in clairvoyance research came when J. B. Rhine, a parapsychologist at Duke University, introduced a standard methodology, with a standard statistical approach to analyzing data, as part of his research into extrasensory perception. A number of psychological departments attempted and failed to repeat Rhine's experiments. At Princeton University, W. S. Cox (1936) produced 25,064 trials with 132 subjects in a playing card ESP experiment. Cox concluded: \"There is no evidence of extrasensory perception either in the 'average man' or of the group investigated or in any particular individual of that group. The discrepancy between these results and those obtained by Rhine is due either to uncontrollable factors in experimental procedure or to the difference in the subjects.\" Four other psychological departments failed to replicate Rhine's results. It was revealed that Rhine's experiments contained methodological flaws and procedural errors.\nEileen Garrett was tested by Rhine at Duke University in 1933 with Zener cards. Certain symbols were placed on the cards and sealed in an envelope, and she was asked to guess their contents. She performed poorly and later criticized the tests by claiming the cards lacked a psychic energy called \"energy stimulus\" and that she could not perform clairvoyance on command. The parapsychologist Samuel Soal and his colleagues tested Garrett in May 1937. Most of the experiments were carried out in the Psychological Laboratory at the University College London. A total of over 12,000 guesses were recorded but Garrett failed to produce above chance level. Soal wrote: \"In the case of Mrs. Eileen Garrett we fail to find the slightest confirmation of Dr. J. B. Rhine's remarkable claims relating to her alleged powers of extra-sensory perception. Not only did she fail when I took charge of the experiments, but she failed equally when four other carefully trained experimenters took my place.\"\nRemote viewing.\nRemote viewing, also known as remote sensing, remote perception, telesthesia and travelling clairvoyance, is the alleged paranormal ability to perceive a remote or hidden target without support of the senses.\nA well-known recent study of remote viewing is the US government-funded project at the Stanford Research Institute from the 1970s through the mid-1990s. In 1972, Harold E. Puthoff and Russell Targ initiated a series of human subject studies to determine whether participants (the \"viewers\" or \"percipients\") could reliably identify and accurately describe salient features of remote locations (\"targets\"). In the early studies, a human \"sender\" was typically present at the remote location as part of the experiment protocol. A three-step process was used. First, target conditions to be experienced by the senders were randomly selected. Second, in the viewing step, participants were asked to verbally express or sketch their impressions of the remote scene. Third, these descriptions were matched by separate judges, as closely as possible, with the intended targets. The term remote viewing was coined to describe this overall process. The first paper by Puthoff and Targ on remote viewing was published in \"Nature\" in March 1974; in it, the team reported some degree of remote viewing success. After the publication of these findings, other attempts to replicate the experiments were carried out with remotely linked groups using computer conferencing.\nThe psychologists David Marks and Richard Kammann attempted to replicate Targ and Puthoff's remote viewing experiments at the Stanford Research Institute. In a series of 35 studies, they could not do so, so they investigated the original experiments' procedure. Marks and Kammann discovered that the notes given to the judges in Targ and Puthoff's experiments contained clues as to which order they were carried out, such as referring to yesterday's two targets, or the date of the session at the top of the page. They concluded that these clues explained the experiment's high hit rates. Marks achieved 100% accuracy without visiting any of the sites but by using cues. James Randi has written that controlled tests by several other researchers, eliminating several sources of cuing and extraneous evidence present in the original tests, produced negative results. Students were also able to solve Puthoff and Targ's locations from the clues inadvertently included in the transcripts.\nIn 1980, Charles Tart claimed that a rejudging of the transcripts from one of Targ and Puthoff's experiments revealed an above-chance result. Targ and Puthoff again refused to provide copies of the transcripts, and they were not made available for study until July 1985, when it was discovered they still contained sensory cues. Marks and Christopher Scott (1986) wrote: \"considering the importance for the remote viewing hypothesis of adequate cue removal, Tart's failure to perform this basic task seems beyond comprehension. As previously concluded, remote viewing has not been demonstrated in the experiments conducted by Puthoff and Targ, only the repeated failure of the investigators to remove sensory cues.\"\nIn 1982, Robert G. Jahn, then Dean of the School of Engineering at Princeton University, wrote a comprehensive review of psychic phenomena from an engineering perspective. His paper included numerous references to remote viewing studies at the time. Statistical flaws in his work have been proposed by others in the parapsychological community and the general scientific community.\nScientific reception.\nAccording to scientific research, clairvoyance is generally explained as the result of confirmation bias, expectancy bias, fraud, hallucination, self-delusion, sensory leakage, subjective validation, wishful thinking or failures to appreciate the base rate of chance occurrences and not as a paranormal power. Parapsychology is generally regarded by the scientific community as a pseudoscience. In 1988, the US National Research Council concluded \"The committee finds no scientific justification from research conducted over a period of 130 years, for the existence of parapsychological phenomena.\"\nSkeptics say that if clairvoyance were a reality, it would have become abundantly clear. They also contend that those who believe in paranormal phenomena do so for merely psychological reasons. According to David G. Myers (\"Psychology,\" 8th ed.):\nThe search for a valid and reliable test of clairvoyance has resulted in thousands of experiments. One controlled procedure has invited 'senders' to telepathically transmit one of four visual images to 'receivers' deprived of sensation in a nearby chamber (Bem &amp; Honorton, 1994). The result? A reported 32 percent accurate response rate, surpassing the chance rate of 25 percent. But follow-up studies have (depending on who was summarizing the results) failed to replicate the phenomenon or produced mixed results (Bem &amp; others, 2001; Milton &amp; Wiseman, 2002; Storm, 2000, 2003).One skeptic, magician James Randi, had a longstanding offer of U.S. $1 million\u2014\"to anyone who proves a genuine psychic power under proper observing conditions\" (Randi, 1999). French, Australian, and Indian groups have parallel offers of up to 200,000 euros to anyone with demonstrable paranormal abilities (CFI, 2003). Large as these sums are, the scientific seal of approval would be worth far more to anyone whose claims could be authenticated. To refute those who say there is no ESP, one need only produce a single person who can demonstrate a single, reproducible ESP phenomenon. So far, no such person has emerged. Randi's offer has been publicized for three decades and dozens of people have been tested, sometimes under the scrutiny of an independent panel of judges. Still, nothing. \"People's desire to believe in the paranormal is stronger than all the evidence that it does not exist.\" Susan Blackmore, \"Blackmore's first law\", 2004.\nClairvoyance is considered a hallucination by mainstream psychiatry.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7738", "revid": "7627571", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7738", "title": "Chiropractic", "text": "Form of pseudoscientific alternative medicine\nChiropractic () is a form of alternative medicine concerned with the diagnosis, treatment and prevention of mechanical disorders of the musculoskeletal system, especially of the spine. The main chiropractic treatment technique involves manual therapy but may also include exercises and health and lifestyle counseling. Most who seek chiropractic care do so for low back pain. Chiropractic is well established in the United States, Canada, and Australia, along with other manual-therapy professions such as osteopathy and physical therapy.\nMany chiropractors (often known informally as chiros), especially those in the field's early history, have proposed that mechanical disorders affect general health, and that regular manipulation of the spine (spinal adjustment) improves general health. A chiropractor may have a Doctor of Chiropractic (D.C.) degree and be referred to as \"doctor\" but is not a Doctor of Medicine (M.D.) or a Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (D.O.). While many chiropractors view themselves as primary care providers, chiropractic clinical training does not meet the requirements for that designation. A small but significant number of chiropractors spread vaccine misinformation, promote unproven dietary supplements, or administer full-spine x-rays.\nThere is no good evidence that chiropractic manipulation is effective in helping manage lower back pain. A 2011 critical evaluation of 45 systematic reviews concluded that the data included in the study \"fail[ed] to demonstrate convincingly that spinal manipulation is an effective intervention for any condition.\" Spinal manipulation may be cost-effective for sub-acute or chronic low back pain, but the results for acute low back pain were insufficient. No compelling evidence exists to indicate that maintenance chiropractic care adequately prevents symptoms or diseases.\nThere is not sufficient data to establish the safety of chiropractic manipulations. It is frequently associated with mild to moderate adverse effects, with serious or fatal complications in rare cases. There is controversy regarding the degree of risk of vertebral artery dissection, which can lead to stroke and death, from cervical manipulation. Several deaths have been associated with this technique and it has been suggested that the relationship is causative, a claim which is disputed by many chiropractors.\nChiropractic is based on several pseudoscientific ideas. Spiritualist D. D. Palmer founded chiropractic in the 1890s, claiming that he had received it from \"the other world\", from a doctor who had died 50 years previously. Throughout its history, chiropractic has been controversial. Its foundation is at odds with evidence-based medicine, and is underpinned by pseudoscientific ideas such as vertebral subluxation and Innate Intelligence. Despite the overwhelming evidence that vaccination is an effective public health intervention, there are significant disagreements among chiropractors over the subject, which has led to negative impacts on both public vaccination and mainstream acceptance of chiropractic. The American Medical Association called chiropractic an \"unscientific cult\" in 1966 and boycotted it until losing an antitrust case in 1987. Chiropractic has had a strong political base and sustained demand for services. In the last decades of the twentieth century, it gained more legitimacy and greater acceptance among conventional physicians and health plans in the United States. During the COVID-19 pandemic, chiropractic professional associations advised chiropractors to adhere to CDC, WHO, and local health department guidance. Despite these recommendations, a small but vocal and influential number of chiropractors spread vaccine misinformation.\nStatus as fringe healing.\nChiropractic is not regarded as a mainstream branch of medicine.\nOrigins in \"folk medicine\".\nChiropractic's origins lie in the folk medicine of bonesetting, and as it evolved it incorporated vitalism, spiritual inspiration and rationalism. Its founder, D.D. Palmer, called it \"a science of healing without drugs\". Its early philosophy was based on deduction from irrefutable doctrine, which helped distinguish chiropractic from medicine, provided it with legal and political defenses against claims of practicing medicine without a license, and allowed chiropractors to establish themselves as an autonomous profession. This \"straight\" philosophy, taught to generations of chiropractors, rejects the inferential reasoning of the scientific method, and relies on deductions from vitalistic first principles rather than on the materialism of science. However, most practitioners tend to incorporate scientific research into chiropractic, and most practitioners are \"mixers\" who attempt to combine the materialistic reductionism of science with the metaphysics of their predecessors and with the holistic paradigm of wellness. A 2008 commentary proposed that chiropractic actively divorce itself from the straight philosophy as part of a campaign to eliminate untestable dogma and engage in critical thinking and evidence-based research.\nAlthough a wide diversity of ideas exist among chiropractors, they share the belief that the spine and health are related in a fundamental way, and that this relationship is mediated through the nervous system. Some chiropractors claim spinal manipulation can have an effect on a variety of ailments such as irritable bowel syndrome and asthma.\n\"Subluxation\" as a Vitalist concept.\nIn science-based medicine, the term \"subluxation\" refers to an incomplete or partial dislocation of a joint, from the Latin \"luxare\" for \"dislocate\". Whereas medical doctors use the term exclusively to refer to physical dislocations, Chiropractic founder D. D. Palmer imbued the word \"subluxation\" with a metaphysical and philosophical meaning drawn from pseudoscientific traditions such as Vitalism.\nPalmer claimed that \"vertebral subluxations\" interfered with the body's function and its inborn ability to heal itself. D. D. Palmer repudiated his earlier theory that vertebral subluxations caused pinched nerves in the intervertebral spaces in favor of subluxations causing altered nerve vibration, either too tense or too slack, affecting the tone (health) of the end organ. He qualified this by noting that knowledge of innate intelligence was not essential to the competent practice of chiropractic. This concept was later expanded upon by his son, B. J. Palmer, and was instrumental in providing the legal basis of differentiating chiropractic from conventional medicine.\nVertebral subluxation, a core concept of traditional chiropractic, remains unsubstantiated and largely untested, and a debate about whether to keep it in the chiropractic paradigm has been ongoing for decades. In general, critics of traditional subluxation-based chiropractic (including chiropractors) are skeptical of its clinical value, dogmatic beliefs and metaphysical approach. While straight chiropractic still retains the traditional vitalistic construct espoused by the founders, evidence-based chiropractic suggests that a mechanistic view will allow chiropractic care to become integrated into the wider health care community. This is still a continuing source of debate within the chiropractic profession as well, with some schools of chiropractic still teaching the traditional/straight subluxation-based chiropractic, while others have moved towards an evidence-based chiropractic that rejects metaphysical foundings and limits itself to primarily neuromusculoskeletal conditions.\nIn 2005, the chiropractic subluxation was defined by the World Health Organization as \"a lesion or dysfunction in a joint or motion segment in which alignment, movement integrity and/or physiological function are altered, although contact between joint surfaces remains intact. It is essentially a functional entity, which may influence biomechanical and neural integrity.\" This differs from the medical definition of subluxation as a significant structural displacement, which can be seen with static imaging techniques such as X-rays.\nAttorney David Chapman-Smith, Secretary-General of the World Federation of Chiropractic, has stated that \"Medical critics have asked how there can be a subluxation if it cannot be seen on X-ray. The answer is that the chiropractic subluxation is essentially a functional entity, not structural, and is therefore no more visible on static X-ray than a limp or headache or any other functional problem.\" The General Chiropractic Council, the statutory regulatory body for chiropractors in the United Kingdom, states that the chiropractic vertebral subluxation complex \"is not supported by any clinical research evidence that would allow claims to be made that it is the cause of disease.\"\nAs of 2014, the US National Board of Chiropractic Examiners states \"The specific focus of chiropractic practice is known as the chiropractic subluxation or joint dysfunction. A subluxation is a health concern that manifests in the skeletal joints, and, through complex anatomical and physiological relationships, affects the nervous system and may lead to reduced function, disability or illness.\"\nPseudoscience versus spinal manipulation therapy.\nWhile some chiropractors limit their practice to short-term treatment of musculoskeletal conditions, many falsely claim to be able treat myriad other conditions. Some dissuade patients from seeking medical care, others have pretended to be qualified to act as a family doctor.\nQuackwatch, an alternative medicine watchdog, cautions against seeing chiropractors who:\nWriting for the \"Skeptical Inquirer\", one physician cautioned against seeing even chiropractors who solely claim to treat musculoskeletal conditions: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I think Spinal Manipulation Therapy (SMT) is a reasonable option for patients to try ... But I could not in good conscience refer a patient to a chiropractor... When chiropractic is effective, what is effective is not 'chiropractic': it is SMT. SMT is also offered by physical therapists, DOs, and others. These are science-based providers ... If I thought a patient might benefit from manipulation, I would rather refer him or her to a science-based provider.\nScope of practice.\nChiropractors emphasize the conservative management of the neuromusculoskeletal system without the use of evidence-based medicines or surgery, with special emphasis on the spine. Back and neck pain are the specialties of chiropractic but many chiropractors treat ailments other than musculoskeletal issues. There is a range of opinions among chiropractors: some believed that treatment should be confined to the spine, or back and neck pain; others disagreed. For example, while one 2009 survey of American chiropractors had found that 73% classified themselves as \"back pain/musculoskeletal specialists\", the label \"back and neck pain specialists\" was regarded by 47% of them as a \"least\" desirable description in a 2005 international survey. It has been proposed that chiropractors specialize in nonsurgical spine care, instead of attempting to also treat other problems, but the more expansive view of chiropractic is still widespread.\nMainstream health care and governmental organizations such as the World Health Organization consider chiropractic to be complementary and alternative medicine (CAM); and a 2008 study reported that 31% of surveyed chiropractors categorized chiropractic as CAM, 27% as integrated medicine, and 12% as mainstream medicine. Many chiropractors believe they are primary care providers, including US and UK chiropractors, but the length, breadth, and depth of chiropractic clinical training do not support the requirements to be considered primary care providers, so their role on primary care is limited and disputed.\nChiropractic overlaps with several other forms of manual therapy, including massage therapy, osteopathy, physical therapy, and sports medicine. In a 2010 article on the history of manipulative therapy, the author opined that \"physical therapy emerged and grew alongside osteopathy, chiropractic, and the evolving \"scientific\" medical profession. However, over the next 100 years, physical therapy, osteopathy, and chiropractic were destined to travel very different paths. In its country of origin, osteopathy would coalesce with the medical profession. Chiropractic would remain autonomous from, and highly competitive with, medicine. Physical therapy, whose roots lay in working alongside and cooperating with medical physicians, continues to do so.\". Osteopathy outside the US remains primarily a manual medical system; physical therapists work alongside and cooperate with mainstream medicine, and osteopathic medicine in the U.S. has merged with the medical profession. Practitioners may distinguish these competing approaches through claims that, compared to other therapists, chiropractors heavily emphasize spinal manipulation, tend to use firmer manipulative techniques, and promote maintenance care; that osteopaths use a wider variety of treatment procedures; and that physical therapists emphasize machinery and exercise.\nChiropractic diagnosis may involve a range of methods including skeletal imaging, observational and tactile assessments, and orthopedic and neurological evaluation. A chiropractor may also refer a patient to an appropriate specialist, or co-manage with another health care provider. Common patient management involves spinal manipulation (SM) and other manual therapies to the joints and soft tissues, rehabilitative exercises, health promotion, electrical modalities, complementary procedures, and lifestyle advice.\nA related field, veterinary chiropractic, applies manual therapies to animals and is recognized in many US states, but is not recognized by the American Chiropractic Association as being chiropractic. It remains controversial within certain segments of the veterinary and chiropractic professions.\nNo single profession \"owns\" spinal manipulation and there is little consensus as to which profession should administer SM, raising concerns by chiropractors that other medical physicians could \"steal\" SM procedures from chiropractors. A focus on evidence-based SM research has also raised concerns that the resulting practice guidelines could limit the scope of chiropractic practice to treating backs and necks. Two US states (Washington and Arkansas) prohibit physical therapists from performing SM, some states allow them to do it only if they have completed advanced training in SM, and some states allow only chiropractors to perform SM, or only chiropractors and physicians. Bills to further prohibit non-chiropractors from performing SM are regularly introduced into state legislatures and are opposed by physical therapist organizations.\nTreatments.\nSpinal manipulation, which chiropractors call \"spinal adjustment\" or \"chiropractic adjustment\", is the most common treatment used in chiropractic care. Spinal manipulation is a passive manual maneuver during which a three-joint complex is taken past the normal range of movement, but not so far as to dislocate or damage the joint. Its defining factor is a dynamic thrust, which is a sudden force that causes an audible release and attempts to increase a joint's range of motion. High-velocity, low-amplitude spinal manipulation (HVLA-SM) thrusts have physiological effects that signal neural discharge from paraspinal muscle tissues, depending on duration and amplitude of the thrust are factors of the degree in paraspinal muscle spindles activation. Clinical skill in employing HVLA-SM thrusts depends on the ability of the practitioner to handle the duration and magnitude of the load. More generally, spinal manipulative therapy (SMT) describes techniques where the hands are used to manipulate, massage, mobilize, adjust, stimulate, apply traction to, or otherwise influence the spine and related tissues.\nThere are several schools of chiropractic adjustive techniques, although most chiropractors mix techniques from several schools. The following adjustive procedures were received by more than 10% of patients of licensed US chiropractors in a 2003 survey: Diversified technique (full-spine manipulation, employing various techniques), extremity adjusting, Activator technique (which uses a spring-loaded tool to deliver precise adjustments to the spine), Thompson Technique (which relies on a drop table and detailed procedural protocols), Gonstead (which emphasizes evaluating the spine along with specific adjustment that avoids rotational vectors), Cox/flexion-distraction (a gentle, low-force adjusting procedure which mixes chiropractic with osteopathic principles and utilizes specialized adjusting tables with movable parts), adjustive instrument, Sacro-Occipital Technique (which models the spine as a torsion bar), Nimmo Receptor-Tonus Technique, applied kinesiology (which emphasises \"muscle testing\" as a diagnostic tool), and cranial. Chiropractic biophysics technique uses inverse functions of rotations during spinal manipulation. Koren Specific Technique (KST) may use their hands, or they may use an electric device known as an \"ArthroStim\" for assessment and spinal manipulations. Insurers in the US and UK that cover other chiropractic techniques exclude KST from coverage because they consider it to be \"experimental and investigational\". Medicine-assisted manipulation, such as manipulation under anesthesia, involves sedation or local anesthetic and is done by a team that includes an anesthesiologist; a 2008 systematic review did not find enough evidence to make recommendations about its use for chronic low back pain.\nMany other procedures are used by chiropractors for treating the spine, other joints and tissues, and general health issues. The following procedures were received by more than one-third of patients of licensed US chiropractors in a 2003 survey: Diversified technique (full-spine manipulation; mentioned in previous paragraph), physical fitness/exercise promotion, corrective or therapeutic exercise, ergonomic/postural advice, self-care strategies, activities of daily living, changing risky/unhealthy behaviors, nutritional/dietary recommendations, relaxation/stress reduction recommendations, ice pack/cryotherapy, extremity adjusting (also mentioned in previous paragraph), trigger point therapy, and disease prevention/early screening advice.\nA 2010 study describing Belgian chiropractors and their patients found chiropractors in Belgium mostly focus on neuromusculoskeletal complaints in adult patients, with emphasis on the spine. The diversified technique is the most often applied technique at 93%, followed by the Activator mechanical-assisted technique at 41%. A 2009 study assessing chiropractic students giving or receiving spinal manipulations while attending a United States chiropractic college found Diversified, Gonstead, and upper cervical manipulations are frequently used methods.\nPractice guidelines.\nReviews of research studies within the chiropractic community have been used to generate practice guidelines outlining standards that specify which chiropractic treatments are legitimate (i.e. supported by evidence) and conceivably reimbursable under managed care health payment systems. Evidence-based guidelines are supported by one end of an ideological continuum among chiropractors; the other end employs antiscientific reasoning and makes unsubstantiated claims. Chiropractic remains at a crossroads, and that in order to progress it would need to embrace science; the promotion by some for it to be a cure-all was both \"misguided and irrational\". A 2007 survey of Alberta chiropractors found that they do not consistently apply research in practice, which may have resulted from a lack of research education and skills. Specific guidelines concerning the treatment of nonspecific (i.e., unknown cause) low back pain are inconsistent between countries.\nEffectiveness.\nNumerous controlled clinical studies of treatments used by chiropractors have been conducted, with varied results. There is no conclusive evidence that chiropractic manipulative treatment is effective for the treatment of any medical condition, except perhaps for certain kinds of back pain.\nGenerally, the research carried out into the effectiveness of chiropractic has been of poor quality. Research published by chiropractors is distinctly biased: reviews of SM for back pain tended to find positive conclusions when authored by chiropractors, while reviews by mainstream authors did not.\nThere is a wide range of ways to measure treatment outcomes. Chiropractic care benefits from the placebo response, but it is difficult to construct a trustworthy placebo for clinical trials of spinal manipulative therapy (SMT). The efficacy of maintenance care in chiropractic is unknown.\nAvailable evidence covers the following conditions:\nSafety.\nThe World Health Organization found chiropractic care in general is safe when employed skillfully and appropriately. There is not sufficient data to establish the safety of chiropractic manipulations. Manipulation is regarded as relatively safe but complications can arise, and it has known adverse effects, risks and contraindications. Absolute contraindications to spinal manipulative therapy are conditions that should not be manipulated; these contraindications include rheumatoid arthritis and conditions known to result in unstable joints. Relative contraindications are conditions where increased risk is acceptable in some situations and where low-force and soft-tissue techniques are treatments of choice; these contraindications include osteoporosis. Although most contraindications apply only to manipulation of the affected region, some neurological signs indicate referral to emergency medical services; these include sudden and severe headache or neck pain unlike that previously experienced. Indirect risks of chiropractic involve delayed or missed diagnoses through consulting a chiropractor.\nSpinal manipulation is associated with frequent, mild and temporary adverse effects, including new or worsening pain or stiffness in the affected region. They have been estimated to occur in 33% to 61% of patients, and frequently occur within an hour of treatment and disappear within 24 to 48 hours; adverse reactions appear to be more common following manipulation than mobilization. The most frequently stated adverse effects are mild headache, soreness, and briefly elevated pain fatigue. Chiropractic is correlated with a very high incidence of minor adverse effects. Rarely, spinal manipulation, particularly on the upper spine, can also result in complications that can lead to permanent disability or death; these can occur in adults and children. Estimates vary widely for the incidence of these complications, and the actual incidence is unknown, due to high levels of underreporting and to the difficulty of linking manipulation to adverse effects such as stroke, which is a particular concern. Adverse effects are poorly reported in recent studies investigating chiropractic manipulations. A 2016 systematic review concludes that the level of reporting is unsuitable and unacceptable. Reports of serious adverse events have occurred, resulting from spinal manipulation therapy of the lumbopelvic region.\nX-rays.\nThe use of X-ray imaging in the case of vertebral subluxation exposes patients to harmful ionizing radiation for no evidentially supported reason. The 2008 book \"Trick or Treatment\" states \"X-rays can reveal neither the subluxations nor the innate intelligence associated with chiropractic philosophy, because they do not exist.\"\nChiropractors sometimes employ diagnostic imaging techniques such as X-rays and CT scans that rely on ionizing radiation. Although there is no clear evidence to justify the practice, some chiropractors still X-ray a patient several times a year. Practice guidelines aim to reduce unnecessary radiation exposure, which increases cancer risk in proportion to the amount of radiation received. Research suggests that radiology instruction given at chiropractic schools worldwide seem to be evidence-based. Although, there seems to be a disparity between some schools and available evidence regarding the aspect of radiography for patients with acute low back pain without an indication of a serious disease, which may contribute to chiropractic overuse of radiography for low back pain. QuackWatch cautions against seeing chiropractors who do full-body x-rays.\nNeck manipulation.\nEstimates for serious adverse events vary from 5 strokes per 100,000 manipulations to 1.46 serious adverse events per 10 million manipulations and 2.68 deaths per 10 million manipulations, though it was determined that there was inadequate data to be conclusive. Several case reports show temporal associations between interventions and potentially serious complications. The published medical literature contains reports of 26 deaths since 1934 following chiropractic manipulations and many more seem to remain unpublished.\nVertebrobasilar artery stroke (VAS) is statistically associated with chiropractic services in persons under 45 years of age, but it is similarly associated with general practitioner services, suggesting that these associations are likely explained by preexisting conditions. Weak to moderately strong evidence supports causation (as opposed to statistical association) between cervical manipulative therapy (CMT) and VAS. There is insufficient evidence to support a strong association or no association between cervical manipulation and stroke. While the biomechanical evidence is not sufficient to support the statement that CMT causes cervical artery dissection (CD), clinical reports suggest that mechanical forces have a part in a substantial number of CDs and the majority of population controlled studies found an association between CMT and VAS in young people. It is strongly recommended that practitioners consider the plausibility of CD as a symptom, and people can be informed of the association between CD and CMT before administering manipulation of the cervical spine. There is controversy regarding the degree of risk of stroke from cervical manipulation. Many chiropractors state that, the association between chiropractic therapy and vertebral arterial dissection is not proven. However, it has been suggested that the causality between chiropractic cervical manipulation beyond the normal range of motion and vascular accidents is probable or definite. There is very low evidence supporting a small association between internal carotid artery dissection and chiropractic neck manipulation. The incidence of internal carotid artery dissection following cervical spine manipulation is unknown. The literature infrequently reports helpful data to better understand the association between cervical manipulative therapy, cervical artery dissection and stroke. The limited evidence is inconclusive that chiropractic spinal manipulation therapy is not a cause of intracranial hypotension. Cervical intradural disc herniation is very rare following spinal manipulation therapy.\nA 2012 systematic review concluded that no accurate assessment of risk-benefit exists for cervical manipulation. A 2010 systematic review stated that there is no good evidence to assume that neck manipulation is an effective treatment for any medical condition and suggested a precautionary principle in healthcare for chiropractic intervention even if a causality with vertebral artery dissection after neck manipulation were merely a remote possibility. The same review concluded that the risk of death from manipulations to the neck outweighs the benefits. Chiropractors have criticized this conclusion, claiming that the author did not evaluate the potential benefits of spinal manipulation. Edzard Ernst stated \"This detail was not the subject of my review. I do, however, refer to such evaluations and should add that a report recently commissioned by the General Chiropractic Council did not support many of the outlandish claims made by many chiropractors across the world.\" A 1999 review of 177 previously reported cases published between 1925 and 1997 in which injuries were attributed to manipulation of the cervical spine (MCS) concluded that \"The literature does not demonstrate that the benefits of MCS outweigh the risks.\" The professions associated with each injury were assessed. Physical therapists (PT) were involved in less than 2% of all cases, with no deaths caused by PTs. Chiropractors were involved in a little more than 60% of all cases, including 32 deaths.&lt;ref name=\"Di_Fabio_1/1/1999\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nA 2009 review evaluating maintenance chiropractic care found that spinal manipulation is associated with considerable harm and no compelling evidence exists to indicate that it adequately prevents symptoms or diseases, thus the risk-benefit is not evidently favorable.\nCost-effectiveness.\nA 2012 systematic review suggested that the use of spine manipulation in clinical practice is a cost-effective treatment when used alone or in combination with other treatment approaches. A 2011 systematic review found evidence supporting the cost-effectiveness of using spinal manipulation for the treatment of sub-acute or chronic low back pain; the results for acute low back pain were insufficient.\nA 2006 systematic cost-effectiveness review found that the reported cost-effectiveness of spinal manipulation in the United Kingdom compared favorably with other treatments for back pain, but that reports were based on data from clinical trials without placebo controls and that the specific cost-effectiveness of the treatment (as opposed to non-specific effects) remains uncertain. A 2005 American systematic review of economic evaluations of conservative treatments for low back pain found that significant quality problems in available studies meant that definite conclusions could not be drawn about the most cost-effective intervention. The cost-effectiveness of maintenance chiropractic care is unknown.\nAnalysis of a clinical and cost utilization data from the years 2003 to 2005 by an integrative medicine independent physician association (IPA) which looked the chiropractic services utilization found that the clinical and cost utilization of chiropractic services based on 70,274 member-months over a 7-year period decreased patient costs associate with the following use of services by 60% for in-hospital admissions, 59% for hospital days, 62% for outpatient surgeries and procedures, and 85% for pharmaceutical costs when compared with conventional medicine (visit to a medical doctor primary care provider) IPA performance for the same health maintenance organization product in the same geography and time frame.\nEducation, licensing, and regulation.\nRequirements vary between countries. In the U.S. chiropractors obtain a non-medical accredited diploma in the field of chiropractic. Chiropractic education in the U.S. has been criticized for failing to meet generally accepted standards of evidence-based medicine. The curriculum content of North American chiropractic and medical colleges with regard to basic and clinical sciences has little similarity, both in the kinds of subjects offered and in the time assigned to each subject. Accredited chiropractic programs in the U.S. require that applicants have 90 semester hours of undergraduate education with a grade point average of at least 3.0 on a 4.0 scale. Many programs require at least three years of undergraduate education, and more are requiring a bachelor's degree. Canada requires a minimum three years of undergraduate education for applicants, and at least 4200 instructional hours (or the equivalent) of full-time chiropractic education for matriculation through an accredited chiropractic program. Graduates of the Canadian Memorial Chiropractic College (CMCC) are formally recognized to have at least 7\u20138 years of university level education. The World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines suggest three major full-time educational paths culminating in either a DC, DCM, BSc, or MSc degree. Besides the full-time paths, they also suggest a conversion program for people with other health care education and limited training programs for regions where no legislation governs chiropractic.\nUpon graduation, there may be a requirement to pass national, state, or provincial board examinations before being licensed to practice in a particular jurisdiction. Depending on the location, continuing education may be required to renew these licenses. Specialty training is available through part-time postgraduate education programs such as chiropractic orthopedics and sports chiropractic, and through full-time residency programs such as radiology or orthopedics.\nIn the U.S., chiropractic schools are accredited through the Council on Chiropractic Education (CCE) while the General Chiropractic Council (GCC) is the statutory governmental body responsible for the regulation of chiropractic in the UK. The U.S. CCE requires a mixing curriculum, which means a straight-educated chiropractor may not be eligible for licensing in states requiring CCE accreditation. CCEs in the U.S., Canada, Australia and Europe have joined to form CCE-International (CCE-I) as a model of accreditation standards with the goal of having credentials portable internationally. Today, there are 18 accredited Doctor of Chiropractic programs in the U.S., 2 in Canada, 6 in Australasia, and 5 in Europe. All but one of the chiropractic colleges in the U.S. are privately funded, but in several other countries they are in government-sponsored universities and colleges. Of the two chiropractic colleges in Canada, one is publicly funded (UQTR) and one is privately funded (CMCC). In 2005, CMCC was granted the privilege of offering a professional health care degree under the Post-secondary Education Choice and Excellence Act, which sets the program within the hierarchy of education in Canada as comparable to that of other primary contact health care professions such as medicine, dentistry and optometry.\nRegulatory colleges and chiropractic boards in the U.S., Canada, Mexico, and Australia are responsible for protecting the public, standards of practice, disciplinary issues, quality assurance and maintenance of competency.\nChiropractors often argue that this education is as good as or better than medical physicians', but most chiropractic training is confined to classrooms with much time spent learning theory, adjustment, and marketing. The fourth year of chiropractic education persistently showed the highest stress levels. Every student, irrespective of year, experienced different ranges of stress when studying. The chiropractic leaders and colleges have had internal struggles. Rather than cooperation, there has been infighting between different factions. A number of actions were posturing due to the confidential nature of the chiropractic colleges in an attempt to enroll students.\nIn 2024, Oregon Public Broadcasting reported on the high debt burden of students who pursued degrees in alternative medicine. Ten different chiropractic programs were ranked among the 47 US graduate programs with highest debt to earnings ratios. Analyses by Quackwatch and the Sunlight Foundation found high rates of default on Health Education Assistance Loan (HEAL) student loans used for chiropractic programs. Among health professionals who were listed as in default on HEAL loans in 2012, 53% were chiropractors.\nEthics.\nThe chiropractic oath is a modern variation of the classical Hippocratic Oath historically taken by physicians and other healthcare professionals swearing to practice their professions ethically. The American Chiropractic Association (ACA) has an ethical code \"based upon the acknowledgement that the social contract dictates the profession's responsibilities to the patient, the public, and the profession; and upholds the fundamental principle that the paramount purpose of the chiropractic doctor's professional services shall be to benefit the patient.\" The International Chiropractor's Association (ICA) also has a set of professional canons.\nA 2008 commentary proposed that the chiropractic profession actively regulate itself to combat abuse, fraud, and quackery, which are more prevalent in chiropractic than in other health care professions, violating the social contract between patients and physicians. According to a 2015 Gallup poll of U.S. adults, the perception of chiropractors is generally favorable; two-thirds of American adults agree that chiropractors have their patient's best interest in mind and more than half also agree that most chiropractors are trustworthy. Less than 10% of US adults disagreed with the statement that chiropractors were trustworthy.\nChiropractors, especially in America, have a reputation for unnecessarily treating patients. In many circumstances the focus seems to be put on economics instead of health care. Sustained chiropractic care is promoted as a preventive tool, but unnecessary manipulation could possibly present a risk to patients. Some chiropractors are concerned by the routine unjustified claims chiropractors have made. A 2010 analysis of chiropractic websites found the majority of chiropractors and their associations made claims of effectiveness not supported by scientific evidence, while 28% of chiropractor websites advocate lower back pain care, which has some sound evidence.\nThe US Office of the Inspector General (OIG) estimated that for calendar year 2013, 82% of payments to chiropractors under Medicare Part B, a total of $359 million, did not comply with Medicare requirements. There have been at least 15 OIG reports about chiropractic billing irregularities since 1986.\nIn 2009, a backlash to the libel suit filed by the British Chiropractic Association (BCA) against Simon Singh inspired the filing of formal complaints of false advertising against more than 500 individual chiropractors within one 24-hour period, prompting the McTimoney Chiropractic Association to write to its members advising them to remove leaflets that make claims about whiplash and colic from their practice, to be wary of new patients and telephone inquiries, and telling their members: \"If you have a website, take it down NOW\" and \"Finally, we strongly suggest you do NOT discuss this with others, especially patients.\" An editorial in \"Nature\" suggested that the BCA may have been trying to suppress debate and that this use of English libel law was a burden on the right to freedom of expression, which is protected by the European Convention on Human Rights. The libel case ended with the BCA withdrawing its suit in 2010.\nReception.\nChiropractic is established in the U.S., Canada, and Australia, and is present to a lesser extent in many other countries. It is viewed as a marginal and non-clinically\u2013proven attempt at complementary and alternative medicine, which has not integrated into mainstream medicine.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, there are approximately 2488 chiropractors, or one chiropractor for every 7980 people. Most private health insurance funds in Australia cover chiropractic care, and the federal government funds chiropractic care when the patient is referred by a medical practitioner. In 2014, the chiropractic profession had a registered workforce of 4,684 practitioners in Australia represented by two major organizations \u2013 the Chiropractors' Association of Australia (CAA) and the Chiropractic and Osteopathic College of Australasia (COCA). Annual expenditure on chiropractic care (alone or combined with osteopathy) in Australia is estimated to be between AUD$750\u2013988 million with musculoskeletal complaints such as back and neck pain making up the bulk of consultations; and proportional expenditure is similar to that found in other countries. While Medicare (the Australian publicly funded universal health care system) coverage of chiropractic services is limited to only those directed by a medical referral to assist chronic disease management, most private health insurers in Australia do provide partial reimbursement for a wider range of chiropractic services in addition to limited third party payments for workers compensation and motor vehicle accidents.\nOf the 2,005 chiropractors who participated in a 2015 survey, 62.4% were male and the average age was 42.1 (SD\u2009=\u200912.1) years. Nearly all chiropractors (97.1%) had a bachelor's degree or higher, with the majority of chiropractor's highest professional qualification being a bachelor or double bachelor's degree (34.6%), followed by a master's degree (32.7%), Doctor of Chiropractic (28.9%) or PhD (0.9%). Only a small number of chiropractor's highest professional qualification was a diploma (2.1%) or advanced diploma (0.8%).\nGermany.\nIn Germany, chiropractic may be offered by medical doctors and alternative practitioners. Chiropractors qualified abroad must obtain a German non-medical practitioner license. Authorities have routinely required a comprehensive knowledge test for this, but in the recent past, some administrative courts have ruled that training abroad should be recognised.\nSwitzerland.\nIn Switzerland, only trained medical professionals are allowed to offer chiropractic. Since 1995, chiropractors have been licensed to prescribe a limited set of pharmaceuticals, which were expanded in 2018. A 2010 survey found that 72% of Swiss chiropractors considered their ability to prescribe nonprescription medication as an advantage for chiropractic treatment.\nThere are approximately 300 chiropractors in Switzerland.\nUnited Kingdom.\nChiropractic is available on the National Health Service in some areas, such as Cornwall, where the treatment is only available for neck or back pain.\nA 2010 study by questionnaire presented to UK chiropractors indicated only 45% of chiropractors disclosed to patients the serious risk associated with manipulation of the cervical spine and that 46% believed there was possibility patients would refuse treatment if the risks were correctly explained. However 80% acknowledged the ethical/moral responsibility to disclose risk to patients.\nUnited States and Canada.\nIn 2025, the American Chiropractic Association reported that 70,000 practitioners were active in the United States. The percentage of the population that utilizes chiropractic care at any given time generally falls into a range from 6% to 12% in the U.S. and Canada, with a global high of 20% in Alberta in 2006. In 2008, chiropractors were reported to be the most common CAM providers for children and adolescents, these patients representing up to 14% of all visits to chiropractors. A 2022 report found 11% of Americans visit a chiropractor.\nIn 2002\u201303, the majority of those who sought chiropractic did so for relief from back and neck pain and other neuromusculoskeletal complaints; most do so specifically for low back pain. The majority of U.S. chiropractors participate in some form of managed care. Although the majority of U.S. chiropractors view themselves as specialists in neuromusculoskeletal conditions, many also consider chiropractic as a type of primary care. In the majority of cases, the care that chiropractors and physicians provide divides the market, however for some, their care is complementary.\nIn the U.S., chiropractors perform over 90% of all manipulative treatments. Satisfaction rates are typically higher for chiropractic care compared to medical care, with a 1998 U.S. survey reporting 83% of respondents satisfied or very satisfied with their care; quality of communication seems to be a consistent predictor of patient satisfaction with chiropractors.\nUtilization of chiropractic care is sensitive to the costs incurred by the co-payment by the patient. The use of chiropractic declined from 9.9% of U.S. adults in 1997 to 7.4% in 2002; this was the largest relative decrease among CAM professions, which overall had a stable use rate. As of 2007 7% of the U.S. population is being reached by chiropractic. They were the third largest medical profession in the US in 2002, following physicians and dentists. Employment of U.S. chiropractors was expected to increase 14% between 2006 and 2016, faster than the average for all occupations.\nSince 1972, chiropractic treatment of the spine has been covered by Medicare, the US federal health insurance program in the United States. In 1974 the United States Commissioner of Education officially listed the Council on Chiropractic Education as a \"Nationally Recognized Accrediting Agency\". This allowed for eligibility for federal education and research grants, student eligibility for federal loans, and gave increased legitimacy for chiropractic as a profession overall. In 1980, the American Medical Association revised its code of ethics, allowing members to provide referrals to chiropractors.\nModernly, chiropractors often work in collaboration with primary care physicians and other medical specialists; the American College of Physicians recommends spinal manipulation therapy as an alternative to pain-relieving drugs for low back pain. Most states require insurers to cover chiropractic care, and most HMOs cover these services.\nChiropractors are not normally licensed to write medical prescriptions or perform major surgery in the United States (although New Mexico has become the first US state to allow \"advanced practice\" trained chiropractors to prescribe certain medications). In the US, their scope of practice varies by state, based on inconsistent views of chiropractic care: some states, such as Iowa, broadly allow treatment of \"human ailments\"; some, such as Delaware, use vague concepts such as \"transition of nerve energy\" to define scope of practice; others, such as New Jersey, specify a severely narrowed scope. US states also differ over whether chiropractors may conduct laboratory tests or diagnostic procedures, dispense dietary supplements, or use other therapies such as homeopathy and acupuncture; in Oregon they can become certified to perform minor surgery and to deliver children via natural childbirth. A 2003 survey of North American chiropractors found that a slight majority favored allowing them to write prescriptions for over-the-counter drugs.\nIn 2024, the University of Pittsburgh announced a Doctor of Chiropractic program\u2014the first of its kind at a public research intensive university.\nHistory.\nChiropractic's origins lie in the folk medicine practice of bonesetting, in which untrained practitioners engaged in joint manipulation or resetting fractured bones. \nChiropractic was founded in 1895 by Daniel David (D. D.) Palmer in Davenport, Iowa. Palmer, a magnetic healer, hypothesized that manual manipulation of the spine could cure disease. The first chiropractic patient of D. D. Palmer was Harvey Lillard, a worker in the building where Palmer's office was located. He claimed that he had severely reduced hearing for 17 years, which started shortly following a \"pop\" in his spine. A few days following his adjustment, Lillard claimed his hearing was almost completely restored. Another of Palmer's patients, Samuel Weed, coined the term \"chiropractic\", from Greek 'hand' (itself from 'hand') and 'practical'. Chiropractic is classified as a field of pseudomedicine.\nChiropractic competed with its predecessor osteopathy, another medical system based on magnetic healing; both systems were founded by charismatic midwesterners in opposition to the conventional medicine of the day, and both postulated that manipulation improved health. Although initially keeping chiropractic a family secret, in 1898 Palmer began teaching it to a few students at his new Palmer School of Chiropractic. One student, his son Bartlett Joshua (B. J.) Palmer, became committed to promoting chiropractic, took over the Palmer School in 1906, and rapidly expanded its enrollment. His son B. J. Palmer helped to expand chiropractic in the early 20th century.\nEarly chiropractors believed that all disease was caused by interruptions in the flow of innate intelligence, a vitalistic nervous energy or life force that represented God's presence in man; chiropractic leaders often invoked religious imagery and moral traditions. D. D. Palmer said he \"received chiropractic from the other world\". D. D. and B. J. both seriously considered declaring chiropractic a religion, which might have provided legal protection under the U.S. constitution, but decided against it partly to avoid confusion with Christian Science. Early chiropractors also tapped into the Populist movement, emphasizing craft, hard work, competition, and advertisement, aligning themselves with the common man against intellectuals and trusts, among which they included the American Medical Association (AMA).\nChiropractic has seen considerable controversy and criticism. Although D. D. and B. J. were \"straight\" and disdained the use of instruments, some early chiropractors, whom B. J. scornfully called \"mixers\", advocated the use of instruments. In 1910, B. J. changed course and endorsed X-rays as necessary for diagnosis; this resulted in a significant exodus from the Palmer School of the more conservative faculty and students. The mixer camp grew until by 1924 B. J. estimated that only 3,000 of the United States' 25,000 chiropractors remained straight. That year, B. J.'s invention and promotion of the neurocalometer, a temperature-sensing device, was highly controversial among B. J.'s fellow straights. By the 1930s, chiropractic was the largest alternative healing profession in the U.S.\nChiropractors faced heavy opposition from organized medicine. D. D. Palmer was jailed in 1907 for practicing medicine without a license. Thousands of chiropractors were prosecuted for practicing medicine without a license, and D. D. and many other chiropractors were jailed. To defend against medical statutes, B. J. argued that chiropractic was separate and distinct from medicine, asserting that chiropractors \"analyzed\" rather than \"diagnosed\", and \"adjusted\" subluxations rather than \"treated\" disease. B. J. cofounded the Universal Chiropractors' Association (UCA) to provide legal services to arrested chiropractors. Although the UCA won their first test case in Wisconsin in 1907, prosecutions instigated by state medical boards became increasingly common and in many cases were successful. In response, chiropractors conducted political campaigns to secure separate licensing statutes, eventually succeeding in all fifty states, from Kansas in 1913 through Louisiana in 1974. The longstanding feud between chiropractors and medical doctors continued for decades.\nChiropractic philosophy includes the following perspectives:\nHolism assumes that health is affected by everything in an individual's environment; some sources also include a spiritual or existential dimension. In contrast, reductionism in chiropractic reduces causes and cures of health problems to a single factor, vertebral subluxation. Homeostasis emphasizes the body's inherent self-healing abilities. Chiropractic's early notion of innate intelligence can be thought of as a metaphor for homeostasis.\nA large number of chiropractors fear that if they do not separate themselves from the traditional vitalistic concept of innate intelligence, chiropractic will continue to be seen as a fringe profession. A variant of chiropractic called naprapathy originated in Chicago in the early twentieth century. It holds that manual manipulation of soft tissue can reduce \"interference\" in the body and thus improve health.\nStraights (Vitalists) versus Mixers (Materialists).\nBy 1914, chiropractors had begun to divide into two groups: \"Straights\", adherents of the Palmers' supernatural vitalist beliefs, and \"Mixers\" who sought to integrate Chiropractic into science-based mainstream medicine. \nOriginally, \"Straight\" chiropractors adhered to pseudoscientific Vitalist ideas set forth by D.D. and B.J. Palmer, and even modern \"straights\" often retain metaphysical definitions and vitalistic qualities. Straight chiropractors believed that vertebral subluxation leads to interference with an \"innate intelligence\" exerted via the human nervous system and is a primary underlying risk factor for many diseases. Straights view the medical diagnosis of patient complaints, which they consider to be the \"secondary effects\" of subluxations, to be unnecessary for chiropractic treatment. Thus, straight chiropractors are concerned primarily with the detection and correction of vertebral subluxation via adjustment and do not \"mix\" other types of therapies into their practice style. Their philosophy and explanations were metaphysical in nature, and they preferred to use traditional chiropractic lexicon terminology such as \"perform spinal analysis\", \"detect subluxation\", \"correct with adjustment\". They preferred to remain separate and distinct from mainstream health care. Modernly, \"Straights\" are a minority among Chiropractors, though \"they have been able to transform their status as purists and heirs of the lineage into influence dramatically out of proportion to their numbers.\"\n\"Mixers\", who make up the majority of chiropractors, \"mix\" chiropractic with diagnostic and treatment approaches from mainstream medical and osteopathic practices. Unlike straight chiropractors, mixers believe subluxation is just one of many causes of disease, and mixers are open to mainstream medicine. Many mixers incorporate mainstream medical diagnostics and employ conventional medical treatments including techniques of physical therapy such as exercise, stretching, massage, ice packs, electrical muscle stimulation, therapeutic ultrasound, and moist heat. But some mixers also use techniques from pseudoscientific alternative medicine, including unnecessary nutritional supplements, acupuncture, homeopathy, herbal remedies, and biofeedback. Author Holly Folk writes that \"Few Mixer chiropractors use the term anymore. Today, one is more likely to hear this side described as 'holistic,' 'wellness-oriented,' or 'integrative' practitioners.\" Folk argues that \"osteopathy underwent a 'Straight-Mixer' debate between traditional vitalists and a faction that embraced the new medical science\".\nAlthough mixers are the majority group, many of them retain belief in vertebral subluxation as shown in a 2003 survey of 1,100 North American chiropractors, which found that 88 percent wanted to retain the term \"vertebral subluxation complex\", and that when asked to estimate the percent of disorders of internal organs that subluxation significantly contributes to, the mean response was 62 percent. A 2008 survey of 6,000 American chiropractors demonstrated that most chiropractors seem to believe that a subluxation-based clinical approach may be of limited utility for addressing visceral disorders, and greatly favored non-subluxation-based clinical approaches for such conditions. The same survey showed that most chiropractors generally believed that the majority of their clinical approach for addressing musculoskeletal/biomechanical disorders such as back pain was based on subluxation. Chiropractors often offer conventional therapies such as physical therapy and lifestyle counseling, and it may for the lay person be difficult to distinguish the unscientific from the scientific.\nRestraint of trade decision 1989.\nThe AMA labeled chiropractic an \"unscientific cult\" in 1966, and until 1980 advised its members that it was unethical for medical doctors to associate with \"unscientific practitioners\". This culminated in a landmark 1987 decision, \"Wilk v. AMA\", in which the court found that the AMA had engaged in unreasonable restraint of trade and conspiracy, and which ended the AMA's de facto boycott of chiropractic.\nGrowing scholarly interest.\nSerious research to test chiropractic theories did not begin until the 1970s, and is continuing to be hampered by antiscientific and pseudoscientific ideas that sustained the profession in its long battle with organized medicine. By the mid-1990s there was a growing scholarly interest in chiropractic, which helped efforts to improve service quality and establish clinical guidelines that recommended manual therapies for acute low back pain.\nIn recent decades chiropractic gained legitimacy and greater acceptance by medical physicians and health plans, and enjoyed a strong political base and sustained demand for services. However, its future seemed uncertain: as the number of practitioners grew, evidence-based medicine insisted on treatments with demonstrated value, managed care restricted payment, and competition grew from massage therapists and other health professions. The profession responded by marketing natural products and devices more aggressively, and by reaching deeper into alternative medicine and primary care.\nPublic health.\nSome chiropractors oppose vaccination and water fluoridation, which are common public health practices. Within the chiropractic community there are significant disagreements about vaccination, one of the most cost-effective public health interventions available. Most chiropractic writings on vaccination focus on its negative aspects, claiming that it is hazardous, ineffective, and unnecessary. Some chiropractors have embraced vaccination, but a significant portion of the profession rejects it, as original chiropractic philosophy traces diseases to causes in the spine and states that vaccines interfere with healing. The extent to which anti-vaccination views perpetuate the current chiropractic profession is uncertain. The American Chiropractic Association and the International Chiropractors Association support individual exemptions to compulsory vaccination laws, and a 1995 survey of U.S. chiropractors found that about a third believed there was no scientific proof that immunization prevents disease. The Canadian Chiropractic Association supports vaccination; a survey in Alberta in 2002 found that 25% of chiropractors advised patients for, and 27% against, vaccinating themselves or their children.\nEarly opposition to water fluoridation included chiropractors, some of whom continue to oppose it as being incompatible with chiropractic philosophy and an infringement of personal freedom. Other chiropractors have actively promoted fluoridation, and several chiropractic organizations have endorsed scientific principles of public health. In addition to traditional chiropractic opposition to water fluoridation and vaccination, chiropractors' attempts to establish a positive reputation for their public health role are also compromised by their reputation for recommending repetitive lifelong chiropractic treatment.\nControversy.\nThroughout its history chiropractic has been the subject of internal and external controversy and criticism. According to Daniel D. Palmer, the founder of chiropractic, subluxation is the sole cause of disease and manipulation is the cure for all diseases of the human race. A 2003 profession-wide survey found \"most chiropractors (whether 'straights' or 'mixers') still hold views of innate intelligence and of the cause and cure of disease (not just back pain) consistent with those of the Palmers.\" A critical evaluation stated \"Chiropractic is rooted in mystical concepts. This led to an internal conflict within the chiropractic profession, which continues today.\" Chiropractors, including D. D. Palmer, were jailed for practicing medicine without a license. For most of its existence, chiropractic has battled with mainstream medicine, sustained by antiscientific and pseudoscientific ideas such as subluxation. Collectively, systematic reviews have not demonstrated that spinal manipulation, the main treatment method employed by chiropractors, is effective for any medical condition, with the possible exception of treatment for back pain. Chiropractic remains controversial, though to a lesser extent than in past years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7739", "revid": "50584560", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7739", "title": "Carbide", "text": "Inorganic compound group\nIn chemistry, a carbide usually describes a compound composed of carbon and a metal. In metallurgy, carbiding or carburizing is the process for producing carbide coatings on a metal piece.\nInterstitial / Metallic carbides.\nThe carbides of the group 4, 5 and 6 transition metals (with the exception of chromium) are often described as interstitial compounds. These carbides have metallic properties and are refractory. Some exhibit a range of stoichiometries, being a non-stoichiometric mixture of various carbides arising due to crystal defects. Some of them, including titanium carbide and tungsten carbide, are important industrially and are used to coat metals in cutting tools.\nThe long-held view is that the carbon atoms fit into octahedral interstices in a close-packed metal lattice when the metal atom radius is greater than approximately 135\u00a0pm:\nThe following table shows structures of the metals and their carbides. (N.B. the body centered cubic structure adopted by vanadium, niobium, tantalum, chromium, molybdenum and tungsten is not a close-packed lattice.) The notation \"h/2\" refers to the M2C type structure described above, which is only an approximate description of the actual structures. The simple view that the lattice of the pure metal \"absorbs\" carbon atoms can be seen to be untrue as the packing of the metal atom lattice in the carbides is different from the packing in the pure metal, although it is technically correct that the carbon atoms fit into the octahedral interstices of a close-packed metal lattice.\nFor a long time the non-stoichiometric phases were believed to be disordered with a random filling of the interstices, however short and longer range ordering has been detected.\nIron forms a number of carbides, , and . The best known is cementite, Fe3C, which is present in steels. These carbides are more reactive than the interstitial carbides; for example, the carbides of Cr, Mn, Fe, Co and Ni are all hydrolysed by dilute acids and sometimes by water, to give a mixture of hydrogen and hydrocarbons. These compounds share features with both the inert interstitials and the more reactive salt-like carbides.\nSome metals, such as lead and tin, are believed not to form carbides under any circumstances. There exists however a mixed titanium-tin carbide, which is a two-dimensional conductor.\nChemical classification of carbides.\nCarbides can be generally classified by the chemical bonds type as follows: \nExamples include calcium carbide (CaC2), silicon carbide (SiC), tungsten carbide (WC; often called, simply, \"carbide\" when referring to machine tooling), and cementite (Fe3C), each used in key industrial applications. The naming of ionic carbides is not systematic.\nSalt-like / saline / ionic carbides.\nSalt-like carbides are composed of highly electropositive elements such as the alkali metals, alkaline earth metals, lanthanides, actinides, and group 3 metals (scandium, yttrium, and lutetium). Aluminium from group 13 forms carbides, but gallium, indium, and thallium do not. These materials feature isolated carbon centers, often described as \"C4\u2212\", in the methanides or methides; two-atom units, \", in the acetylides; and three-atom units, \", in the allylides. The graphite intercalation compound KC8, prepared from vapour of potassium and graphite, and the alkali metal derivatives of C60 are not usually classified as carbides.\nMethanides.\nMethanides are a subset of carbides distinguished by their tendency to decompose in water producing methane. Three examples are aluminium carbide , magnesium carbide and beryllium carbide .\nTransition metal carbides are not saline: their reaction with water is very slow and is usually neglected. For example, depending on surface porosity, 5\u201330 atomic layers of titanium carbide are hydrolyzed, forming methane within 5 minutes at ambient conditions, following by saturation of the reaction.\nNote that methanide in this context is a trivial historical name. According to the IUPAC systematic naming conventions, a compound such as NaCH3 would be termed a \"methanide\", although this compound is often called methylsodium. See Methyl group#Methyl anion for more information about the anion.\nAcetylides/ethynides.\nSeveral carbides are assumed to be salts of the acetylide anion (also called percarbide, by analogy with peroxide), which has a triple bond between the two carbon atoms. Alkali metals, alkaline earth metals, and lanthanoid metals form acetylides, for example, sodium carbide Na2C2, calcium carbide CaC2, and LaC2. Lanthanides also form carbides (sesquicarbides, see below) with formula M2C3. Metals from group 11 also tend to form acetylides, such as copper(I) acetylide and silver acetylide. Carbides of the actinide elements, which have stoichiometry MC2 and M2C3, are also described as salt-like derivatives of .\nThe C\u2013C triple bond length ranges from 119.2\u00a0pm in CaC2 (similar to ethyne), to 130.3\u00a0pm in LaC2 and 134\u00a0pm in UC2. The bonding in LaC2 has been described in terms of LaIII with the extra electron delocalised into the antibonding orbital on , explaining the metallic conduction.\nAllylides.\nThe polyatomic ion , sometimes called allylide, is found in and . The ion is linear and is isoelectronic with CO2. The C\u2013C distance in is 133.2\u00a0pm. yields methylacetylene, , and propadiene, , on hydrolysis, which was the first indication that it contains .\nCovalent carbides.\nCarbides of silicon and boron are described as \"covalent carbides\", although virtually all compounds of carbon exhibit some covalent character. Silicon carbide has two similar crystalline forms, which are both related to the diamond structure. Boron carbide, B4C, on the other hand, has an unusual structure which includes icosahedral boron units linked by carbon atoms. In this respect boron carbide is similar to the boron rich borides. Both silicon carbide (also known as \"carborundum\") and boron carbide are very hard materials and refractory. Both materials are important industrially. Boron also forms other covalent carbides, such as B25C.\nMolecular carbides.\nMetal complexes containing C are known as metal carbido complexes. Most common are carbon-centered octahedral clusters, such as (where \"Ph\" represents a phenyl group) and . Similar species are known for the metal carbonyls and the early metal halides. A few terminal carbides have been isolated, such as .\nMetallocarbohedrynes (or \"met-cars\") are stable clusters with the general formula where M is a transition metal (Ti, Zr, V, etc.).\nRelated materials.\nIn addition to the carbides, other groups of related carbon compounds exist:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7740", "revid": "48535054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7740", "title": "Charles C. Krulak", "text": "United States Marine Corps general\nCharles Chandler Krulak (born March 4, 1942) is a retired United States Marine Corps four-star general who served as the 31st Commandant of the Marine Corps from July 1, 1995, to June 30, 1999. He is the son of Lieutenant General Victor H. \"Brute\" Krulak, who served in World War II, Korea, and Vietnam. He was the 13th President of Birmingham-Southern College after his stint as a non-executive director of English association football club Aston Villa.\nEarly life and education.\nKrulak was born in Quantico, Virginia, on March 4, 1942, the son of Amy (n\u00e9e Chandler) and Victor H. Krulak. He graduated from Phillips Exeter Academy in Exeter, New Hampshire, in 1960, where he was classmates with novelist John Irving. Krulak then attended the United States Naval Academy, graduating in 1964 with a bachelor's degree. Krulak also holds a master's degree in labor relations from George Washington University (1973). He is a graduate of the Amphibious Warfare School (1968); the Army Command and General Staff College (1976); and the National War College (1982).\nMarine career.\nAfter his commissioning and graduation from The Basic School at Marine Corps Base Quantico, Krulak held a variety of command and staff positions. His command positions included: commanding officer of a platoon and two rifle companies during two tours of duty in Vietnam; commanding officer of Special Training Branch and Recruit Series at Marine Corps Recruit Depot San Diego, California (1966\u20131968); commanding officer of Counter-Guerilla Warfare School, Northern Training Area on Okinawa (1970), Company officer at the United States Naval Academy (1970\u20131973); commanding officer of the Marine Barracks at Naval Air Station North Island, California (1973\u20131976), and commanding officer, 3rd Battalion, 3rd Marines (1983\u20131985).\nKrulak's staff assignments included: operations officer, 2nd Battalion, 9th Marines (1977\u20131978); chief of the Combat Arms Monitor Section at Headquarters Marine Corps, Washington, D.C. (1978\u20131979); executive assistant to the Director of Personnel Management, Headquarters Marine Corps (1979\u20131981); Plans Office, Fleet Marine Forces Pacific, Camp H.M. Smith, Hawaii (1982\u20131983); executive officer, 3rd Marine Regiment, 1st Marine Expeditionary Brigade; assistant chief of staff, maritime pre-positioning ships, 1st MEB; assistant chief of staff for operations, 1st Marine Expeditionary Brigade; and the military assistant to the assistant secretary of defense for command, control, communications and intelligence, Office of the Secretary of Defense.\nKrulak was assigned duty as the deputy director of the White House Military Office in September 1987. While serving in this capacity, he was selected for promotion to brigadier general in November 1988. He was advanced to that grade on June 5, 1989, and assigned duties as the commanding general, 10th MEB/Assistant division commander, 2nd Marine Division, Fleet Marine Force Atlantic, at Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune, North Carolina on July 10, 1989. On June 1, 1990, he assumed duties as the commanding general, 2nd Force Service Support Group Group/Commanding general, 6th Marine Expeditionary Brigade, Fleet Marine Force Atlantic and commanded the 2d FSSG during the Gulf War. He served in this capacity until July 12, 1991, and was assigned duty as assistant deputy chief of staff for manpower and reserve affairs (personnel Management/Personnel Procurement), Headquarters Marine Corps on August 5, 1991. He was advanced to major general on March 20, 1992. Krulak was assigned as commanding general, Marine Corps Combat Development Command, Quantico, on August 24, 1992, and was promoted to lieutenant general on September 1, 1992. On July 22, 1994, he was assigned as commander of Marine Forces Pacific/commanding general, Fleet Marine Force Pacific, and in March 1995 he was nominated to serve as the Commandant of the Marine Corps.\nOn June, 29, he was promoted to general and assumed duties as the 31st commandant on June 30, 1995. He was relieved on June 30, 1999, by General James L. Jones.\nIn 1997, Krulak became a Life Member of the Sons of the Revolution in the State of California.\nSilver Star citation.\nCitation:\nThe President of the United States of America takes pleasure in presenting the Silver Star to Captain Charles Chandler Krulak, United States Marine Corps, for conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity in action while serving as Commanding Officer of Company L, Third Battalion, Third Marines, Third Marine Division, during combat operations against the enemy in the Republic of Vietnam. On 3 June 1969, during Operation Virginia Ridge, Company L was occupying ambush positions near the Demilitarized Zone west of Con Thien when the Marines came under a heavy volume of mortar fire and sustained several casualties. Although seriously wounded himself, Captain Krulak unhesitatingly left his covered position and, thinking only of the welfare of his men, fearlessly maneuvered across the fire-swept terrain to ensure that his Marines were in effective defensive locations and capable of repelling an expected ground attack. Shortly after the initial mortar attack, the Company was subjected to a second intense mortar barrage. Realizing that the determined enemy soldiers had accurate range on the Marine emplacements, and unwilling to incur additional casualties, he commenced maneuvering his men to an alternate location. Simultaneously, undaunted by the fierce barrage, Captain Krulak fearlessly moved to a dangerously exposed vantage point from which he pinpointed the principal sources of hostile fire and skillfully coordinated fixed-wing air strikes and supporting artillery fire on the enemy positions, silencing the fire. By this time, both the platoon commander and a platoon sergeant of one of his platoons had been seriously wounded. After repeatedly exposing himself to the relentless fire to supervise the evacuation of the casualties, he then personally led the platoon back to the main body of his Company across 3,000 meters of rugged mountain terrain to another patrol base and, although weak from loss of blood and the pain of his injuries, steadfastly refused medical evacuation until the arrival of another officer on the following morning. By his courage, dynamic leadership, and inspiring devotion to duty in the face of grave personal danger, Captain Krulak minimized Marine casualties and upheld the highest traditions of the Marine Corps and of the United States Naval Service.\nPersonal life.\nKrulak received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement in 1996. The Golden Plate was presented by Awards Council member and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General John M. Shalikashvili, USA.\nKrulak joined MBNA America in September 1999 as chief administrative officer, responsible for personnel, benefits, compensation, education, and other administrative services. Krulak has served as the Senior Vice Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of MBNA Europe (2001\u20132005) and was based at the Chester campus in the UK. He was the executive vice chairman and chief administration officer of MBNA Corporation (2004\u20132005). He retired from MBNA in 2005.\nFollowing the takeover of English football club Aston Villa by MBNA Chairman Randy Lerner in August 2006 and as of September 19, 2006, Krulak joined the board of Aston Villa as non-executive director where he posted on several fans forums. Krulak was generally referred to as \"The General\" by fans on these boards.\nKrulak also serves on the boards of ConocoPhillips, Freeport-McMoran (formerly known as Phelps Dodge Corporation) and Union Pacific Corporation. In addition, he serves on the advisory council of Hope For The Warriors, a national non-profit dedicated to provide a full cycle of non-medical care to combat wounded service members, their families, and families of the fallen from each military branch.\nKrulak was elected as the 13th President of Birmingham\u2013Southern College in Birmingham, Alabama on March 21, 2011, and retired June 1, 2015. He received an honorary doctorate of Humane Letters from Birmingham-Southern College. The Krulak Institute for Leadership, Experiential Learning, and Civic Engagement at Birmingham-Southern College is named for him.\nKrulak was the Vice Chair of the Sweet Briar College Board of Directors. He joined the Board in the Summer of 2015.\nIn 2019, Krulak criticized the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute's decision to award the Fred Shuttlesworth Human Rights Award to Angela Davis, an activist and scholar. In the statement, Krulak expressed \"sadness\" that Davis was selected, given her former affiliation with the Communist Party USA as well as support for the Soviet Union, Cuba and other Communist countries with poor human rights records. \nAwards and decorations.\nGeneral Krulak's decorations and medals include: \nLegacy.\nKrulak famously referred to the \"Strategic Corporal\" and the Three Block War as two of the key lessons identified from the deployments in Somalia, Haiti and Bosnia. These concepts are still considered vital in understanding the increasing complexity of modern battlefields.\nKrulak explained some of his warfighting philosophy in an interview with Tom Clancy in Clancy's nonfiction book \"Marine\". Clancy referred to Krulak as \"Warrior Prince of the Corps.\" Krulak also rewrote the Marine Corps' basic combat study text, \"\", incorporating his theories on operations in the modern battlefield.\nFamily.\nKrulak is married to Zandi Meyers from Annapolis. They have two sons: Dr. David C. Krulak, a former U.S. Navy captain and the current Director of the TRICARE Health Plan at the Defense Health Agency and Dr. Todd C. Krulak, PhD., a retired freelance rave DJ who is a professor at Samford University; and five grandchildren: Capt Brian Krulak (USMC), Katie, Mary, Matthew, and Charles.\nHe is the son of Lieutenant General Victor H. Krulak Sr., and the younger brother of Commander Victor H. Krulak Jr, Navy Chaplain Corps and Colonel William Krulak, United States Marine Corps Reserve. Krulak's godfather was USMC General Holland \"Howlin' Mad\" Smith.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n\u00a0This article incorporates public domain material from "}
{"id": "7742", "revid": "36059691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7742", "title": "Compaq", "text": "American information technology company (1982\u20132013)\nCompaq Computer Corporation was an American information technology company founded in 1982 that developed, sold, and supported computers and related products and services. Compaq produced some of the first IBM PC compatible computers, being the second company after Columbia Data Products to legally reverse engineer the BIOS of the IBM Personal Computer. It rose to become the largest supplier of PC systems during the 1990s. The company was initially based in Harris County, Texas.\nThe company was formed by Rod Canion, Jim Harris, and Bill Murto, all of whom were former Texas Instruments senior managers. All three had left the company in 1991 due to an internal shakeup, and saw Eckhard Pfeiffer appointed as president and CEO, who served throughout the 1990s. Ben Rosen provided the venture capital financing for the fledgling company and served as chairman of the board for 17 years from 1983 until September 28, 2000, when he retired and was succeeded by Michael Capellas, who served as its last chairman and CEO until its merger.\nCompaq was overtaken by Dell as the top global PC maker two times; one in 1999 and the other in 2001. Struggling to keep up against its competitors with the price wars against Dell, the launch of a joint venture with ADI Corporation in 1994, and a risky acquisition of DEC in 1998 (which includes the inheritance of the DEC Alpha family of CPUs), Compaq was acquired by Hewlett-Packard (HP) for US$25 billion in 2002. Despite using the Compaq name in HP's own HP Compaq brand of business computers, which served as a replacement for the Compaq Evo in 2003 as well as the HP ProBook brand in 2009, the Compaq brand as a whole remained in use by HP for lower-end systems until 2013 when it was discontinued; two years after the Compaq brand was discontinued, HP itself was later split up into two companies in 2015, leading to its legal successors HP Inc. and Hewlett Packard Enterprise.\nAs of 2025[ [update]], the Compaq brand is currently licensed to third parties outside of North America for use on electronics in Latin America (e.g. Mexico and Brazil) and India.\nHistory.\n1982\u20131990.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plain image with caption/styles.css\"/&gt; \nOriginal logo, used from 1982 to 1993 \nCompaq was founded in February 1982 by Rod Canion, Jim Harris, and Bill Murto, three senior managers from semiconductor manufacturer Texas Instruments. The three of them had left due to lack of faith and loss of confidence in TI's management and initially considered but ultimately decided against starting a chain of Mexican restaurants. Each invested $1,000 to form the company, which was founded with the temporary name \"Gateway Technology\". The name \"COMPAQ\" was said to be derived from \"Compatibility and Quality\", but this explanation was an afterthought. The name was chosen from many suggested by Ogilvy &amp; Mather, it being the name least rejected. The first Compaq PC was sketched out on a placemat by Ted Papajohn while dining with the founders in a pie shop, (named House of Pies in Houston). Their first venture capital came from Benjamin M. Rosen and Sevin Rosen Funds, who helped the fledgling company secure $ to produce their initial computer. Overall, the founders managed to raise $25 million from venture capitalists, as this gave stability to the new company as well as providing assurances to the dealers or middlemen.\nCompaq differentiated its offerings from other IBM PC clones by not focusing mainly on price, but instead concentrating on new features such as portability and better technology, at prices comparable to those of IBM's PCs. In contrast to Dell and Gateway 2000, Compaq hired veteran engineers with an average of 15 years' experience, which lent credibility to Compaq's reputation of reliability among customers. Due to its partnership with Intel, Compaq was able to maintain a technological lead in the market place as it was the first one to come out with computers containing the next generation of each Intel x86 processors.\nUnder Canion's direction, Compaq sold computers only through dealers to avoid potential competition that a direct sales channel would foster, which helped foster loyalty among resellers. By giving dealers considerable leeway in pricing Compaq's offerings, either a significant markup for more profits or discount for more sales, dealers had a major incentive to advertise Compaq.\nDuring its first year of sales (second year of operation), the company sold 53,000 PCs for sales of $, the first start-up to hit the $ mark that fast. Compaq went public in 1983 on the NYSE and raised $. In 1986, it enjoyed record sales of $ from 150,000 PCs and became the youngest-ever firm to make the Fortune 500. In 1985, sales reached $504 million. The company shipped its 500,000th computer in April 1986. In 1987, Compaq hit the $ revenue mark, taking the least amount of time to reach that milestone. By 1991, Compaq held the fifth place spot in the PC market with $ in sales that year.\nTwo key marketing executives in Compaq's early years, Jim D'Arezzo and Sparky Sparks, had come from IBM's PC Group. Other key executives responsible for the company's meteoric growth in the late 1980s and early 1990s were Ross A. Cooley, another former IBM associate, who served for many years as SVP of GM North America; Michael Swavely, who was the company's chief marketing officer in the early years, and eventually ran the North America organization, later passing along that responsibility to Cooley when Swavely retired. In the United States, Brendan A. \"Mac\" McLoughlin (another long time IBM executive) led the company's field sales organization after starting up the Western U.S. Area of Operations. These executives, along with other key contributors, including Kevin Ellington, Douglas Johns, Steven Flannigan, and Gary Stimac, helped the company compete against the IBM Corporation in all personal computer sales categories, after many predicted that none could compete with the behemoth.\nThe soft-spoken Canion was popular with employees and the culture that he built helped Compaq to attract the best talent. Instead of headquartering the company in a downtown Houston skyscraper, Canion chose a West Coast-style campus surrounded by forests, where every employee had similar offices and no-one (not even the CEO) had a reserved parking spot. At semi-annual meetings, turnout was high as any employee could ask questions to senior managers.\nIn 1987, company co-founder Bill Murto resigned to study at a religious education program at the University of St. Thomas. Murto had helped to organise the company's marketing and authorized-dealer distribution strategy and held the post of senior vice president of sales since June 1985. Murto was succeeded by Ross A. Cooley, director of corporate sales. Cooley would report to Michael S. Swavely, vice president for marketing, who was given increased responsibility and the title of vice president for sales and marketing.\nIntroduction of Compaq Portable.\nIn November 1982, Compaq announced its first product, the Compaq Portable, a portable IBM PC compatible personal computer. It was released in March 1983 at $. The Compaq Portable was one of the progenitors of today's laptop; some called it a \"suitcase computer\" for its size and the look of its case. It was the second IBM-compatible PC, capable of running all software that would run on an IBM PC. It was a commercial success, selling 53,000 units in its first year and generating $ in sales revenue. The Compaq Portable was the first in the range of the Compaq Portable series. Compaq was able to market a legal IBM clone because IBM mostly used \"off the shelf\" parts for its PC. Furthermore, Microsoft had kept the right to license MS-DOS, the most popular and de facto standard operating system for the IBM PC, to other computer manufacturers. The only part which had to be duplicated was the BIOS, which Compaq did legally by using clean room design at a cost of $. Compaq also developed COMPAQ-DOS, its own MS-DOS variant. Microsoft later licensed COMPAQ-DOS and resold it as MS-DOS.\nUnlike other companies, Compaq did not bundle application software with its computers. Vice President of Sales and Service H. L. Sparks said in early 1984:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We've considered it, and every time we consider it we reject it. I don't believe and our dealer network doesn't believe that bundling is the best way to merchandise those products.\nYou remove the freedom from the dealers to really merchandise when you bundle in software. It is perceived by a lot of people as a marketing gimmick. You know, when you advertise a $ computer with $ worth of free software, it obviously can't be true.\nThe software should stand on its merits and be supported and so should the hardware. Why should you be constrained to use the software that comes with a piece of hardware? I think it can tend to inhibit sales over the long run.\nCompaq instead emphasized PC compatibility, of which Future Computing in May 1983 ranked Compaq as among the \"Best\" examples. \"Many industry observers think [Compaq] is poised for meteoric growth\", \"The New York Times\" reported in March of that year. By October, when the company announced the Compaq Plus with a hard drive, \"PC Magazine\" wrote of \"the reputation for compatibility it built with its highly regarded floppy disk portable\". The company bragged that it was more IBM compatible than IBM itself, such as the IBM Portable PC. Compaq computers remained the most compatible PC clones into 1984, and maintained its reputation for compatibility for years, even as clone BIOSes became available from Phoenix Technologies and other companies that also reverse engineered IBM's design, then sold their version to clone manufacturers.\nCompaq Deskpro.\nOn June 28, 1984, Compaq released the Deskpro, a 16-bit desktop computer using an Intel 8086 microprocessor running at . It was considerably faster than an IBM PC and was, like the original Compaq Portable, also capable of running IBM software. It was Compaq's first non-portable computer and began the Deskpro line of computers.\nCompaq DeskPro 386.\nIn 1986, Compaq introduced the Deskpro 386, the first PC based on Intel's new 80386 microprocessor. Bill Gates of Microsoft later said\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the folks at IBM didn't trust the 386. They didn't think it would get done. So we encouraged Compaq to go ahead and just do a 386 machine. That was the first time people started to get a sense that it wasn't just IBM setting the standards, that this industry had a life of its own, and that companies like Compaq and Intel were in there doing new things that people should pay attention to.\nThe Compaq 386 computer marked the first CPU change to the PC platform that was not initiated by IBM. Compaq had concluded, according to \"PC\", that it could do so because \"IBM's DOS standard is now bigger than IBM\"; IBM could not make changes to the PC architecture it had created to hurt Compaq, without also obsoleting millions of real IBM PCs. An IBM-made 386 machine reached the market almost a year later, but by that time Compaq was the leading 386 supplier with 28% market share, compared to IBM's 16%.\nFor the first three months after announcement, the Deskpro 386 shipped with Windows/386. This was a version of Windows 2.1 adapted for the 80386 processor. Support for the virtual 8086 mode was added by Compaq engineers. (Windows, running on top of the MS-DOS operating system, would not become a popular \"operating environment\" until at least the release of Windows 3.0 in 1990.)\nCompaq SystemPro.\nCompaq's technical leadership and the rivalry with IBM was emphasized when the SystemPro server was launched in late 1989 \u2013 this was a true server product with standard support for a second CPU and RAID, but also the first product to feature the EISA bus, designed in reaction to IBM's MCA (Micro Channel Architecture) which was incompatible with the original AT bus.\nAlthough Compaq had become successful by being 100 percent IBM-compatible, it decided to continue with the original AT bus\u2014which it renamed ISA\u2014instead of licensing IBM's MCA. Prior to funding the prototype for EISA, Compaq had invested significant resources into reverse engineering MCA, but its executives correctly calculated that the $80 billion already spent by corporations on IBM-compatible technology would make it difficult for even IBM to force manufacturers to adopt the new MCA design. Instead of cloning MCA, Compaq led an alliance with Hewlett Packard and seven other major manufacturers, known collectively as the \"Gang of Nine\", to develop EISA. Within a year, when it became apparent that MCA was dying, IBM also licensed the EISA standard. Thanks to Compaq's leadership, the concept of open-systems within the PC industry was preserved.\nCompaq SLT and LTE.\nDevelopment of a truly mobile successor to the Portable line began in 1986, the company releasing two stopgap products in the meantime, the SLT (Compaq's first laptop) and the Compaq Portable III (a lighter-weight, lunchbox-sized entry in the Portable line). In 1989, they introduced the LTE, their first notebook-sized laptop which competed with NEC's UltraLite and Zenith Data Systems's MinisPort. However, whereas the UltraLite and MinisPort failed to gain much uptake due to their novel but nonstandard data storage technologies, the LTE succeeded on account of its use of the conventional floppy drive and spinning hard drive, allowing users to transfer data to and from their desktop computers without any hassle. As well, Compaq began offering docking stations with the release of the LTE/386s in 1990, providing performance comparable to then-current desktop machines. Thus, the LTE was the first commercially successful notebook computer, helping launch the burgeoning industry. It was a direct influence on both Apple and IBM for the development of their own notebook computers, the PowerBook and ThinkPad, respectively.\n1990\u20131994.\nDecline of IBM's offer.\nBefore announcing EISA, Canion turned down an offer by William C. Lowe of IBM to instead cooperate on PC technology, essentially dividing the industry between the two companies. By 1989, \"The New York Times\" wrote that being the first to release a 80386-based personal computer made Compaq the leader of the industry and \"hurt no company more - in prestige as well as dollars - than\" IBM. The company was so influential that observers and its executives spoke of \"Compaq compatible\". \"InfoWorld\" reported that \"In the [ISA market] Compaq is already IBM's equal in being seen as a safe bet\", quoting a sell-side analyst describing it as \"now \"the\" safe choice in personal computers\". Even rival Tandy Corporation acknowledged Compaq's leadership, stating that within the \"Gang of Nine\" \"when you have 10 people sit down before a table to write a letter to the president, someone has to write the letter. Compaq is sitting down at the typewriter\". A 1990 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants member survey found that 16% of respondents used Compaq computers, second only to IBM (23%). Epson (4%) and all other PC-compatible vendors had single-digit shares.\nOuster of co-founders.\nMichael S. Swavely, president of Compaq's North American division since May 1989, took a six-month sabbatical in January 1991 (which would eventually become retirement effective on July 12, 1991). Eckhard Pfeiffer, then president of Compaq International, was named to succeed him. Pfeiffer also received the title of chief operating officer, with responsibility for the company's operations on a worldwide basis, so that Canion could devote more time to strategy. Swavely's abrupt departure in January led to rumours of turmoil in Compaq's executive suite, including friction between Canion and Swavely, likely as Swavely's rival Pfeiffer had received the number two leadership position. Swavely's U.S. marketing organization was losing ground with only 4% growth for Compaq versus 7% in the market, likely due to short supplies of the LTE 386s from component shortages, rivals that undercut Compaq's prices by as much as 35%, and large customers who did not like Compaq's dealer-only policy. Pfeiffer became president and CEO of Compaq later that year, as a result of a boardroom coup led by board chairman Ben Rosen that forced co-founder Rod Canion to resign as president and CEO.\nPfeiffer had joined Compaq from Texas Instruments, and established operations from scratch in both Europe and Asia. Pfeiffer was given US$20,000 to start up Compaq Europe He started up Compaq's first overseas office in Munich in 1984. By 1990, Compaq Europe was a $2 billion business and number two behind IBM in that region, and foreign sales contributed 54 percent of Compaq's revenues. Pfeiffer, while transplanting Compaq's U.S. strategy of dealer-only distribution to Europe, was more selective in signing up dealers than Compaq had been in the U. S. such that European dealers were more qualified to handle its increasingly complex products.\nDuring the 1980s, under Canion's direction Compaq had focused on engineering, research, and quality control, producing high-end, high-performance machines with high profit margins that allowed Compaq to continue investing in engineering and next-generation technology. This strategy was successful as Compaq was considered a trusted brand, while many other IBM clones were untrusted due to being plagued by poor reliability. However, by the end of the eighties many manufacturers had improved their quality and were able to produce inexpensive PCs with off-the-shelf components, incurring none of the R&amp;D costs which allowed them to undercut Compaq's expensive computers. Faced with lower-cost rivals such as Dell, AST Research, and Gateway 2000, Compaq suffered a $71 million loss for that quarter, their first loss as a company, while the stock had dropped by over two-thirds. An analyst stated that \"Compaq has made a lot of tactical errors in the last year and a half. They were trend-setters, now they are lagging\". Canion initially believed that the 1990s recession was responsible for Compaq's declining sales but insisted that they would recover once the economy improved, however Pfeiffer's observation of the European market noted that it was competition as rivals could match Compaq at a fraction of the cost. Under pressure from Compaq's board to control costs as staff was ballooning at their Houston headquarters despite falling U.S. sales, while the number of non-U.S. employees had stayed constant, Compaq made its first-ever layoffs (1400 employees which was 12% of its workforce) while Pfeiffer was promoted to EVP and COO.\nRosen and Canion had disagreed about how to counter the cheaper Asian PC imports, as Canion wanted Compaq to build lower cost PCs with components developed in-house in order to preserve Compaq's reputation for engineering and quality, while Rosen believed that Compaq needed to buy standard components from suppliers and reach the market faster. While Canion developed an 18-month plan to create a line of low-priced computers, Rosen sent his own Compaq engineering team to COMDEX without Canion's knowledge and discovered that a low-priced PC could be made in half the time and at lower cost than Canion's initiative.\nRosen initiated a 14-hour board meeting, and the directors also interviewed Pfeiffer for several hours without informing Canion. At the conclusion, the board was unanimous in picking Pfeiffer over Canion. As Canion was popular with company workers, 150 employees staged an impromptu protest with signs stating, \"We love you, Rod.\" and taking out a newspaper ad saying \"Rod, you are the wind beneath our wings. We love you.\" Canion declined an offer to remain on Compaq's board and was bitter about his ouster as he did not speak to Rosen for years, although their relationship became cordial again. In 1999, Canion admitted that his ouster was justified, saying \"I was burned out. I needed to leave. He [Rosen] felt I didn't have a strong sense of urgency\". Two weeks after Canion's ouster, five other senior executives resigned, including remaining company founder James Harris as SVP of Engineering. These departures were motivated by an enhanced severance or early retirement, as well as an imminent demotion as their functions were to be shifted to vice presidents.\nIntroduction of Compaq Presario.\nUnder Pfeiffer's tenure as chief executive, Compaq entered the retail computer market with the Compaq Presario as one of the first manufacturers in the mid-1990s to market a sub-$1000 PC. In order to maintain the prices it wanted, Compaq became the first first-tier computer manufacturer to utilise CPUs from AMD and Cyrix. The two price wars resulting from Compaq's actions ultimately drove numerous competitors from the market, such as Packard Bell and AST Research. From third place in 1993, Compaq had overtaken Apple Computer and even surpassed IBM as the top PC manufacturer in 1994, as both IBM and Apple were struggling considerably during that time. Compaq's inventory and gross margins were better than that of its rivals which enabled it to wage the price wars. \"Fortune\" noted in February 1996 that $1,000 invested in Compaq ten years earlier would be worth $22,000 by then, compared to $2,900 in Apple.\nCompaq decided to make a foray into printers in 1989, and the first models were released to positive reviews in 1992. However, Pfeiffer saw that the prospects of taking on market leader Hewlett-Packard (who had 60% market share) was tough, as that would force Compaq to devote more funds and people to that project than originally budgeted. Compaq ended up selling the printer business to Xerox and took a charge of $50 million.\n1994\u20132002.\nJoint ventures, partnerships and alliances.\nIn 1994, Compaq formed a joint venture with ADI Corporation, a Taiwanese manufacturer who produced the bulk of Compaq's monitors, to raise multiple factories in Mexico, Brazil, and Europe to assemble and store ADI's monitors. Compaq sold many of the monitors that they offered to customers of their Deskpro and Presario lines as standalone units to third-party resellers, including their popular 171FS monitor.\nOn June 26, 1995, Compaq reached an agreement with Cisco Systems, Inc., in order to get into networking, including digital modems, routers, and switches favoured by small businesses and corporate departments, which was now a $4 billion business and the fastest-growing part of the computer hardware market. Compaq also built up a network engineering and marketing staff.\nMost of Compaq's server sales were for systems that would be running Microsoft's Windows NT operating system, and indeed Compaq was the largest hardware supplier for Windows NT. However, some 20\u00a0percent of Compaq servers went for systems that would be running the Unix operating system. This was exemplified by a strategic alliance formed in 1997 between Compaq and the Santa Cruz Operation (SCO), which was known for its server Unix operating system products on Intel-architecture-based hardware. Compaq was also the largest hardware supplier for SCO's Unix products, and some 10\u00a0percent of Compaq's ProLiant servers ran SCO's UnixWare.\nIn 1998, Compaq signed new sales and equipment alliance with NaviSite. Under the pact, Compaq agreed to promote and sell NaviSite Web hosting services. In return, NaviSite took Compaq as a preferred provider for its storage and Intel-based servers.\nDuring November 1999, Compaq began to work with Microsoft to create the first in a line of small-scale, web-based computer systems called MSN Companions.\nManagement shuffle, acquisitions and ouster of Pfeiffer.\nIn 1996, despite record sales and profits at Compaq, Pfeiffer initiated a major management shakeup in the senior ranks. John T. Rose, who previously ran Compaq's desktop PC division, took over the corporate server business from SVP Gary Stimac who had resigned. Rose had joined Compaq in 1993 from Digital Equipment Corporation where he oversaw the personal computer division and worldwide engineering, while Stimac had been with Compaq since 1982 and was one of the longest-serving executives. Senior Vice-president for North America Ross Cooley announced his resignation effective at the end of 1996. CFO Daryl J. White, who joined the company in January 1983 resigned in May 1996 after 8 years as CFO. Michael Winkler, who joined Compaq in 1995 to run its portable computer division, was promoted to general manager of the new PC products group. Earl Mason, hired from Inland Steel effective in May 1996, immediately made an impact as the new CFO. Under Mason's guidance, Compaq utilised its assets more efficiently instead of focusing just on income and profits, which increased Compaq's cash from $ to nearly $ in one year. Additionally, Compaq's return on invested capital (after-tax operating profit divided by operating assets) doubled to 50 percent from 25 percent in that period.\nCompaq had been producing the PC chassis at its plant in Shenzhen, China to cut costs. In 1996, instead of expanding its own plant, Compaq asked a Taiwanese supplier to set up a new factory nearby to produce the mechanicals, with the Taiwanese supplier owning the inventory until it reached Compaq in Houston. Pfeiffer also introduced a new distribution strategy, to build PCs made-to-order which would eliminate the stockpile of computers in warehouses and cut the components inventory down to two weeks, with the supply chain from supplier to dealer linked by complex software.\nVice-president for Corporate Development Kenneth E. Kurtzman assembled five teams to examine Compaq's businesses and assess each unit's strategy and that of key rivals. Kurtzman's teams recommended to Pfeiffer that each business unit had to be first or second in its market within three years\u2014or else Compaq should exit that line. Also, the company should no longer use profits from high-margin businesses to carry marginally profitable ones, as instead each unit must show a return on investment. Pfeiffer's vision was to make Compaq a full-fledged computer company, moving beyond its main business of manufacturing retail PCs and into the more lucrative business services and solutions that IBM did well at, such as computer servers which would also require more \"customer handholding\" from either the dealers or Compaq staff themselves. Unlike IBM and HP, Compaq would not build up field technicians and programmers in-house as those could be costly assets, instead Compaq would leverage its partnerships (including those with Andersen Consulting and software maker SAP) to install and maintain corporate systems. This allowed Compaq to compete in the \"big-iron market\" without incurring the costs of running its own services or software businesses.\nPfeiffer also made several major and some minor acquisitions. In 1997, Compaq bought Tandem Computers, known for their NonStop server line. This acquisition instantly gave Compaq a presence in the higher end business computing market. The alliance between Compaq and SCO took advantage of this to put out the UnixWare NonStop Clusters product in 1998.\nMinor acquisitions centred around building a networking arm and included NetWorth based in Irving, Texas and Thomas-Conrad based in Austin, Texas\u2014both acquired in 1995. In 1997, Microcom was also acquired, based in Norwood, MA, which brought a line of modems, Remote Access Servers (RAS) and the popular Carbon Copy software.\nIn 1998, Compaq acquired Digital Equipment Corporation for a then-industry record of $9.6 billion. The merger made Compaq, at the time, the world's second largest computer maker in the world in terms of revenue behind IBM. Digital Equipment, which had nearly twice as many employees as Compaq while generating half the revenue, had been a leading computer company during the 1970s and early 1980s. However, Digital had struggled during the 1990s, with high operating costs. For nine years, the company had lost money or barely broke even, and had recently refocused itself as a \"network solutions company\". In 1995, Compaq had considered a bid for Digital but only became seriously interested in 1997 after Digital's major divestments and refocusing on the Internet. At the time of the acquisition, services accounted for 45 percent of Digital's revenues (about $6 billion) and their gross margins on services averaged 34 percent, considerably higher than Compaq's 25% margins on PC sales and also satisfying customers who had demanded more services from Compaq for years. Compaq had originally wanted to purchase only Digital's services business but that was turned down. When the announcement was made, it was initially viewed as a master stroke as it immediately gave Compaq a 22,000 person global service operation to help corporations handle major technological purchases (by 2001 services made up over 20% of Compaq's revenues, largely due to the Digital employees inherited from the merger), in order to compete with IBM. However, it was also a risky merger, as the combined company would have to lay off 2,000 employees from Compaq and 15,000 from Digital which would potentially hurt morale. Furthermore, Compaq fell behind schedule in integrating Digital's operations, which also distracted the company from its strength in low-end PCs where it used to lead the market in rolling out next-generation systems which let rival Dell grab market share. Reportedly Compaq had three consulting firms working to integrate Digital alone.\nHowever, Pfeiffer had little vision for what the combined companies should do, or indeed how the three dramatically different cultures could work as a single entity, and Compaq struggled from strategy indecisiveness and lost focus, as a result being caught in between the low end and high end of the market. Mark Anderson, president of Strategic News Service, a research firm based in Friday Harbor, Wash. was quoted as saying, \"The kind of goals he had sounded good to shareholders \u2013 like being a $50 billion company by the year 2000, or to beat I.B.M. \u2013 but they didn't have anything to do with customers. The new C.E.O. should look at everything Eckhard acquired and ask did the customer benefit from that. If the answer isn't yes, they should get rid of it.\" On one hand, Compaq had previously dominated the PC market with its price war but was now struggling against Dell, which sold directly to buyers, avoiding the dealer channel and its markup, and built each machine to order to keep inventories and costs at a minimum. At the same time, Compaq, through its acquisitions of the Digital Equipment Corporation in 1998 and Tandem Computers in 1997, had tried to become a major systems company, like IBM and Hewlett-Packard. While IBM and HP were able generate repeat business from corporate customers to drive sales of their different divisions, Compaq had not yet managed to make its newly acquired sales and services organizations work as seamlessly.\nIn January 1998, Compaq was at its height. CEO Pfeiffer boldly predicted that the Microsoft/Intel \"Wintel\" duopoly would be replaced by \"Wintelpaq\". In early 1998, Compaq had the problem of bloated PC inventories, and by summer 1998, Compaq was suffering from product-quality problems. Robert W. Stearns, SVP of Business Development, said \"In [Pfeiffer's] quest for bigness, he lost an understanding of the customer and built what I call empty market share\u2014large but not profitable\", while Jim Moore, a technology strategy consultant with GeoPartners Research in Cambridge, Mass., says Pfeiffer \"raced to scale without having economies of scale.\" The \"colossus\" that Pfeiffer built up was not nimble enough to adapt to the fast-changing computer industry. That year Compaq forecast demand poorly and shipped too many PCs, causing resellers to dump them at fire sale prices, and since Compaq protected resellers from heavy losses it cost them two quarters of operating profits.\nPfeiffer also refused to develop a potential successor, rebuffing Rosen's suggestion to recruit a few executives to create the separate position of Compaq president. The board complained that Pfeiffer was too removed from management and the rank-and-file, as he surrounded himself with a \"clique\" of Chief Financial Officer Earl Mason, Senior Vice-President John T. Rose, and Senior Vice-President of Human Resources Hans Gutsch. Current and former Compaq employees complained that Gutsch was part of a group of senior executives, dubbed the \"A team\", who controlled access to Pfeiffer. Gutsch was said to be a \"master of corporate politics, pitting senior vice presidents against each other and inserting himself into parts of the company that normally would not be under his purview\". Gutsch, who oversaw security, had an extensive security system and guard station installed on the eight floor of CCA-11, where the company's senior vice presidents worked. There were accusations that Gutsch and others sought to divide top management, although this was regarded by others as sour grapes on the part of executives who were shut out of planning that involved the acquisitions of Tandem Computers and Digital Equipment Corp. Pfeiffer reduced the size of the group working on the deal due to news leaks, saying \"We cut the team down to the minimum number of people\u2014those who would have to be directly involved, and not one person more\". Robert W. Stearns, Compaq's senior vice president for business development, with responsibility for mergers and acquisitions, had opposed the acquisition of Digital as the cultural differences between both companies were too great, and complained that he was placed on the \"B team\" as a result.\nCompaq entered 1999 with strong expectations. Fourth-quarter 1998 earnings reported in January 1999 beat expectations by six cents a share with record 48 percent growth. The company launched \"Compaq.com\" as the key for its new direct sales strategy, and planned an IPO for AltaVista toward the end of 1999 in order to capitalize on the dotcom bubble. However, by February 1999, analysts were sceptical of Compaq's plan to sell both direct and to resellers. Compaq was hit with two class-action lawsuits, as a result of CFO Earl Mason, SVP John Rose, and other executives selling US$ of stock before a conference call with analysts, where they noted that demand for PCs was slowing down.\nOn April 17, 1999, just nine days after Compaq reported first-quarter profit being at half of what analysts had expected, the latest in a string of earnings disappointments, Pfeiffer was forced to resign as CEO in a coup led by board chairman Ben Rosen. Reportedly, at the special board meeting held on April 15, 1999, the directors were unanimous in dismissing Pfeiffer. The company's stock had fallen 50 percent since its all-time high in January 1999. Compaq shares, which traded as high as $ early in 1999, dropped 23 percent on April 12, 1999, the first day of trading after the first-quarter announcement and closed the following Friday at $. During three out of the last six quarters of Pfeiffer's tenure, the company's revenues or earnings had missed expectations. While rival Dell had 55% growth in U.S. PC sales in the first quarter of 1999, Compaq could only manage 10%. Rosen suggested that the accelerating change brought about by the Internet had overtaken Compaq's management team, saying \"As a company engaged in transforming its industry for the Internet era, we must have the organizational flexibility necessary to move at Internet speed.\" In a statement, Pfeiffer said \"Compaq has come a long way since I joined the company in 1983\" and \"under Ben's guidance, I know this company will realize its potential.\" Rosen's priority was to have Compaq catchup as an E-commerce competitor, and he also moved to streamline operations and reduce the indecision that plagued the company.\nRoger Kay, an analyst at International Data Corporation, observed that Compaq's behaviour at times seemed like a personal vendetta, noting that \"Eckhard has been so obsessed with staying ahead of Dell that they focused too hard on market share and stopped paying attention to profitability and liquidity. They got whacked in a price war that they started.\" Subsequent earnings releases from Compaq's rivals, Dell, Gateway, IBM, and Hewlett-Packard suggested that the problems were not affecting the whole PC industry as Pfeiffer had suggested. Dell and Gateway sold direct, which helped them to avoid Compaq's inventory problems and compete on price without dealer markups, plus Gateway sold web access and a broad range of software tailored to small businesses. Hewlett-Packard's PC business had similar challenges like Compaq but this was offset by HP's extremely lucrative printer business, while IBM sold PCs at a loss but used them to lock in multi-year services contracts with customers.\nAfter Pfeiffer's resignation, the board established an office of the CEO with a triumvirate of directors; Rosen as interim CEO and vice chairmen Frank P. Doyle and Robert Ted Enloe III. They began \"cleaning house\", as shortly afterward many of Pfeiffer's top executives resigned or were pushed out, including John J. Rando, Earl L. Mason, and John T. Rose. Rando, senior vice president and general manager of Compaq Services, was a key player during the merger discussions and the most senior executive from Digital to remain with Compaq after the acquisition closed and had been touted by some as the heir-apparent to Pfeiffer. Rando's division had performed strongly as it had sales of $ for the first quarter compared to $ in 1998, which met expectations and was anticipated to post accelerated and profitable growth going forward. At the time of Rando's departure, Compaq Services ranked third behind those of IBM and EDS, while slightly ahead of Hewlett-Packard's and Andersen Consulting, however customers switched from Digital technology-based workstations to those of HP, IBM, and Sun Microsystems. Mason, senior vice president and chief financial officer, had previously been offered the job of chief executive of Alliant Foodservice, Inc., a foodservice distributor based in Chicago, and he informed Compaq's board that he accepted the offer. Rose, senior vice president and general manager of Compaq's Enterprise Computing group, resigned effective as of June 3 and was succeeded by Tandem veteran Enrico Pesatori. Rose was reportedly upset that he was not considered for the CEO vacancy, which became apparent once Michael Capellas was named COO. While Enterprise Computing, responsible for engineering and marketing of network servers, workstations and data-storage products, reportedly accounted for one third of Compaq's revenues and likely the largest part of its profits, it was responsible for the earnings shortfall in Q1 of 1999. In addition, Rose was part of the \"old guard\" close to former CEO Pfeiffer, and he and other Compaq executives had been criticized at the company's annual meeting for selling stock before reporting the sales slowdown. Rose was succeeded by SVP Enrico Pesatori, who had previously worked as a senior executive at Olivetti, Zenith Data Systems, Digital Equipment Corporation, and Tandem Computers. Capellas was appointed COO after pressure mounted on Rosen to find a permanent CEO, however it was reported that potential candidates did not want to work under Rosen as chairman. Around the same time Pesatori was placed in charge of the newly created Enterprise Solutions and Services Group, making him Compaq's second most powerful executive in operational responsibility after Capellas.\nPfeiffer's permanent replacement was Michael Capellas, who had been serving as Compaq's SVP and CIO for under a year. A couple months after Pfeiffer's ouster, Capellas was elevated to interim chief operating officer on June 2, 2000, and was soon appointed president and CEO. Capellas also assumed the title of chairman on September 28, 2000, when Rosen stepped down from the board of directors. At his retirement, Rosen proclaimed \"These are great achievements\u2014to create 65,000 jobs, $ in sales and $ in market value, all starting with a sketch and a dream\".\nStruggles.\nCapellas was able to restore some of the luster lost in the latter part of the Pfeiffer era and he repaired the relationship with Microsoft which had deteriorated under his predecessor's tenure.\nHowever, Compaq still struggled against lower-cost competitors with direct sales channels such as Dell who took over the top spot of PC manufacturer from Compaq in 2001. Compaq relied significantly on reseller channels, so their criticism caused Compaq to retreat from its proposed direct sales plan, although Capellas maintained that he would use the middlemen to provide value-added services. Despite falling to No. 2 among PC manufacturers, Capellas proclaimed \"We are No. 2 in the traditional PC market, but we're focused on industry leadership in the next generation of Internet access devices and wireless mobility. That's where the growth and the profitability will be.\" The company's longer-term strategy involved extending its services to servers and storage products, as well as handheld computers such as the iPAQ PocketPC which accounted for 11 percent of total unit volume.\nCompaq struggled as a result of the collapse of the dot-com bubble, which hurt sales of their high-end systems in 2001 and 2002, and they managed only a small profit in a few quarters during these years. They also accumulated $1.7 billion in short-term debt around this time. The stock price of Compaq, which was around $25 when Capellas became CEO, was trading at half that by 2002.\nAcquisition by Hewlett-Packard.\nOn September 4, 2001, Compaq signed a merger agreement with Hewlett-Packard for US$, including US$ for goodwill, where each Compaq share would be exchanged for 0.6325 of a Hewlett-Packard share. There would be a termination fee of US$ that either company would have to pay the other to break the merger. Compaq shareholders would own 36% of the combined company while HP's would have 64%. Hewlett-Packard had reported yearly revenues of $, while Compaq's was $, and the combined company would have been close to IBM's $ revenues. It was projected to have $ in annual cost savings by mid-2004. The expected layoffs at Compaq and HP, 8500 and 9000 jobs respectively, would leave the combined company with a workforce of 145,000. The companies would dole out a combined $ in bonuses to prevent key employees from leaving if shareholders approve the proposed merger, with $ for HP employees and $ for Compaq employees.\nBoth companies had to seek approval from their shareholders through separate special meetings. While Compaq shareholders unanimously approved the deal, there was a public proxy battle within HP as the deal was strongly opposed by numerous large HP shareholders, including the sons of the company founders, Walter Hewlett and David W. Packard, as well as the California Public Employees\u2019 Retirement System (CalPERS) and the Ontario Teachers' Pension Plan. Walter Hewlett only reluctantly approved the merger, in his duty as a member of the board of directors, since the merger agreement \"called for unanimous board approval in order to ensure the best possible shareholder reception\". While supporters of the merger argued that there would be economies of scale and that the sales of PCs would drive sales of printers and cameras, Walter Hewlett was convinced that PCs were a low-margin but risky business that would not contribute and would likely dilute the old HP's traditionally profitable Imaging and Printing division. David W. Packard in his opposition to the deal \"[cited] massive layoffs as an example of this departure from HP\u2019s core values...[arguing] that although the founders never guaranteed job security, 'Bill and Dave never developed a premeditated business strategy that treated HP employees as expendable.'\" Packard further stated that \"[Carly] Fiorina\u2019s high-handed management and her efforts to reinvent the company ran counter to the company\u2019s core values as established by the founders\". The founders' families who controlled a significant amount of HP shares were further irked because Fiorina had made no attempt to reach out to them and consult about the merger, instead they received the same standard roadshow presentation as other investors.\nAnalysts on Wall Street were generally critical of the merger, as both companies had been struggling before the announcement, and the stock prices of both companies dropped in the months after the merger agreement was made public. Particularly rival Dell made gains from defecting HP and Compaq customers who were wary of the merger. Carly Fiorina, initially seen as HP's savior when she was hired as CEO back in 1999, had seen the company's stock price drop to less than half since she assumed the position, and her job was said to be on shaky ground before the merger announcement. HP's offer was regarded by analysts to be overvaluing Compaq, due to Compaq's shaky financial performance in the past recent years (there were rumours that it could run out of money in 12 months and be forced to cease business operations had it stayed independent), as well as Compaq's own more conservative valuation of its assets. Detractors of the deal noted that buying Compaq was a \"distraction\" that would not directly help HP take on IBM's breadth or Dell Computer's direct sales model. Plus there were significant cultural differences between HP and Compaq; which made decisions by consensus and rapid autocratic styles, respectively. One of Compaq's few bright spots was its services business, which was outperforming HP's own services division.\nThe merger was approved by HP shareholders only after the narrowest of margins, and allegations of vote buying (primarily involving an alleged last-second back-room deal with Deutsche Bank) haunted the new company. It was subsequently disclosed that HP had retained Deutsche Bank's investment banking division in January 2002 to assist in the merger. HP had agreed to pay Deutsche Bank $ guaranteed, and another $ contingent upon approval of the merger. On August 19, 2003, the U.S. SEC charged Deutsche Bank with failing to disclose a material conflict of interest in its voting of client proxies for the merger and imposed a civil penalty of $. Deutsche Bank consented without admitting or denying the findings.\nOn May 3, 2002, Hewlett-Packard announced that it had closed the acquisition of Compaq. The newly merged HP-Compaq company would officially launch four days later on May 7. Compaq's pre-merger ticker symbol was CPQ. This was combined with Hewlett-Packard's ticker symbol (HWP) to create the current ticker symbol (HPQ), which was announced on May 6.\n2002\u20132013.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plain image with caption/styles.css\"/&gt; \nLogo used from 2007 to 2013; used since 2013 as leased trademarks in South America and India \nCapellas, Compaq's last chairman and CEO, became president of the post-merger Hewlett-Packard, under chairman and CEO Carly Fiorina, to ease the integration of the two companies. However, Capellas was reported not to be happy with his role, being said not to be utilised and being unlikely to become CEO as the board supported Fiorina. Capellas stepped down as HP president on November 12, 2002, after just six months on the job, to become CEO of MCI Worldcom where he would lead its acquisition by Verizon. Capellas' former role of president was not filled as the executives who reported to him then reported directly to the CEO.\nFiorina helmed the post-merger HP for nearly three years after Capellas left. HP laid off thousands of former Compaq, DEC, HP, and Tandem employees, its stock price generally declined and profits did not perk up. Several senior executives from the Compaq side including Jeff Clarke and Peter Blackmore would resign or be ousted from the post-merger HP. Though the combination of both companies' PC manufacturing capacity initially made the post-merger HP number one, it soon lost the lead and further market share to Dell which squeezed HP on low end PCs. HP was also unable to compete effectively with IBM in the high-end server market. In addition, the merging of the stagnant Compaq computer assembly business with HP's lucrative printing and imaging division was criticized for obstructing the profitability of the printing/imaging segment. Overall, it has been suggested that the purchase of Compaq was not a good move for HP, due to the narrow profit margins in the commoditized PC business, especially in light of IBM's 2004 announcement to sell its PC division to Lenovo. \"The Inquirer\" noted that the continued low return on investment and small margins of HP's personal computer manufacturing business, now named the Personal Systems Group, \"continues to be what it was in the individual companies, not much more than a job creation scheme for its employees\". One of the few positives was Compaq's sales approach and enterprise focus that influenced the newly combined company's strategy and philosophy.\nIn February 2005, the board of directors ousted Fiorina, with CFO Robert Wayman being named interim CEO. Former Compaq CEO Capellas was mentioned by some as a potential successor, but several months afterwards, Mark Hurd was hired as president and CEO of HP. Hurd separated the PC division from the imaging and printing division and renamed it the Personal Systems Group, placing it under the leadership of EVP Todd R. Bradley. Hewlett Packard's PC business has since been reinvigorated by Hurd's restructuring and now generates more revenue than the traditionally more profitable printers. By late 2006, HP had retaken the #1 sales position of PCs from Dell, which struggled with missed estimates and poor quality, and held that rank until supplanted in the mid-2010s by Lenovo.\nMost Compaq products have been re-branded with the HP nameplate, such as the company's market leading ProLiant server line (now owned by Hewlett Packard Enterprise, which spun off from HP in 2015), while the Compaq brand was repurposed for some of HP's consumer-oriented and budget products, notably Compaq Presario PCs. HP's business Vectra desktop and OmniBook laptop computer line were discontinued in favour of Compaq's Evo line, which was initially rebranded HP Compaq but now use brands such as EliteBook and ProBook, among others, making it one of the last families of computers made by Compaq prior to the 2002 merger. HP has also since revived the OmniBook name in 2024 as the branding for HP's consumer laptop line. HP's Jornada PDAs were replaced by Compaq iPAQ PDAs, which were renamed HP iPAQ. Following the merger, all Compaq computers were shipped with HP software.\nIn May 2007, HP announced in a press release a new logo for their Compaq Division to be placed on the new model Compaq Presarios.\nIn 2009, HP sold part of Compaq's former headquarters to the Lone Star College System.\nOn August 18, 2011, then-CEO of HP L\u00e9o Apotheker announced plans for a partial or full spinoff of the Personal Systems Group. The PC unit had the lowest profit margin although it accounted for nearly a third of HP's overall revenues in 2010. HP was still selling more PCs than any other vendor, shipping 14.9 million PCs in the second quarter of 2011 (17.5% of the market according to Gartner), while Dell and Lenovo were tied for second place, each with more than a 12% share of the market and shipments of over 10 million units. However, the announcement of the PC spinoff (concurrent with the discontinuation of WebOS, and the purchase of Autonomy Corp. for $10 billion) was poorly received by the market, and after Apotheker's ouster, plans for a divestiture were cancelled. In March 2012, the printing and imaging division was merged into the PC unit. In October 2012, according to Gartner, Lenovo took the lead as the number one PC manufacturer from HP, while IDC ranked Lenovo just right behind HP. In Q2 2013, \"Forbes\" reported that Lenovo ranked ahead of HP as the world's number-one PC supplier.\nHP discontinued the Compaq brand entirely in North America in 2013.\n2013\u2013present.\nAfter the Compaq brand was discontinued in North America, Globalk (a Brazilian-based retailer and licensing management firm) started a partnership with HP in 2013 to re-introduce the brand with a new line of desktop and laptop computers. The brand has since been relicensed to Positivo Tecnologia (a Brazilian-based computer technology company) on April 13, 2021.\nIn 2015, Grupo Newsan (an Argentinian-based company) acquired the brand's license, along with a $3 million investment, and developed two new lines of Presario notebooks for the local market over the course of the year. In March 2019, the website for Compaq's Argentine division went offline; the last archived copy of the site was made in October 2018, featuring the same models that were first introduced in 2016.\nIn 2018, Ossify Industries (an Indian-based company) entered a licensing agreement with HP to use the Compaq brand name for the distribution and manufacturing of Smart TV sets.\nHeadquarters.\nThe Compaq World Headquarters campus consisted of of land which contained 15 office buildings, 7 manufacturing buildings, a product conference centre, an employee cafeteria, mechanical laboratories, warehouses, and chemical handling facilities.\nInstead of headquartering the company in a downtown Houston skyscraper, then-CEO and co-founder Rod Canion chose a \u201cCalifornia-style\u201d or West Coast-style campus surrounded by forests, where every employee had similar offices and no-one (not even the CEO) had a reserved parking spot. As it grew, Compaq became so important to Houston that it negotiated the expansion of SH\u00a0249 in the late 1980s, and many other technology companies appeared in what became known as the \"249 Corridor\".\nAfter Canion's ouster, senior vice-president of human resources, Hans W. Gutsch, oversaw the company's facilities and security. Gutsch had an extensive security system and guard station installed on the eight floor of CCA-1, where the company's senior vice presidents had their offices. Eckhard Pfeiffer, who succeeded Canion as president and CEO, introduced a whole series of executive perks to a company that had always had an egalitarian culture; for instance, he oversaw the construction of an executive parking garage, previously parking places had never been reserved.\nOn August 31, 1998, the Compaq Commons was opened in the headquarters campus, which featured a conference centre, an employee convenience store, a wellness centre, and an employee cafeteria.\nCompaq's former headquarters then became HP's United States campus after Compaq was acquired by HP in 2002. From May 2002 to April 2022, the site was one of HP's largest campuses, with 7,000 employees in all six of HP's divisions. In 2009, HP sold part of Compaq's former headquarters to the Lone Star College System, which became Lone Star College\u2013University Park in 2010. Hewlett Packard Buildings #7 &amp; #8, which consisted of two eight-story reinforced concrete buildings totaling 450,000 square feet plus a 1,200-car parking garage and a central chiller plant, were all deemed by the college to be too robust and costly to maintain, and so were subsequently demolished by implosion on September 18, 2011 to make way for a new green space where the buildings once stood.\nThe campus was later inherited by Hewlett Packard Enterprise, one of the successor companies when HP split into two in November 2015. In 2018, Hewlett Packard Enterprise announced the sale of the entire former Compaq headquarters, which was subsequently sold to Mexican beverage distributor Mexcor in April 2022. In March 2024, a major portion of Compaq's former headquarters and HP/HPE campus was then rebranded as Viva Center by the property owner, Morales Capital Group, which plans to turn the campus into a mixed-use tech hub featuring public gathering areas, events and apartments.\nCompetitors.\nCompaq originally competed directly against IBM, manufacturing computer systems equivalent with the IBM PC, as well as Apple Computer. In the 1990s, as IBM's own PC division declined, Compaq faced other IBM PC Compatible manufacturers like Dell, Packard Bell, AST Research, and Gateway 2000.\nBy the mid-1990s, Compaq's price war had enabled it to overtake IBM and Apple, while other IBM PC Compatible manufacturers such as Packard Bell and AST were driven out from the market. Dell overtook Compaq and became the number-one supplier of PCs in 1999, which Compaq briefly regained in 2000 before being overtaken again by Dell in 2001.\nAt the time of their 2002 merger, Compaq and HP were the second and third largest PC manufacturers, so their combination made them number one. However, the combined HP-Compaq struggled and fell to second place behind Dell from 2003 to 2006. Due to Dell's struggles in late 2006, HP has led all PC vendors from 2007 to 2012.\nDuring its existence as a division of HP, Compaq primarily competed against other budget-oriented personal computer series from manufacturers including Acer, Lenovo, and Toshiba. Most of Compaq's competitors except Dell were later acquired by bigger rivals like Acer (Gateway 2000 and Packard Bell) and Lenovo absorbing IBM's PC division. Since 2013, Lenovo has been the world leader for PCs.\nSponsorship.\nCompaq sponsored Queens Park Rangers F.C. for the 1994\u201395 and 1995\u201396 seasons.\nPrior to its merger with HP in 2002, Compaq sponsored the Williams Racing Formula One team (then known as WilliamsF1 at the time) beginning in January 2000, which also coincided with the team's first use of BMW engines for their cars as part of a then-partnership with BMW at the time. The company sponsored the 2000 and 2001 British Grand Prix, with all of their cars and team equipment featuring prominent Compaq branding throughout among other brands. After Compaq was acquired by HP in 2002, HP inherited and continued the sponsorship deal for a few more years, replacing the Compaq branding on all cars and team equipment with the HP branding following the 2002 merger. HP then sponsored the 2002 British Grand Prix up until the 2005 British Grand Prix, the latter of which also marked the last time the team used BMW engines for their cars before switching over to Cosworth engines the following season.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7743", "revid": "107439", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7743", "title": "Cell Incubator", "text": ""}
{"id": "7744", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7744", "title": "Cell incubator", "text": ""}
{"id": "7751", "revid": "1094363112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7751", "title": "CPSU (disambiguation)", "text": "CPSU is the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, the sole governing party of the Soviet Union until 1990.\nCPSU may also refer to:\nOrganizations.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "7755", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7755", "title": "Cluny", "text": "Commune in France\nCluny () is a commune in the eastern French department of Sa\u00f4ne-et-Loire, in the region of Bourgogne-Franche-Comt\u00e9. It is northwest of M\u00e2con.\nThe town grew up around the Benedictine Abbey of Cluny, founded by Duke William I of Aquitaine in 910. The height of Cluniac influence was from the second half of the 10th century through the early 12th. The abbey was sacked by the Huguenots in 1562, and many of its valuable manuscripts were destroyed or removed.\nGeography.\nThe river Grosne flows northward through the commune and crosses the town.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7756", "revid": "1306679340", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7756", "title": "Chet Atkins", "text": "American country music guitarist (1924\u20132001)\nChester Burton Atkins (June 20, 1924\u00a0\u2013 June 30, 2001), also known as \"Mister Guitar\" and \"the Country Gentleman\", was an American musician who, along with Owen Bradley and Bob Ferguson, helped create the Nashville sound, the country music style which expanded its appeal to adult pop music fans. He was primarily a guitarist, but he also played the mandolin, fiddle, banjo, and ukulele, and occasionally sang.\nAtkins's signature picking style was inspired by Merle Travis. His other major guitar influences were Django Reinhardt, George Barnes, Les Paul, and, later, Jerry Reed. His distinctive picking style and musicianship brought him admirers inside and outside the country scene, both in the United States and abroad. Atkins spent most of his career at RCA Victor and produced records for the Browns, Hank Snow, Porter Wagoner, Norma Jean, Dolly Parton, Dottie West, Perry Como, Floyd Cramer, Elvis Presley, the Everly Brothers, Eddy Arnold, Don Gibson, Jim Reeves, Jerry Reed, Skeeter Davis, Waylon Jennings, Roger Whittaker, Ann-Margret and many others.\n\"Rolling Stone\" credited Atkins with inventing the \"popwise 'Nashville sound' that rescued country music from a commercial slump\" and ranked him number 21 on their list of \"The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time\". In 2023, Atkins was named the 39th best guitarist of all time. Among many other honors, Atkins received 14 Grammy Awards and the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award. He also received nine Country Music Association awards for Instrumentalist of the Year. He was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, the Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum, and the Musicians Hall of Fame and Museum.\nBiography.\nChildhood and early life.\nAtkins was born on June 20, 1924, in Luttrell, Tennessee, near Clinch Mountain. His parents divorced when he was six years old, after which he was raised by his mother. He was the youngest of three boys and a girl. He started out on the ukulele, later moving on to the fiddle, but he made a swap with his brother Lowell when he was nine: an old pistol and some chores for a guitar. He stated in his 1974 autobiography, \"We were so poor and everybody around us was so poor that it was the forties before anyone even knew there had been a depression.\" Forced to relocate to Fortson, Georgia, outside of Columbus to live with his father because of a critical asthma condition, Atkins was a sensitive youth who became obsessed with music. Because of his illness, he was forced to sleep in a straight-back chair to breathe comfortably. On those nights, he played his guitar until he fell asleep holding it, a habit that lasted his whole life. While living in Fortson, Atkins attended the historic Mountain Hill School. He returned in the 1990s to play a series of charity concerts to save the school from demolition.\nStories have been told about the very young Chet who, when a friend or relative would come to visit and play guitar, crowded the musician and put his ear so close to the instrument that it became difficult for the visitor to play.\nAtkins became an accomplished guitarist while he was in high school. He used the restroom in the school to practice, because it had good acoustics. His first guitar had a nail for a nut and was so bowed that only the first few frets could be used. He later purchased a semi-acoustic electric guitar and amplifier, but he had to travel many miles to find an electrical outlet, since his home didn't have electricity.\nLater in life, he lightheartedly gave himself (along with John Knowles, Tommy Emmanuel, Steve Wariner, and Jerry Reed) the honorary degree CGP (\"Certified Guitar Player\").\nIn 2011, his daughter Merle Atkins Russell bestowed the CGP degree on his longtime sideman Paul Yandell. She then declared no more CGPs would be allowed by the Atkins estate.\nHis half-brother Jim was a successful guitarist who worked with the Les Paul Trio in New York.\nAtkins did not have a strong style of his own until 1939 when (while still living in Georgia) he heard Merle Travis picking over WLW radio. This early influence dramatically shaped his unique playing style. Whereas Travis used his index finger on his right hand for the melody and his thumb for the bass notes, Atkins expanded his right-hand style to include picking with his first three fingers, with the thumb on bass. He also listened closely to the single-string playing of George Barnes and Les Paul.\nChet Atkins was an amateur radio general class licensee. Formerly using the call sign WA4CZD, he obtained the vanity call sign W4CGP in 1998 to include the CGP designation, which supposedly stood for \"Certified Guitar Picker\". He was a member of the American Radio Relay League.\nEarly musical career.\nAfter dropping out of high school in 1942, Atkins landed a job at WNOX (AM) (now WNML) radio in Knoxville, where he played fiddle and guitar with the singer Bill Carlisle and the comic Archie Campbell and became a member of the station's Dixieland Swingsters, a small swing instrumental combo. After three years, he moved to WLW-AM in Cincinnati, Ohio, where Merle Travis had formerly worked.\nAfter six months, he moved to Raleigh and worked with Johnnie and Jack before heading for Richmond, Virginia, where he performed with Sunshine Sue Workman. Atkins's shy personality worked against him, as did the fact that his sophisticated style led many to doubt he was truly \"country\". He was fired often but was soon able to land another job at another radio station on account of his unique playing ability.\nAtkins and Jethro Burns (of Homer and Jethro) married twin sisters Leona and Lois Johnson, who sang as Laverne and Fern Johnson, the Johnson Sisters. Leona Atkins outlived her husband by eight years, dying in 2009 at the age of 85.\nTravelling to Chicago, Atkins auditioned for Red Foley, who was leaving his star position on WLS-AM's \"National Barn Dance\" to join the Grand Ole Opry. Atkins made his first appearance at the Opry in 1946 as a member of Foley's band. He also recorded a single for Nashville-based Bullet Records that year. That single, \"Guitar Blues\", was fairly progressive, including a clarinet solo by the Nashville dance band musician Dutch McMillin and produced by Jim Bulleit, founder of Bullet Records. He had a solo spot on the Opry, but when that was cut, Atkins moved on to KWTO in Springfield, Missouri. Despite the support of executive Si Siman, however, he soon was fired for not sounding \"country enough\".\nSigning with RCA Victor.\nWhile working with a Western band in Denver, Colorado, Atkins came to the attention of RCA Victor. Siman had been encouraging Steve Sholes to sign Atkins, as his style (with the success of Merle Travis as a hit recording artist) was suddenly in vogue. Sholes, A&amp;R director of country music at RCA, tracked Atkins down in Denver.\nHe made his first RCA Victor recordings in Chicago in 1947, but they did not sell. He did some studio work for RCA that year, but had relocated to Knoxville again where he worked with Homer and Jethro on WNOX's new Saturday night radio show \"The Tennessee Barn Dance\" and the popular \"Midday Merry Go Round\".\nIn 1949, he left WNOX to join June Carter with Mother Maybelle and the Carter Sisters on KWTO. This incarnation of the Carter Family featured Maybelle Carter and daughters June, Helen, and Anita. Their work soon attracted attention from the Grand Ole Opry. The group relocated to Nashville in the mid-1950s. Atkins began working on recording sessions and performing on WSM-AM and the Opry. Atkins became a member of the Opry in the 1950s.\nWhile he had not yet had a hit record for RCA Victor, his stature was growing. He began assisting Sholes as a session leader when the New York\u2013based producer needed help organizing Nashville sessions for RCA Victor artists. Atkins's first hit single was \"Mr. Sandman\", followed by \"Silver Bell\", which he recorded as a duet with Hank Snow. His albums also became more popular. He was featured on ABC-TV's \"The Eddy Arnold Show\" in the summer of 1956 and on \"Country Music Jubilee\" in 1957 and 1958 (by then renamed \"Jubilee USA\").\nIn addition to recording, Atkins was a design consultant for Gretsch, which manufactured a popular Chet Atkins line of electric guitars from 1955 to 1980. He became manager of RCA Victor's Nashville studios, eventually inspiring and seeing the completion of the legendary RCA Studio B, the first studio built specifically for the purpose of recording on the now-famous Music Row. Also later on, Chet and Owen Bradley would become instrumental in the creation of studio B's adjacent building RCA Studio A as well.\nPerformer and producer.\nWhen Sholes took over pop production in 1957\u2014a result of his success with Elvis Presley\u2014he put Atkins in charge of RCA Victor's Nashville division. With country music record sales declining as rock and roll became more popular, Atkins took his cue from Owen Bradley and eliminated fiddles and steel guitar from many recordings, though not all, as a means of making country singers appeal to pop fans, many of whom disliked the \"twang\" elements of country. This became known as the Nashville Sound, which Atkins said was a label created by the media for a style of recording during that period intended to keep country (and their jobs) viable.\nAtkins used the Jordanaires and a rhythm section on hits such as Jim Reeves's \"Four Walls\" and \"He'll Have to Go\" and Don Gibson's \"Oh Lonesome Me\" and \"Blue Blue Day\". The once-rare phenomenon of having a country hit cross over to pop success became more common. He and Bradley had essentially put the producer in the driver's seat, guiding an artist's choice of material and the musical background. Other Nashville producers quickly copied this successful formula, which resulted in certain country hits \"crossing over\" to find success in the pop field.\nAtkins made his own records, which usually visited pop standards and jazz, in a sophisticated home studio, often recording the rhythm tracks at RCA and adding his solo parts at home, refining the tracks until the results satisfied him. Guitarists of all styles came to admire various Atkins albums for their unique musical ideas and in some cases experimental electronic ideas. In this period, he became known internationally as \"Mister Guitar\", inspiring an album, \"Mister Guitar\", engineered by both Bob Ferris and Bill Porter, Ferris's replacement.\nAt the end of March 1959, Porter took over as chief engineer at what was at the time RCA Victor's only Nashville studio, in the space that would become known as Studio B after the opening of a second studio in 1965. (At the time, RCA's sole Nashville studio had no letter designation.) Porter soon helped Atkins get a better reverberation sound from the studio's German effects device, an EMT 140 plate reverb. With his golden ear, Porter found the studio's acoustics to be problematic, and he devised a set of acoustic baffles to hang from the ceiling, then selected positions for microphones based on resonant room modes. The sound of the recordings improved significantly, and the studio achieved a string of successes. The Nashville sound became more dynamic. In later years, when Bradley asked how he achieved his sound, Atkins told him \"it was Porter.\" Porter described Atkins as respectful of musicians when recording\u2014if someone was out of tune, he would not single that person out by name. Instead, he would say something like, \"we got a little tuning problem\u00a0... Everybody check and see what's going on.\" If that did not work, Atkins would instruct Porter to turn the offending player down in the mix. When Porter left RCA in late-1964, Atkins said, \"the sound was never the same, never as great.\"\nAtkins's trademark \"Atkins style\" of playing uses the thumb and first two or sometimes three fingers of the right hand. He developed this style from listening to Merle Travis, occasionally on a primitive radio. He was sure no one could play that articulately with just the thumb and index finger (which was exactly how Travis played), and he assumed it required the thumb and two fingers\u2014and that was the style he pioneered and mastered.\nHe enjoyed jamming with fellow studio musicians, and they were asked to perform at the Newport Jazz Festival in 1960. That performance was cancelled because of rioting, but a live recording of the group (\"After the Riot at Newport\") was released. Atkins performed by invitation at the White House for every U.S. president from John F. Kennedy through to George H. W. Bush. Atkins was a member of the Million Dollar Band during the 1980s. He is also well known for his song \"Yankee Doodle Dixie\", in which he played \"Yankee Doodle\" and \"Dixie\" simultaneously, on the same guitar.\nBefore his mentor Sholes died in 1968, Atkins had become vice president of RCA's country division. In 1987, he told \"Nine-O-One Network\" magazine that he was \"ashamed\" of his promotion: \"I wanted to be known as a guitarist and I know, too, that they give you titles like that in lieu of money. So beware when they want to make you vice president.\" He had brought Waylon Jennings, Willie Nelson, Connie Smith, Bobby Bare, Dolly Parton, Jerry Reed, and John Hartford to the label in the 1960s and inspired and helped countless others. He took a considerable risk during the mid-1960s, when the civil rights movement sparked violence throughout the South, by signing country music's first African-American singer, Charley Pride, who sang rawer country than the smoother music Atkins had pioneered.\nAtkins's biggest hit single came in 1965, with \"Yakety Axe\", an adaptation of \"Yakety Sax\", by his friend, the saxophonist Boots Randolph. He rarely performed in those days and eventually hired other RCA producers, such as Bob Ferguson and Felton Jarvis, to lessen his workload.\nLater career.\nIn the 1970s, Atkins became increasingly stressed by his executive duties. He produced fewer records, but could still turn out hits such as Perry Como's 1973 pop hit \"And I Love You So\". He recorded extensively with close friend and fellow picker Jerry Reed, who had become a hit artist in his own right. A 1973 diagnosis of colon cancer, however, led Atkins to redefine his role at RCA Records, to allow others to handle administration while he went back to his first love, the guitar, often recording with Reed or even Jethro Burns from Homer and Jethro (his brother-in-law) after Homer died in 1971. Atkins would turn over his administrative duties to Jerry Bradley, son of Owen, in 1973 at RCA.\nAtkins did little production work at RCA after stepping down and in fact, had hired producers at the label in the 1960s, among them Bob Ferguson and Felton Jarvis. As a recording artist, Atkins grew disillusioned with RCA in the late 1970s. He felt stifled because the record company would not let him branch into jazz. He had also produced late '60s jazz recordings by Canadian guitarist Lenny Breau, a friend and protege. His mid-1970s collaborations with one of his influences, Les Paul, \"Chester &amp; Lester\" and \"Guitar Monsters\", had already reflected that interest; \"Chester &amp; Lester\" was one of the best-selling recordings of Atkins's career. At the same time, he grew dissatisfied with the direction Gretsch (no longer family-owned) was going and withdrew his authorization for them to use his name and began designing guitars with Gibson. In 1982, Atkins ended his 35-year association with RCA Records and signed with rival Columbia Records. He produced his first album for Columbia in 1983.\nAtkins had always been an ardent lover of jazz and throughout his career he was often criticized by \"pure\" country musicians for his jazz influences. He also said on many occasions that he did not like being referred to as a \"country guitarist\", insisting that he was \"a guitarist, period.\" Although he played by ear and was a masterful improviser, he was able to read music and even performed some classical guitar pieces. When Roger C. Field, a friend, suggested to him in 1991 that he record and perform with a female singer, he did so with Suzy Bogguss.\nAtkins returned to his country roots for albums he recorded with Mark Knopfler and Jerry Reed. Knopfler had long mentioned Atkins as one of his earliest influences. Atkins also collaborated with Australian guitar legend Tommy Emmanuel. On being asked to name the ten most influential guitarists of the twentieth century, he named Django Reinhardt to the first position, and also placed himself on the list.\nIn later years, he returned to radio, appearing on Garrison Keillor's \"Prairie Home Companion\" program, on American Public Media radio, even picking up a fiddle from time to time, and performing songs such as Bob Wills's \"Corrina, Corrina\" and Willie Nelson's \"Seven Spanish Angels\" with Nelson on a 1985 broadcast of the show at the Bridges Auditorium on the campus of Pomona College.\nDeath and legacy.\nAtkins continued performing in the 1990s, but his health declined after he was again diagnosed with colon cancer in 1996. He died on June 30, 2001, at his home in Nashville, Tennessee, at age 77. His memorial service was held at Ryman Auditorium in Nashville. He was buried at Harpeth Hills Memory Gardens in Nashville.\nAtkins received numerous awards, including 14 Grammy awards and nine Country Music Association awards for Instrumentalist of the Year. In 1993, he was honored with the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award. \"Billboard\" magazine awarded him its Century Award, its \"highest honor for distinguished creative achievement\", in December 1997. In 2002, Atkins was posthumously inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. His award was presented by Marty Stuart and Brian Setzer and accepted by Atkins's grandson, Jonathan Russell. The following year, Atkins ranked number 28 in Country Music Television's \"40 Greatest Men of Country Music\". In November 2011, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked Atkins number 21 on their list of the \"100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time\".\nAtkins is notable for his broad influence. His love for numerous styles of music can be traced from his early recording of the stride pianist James P. Johnson's \"Carolina Shout\", all the way to the rock stylings of Eric Johnson, an invited guest on Atkins's recording sessions, who, when Atkins attempted to copy his influential rocker \"Cliffs of Dover\", led to Atkins's creation of a unique arrangement of \"Londonderry Air (Danny Boy)\".\nThe classical guitar selections included on almost all his albums were, for many American artists working in the field today, the first classical guitar they ever heard. He recorded smooth jazz guitar still played on American airwaves.\nA stretch of Interstate 185 in southwest Georgia (between LaGrange and Columbus) is named \"Chet Atkins Parkway\". This stretch of interstate runs through Fortson, where Atkins spent much of his childhood.\nGeorge Harrison was notably inspired by Atkins. This influence is shown on songs such as \"All My Loving\".\nAt the age of 13, the future jazz guitarist Earl Klugh was captivated watching Atkins perform on \"The Perry Como Show.\" He was also a big influence on Doyle Dykes, and inspired Tommy Emmanuel. Johnny Winter's thumb-picking style came from Atkins' playing. Steve Howe called Atkins his favorite \"all round guitarist\", adding that \"there are those in different areas of music who are better than him, but nobody had the same ability when it comes to being across the board. For me, it was an education to listen to what he did.\"\nClint Black's album \"Nothin' but the Taillights\" includes the song \"Ode to Chet\", which includes the lyrics \"'Cause I can win her over like Romeo did Juliet, if I can only show her I can almost pick that legato lick like Chet\" and \"It'll take more than Mel Bay 1, 2, &amp; 3 if I'm ever gonna play like CGP.\" Atkins played guitar on the track. At the end of the song, Black and Atkins had a brief conversation.\nAtkins' song \"Jam Man\" was used in commercials for Esurance.\nIn 1967, a tribute song, \"Chet's Tune\", was produced for Atkins' birthday, with contributions by a long list of RCA Victor artists, including Eddy Arnold, Connie Smith, Jerry Reed, Willie Nelson, Hank Snow, and others. The song was written by the Nashville songwriter Cy Coben, a friend of Atkins. The single reached number 38 on the country charts.\nIn 2009, Steve Wariner released an album titled \"My Tribute to Chet Atkins\". One song from that record, \"Producer's Medley\", featured Wariner's recreation of several famous songs that Atkins both produced and performed. \"Producer's Medley\" won the Grammy for Best Country Instrumental Performance in 2010.\nIndustry awards.\nCountry Music Association\nCountry Music Hall of Fame and Museum\nGrammy Awards\nRock and Roll Hall of Fame\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7757", "revid": "494861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7757", "title": "Conrad II (disambiguation)", "text": "Conrad II or Konrad II may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "7765", "revid": "27640924", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7765", "title": "Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma", "text": "French film journal\n (, lit.\u2009'notebooks on cinema') is a French film magazine co-founded in 1951 by Andr\u00e9 Bazin, Jacques Doniol-Valcroze, and Joseph-Marie Lo Duca. It developed from the earlier magazine \"Revue du Cin\u00e9ma\" (lit.\u2009'review of cinema' established in 1928) involving members of two Paris film clubs\u2014 Objectif 49 (Objective 49) (Robert Bresson, Jean Cocteau, and Alexandre Astruc, among others) and the Cin\u00e9-Club du Quartier Latin (Latin Quarter Cinema Club).\nInitially edited by Doniol-Valcroze and, after 1957, by \u00c9ric Rohmer (aka, Maurice Scherer), it included amongst its writers Jacques Rivette, Jean-Luc Godard, Claude Chabrol, and Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut, who went on to become highly influential filmmakers. It is the oldest French-language film magazine in publication.\nHistory.\nThe first issue of \"Cahiers\" appeared in April 1951. Much of its head staff, including Bazin, Doniol-Valcroze, Lo Duca, and the various younger, less-established critics, had met and shared their beliefs about film through their involvement in the publication of \"Revue du Cin\u00e9ma\" from 1946 until its final issue in 1948; \"Cahiers\" was created as a successor to this earlier magazine.\nEarly issues of \"Cahiers\" were small journals of thirty pages which bore minimalist covers, distinctive for their lack of headlines in favor of film stills on a distinctive bright yellow background. Each issue contained four or five articles (with at least one piece by Bazin in most issues), most of which were reviews of specific films or appreciations of directors, supplemented on occasion by longer theoretical essays. The first few years of the magazine's publication were dominated by Bazin, who was the \"de facto\" head of the editorial board.\nBazin intended \"Cahiers\" to be a continuation of the intellectual form of criticism that \"Revue\" had printed, which prominently featured his articles advocating for realism as the most valuable quality of cinema. As more issues of \"Cahiers\" were published, however, Bazin found that a group of young proteges and critics serving as editors underneath him were beginning to disagree with him in the pages of the magazine. Godard would voice his discontent with Bazin as early as 1952, when he challenged Bazin's views on editing in an article for the September issue of \"Cahiers.\" Gradually, the tastes of these young critics drifted away from those of Bazin, as members of the group began to write critical appreciations of more commercial American filmmakers such as Alfred Hitchcock and Howard Hawks rather than the canonized French and Italian filmmakers that interested Bazin.\nThe younger critics broke completely with Bazin by 1954, when an article in the January issue by Truffaut attacked what he called \"La qualit\u00e9 fran\u00e7aise\" (lit.\u2009'the French quality', usually translated as \"The Tradition of Quality\"), denouncing many critically respected French films of the time as being unimaginative, oversimplified, and even immoral adaptations of literary works. The article became the manifesto for the \"politique des auteurs\" (lit.\u2009'the policy of the authors'), which became the label for \"Cahiers\" younger critics' emphasis on the importance of the director in the creation of a film\u2014as a film's \"author\"\u2014and their re-evaluation of Hollywood films and directors such as Hitchcock, Hawks, Jerry Lewis, Robert Aldrich, Nicholas Ray, and Fritz Lang. Subsequently, American critic Andrew Sarris latched onto the word, \"auteur\", and paired it with the English word, \"theory\"; hence coining the phrase the \"auteur theory\" by which this critical approach is known in English-language film criticism.\nAfter the publication of Truffaut's article, Doniol-Valcroze and most of the \"Cahiers\" editors besides Bazin and Lo Duca rallied behind the rebellious authors; Lo Duca left \"Cahiers\" a year later, while Bazin, in failing health, gave editorial control of the magazine to Rohmer and largely left Paris, though he continued to write for the magazine. Now with control over the magazine's ideological approaches to film, the younger critics (minus Godard, who had left Paris in 1952, not to return until 1956) changed the format of \"Cahiers\" somewhat, frequently conducting interviews with directors deemed \"auteurs\" and voting on films in a \"Council\" of ten core critics. These critics came to champion non-American directors as well, writing on the \"mise en sc\u00e8ne\" (the \"dominant object of study\" at the magazine) of such filmmakers as Jean Renoir, Roberto Rossellini, Kenji Mizoguchi, Max Oph\u00fcls, and Jean Cocteau, many of whom Bazin had introduced them to.\nBy the end of the 1950s, many of the remaining editors of \"Cahiers\", however, were becoming increasingly dissatisfied with the mere act of writing film criticism. Spurred on by the return of Godard to Paris in 1956 (who in the interim had made a short film himself), many of the younger critics became interested in making films themselves. Godard, Truffaut, Chabrol, Doniol-Valcroze, and even Rohmer, who had officially succeeded Doniol-Valcroze as head editor in 1958, began to divide their time between making films and writing about them. The films that these critics made were experimental explorations of various theoretical, artistic, and ideological aspects of the film form, and would, along with the films of young French filmmakers outside the \"Cahiers\" circle, form the basis for the cinematic movement known as the French New Wave. Meanwhile, \"Cahiers\" underwent staff changes, as Rohmer hired new editors such as Jean Douchet to fill the roles of those editors who were now making films, while other existing editors, particularly Jacques Rivette, began to write even more for the magazine. Many of the newer critical voices (except for Rivette) largely ignored the films of the New Wave for Hollywood when they were not outright criticizing them, creating friction between much of the directorial side of the younger critics and the head editor Rohmer. A group of five \"Cahiers\" editors, including Godard and Doniol-Valcroze and led by Rivette, urged Rohmer to refocus the magazine's content on newer films such as their own. When he refused, the \"gang of five\" forced Rohmer out and installed Rivette as his replacement in 1963.\nRivette shifted political and social concerns farther to the left, and began a trend in the magazine of paying more attention to non-Hollywood films. The style of the journal moved through literary modernism in the early 1960s to radicalism and dialectical materialism by 1970. Moreover, during the mid-1970s the magazine was run by a Maoist editorial collective. In the mid-1970s, a review of the American film \"Jaws\" marked the magazine's return to more commercial perspectives, and an editorial turnover: (Serge Daney, Serge Toubiana, Thierry Jousse, Antoine de Baecque, and Charles Tesson). It led to the rehabilitation of some of the old \"Cahiers\" favourites, as well as some new film makers like Manoel de Oliveira, Raoul Ruiz, Hou Hsiao-hsien, Youssef Chahine, and Maurice Pialat. Recent writers have included Daney, Andr\u00e9 T\u00e9chin\u00e9, L\u00e9os Carax, Olivier Assayas, Dani\u00e8le Dubroux, and Serge Le P\u00e9ron.\nIn 1998, the Editions de l'Etoile (the company publishing \"Cahiers\") was acquired by the press group . Traditionally losing money, the magazine attempted a make-over in 1999 to gain new readers, leading to a first split among writers and resulting in a magazine addressing all visual arts in a post-modernist approach. This version of the magazine printed ill-received opinion pieces on reality TV or video games that confused the traditional readership of the magazine.\n took full editorial control of the magazine in 2003, appointing Jean-Michel Frodon as editor-in-chief. In February 2009, \"Cahiers\" was acquired from by Richard Schlagman, also owner of Phaidon Press, a worldwide publishing group which specialises in books on the visual arts. In July 2009, St\u00e9phane Delorme and Jean-Philippe Tess\u00e9 were promoted respectively to the positions of editor-in-chief and deputy chief editor.\nIn February 2020, the magazine was bought by several French entrepreneurs, including Xavier Niel and Alain Weill. The entire editorial staff resigned, saying the change posed a threat to their editorial independence.\nAnnual top 10 films list.\nThe magazine has compiled a list of the top 10 films of each year for much of its existence.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7766", "revid": "76", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7766", "title": "Cartzonna", "text": ""}
{"id": "7767", "revid": "50406000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7767", "title": "Circuit Zandvoort", "text": "Motorsport track in the Netherlands\nCircuit Zandvoort (), known for sponsorship reasons as CM.com Circuit Zandvoort, previously known as Circuit Park Zandvoort until 2017, is a motorsport race track located in the dunes north of Zandvoort, the Netherlands, near the North Sea coast line and west of Amsterdam. It returned to the Formula One calendar in 2021 as the location of the revived Dutch Grand Prix. This partnership with Formula One will end in 2026.\nHistory.\n1930s to mid 1980s.\nThere were plans for races at Zandvoort before World War II: the first street race was held on 3 June 1939. However, a permanent race track was not constructed until after the war, using communications roads built by the occupying German army. Contrary to popular belief John Hugenholtz cannot be credited with the design of the Zandvoort track, although he was involved as the chairman of the Nederlandse Automobiel Ren Club (Dutch Auto Racing Club) before becoming the first track director in 1949. Instead, it was 1927 Le Mans winner, S. C. H. \"Sammy\" Davis who was brought in as a track design advisor in July 1946 although the layout was partly dictated by the existing roads.\nThe first race on the circuit, the \"Prijs van Zandvoort\", took place on 7 August 1948. The race was renamed the \"Grote Prijs van Zandvoort\" (Zandvoort Grand Prix) in 1949, then the \"Grote Prijs van Nederland\" (Dutch Grand Prix) in 1950. The 1952 race was the first to be run as a round of the World Championship, albeit to Formula Two regulations rather than Formula One regulations like all the European rounds of the championship that year; a similar situation also applied to the 1953. There was no Dutch Grand Prix in 1954, 1956 or 1957, but 1955 saw the first true Formula One race as part of the Drivers' Championship. The Dutch Grand Prix returned in 1958 and remained a permanent fixture on the F1 calendar (with the exception of 1972) through , when it was held for the last time in the 20th century.\nSince 1985.\nTo solve a number of problems that had made it impossible to develop and upgrade the circuit, most importantly noise pollution for Zandvoort inhabitants living closest to the track, the track management developed and adopted a plan to move the most southern part of the track away from the nearby housing estate, and rebuild a more compact track in the remaining former 'infield'. In January 1987 this plan got the necessary 'green light' when it was formally approved by the Provincial Council of North Holland. However, only a couple of months later a new problem arose: the company that commercially ran the circuit (CENAV), called in the receiver and went out of business, marking the end of 'Circuit Zandvoort'. Again the track, owned by the municipality of Zandvoort, was in danger of being permanently lost for motorsports. However, a new operating foundation, the \"Stichting Exploitatie Circuit Park\", was formed and started work at the realization of the track's reconstruction plans. Circuit Park Zandvoort was born and in the summer of 1989 the track was remodeled to an interim Club Circuit of , while the disposed southern part of the track was used to build a Vendorado Bungalow Park and new premises for the local football and field-hockey clubs.\nIn 1995, CPZ (\"Circuit Park Zandvoort\") got the \"A Status\" of the government of the Netherlands and began building an international Grand Prix Circuit. This project was finished in 2001 when, after the track was redesigned to a long circuit and a new pits building was realized (by HPG, the development company of John Hugenholtz Jr., son of the former director), a new grandstand was situated along the long straight. One of the major events that is held at the circuit, along with DTM and A1GP, is the RTL Masters of Formula 3, where Formula Three cars of several national racing series compete with each other (originally called Marlboro Masters, before tobacco advertising ban). A noise restriction order was responsible for this event moving to the Belgian Circuit Zolder for 2007 and 2008. However, the race returned to its historical home in 2009.\nCircuit Park Zandvoort played host to the first race in the 2006/07 season of A1 Grand Prix from 29 September\u20131 October 2006. On 21 August 2008, the official A1GP site reported that the 2008/09 season's first race has moved from the Mugello Circuit, Italy to Zandvoort on 4\u20135 October 2008 due to the delay in the building the new chassis for the new race cars. The Dutch round moved to TT Circuit Assen in 2010. A1GP bankrupted before its fifth season and the Dutch round was replaced with Superleague Formula.\nIn November 2018 reported that Formula One Management (FOM) had invited the owners of the Zandvoort race track to make a proposal to stage a Grand Prix race in 2020. In March 2019, it was confirmed that a letter of intent had been signed between Zandvoort and FOM to stage the Dutch Grand Prix, dependent on private funding being secured to cover the cost of hosting the race. A deadline of 31 March 2019 was set for a final decision to be made. On 14 May 2019 it was confirmed that Zandvoort would host the Dutch Grand Prix for 2020 and beyond for a duration of at least three years, with the option to host another two years beyond that. \nSeveral alterations were made to the track by Jarno Zaffelli to bring it up to date with F1 standards, including adding banking to turn 14 (Arie Luyendijkbocht) and turn 3 (Hugenholtzbocht), but the layout as a whole remained the same. The municipality of Zandvoort invested four million euros into the infrastructure around the circuit to improve the accessibility to the track. On 29 August 2019, the 2020 Dutch Grand Prix at Zandvoort was included as the fifth race on the provisional schedule, listed on 3 May 2020, between the Chinese Grand Prix and Spanish Grand Prix. The 2020 scheduled appearance was canceled due to the COVID-19 pandemic, however F1 racing did finally return to the circuit on 5 September 2021. On 17 September 2019, it was announced that Zandvoort would host the FIA Formula 2 Championship and FIA Formula 3 Championship, replacing the series' support races at Circuit Paul Ricard.\nThe circuit.\nThe circuit gained popularity because of its fast, sweeping corners such as Scheivlak as well as the \"Tarzanbocht\" (Tarzan corner) hairpin at the end of the start/finish straight. Tarzanbocht is the most famous corner in the circuit. Since there is a camber in the corner, it provides excellent overtaking opportunities. It is possible to pass around the outside as well as the easier inside lane. This corner is reportedly named after a local character who had earned the nickname of Tarzan and only wanted to give up his vegetable garden in the dunes if the track's designers named a nearby corner after him. On the other hand, many different stories about Tarzan Corner are known.\nThe circuit design has been modified and altered several times:\nTrack configurations.\nThe corners are named as follows (the numbers correspond to the present map, starting at the start/finish line):\nThe elevation difference is .\nTurns 3 and 13/14 are extremely cambered corners; turn 3 has a 19-degree bank while turns 13/14 have an 18-degree bank.\nLap records.\nThe official lap record for the current circuit layout is 1:11.097, set by Lewis Hamilton driving for Mercedes in the 2021 Dutch Grand Prix. The all-time fastest official track record set during a race weekend for the current Grand Prix Circuit layout is 1:08.662, set by Oscar Piastri driving for McLaren during qualifying in the 2025 Dutch Grand Prix. As of August 2025, the fastest official race lap records at the Circuit Zandvoort are listed as:\nFatal accidents.\nIn the history of the circuit, several fatal accidents have occurred.\nCycling and running competitions.\nMotor racer Willy Koppen was the first woman to participate in motor trials in the early fifties on the circuit. In August 1959 the UCI Road World Championships men's race was held at Zandvoort. Andr\u00e9 Darrigade of France won the race, Tom Simpson (Britain) was 4th.\nIn 1994 a large interregional amateur race cycling race was organised by HSV De Kampioen in Haarlem. \nSince 2008, the course has been used as the venue for the Runner's World Zandvoort Circuit Run, a 5-kilometre road running competition. The 2010 edition of the race attracted Lornah Kiplagat, a multiple world champion, who won the ladies 5\u00a0km race.\nThe Cycling Zandvoort 24h race was first held on 25\u201326 May 2013. It is open for public for soloists and teams up to 8 riders. A 6-hours was added to the event in 2016. On 13./14. June 2015 (12:00) the Cycling Zandvoort \u2013 24 hour race over 4307-m-laps took place.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7768", "revid": "286968", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7768", "title": "Crete Senesi", "text": "Area of the Italian region of Tuscany\nThe Crete Senesi refers to an area of the Italian region of Tuscany immediately to the south of Siena. It consists of a range of hills and woods among villages and includes the \"comuni\" of Asciano, Buonconvento, Monteroni d'Arbia, Rapolano Terme and San Giovanni d'Asso, all within the province of Siena. They border to the north with the Chianti Senese area, to the east with Val di Chiana and to the south-west with Val d'Orcia. Nearby is also the semi-arid area known as the Accona Desert.\n\"Crete Senesi\" are literally the \"clays of Siena\": the distinctive grey colouration of the soil gives the landscape an appearance often described as lunar. This characteristic clay, known as \"mattaione\", represents the sediments of the Pliocene sea which covered the area between 2.5 and 4.5 million years ago. The landscape is characterized by barren and gently undulating hills, solitary oaks and cypresses, isolated farms at the top of the heights, stretches of wood and ponds of rainwater (commonly referred as \"fontoni,\" literally \"big springs\") in the valleys\".\" Badlands and \"biancane\u200a\" are typical conformations of the land. \nPerhaps the most notable edifice of this area is the Abbey of Monte Oliveto Maggiore, located 10\u00a0km south of Asciano.\nThe region is known for its production of white truffles, and hosts a festival and a museum dedicated to the rare fungus (genus Tuber).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7770", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7770", "title": "Christmas tree", "text": "Decorated tree associated with Christmas\nA Christmas tree is a decorated tree, usually an evergreen conifer, such as a spruce, pine or fir, associated with the celebration of Christmas. It may also consist of an artificial tree of similar appearance.\nThe custom was developed in Central Europe, particularly Germany and Livonia (now Estonia and Latvia), where Protestant Christians brought decorated trees into their homes. The tree was traditionally decorated with \"roses made of colored paper, tinsel, apples, wafers, and confectionery\". Moravian Christians began to illuminate Christmas trees with candles, which were often replaced by Christmas lights after the advent of electrification. Today, there is a wide variety of traditional and modern ornaments, such as garlands, baubles, tinsel, and candy canes. An angel or star might be placed at the top of the tree to represent the Angel Gabriel or the Star of Bethlehem, respectively, from the Nativity. Edible items such as gingerbread, chocolate, and other sweets are also popular and are tied to or hung from the tree's branches with ribbons. The Christmas tree has been historically regarded as a custom of the Lutheran Churches and only in 1982 did the Catholic Church erect the first Vatican Christmas Tree.\nIn the Western Christian tradition, Christmas trees are variously erected on days such as the first day of Advent, or even as late as Christmas Eve, depending on the country; customs of the same faith hold that it is unlucky to remove Christmas decorations, such as the Christmas tree, before Twelfth Night and, if they are not taken down on that day, it is appropriate to do so on Candlemas, the latter of which ends the Christmas-Epiphany season in some denominations.\nThe Christmas tree is sometimes compared with the \"Yule-tree\", especially in discussions of its folkloric origins. Mount Ingino Christmas Tree, a light display on the side of Mount Ingino in Gubbio, Italy, is sometimes called the tallest Christmas tree in the world.\nHistory.\nOrigin of the modern Christmas tree.\nModern Christmas trees originated in Central Europe and the Baltic states, particularly Estonia, Germany and Livonia (now Latvia) during the Renaissance in early modern Europe. Its 16th-century origins are sometimes associated with Protestant Christian reformer Martin Luther, who is said to have first added lighted candles to an evergreen tree. The Christmas tree was first recorded to be used by German Lutherans in the 16th century, with records indicating that a Christmas tree was placed in the Cathedral of Strasbourg in 1539 under the leadership of the Protestant Reformer Martin Bucer. The Moravian Christians put lighted candles on those trees. The earliest known firmly dated representation of a Christmas tree is on the keystone sculpture of a private home in Turckheim, Alsace (then part of the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation, today part of France), with the date 1576.\nPossible predecessors.\nModern Christmas trees have been related to the \"tree of paradise\" of medieval mystery plays that were given on 24 December, the commemoration and name day of Adam and Eve in various countries. In such plays, a tree decorated with apples (representing fruit from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil and thus to the original sin that Christ took away) and round white wafers (to represent the Eucharist and redemption) was used as a setting for the play. Like the Christmas crib, the Paradise tree was later placed in homes. The apples were replaced by round objects such as shiny red baubles.\nFir trees decorated with apples served as the central prop for the paradise play, a kind of folk religious drama often performed on 24 December. These props were called paradise trees, and some researchers believe they were the forerunners of the Christmas tree.\nAt the end of the Middle Ages, an early predecessor appears referred in the 15th century Regiment of the Cistercian Alcoba\u00e7a Monastery in Portugal. The Regiment of the local \"high-Sacristans\" of the Cistercian Order refers to what may be considered the oldest references to the Christmas tree: \"Note on how to put the Christmas branch, \"scilicet\": On the Christmas eve, you will look for a large Branch of green laurel, and you shall reap many red oranges, and place them on the branches that come of the laurel, specifically as you have seen, and in every orange you shall put a candle, and hang the Branch by a rope in the pole, which shall be by the candle of the high altar.\"\nOther sources have offered a connection between the symbolism of the first documented Christmas trees in Germany around 1600 and the trees of pre-Christian traditions. According to the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\", \"The use of evergreen trees, wreaths, and garlands to symbolize eternal life was a custom of the ancient Egyptians, Chinese, and Hebrews. Tree worship was common among the pagan Europeans and survived their conversion to Christianity in the Scandinavian customs of decorating the house and barn with evergreens at the New Year to scare away the devil and of setting up a tree for the birds during Christmas time.\"\nIt is commonly believed that ancient Romans used to decorate their houses with evergreen trees to celebrate Saturnalia. In the poem \"Epithalamium\" by Catullus, he tells of the gods decorating the home of Peleus with trees, including laurel and cypress. Later Libanius, Tertullian, and Chrysostom speak of the use of evergreen trees to adorn Christian houses.\nThe Vikings and Saxons worshiped trees. The story of Saint Boniface cutting down Donar's Oak illustrates the pagan practices in 8th century among the Germans. A later folk version of the story adds the detail that an evergreen tree grew in place of the felled oak, telling them about how its triangular shape reminds humanity of the Trinity and how it points to heaven.\nHistorical practices by region.\nEstonia, Latvia, and Germany.\nCustoms of erecting decorated trees in winter time can be traced to Christmas celebrations in Renaissance-era guilds in Northern Germany and Livonia. The first evidence of decorated trees associated with Christmas Day are trees in guildhalls decorated with sweets to be enjoyed by the apprentices and children. In Livonia (present-day Estonia and Latvia), in 1441, 1442, 1510, and 1514, the Brotherhood of Blackheads erected a tree for the holidays in their guild houses in Reval (now Tallinn) and Riga. On the last night of the celebrations leading up to the holidays, the tree was taken to the Town Hall Square, where the members of the brotherhood danced around it.\nA Bremen guild chronicle of 1570 reports that a small tree decorated with \"apples, nuts, dates, pretzels, and paper flowers\" was erected in the guild-house for the benefit of the guild members' children, who collected the dainties on Christmas Day. In 1584, the pastor and chronicler Balthasar Russow in his (1584) wrote of an established tradition of setting up a decorated spruce at the market square, where the young men \"went with a flock of maidens and women, first sang and danced there and then set the tree aflame\".\nAfter the Protestant Reformation, such trees are seen in the houses of upper-class Protestant families as a counterpart to the Catholic Christmas cribs. This transition from the guild hall to bourgeois family homes in the Protestant parts of Germany ultimately gives rise to the modern tradition as it developed in the 18th and 19th centuries. In the present-day, the churches and homes of Protestants and Catholics feature both Christmas cribs and Christmas trees.\nPoland.\nA hanging from the ceiling rafters\nIn Poland, there is a folk tradition dating back to an old Slavic pre-Christian custom of suspending a branch of fir, spruce, or pine from the ceiling rafters, called , during the time of the Koliada winter festival. The branches were decorated with apples, nuts, acorns, and stars made of straw. In more recent times, the decorations also included colored paper cutouts (), wafers, cookies, and Christmas baubles. According to old pagan beliefs, the powers of the branch were linked to good harvest and prosperity.\nThe custom was practiced by Polish peasants until the early 20th century, particularly in the regions of Lesser Poland and Upper Silesia. Most often the branches were hung above the dinner table on Christmas Eve. Beginning in the mid-19th century, the tradition over time was almost completely replaced by the later German practice of decorating a standing Christmas tree.\n18th to early 20th centuries.\nAdoption by European nobility.\nIn the early 19th century, the custom became popular among the nobility and spread to royal courts as far as Russia. Introduced by Fanny von Arnstein and popularized by Princess Henrietta of Nassau-Weilburg, the Christmas tree reached Vienna in 1814, during the Congress of Vienna, and the custom spread across Austria in the following years. In France, the first Christmas tree was introduced in 1840 by the duchesse d'Orl\u00e9ans. In Denmark, a newspaper company claims that the first attested Christmas tree was lit in 1808 by Countess Wilhemine of Holsteinborg. It was the aging countess who told the story of the first Danish Christmas tree to Danish writer Hans Christian Andersen in 1865. He had published a fairy tale called \"The Fir-Tree\" in 1844, recounting the fate of a fir tree being used as a Christmas tree.\nAdoption by country or region.\nGermany.\nBy the early 18th century, the custom had become common in towns of the upper Rhineland, but it had not yet spread to rural areas. Wax candles, expensive items at the time, are found in attestations from the late 18th century.\nAlong the Lower Rhine, an area of Roman Catholic majority, the Christmas tree was largely regarded as a Protestant custom. As a result, it remained confined to the upper Rhineland for a relatively long period of time. The custom did eventually gain wider acceptance beginning around 1815 by way of Prussian officials who emigrated there following the Congress of Vienna.\nIn the 19th century, the Christmas tree was taken to be an expression of German culture and of , especially among emigrants overseas.\nA decisive factor in winning general popularity was the German army's decision to place Christmas trees in its barracks and military hospitals during the Franco-Prussian War. Only at the start of the 20th century did Christmas trees appear inside churches, this time in a new brightly lit form.\nSlovenia.\nEarly Slovenian custom, dating back to around the 17th century, was to suspend the tree either upright or upside-down above the well, a corner of the dinner table, in the backyard, or from the fences, modestly decorated with fruits or not decorated at all. German brewer Peter Luelsdorf brought the first Christmas tree of the current tradition to Slovenia in 1845. He set it up in his small brewery inn in Ljubljana, the Slovenian capital. German officials, craftsmen and merchants quickly spread the tradition among the bourgeois population. The trees were typically decorated with walnuts, golden apples, carobs, and candles. At first, the Catholic majority rejected this custom because they considered it a typical Protestant tradition. However, this tradition was almost unknown to the rural population until World War I, after which the decorating of trees became common. The first decorated Christmas market was organized in Ljubljana in 1859.\nAfter World War II, during the Yugoslavia period, spruce trees set in the public places (towns, squares, and markets) were, for political reasons, replaced with fir trees, a symbol of socialism and Slavic mythology, strongly associated with loyalty, courage, and dignity. However, spruce retained its popularity in Slovenian homes during those years and came back to public places after independence.\nItaly.\nThe Christmas tree tradition in Italy originated from Germanic influences introduced in the late 19th century. Queen Margherita of Savoy erected the first tree at the Quirinal Palace in Rome. Domestic adoption occurred in the 1960s, with families using branches from cypress, oak, or cork trees. Decorations consisted of oranges, clementines, candies, twine, candles, and lanterns. Italians erect trees on 8 December, the Feast of the Immaculate Conception, with exceptions in Milan on 7 December for Saint Ambrose and in Bari on 6 December for Saint Nicholas. Families assemble the tree together; adults position lights, while children place ornaments and the top star or angel. Trees remain until 6 January, the Epiphany. Public displays include the Vatican tree, established in 1982 by Pope John Paul II, and the hillside tree of lights in Gubbio.\nBritain.\nAlthough the tradition of decorating churches and homes with evergreens at Christmas was long established, the custom of decorating an entire small tree was unknown in Britain until the 19th century. The German-born Queen Charlotte introduced a Christmas tree at a party she gave for children in 1800. The custom did not at first spread much beyond the royal family. Queen Victoria, as a child, was familiar with it and a tree was placed in her room every Christmas. In her journal for Christmas Eve 1832, the delighted 13-year-old princess wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the year following Victoria's marriage to her German cousin Prince Albert, in 1841, the custom became even more widespread as wealthier middle-class families followed the fashion. In 1842, a newspaper advertisement for Christmas trees makes clear their smart cachet, German origins and association with children and gift-giving. An illustrated book, \"The Christmas Tree\", describing their use and origins in detail, was on sale in December 1844.\nOn 2January 1846, Elizabeth Fielding (n\u00e9e Fox Strangways) wrote from Lacock Abbey to William Henry Fox-Talbot: \"Constance is extremely busy preparing the Bohemian Xmas Tree. It is made from Caroline's description of those she saw in Germany\".\nIn 1847, Prince Albert wrote: \"I must now seek in the children an echo of what Ernest [his brother] and I were in the old time, of what we felt and thought; and their delight in the Christmas trees is not less than ours used to be\".\nA boost to the trend was given in 1848 when \"The Illustrated London News\", in a report picked up by other papers, described the trees in Windsor Castle in detail and showed the main tree, surrounded by the royal family, on its cover. In fewer than ten years, the adoption of the tradition in middle and upper-class homes was widespread. By 1856, a northern provincial newspaper contained an advert alluding casually to them, as well as reporting the accidental death of a woman whose dress caught fire as she lit the tapers on a Christmas tree. They had not yet spread down the social scale though, as a report from Berlin in 1858 contrasts the situation there where \"Every family has its own\" with that of Britain, where Christmas trees were still the preserve of the wealthy or the \"romantic\".\nTheir use at public entertainments, charity bazaars and in hospitals made them increasingly familiar however, and in 1906 a charity was set up specifically to ensure even poor children in London slums \"who had never seen a Christmas tree\" would enjoy one that year. Anti-German sentiment after World WarI briefly reduced their popularity but the effect was short-lived, and by the mid-1920s the use of Christmas trees had spread to all classes. In 1933, a restriction on the importation of foreign trees led to the \"rapid growth of a new industry\" as the growing of Christmas trees within Britain became commercially viable due to the size of demand. By 2013, the number of trees grown in Britain for the Christmas market was approximately eight million and their display in homes, shops and public spaces a normal part of the Christmas season.\n\"Georgia\".\nGeorgians have their own type of traditional Christmas tree called chichilaki, made from dried up hazelnut or walnut branches that are shaped to form a small coniferous tree. These pale-colored ornaments differ in height from to . Chichilakis are most common in the Guria and Samegrelo regions of Georgia near the Black Sea, but they can also be found in some stores around the capital of Tbilisi.\nGeorgians believe that the chichilaki resembles the famous beard of St. Basil the Great, because Eastern Orthodox Church commemorates St. Basil on 1 January.\nThe Bahamas.\nThe earliest reference to Christmas trees being used in the Bahamas dates to January 1864 and is associated with the Anglican Sunday Schools in Nassau, New Providence: \"After prayers and a sermon from the Rev. R. Swann, the teachers and children of St. Agnes', accompanied by those of St. Mary's, marched to the Parsonage of Rev. J. H. Fisher, in front of which a large Christmas tree had been planted for their gratification. The delighted little ones formed a circle around it singing 'Come follow me to the Christmas tree.'\" The gifts decorated the trees as ornaments and the children were given tickets with numbers that matched the gifts. This appears to be the typical way of decorating the trees in 1860s Bahamas. In the Christmas of 1864, there was a Christmas tree put up in the Ladies Saloon in the Royal Victoria Hotel for the respectable children of the neighbourhood. The tree was ornamented with gifts for the children who formed a circle about it and sang the song \"Oats and Beans\". The gifts were later given to the children in the name of Santa Claus.\nNorth America.\nThe tradition was introduced to North America in the winter of 1781 by Hessian soldiers stationed in the Province of Qu\u00e9bec (1763\u20131791) to garrison the colony against American attack. General Friedrich Adolf Riedesel and his wife, the Baroness von Riedesel, held a Christmas party for the officers at Sorel, Quebec, delighting their guests with a fir tree decorated with candles and fruits.\nThe Christmas tree became very common in the United States of America in the early 19th century. Dating from late 1812 or early 1813, the watercolor sketchbooks of John Lewis Krimmel contain perhaps the earliest depictions of a Christmas tree in American art, representing a family celebrating Christmas Eve in the Moravian tradition. The first published image of a Christmas tree appeared in 1836 as the frontispiece to \"The Stranger's Gift\" by Hermann Bokum. The first mention of the Christmas tree in American literature was in a story in the 1836 edition of \"The Token and Atlantic Souvenir\", titled \"New Year's Day\", by Catherine Maria Sedgwick, where she tells the story of a German maid decorating her mistress' tree. Also, a woodcut of the British royal family with their Christmas tree at Windsor Castle, initially published in \"The Illustrated London News\" in December 1848, was copied in the United States at Christmas 1850, in \"Godey's Lady's Book\". \"Godey's\" copied it exactly, except for the removal of the Queen's tiara and Prince Albert's moustache, to remake the engraving into an American scene. The republished \"Godey's\" image became the first widely circulated picture of a decorated evergreen Christmas tree in America. Art historian Karal Ann Marling called Queen Victoria and Prince Albert, shorn of their royal trappings, \"the first influential American Christmas tree\". Folk-culture historian Alfred Lewis Shoemaker states, \"In all of America there was no more important medium in spreading the Christmas tree in the decade 1850\u201360 than \"Godey's Lady's Book\"\". The image was reprinted in 1860, and by the 1870s, putting up a Christmas tree had become even more common in America.\nPresident Benjamin Harrison and his wife Caroline put up the first White House Christmas tree in 1889.\nSeveral cities in the United States with German connections lay claim to that country's first Christmas tree. Windsor Locks, Connecticut, claims that a Hessian soldier put up a Christmas tree in 1777 while imprisoned at the Noden-Reed House, while the \"First Christmas Tree in America\" is also claimed by Easton, Pennsylvania, where German settlers purportedly erected a Christmas tree in 1816. In his diary, Matthew Zahm of Lancaster, Pennsylvania, recorded the use of a Christmas tree in 1821, leading Lancaster to also lay claim to the first Christmas tree in America. Other accounts credit Charles Follen, a German immigrant to Boston, for being the first to introduce to America the custom of decorating a Christmas tree. In 1847, August Imgard, a German immigrant living in Wooster, Ohio cut a blue spruce tree from a woods outside town, had the Wooster village tinsmith construct a star, and placed the tree in his house, decorating it with paper ornaments, gilded nuts and Kuchen. German immigrant Charles Minnigerode accepted a position as a professor of humanities at the College of William &amp; Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia, in 1842, where he taught Latin and Greek. Entering into the social life of the Virginia Tidewater, Minnigerode introduced the German custom of decorating an evergreen tree at Christmas at the home of law professor St. George Tucker, thereby becoming another of many influences that prompted Americans to adopt the practice at about that time. An 1853 article on Christmas customs in Pennsylvania defines them as mostly \"German in origin\", including the Christmas tree, which is \"planted in a flower pot filled with earth, and its branches are covered with presents, chiefly of confectionary, for the younger members of the family.\" The article distinguishes between customs in different states, however, claiming that in New England generally \"Christmas is not much celebrated\", whereas in Pennsylvania and New York it is.\nWhen Edward H. Johnson was vice president of the Edison Electric Light Company, a predecessor of General Electric, he created the first known electrically illuminated Christmas tree at his home in New York City in 1882. Johnson became the \"Father of Electric Christmas Tree Lights\".\nThe lyrics sung in the United States to the German tune begin \"O Christmas tree...\", giving rise to the mistaken idea that the German word (fir tree) means \"Christmas tree\", the German word for which is instead .\n1935 to present.\nUnder the state atheism of the Soviet Union, the Christmas tree\u2014along with the entire celebration of the Christian holiday\u2014was banned in the country after the October Revolution. However, the government then introduced a \"New-Year spruce\" () in 1935 for the New Year holiday. It became a fully secular icon: for example, the crowning star was regarded not as a symbol of the Bethlehem Star, but as the Red star. Secular decorations, such as figurines of airplanes, bicycles, space rockets, cosmonauts, and characters of Russian fairy tales, were also produced. This tradition has persisted after the fall of the USSR, with the New Year holiday outweighing Christmas (7 January) for a wide majority of Russian people.\nThe \"Peanuts\" TV special \"A Charlie Brown Christmas\" (1965) was influential on the pop culture surrounding the Christmas tree. Aluminum Christmas trees were popular during the early 1960s in the US. They were satirized in the TV special and came to be seen as symbolizing the commercialization of Christmas. The term \"Charlie Brown Christmas tree,\" describing any poor-looking or malformed tree, especially a small one, also derives from the 1965 TV special, based on the appearance of Charlie Brown's Christmas tree.\nPublic Christmas trees.\nSince the early 20th century, it has become common in many cities, towns, and department stores to put up public Christmas trees outdoors, such as the Macy's Great Tree in Atlanta (since 1948), the Rockefeller Center Christmas Tree in New York City, and the large Christmas tree at Victoria Square in Adelaide.\nThe use of fire retardant allows many indoor public areas to display real trees while remaining code-compliant. Licensed applicators of fire retardant solution spray the tree, tag it, and provide a certificate for inspection.\nThe United States' National Christmas Tree has been lit each year since 1923 on the South Lawn of the White House, becoming part of what evolved into a major holiday event at the White House. President Jimmy Carter lit only the crowning star atop the tree in 1979 in honor of the Americans being held hostage in Iran. This was repeated in 1980, except the tree was fully lit for 417 seconds, one second for each day the hostages had been in captivity.\nDuring most of the 1970s and 1980s, the largest decorated Christmas tree in the world was put up every year on the property of the \"National Enquirer\" in Lantana, Florida. This tradition grew into one of the most spectacular and celebrated events in the history of southern Florida, but was discontinued on the death of the paper's founder in the late 1980s.\nIn some cities, a charity event called the Festival of Trees is organized, in which multiple trees are decorated and displayed. \nThe giving of Christmas trees has also often been associated with the end of hostilities. After the signing of the Armistice in 1918, the city of Manchester, England, sent a tree, and \u00a3500 to buy chocolate and cakes, for the children of the much-bombarded town of Lille in northern France.\nIn some cases, the trees represent special commemorative gifts, such as in Trafalgar Square in London, where the City of Oslo, Norway, presents a tree to the people of London as a token of appreciation for the British support of Norwegian resistance during World War II; in Boston, United States, where the tree is a gift from the province of Nova Scotia, in thanks for rapid deployment of supplies and rescuers to the 1917 ammunition ship explosion that leveled the city of Halifax; and in Newcastle upon Tyne, England, where the main civic Christmas tree is an annual gift from the city of Bergen, Norway, in thanks for the part played by soldiers from Newcastle in liberating Bergen from Nazi occupation. Norway also annually gifts a Christmas tree to Washington, D.C., as a symbol of friendship between Norway and the US and as an expression of gratitude from Norway for the help received from the US during World War II.\nCustoms and traditions.\nSetting up and taking down.\nBoth setting up and taking down a Christmas tree are associated with specific dates; liturgically, this is done through the hanging of the greens ceremony. In many areas, it has become customary to set up one's Christmas tree on Advent Sunday, the first day of the Advent season. Traditionally, however, Christmas trees were not brought in and decorated until the evening of Christmas Eve (24 December), the end of the Advent season and the start of the twelve days of Christmastide. It is customary for Christians in many localities to remove their Christmas decorations on the last day of the twelve days of Christmastide that falls on 5 January\u2014Epiphany Eve (Twelfth Night), although those in other Christian countries remove them on Candlemas, the conclusion of the extended Christmas-Epiphany season (Epiphanytide). According to the first tradition, those who fail to remember to remove their Christmas decorations on Epiphany Eve must leave them untouched until Candlemas, the second opportunity to remove them; failure to observe this custom is considered inauspicious.\nDecorations.\nChristmas ornaments are decorations (usually made of glass, metal, wood, or ceramics) that are used to decorate a Christmas tree. The first decorated trees were adorned with apples, white candy canes and pastries in the shapes of stars, hearts and flowers. Glass baubles were first made in Lauscha, Germany in 1847, along with garlands of glass beads and tin figures that could be hung on trees. The popularity of these decorations fueled the production of glass figures made by highly skilled artisans with clay molds.\nTinsel and several types of garland or ribbon are commonly used as Christmas tree decorations. Silvered saran-based tinsel was introduced later. Delicate mold-blown and painted colored glass Christmas ornaments were a specialty of the glass factories in the Thuringian Forest, especially in Lauscha in the late 19th century, and have since become a large industry, complete with famous-name designers. Baubles are another common decoration, consisting of small hollow glass or plastic spheres coated with a thin metallic layer to make them reflective, with a further coating of a thin pigmented polymer in order to provide coloration.\nLighting with electric lights (Christmas lights or, in the United Kingdom, fairy lights) is commonly done. A tree-topper, typically an angel or a star, is traditionally placed at the highest point to complete the decoration.\nIn the late 1800s, home-made white Christmas trees were made by wrapping strips of cotton batting around leafless branches creating the appearance of a snow-laden tree.\nIn the 1940s and 1950s, popularized by Hollywood films in the late 1930s, flocking was very popular on the West Coast of the United States. There were home flocking kits that could be used with vacuum cleaners. In the 1980s, some trees were sprayed with fluffy white flocking to simulate snow.\nSymbolism and interpretations.\nThe earliest legend of the origin of a fir tree becoming a Christian symbol dates back to 723 AD, involving Saint Boniface as he was evangelizing Germany. It is said that at a pagan gathering in Geismar, where a group of people dancing under a decorated oak tree were about to sacrifice a baby in the name of Thor, Saint Boniface took an axe and called on the name of Jesus. In one swipe, he managed to take down the entire oak tree, to the crowd's astonishment. Behind the fallen tree was a baby fir tree. Boniface said, \"let this tree be the symbol of the true God, its leaves are ever green and will not die.\" The tree's needles pointed heavenward and it was shaped triangularly, representing the Holy Trinity.\nWhen decorating the Christmas tree, many individuals place a star at the top of the tree, symbolizing the Star of Bethlehem. It became popular for people to also use an angel to top the Christmas tree in order to symbolize the angels mentioned in the accounts of the Nativity of Jesus. Additionally, in the context of a Christian celebration of Christmas, the evergreen Christmas tree symbolizes eternal life; the candles or lights on the tree represent Christ as the light of the world.\nProduction.\nEach year, 33 to 36 million Christmas trees are produced in America, and 50 to 60 million are produced in Europe. In 1998, there were about 15,000 growers in America (a third of them \"choose and cut\" farms). In that same year, it was estimated that Americans spent $1.5billion on Christmas trees. By 2016, that had climbed to $2.04billion for natural trees and a further $1.86billion for artificial trees. In Europe, 75 million trees worth \u20ac2.4billion ($3.2 billion) are harvested annually.\nNatural trees.\nThe most commonly used species are fir (\"Abies\"), which have the benefit of not shedding their needles when they dry out, as well as retaining good foliage color and scent; but species in other genera are also used.\nIn northern Europe most commonly used are:\nIn North America, Central America, South America and Australia most commonly used are:\nSeveral other species are used to a lesser extent. Less-traditional conifers are sometimes used, such as giant sequoia, Leyland cypress, Monterey cypress, and eastern juniper. Various types of spruce tree are also used for Christmas trees (including the blue spruce and, less commonly, the white spruce); but spruces begin to lose their needles rapidly upon being cut, and spruce needles are often sharp, making decorating uncomfortable. Virginia pine is still available on some tree farms in the southeastern United States; however, its winter color is faded. The long-needled eastern white pine is also used there, though it is an unpopular Christmas tree in most parts of the country, owing also to its faded winter coloration and limp branches, making decorating difficult with all but the lightest ornaments. Norfolk Island pine is sometimes used, particularly in Oceania, and in Australia, some species of the genera \"Casuarina\" and \"Allocasuarina\" are also occasionally used as Christmas trees. But, by far, the most common tree is the Pinus radiata Monterey pine. \"Adenanthos sericeus\" or Albany woolly bush is commonly sold in southern Australia as a potted living Christmas tree. Hemlock species are generally considered unsuitable as Christmas trees due to their poor needle retention and inability to support the weight of lights and ornaments.\nSome trees, frequently referred to as \"living Christmas trees\", are sold live with roots and soil, often from a plant nursery, to be stored at nurseries in planters or planted later outdoors and enjoyed (and often decorated) for years or decades. Others are produced in a container and sometimes as topiary for a porch or patio. However, when done improperly, the combination of root loss caused by digging, and the indoor environment of high temperature and low humidity is very detrimental to the tree's health; additionally, the warmth of an indoor climate will bring the tree out of its natural winter dormancy, leaving it little protection when put back outside into a cold outdoor climate. Often Christmas trees are a large attraction for living animals, including mice and spiders. Thus, the survival rate of these trees is low. However, when done properly, replanting provides higher survival rates.\nEuropean tradition prefers the open aspect of naturally grown, unsheared trees, while in North America (outside western areas where trees are often wild-harvested on public lands) there is a preference for close-sheared trees with denser foliage, but less space to hang decorations.\nIn the past, Christmas trees were often harvested from wild forests, but now almost all are commercially grown on tree farms. Almost all Christmas trees in the United States are grown on Christmas tree farms where they are cut after about ten years of growth and new trees planted. According to the United States Department of Agriculture's agriculture census for 2007, 21,537 farms were producing conifers for the cut Christmas tree market in America, were planted in Christmas trees.\nThe life cycle of a Christmas tree from the seed to a tree takes, depending on species and treatment in cultivation, between eight and twelve years. First, the seed is extracted from cones harvested from older trees. These seeds are then usually grown in nurseries and then sold to Christmas tree farms at an age of three to four years. The remaining development of the tree greatly depends on the climate, soil quality, as well as the cultivation and how the trees are tended by the Christmas tree farmer. One issue that farmers face is the destruction of pine trees by pests, such as \"T. piniperda.\"\nArtificial trees.\nThe first artificial Christmas trees were developed in Germany during the 19th century, though earlier examples exist. These \"trees\" were made using goose feathers that were dyed green, as one response by Germans to continued deforestation. Feather Christmas trees ranged widely in size, from a small tree to a large tree sold in department stores during the 1920s. Often, the tree branches were tipped with artificial red berries which acted as candle holders.\nOver the years, other styles of artificial Christmas trees have evolved and become popular. In 1930, the U.S.-based Addis Brush Company created the first artificial Christmas tree made from brush bristles. Another type of artificial tree is the aluminum Christmas tree, first manufactured in Chicago in 1958, and later in Manitowoc, Wisconsin, where the majority of the trees were produced. Most modern artificial Christmas trees are made from plastic recycled from used packaging materials, such as polyvinyl chloride (PVC). Approximately 10% of artificial Christmas trees are using virgin suspension PVC resin; despite being plastic most artificial trees are not recyclable or biodegradable.\nTrends developed in the early 2000s included optical fiber Christmas trees, which come in two major varieties; one resembling a traditional Christmas tree. One Dallas-based company offers \"holographic mylar\" trees in many hues. Tree-shaped objects made from such materials as cardboard, glass, ceramic or other materials can be found in use as tabletop decorations. Upside-down artificial Christmas trees became popular for a short time and were originally introduced as a marketing gimmick; they allowed consumers to get closer to ornaments for sale in retail stores and opened up floor space for more products.\nArtificial trees became increasingly popular during the late 20th century. Users of artificial Christmas trees assert that they are more convenient, and, because they are reusable, much cheaper than their natural alternative. They are also considered much safer, as natural trees can be a significant fire hazard. Between 2001 and 2007, artificial Christmas tree sales in the U.S. jumped from 7.3 million to 17.4 million. Currently, it is estimated that around 58% of Christmas trees used in the United States are artificial, while numbers in the United Kingdom are indicated to be around 66%.\nEnvironmental issues.\nThe debate about the environmental impact of artificial trees is ongoing. Generally, natural tree growers contend that artificial trees are more environmentally harmful than their natural counterparts. However, trade groups, such as the American Christmas Tree Association, claim that the PVC used in Christmas trees is chemically and mechanically stable, does not affect human health, and has excellent recyclable properties.\nLive trees are typically grown as a crop and replanted in rotation after cutting, often providing suitable habitat for wildlife. Alternately, live trees can be donated to livestock farmers who find that such trees uncontaminated by chemical additives are excellent fodder. In some cases, management of Christmas tree crops can result in poor habitat since it sometimes involves heavy input of pesticides.\nConcerns have been raised by arborists about people cutting down old and rare conifers, such as the \"Keteleeria evelyniana\" for Christmas trees.\nReal or cut trees are used only for a short time, but can be recycled and used as mulch, wildlife habitat, or used to prevent erosion. Real trees are carbon-neutral, they emit no more carbon dioxide by being cut down and disposed of than they absorb while growing. However, emissions can occur from farming activities and transportation. An independent life-cycle assessment study, conducted by a firm of experts in sustainable development, states that a natural tree will generate of greenhouse gases every year (based on purchasing from home) whereas the artificial tree will produce over its lifetime. Some people use living Christmas or potted trees for several seasons, providing a longer life cycle for each tree. Living Christmas trees can be purchased or rented from local market growers. Rentals are picked up after the holidays, while purchased trees can be planted by the owner after use or donated to local tree adoption or urban reforestation services. Smaller and younger trees may be replanted after each season, with the following year running up to the next Christmas allowing the tree to carry out further growth.\nThe use of lead stabilizer in Chinese imported trees has been an issue of concern among politicians and scientists over recent years. A 2004 study found that while in general artificial trees pose little health risk from lead contamination, there do exist \"worst-case scenarios\" where major health risks to young children exist. A 2008 United States Environmental Protection Agency report found that as the PVC in artificial Christmas trees aged it began to degrade. The report determined that of the fifty million artificial trees in the United States approximately twenty million were nine or more years old, the point where dangerous lead contamination levels are reached. A professional study on the life-cycle assessment of both real and artificial Christmas trees revealed that one must use an artificial Christmas tree at least twenty years to leave an environmental footprint as small as the natural Christmas tree.\nReligious issues.\nUnder the Marxist-Leninist doctrine of state atheism in the Soviet Union, after its foundation in 1917, Christmas celebrations\u2014along with other religious holidays\u2014were prohibited as a result of the Soviet anti-religious campaign. The League of Militant Atheists encouraged school pupils to campaign against Christmas traditions, among them being the Christmas tree, as well as other Christian holidays, including Easter; the League established an anti-religious holiday to be the 31st of each month as a replacement. With the Christmas tree being prohibited in accordance with Soviet anti-religious legislation, people supplanted the former Christmas custom with New Year's trees as a secular replacement. \nPope John Paul II introduced the Christmas tree custom to the Vatican in 1982. Although at first disapproved of by some as out of place at the centre of the Roman Catholic Church, the Vatican Christmas Tree has become an integral part of the Vatican Christmas celebrations, and in 2005 Pope Benedict XVI spoke of it as part of the normal Christmas decorations in Catholic homes. In 2004, Pope John Paul called the Christmas tree a symbol of Christ. This very ancient custom, he said, exalts the value of life, as in winter what is evergreen becomes a sign of undying life, and it reminds Christians of the \"tree of life\", an image of Christ, the supreme gift of God to humanity. In the previous year he said: \"Beside the crib, the Christmas tree, with its twinkling lights, reminds us that with the birth of Jesus the tree of life has blossomed anew in the desert of humanity. The crib and the tree: precious symbols, which hand down in time the true meaning of Christmas.\" The Catholic Church's official \"Book of Blessings\" has a service for the blessing of the Christmas tree in a home. The Episcopal Church in \"The Anglican Family Prayer Book\", which has the imprimatur of The Rt. Rev. Catherine S. Roskam of the Anglican Communion, has long had a ritual titled \"Blessing of a Christmas Tree\", as well as \"Blessing of a Cr\u00e8che\", for use in the church and the home; family services and public liturgies for the blessing of Christmas trees are common in other Christian denominations as well.\nChrismon trees, which find their origin in the Lutheran Christian tradition though are now used in many Christian denominations such as the Catholic Church and Methodist Church, are used to decorate churches during the liturgical season of Advent; during the period of Christmastide, Christian churches display the traditional Christmas tree in their sanctuaries.\nIn 2005, the city of Boston renamed the spruce tree used to decorate the Boston Common a \"Holiday Tree\" rather than a \"Christmas Tree\". The name change was reversed after the city was threatened with several lawsuits.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7772", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7772", "title": "Carrier battle group", "text": "Type of naval fleet with an aircraft carrier\nA carrier battle group (CVBG) is a naval fleet consisting of an aircraft carrier capital ship and its large number of escorts, together defining the group. The \"CV\" in \"CVBG\" is the United States Navy hull classification code for an aircraft carrier.\nThe first naval task forces built around carriers appeared just prior to and during World War II. The Imperial Japanese Navy (IJN) was the first to assemble many carriers into a single task force, known as the \"Kido Butai\". This task force was used with devastating effect in the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. The Kido Butai operated as the IJN's main carrier battle group until four of its carriers were sunk at the Battle of Midway. In contrast, the United States Navy deployed its large carriers in separate formations, with each carrier assigned its own cruiser and destroyer escorts. These single-carrier formations would often be paired or grouped together for certain assignments, most notably the Battle of the Coral Sea and Midway. By 1943, however, large numbers of fleet and light carriers became available, which required larger formations of three or four carriers. These groups eventually formed the Fast Carrier Task Force, which became the primary battle unit of the U.S. Third and Fifth Fleets.\nWith the construction of the large \"supercarriers\" of the Cold War era, the practice of operating each carrier in a single formation was revived. During the Cold War, the main role of the CVBG in case of conflict with the Soviet Union would have been to protect Atlantic supply routes between the United States and its NATO allies in Europe, while the role of the Soviet Navy would have been to interrupt these sea lanes, a fundamentally easier task. Because the Soviet Union had no large carriers of its own, a situation of dueling aircraft carriers would have been unlikely. However, a primary mission of the Soviet Navy's attack submarines was to track every allied battle group and, on the outbreak of hostilities, sink the carriers. Understanding this threat, the CVBG expended enormous resources in its own anti-submarine warfare mission.\nCarrier battle groups in crises.\nIn the late 20th and early 21st centuries, most uses of carrier battle groups by the United States as well as that of other Western nations have been in situations where their use has been uncontested by other comparable forces. During the Cold War, an important battle scenario was an attack against a CVBG using numerous anti-ship missiles.\n1956 Suez Crisis.\nBritish and French carrier battle groups were involved in the 1956 Suez Crisis.\n1971 Indo-Pakistan war.\nDuring the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971, India used its carrier strike group centered on to impose a naval blockade on East Pakistan. Air strikes were carried out initially on shipping in the harbors of Chittagong and Cox's Bazar, sinking or incapacitating most ships there. Further strikes were carried out on Cox's Bazar from 60 nautical miles (110\u00a0km) offshore. On the evening of 4 December, the air group again struck Chittagong harbor. Later strikes targeted Khulna and the Port of Mongla. Air strikes continued until 10 December 1971.\n1982 Falklands War.\nThe first attempted use of anti-ship missiles against a carrier battle group was part of Argentina's efforts against British armed forces during the Falklands War. This was the last conflict so far in which opposing belligerents employed aircraft carriers, although Argentina made little use of its sole carrier, , which was originally built in the United Kingdom as HMS \"Venerable\" and later served with the Royal Netherlands Navy (1948\u20131968).\nLebanon.\nThe United States Sixth Fleet assembled a force of three carrier battle groups and a battleship during the Lebanese Civil War in 1983. Daily reconnaissance flights were flown over the Bekaa Valley and a strike was flown against targets in the area resulting in loss of an A-6 Intruder and an A-7 Corsair.\nGulf of Sidra.\nCarrier battle groups routinely operated in the Gulf of Sidra inside the \"Line of Death\" proclaimed by Libya resulting in aerial engagements in 1981, 1986 and 1989 between U.S. Navy Tomcats and Libyan Su-22 aircraft, SA-5 surface-to-air missiles and MiG-23 fighters. During the 1986 clashes, three carrier battle groups deployed to the Gulf of Sidra and ultimately two of them conducted strikes against Libya in Operation El Dorado Canyon.\n2011 military intervention in Libya.\nDuring the international military intervention in the 2011 Libyan civil war, the French Navy deployed its aircraft carrier, , off Libya. The \"Charles de Gaulle\" was accompanied by several frigates as , , , the replenishment tanker \"Meuse\" and two nuclear attack submarines.\nApplications.\nChina.\nChina plans to set up several carrier battle groups in the future. At present China's two aircraft carriers, and , use Type 055 destroyers for area air defence with anti-submarine warfare, Type 052C or Type 052D destroyers for air defence, Type 054A frigates for anti-submarine and anti-ship warfare, one to two Type 093 nuclear attack submarines, and one Type 901 supply ship. China is building a third carrier, as well as a nuclear-powered fourth carrier planned for construction and expected to be completed by the late 2020s.\nFrance.\nThe only serving French carrier is the , which also serves as the flagship of the French Navy. The carrier battle group of the is known as the (GAN) and is usually composed, in addition to the aircraft carrier, of:\nThis group is commanded by a rear admiral () on board the aircraft carrier. The commanding officer of the air group (usually a \u2014equivalent to commander) is subordinate to the commanding officer of the aircraft carrier, a senior captain. The escort destroyers (called frigates in the French denomination) are commanded by more junior captains.\nFrance also operates three s. While incapable of operating fixed-winged aircraft, they function as helicopter carriers and form the backbone of France's amphibious force. These ships are typically escorted by the same escorts \"Charles De Gaulle\" uses.\nIndia.\nThe Indian Navy has operated all types of aircraft carriers including CATOBAR configured , STOVL configured and STOBAR configured and and CBGs centered on them. The Indian Navy has been operating carrier battle groups since 1961, with its first carrier battle group formed around the now decommissioned \"Vikrant\" (1961). \"Viraat\" was an updated light carrier originally built for the Royal Navy as , which was laid down in 1944 and commissioned in 1959. It was purchased by India in May 1987, and was decommissioned in March 2017. India commissioned \"Vikramaditya\" in 2013 followed by the new \"Vikrant\" (2013) in 2022. \"Vikramaditya\" is the modified , \"Vikrant\" is the first indigenous aircraft carrier built in India. India plans to have three carrier battle groups by 2035, each centered on \"Vikrant\" (2013), \"Vikramaditya\" and , another planned carrier. As of 2023, the Indian Navy operates two carrier battle groups centred on \"Vikramaditya\" and \"Vikrant\".\nThe Indian Navy's carrier battle group centred on \"Viraat\" consisted of two destroyers, usually of the (previously s), two or more frigates, usually of the , or es, and one support ship.\nThe Carrier Battle Group (CBG) led by \"Vikramaditya\" includes s, s and the support ship among others. While the independent CBG of \"Vikrant\" is expected to consist of s, s, s and the support ship .\nItaly.\nThe CVS\u2013ASW (Aircraft Carrier with Anti-Submarine Warfare) was Italy's first carrier. The battle group based at Taranto called COMFORAL was formed by the carrier \"Giuseppe Garibaldi\", two s, two support ships (\"Etna\" and \"Elettra\"), and three amphibious/support ships (\"San Giusto\", \"San Marco\" and \"San Giorgio\").\nAfter 2010, the Italian battle group will be formed by the new , 5\u20136 new warships (including Orizzonte-class destroyers and frigates), one new support ship, some minehunters and new submarines (the COMFORAL will be a reserve group).\nRussia.\n\"Admiral Kuznetsov\" has been observed sailing together with a (CBGN), (CG), (ASuW), (ASW) and \"Krivak\" I/II FFG (ASW). These escorts, especially the heavily armed \"Kirov\"-class battlecruiser, use advanced sensors and carry a variety of weaponry. During \"Admiral Kuznetsov\"'s deployment to Syria in November 2016 on her first combat tour, the carrier was escorted by a pair of \"Udaloy\"-class destroyers and a \"Kirov\"-class battlecruiser en route, while additional Russian Navy warships met her off Syria.\n\"Admiral Kuznetsov\" is designed specifically to sail alone and carries greater firepower than her U.S. counterparts. This includes 12x SS-N-19 'Shipwreck' (long range, high speed, sea-skimming) SSMs, 24 x VLS units loaded with 192 SA-N-9 'Gauntlet' SAMs, and 8 x Kashtan CIWS with dual 30\u00a0mm guns, and 8 \u00d7 AK-630 CIWS. Compared to the 4 \u00d7 Phalanx CIWS and 4 \u00d7 Sea Sparrow launchers, each with 8 missiles carried by the \"Nimitz\" class, \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" is well armed for both air-defence and offensive operations against hostile shipping.\nUnited Kingdom.\nAs one of the pioneers of aircraft carriers, the Royal Navy has maintained a carrier strike capability since the commissioning of in 1918. However, the capability was temporarily lost between 2010 and 2018, following the retirement of the and Harrier GR9s. During this period, the Royal Navy worked to regenerate its carrier strike capability based on the Carrier-Enabled Power Projection (CEPP) concept by ordering two s and the F-35B Lightning aircraft to operate from them. To maintain its skills and experience, the Royal Navy embedded personnel and ships with partner navies, in particular the United States Navy.\nIn 2017, the first \"Queen Elizabeth\"-class aircraft carrier, , entered service followed by her sister ship, , in 2019. The first carrier strike group took to sea in September 2019 as part of an exercise known as Westlant 19. HMS \"Queen Elizabeth\" and her air group of F-35B Lightning jets operated alongside two surface escorts and a fleet tanker off the east coast of the United States. The deployment was in preparation for the first operational deployment in 2021, which is expected to involve HMS \"Queen Elizabeth\" alongside four Royal Navy escorts, two support ships and a submarine.\nUnder current plans, a Royal Navy carrier strike group will typically comprise a \"Queen Elizabeth\"-class aircraft carrier, two air defence destroyers, two anti-submarine frigates, a submarine, solid stores ship and a fleet tanker. However, the composition varies depending on the operational tasking. While \"Queen Elizabeth\"'s initial deployment will be as part of an all-British carrier group, it is envisaged in the longer term that the UK's carriers will usually form the centre of a multi-national operation \u2013 in 2018, it was announced that the British and Dutch governments had come to an agreement that would see escort vessels of the Royal Netherlands Navy operating as part of the UK Carrier Strike Group. Command of the UK carrier strike group is the responsibility of Commander United Kingdom Carrier Strike Group. A June 2020 National Audit Office report however provided a critical review of the forthcoming Carrier Strike Group, especially noting the delay to the Crowsnest system.\nUnited States.\nCarrier strike group.\nIn modern United States Navy carrier air operations, a carrier strike group (CSG) normally consists of one aircraft carrier, one guided missile cruiser (for air defense), two LAMPS-capable warships (focusing on anti-submarine and surface warfare), and one to two anti-submarine destroyers or frigates. The large number of CSGs used by the United States reflects, in part, a division of roles and missions allotted during the Cold War, in which the United States assumed primary responsibility for blue-water operations and for safeguarding supply lines between the United States and Europe, while the NATO allies assumed responsibility for less costly brown- and green-water operations. The CSG has replaced the old term of carrier battle group (CVBG or CARBATGRU). The US Navy maintains 11 carrier strike groups, 10 of which are based in the United States and one that is forward deployed in Yokosuka, Japan.\nExpeditionary strike group.\nAn expeditionary strike group is composed of an amphibious assault ship (landing helicopter assault/landing helicopter dock), a dock landing ship, an amphibious transport dock, a Marine expeditionary unit, AV-8B Harrier II or, more the newer Lockheed Martin F-35B Lightning II aircraft, CH-53E Super Stallion and CH-46E Sea Knight helicopters or, more recently, MV-22B tiltrotors. Cruisers, destroyers and attack submarines are deployed with either an Expeditionary Strike Group or a Carrier Strike Group.\nBattleship battle group.\nDuring the period when the American navy recommissioned all four of its s, it sometimes used a similar formation centered on a battleship, referred to as a battleship battle group. It was alternately referred to as a surface action group. The battleship battle group typically consisted of one modernized battleship, one , one or , one , three s and one auxiliary ship such as a replenishment oiler.\nSurface action group.\nA surface action group is \"a temporary or standing organization of combatant ships, other than carriers, tailored for a specific tactical mission\".\nUnderway replenishment.\nSince its origins, the viability of the carrier battle group has been dependent on its ability to remain at sea for extended periods. Specialized ships were developed to provide underway replenishment of fuel (for the carrier and its aircraft), ordnance, and other supplies necessary to sustain operations. Carrier battle groups devote a great deal of planning to efficiently conduct underway replenishment to minimize the time spent conducting replenishment. The carrier can also provide replenishment on a limited basis to its escorts, but typically a replenishment ship such as a fast combat support ship (AOE) or replenishment oiler (AOR) pulls alongside a carrier and conducts simultaneous operations with the carrier on its port side and one of the escorts on its starboard side. The advent of the helicopter provides the ability to speed replenishment by lifting supplies at the same time that fueling hoses and lines are delivering other goods.\nDebate on future viability.\nThere is debate in naval warfare circles as to the viability of carrier battle groups in 21st century naval warfare. Proponents of the CVBG argue that it provides unmatched firepower and force projection capabilities. Opponents argue that CVBGs are increasingly vulnerable to arsenal ships and cruise missiles, especially those with supersonic or even hypersonic flight and the ability to perform radical trajectory changes to avoid anti-missile systems. It is also noted that CVBGs were designed for Cold War scenarios, and are less useful in establishing control of areas close to shore. It is argued however that such missiles and arsenal ships pose no serious threat as they would be eliminated due to increasing improvement in ship defenses such as Cooperative Engagement Capability (CEC), DEW technology and missile technology.\nAdditionally, carrier battle groups proved to be vulnerable to diesel-electric submarines owned by many smaller naval forces. Examples are the German \"U24\" of the conventional 206 class which in 2001 \"sank\" USS \"Enterprise\" during the exercise JTFEX 01-2 in the Caribbean Sea by firing flares and taking a photograph through its periscope or the Swedish \"Gotland\" which managed the same feat in 2006 during JTFEX 06-2 by penetrating the defensive measures of Carrier Strike Group 7 undetected and snap several pictures of .\nHowever, carriers have been called upon to be first responders even when conventional land-based aircraft were employed. During Desert Shield, the U.S. Navy sortied additional carriers to augment the on-station assets, eventually maintaining six carriers for Desert Storm. Although the U.S. Air Force sent fighters such as the F-16 to theater in Desert Shield, they had to carry bombs with them as no stores were in place for sustained operations, whereas the carriers arrived on scene with full magazines and had support ships to allow them to conduct strikes indefinitely.\nThe Global War on Terror has shown the flexibility and responsiveness of the carrier on multiple occasions when land-based air was not feasible or able to respond in a timely fashion. After the 11 September terrorist attacks on the U.S., carriers immediately headed to the Arabian Sea to support Operation Enduring Freedom and took up station, building to a force of three carriers. Their steaming location was closer to the targets in Afghanistan than any land-based assets and thereby more responsive. The was adapted to be a support base for special operations helicopters. Carriers were used again in Operation Iraqi Freedom and even provided aircraft to be based ashore on occasion and have done so periodically when special capabilities are needed. This precedent was established during World War II in the Battle of Guadalcanal.\nRegardless of the debate over viability, the United States has made a major investment in the development of a new carrier class\u2014the s (formerly designated CVN-X, or the X Carrier)\u2014to replace the existing s. The new \"Ford\"-class carriers are designed to be modular and are easily adaptable as technology and equipment needed on board changes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7773", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7773", "title": "Boeing Vertol CH-46 Sea Knight", "text": "Tandem transport helicopter designed by Vertol\nThe Boeing Vertol CH-46 Sea Knight is an American medium-lift tandem-rotor transport helicopter powered by twin turboshaft engines. It was designed by Vertol and manufactured by Boeing Vertol following Vertol's acquisition by Boeing.\nDevelopment of the Sea Knight, which was originally designated by the firm as the Vertol Model 107, commenced during 1956. It was envisioned as a successor to the first generation of rotorcraft, such as the H-21 \"Flying Banana\", that had been powered by piston engines; in its place, the V-107 made use of the emergent turboshaft engine. On 22 April 1958, the V-107 prototype performed its maiden flight. During June 1958, the US Army awarded a contract for the construction of ten production-standard aircraft, designated as the YHC-1A, based on the V-107; this initial order was later cut down to three YHC-1As. During 1961, the US Marine Corps (USMC), which had been studying its requirements for a medium-lift, twin-turbine cargo/troop assault helicopter, selected Boeing Vertol's Model 107M as the basis from which to manufacture a suitable rotorcraft to meet their needs. Known colloquially as the \"Phrog\" and formally as the \"Sea Knight\", it was operated across all US Marine Corps' operational environments between its introduction during the Vietnam War and its frontline retirement during 2014.\nThe Sea Knight was operated by the USMC to provide all-weather, day-or-night assault transport of combat troops, supplies and equipment until it was replaced by the MV-22 Osprey during the 2010s. The USMC also used the helicopter for combat support, search and rescue (SAR), casualty evacuation and Tactical Recovery of Aircraft and Personnel (TRAP). The Sea Knight also functioned as the US Navy's standard medium-lift utility helicopter prior to the type being phased out of service in favor of the MH-60S Knighthawk during the early 2000s. Several overseas operators acquired the rotorcraft as well. Canada operated the Sea Knight, designated as CH-113; the type was used predominantly in the SAR role until 2004. Other export customers for the type included Japan, Sweden, and Saudi Arabia. The commercial version of the rotorcraft is the BV 107-II, commonly referred to simply as the \"Vertol\". The Sea Knight is an amphibious helicopter, able to land directly on calm water and float, but only for a few hours.\nDevelopment.\nOrigins.\nDuring the 1940s and 1950s, American rotorcraft manufacturer Piasecki Helicopter emerged as a pioneering developer of tandem-rotor helicopters; perhaps the most famous of these being the piston-powered H-21 \"Flying Banana\", an early utility and transport helicopter. During 1955, Piasecki was officially renamed as Vertol Corporation (standing for vertical take-off and landing); it was around this time that work commenced on the development of a new generation of tandem rotor helicopter. During 1956, the new design received the internal company designation of \"Vertol Model 107\", or simply \"V-107\"; this rotorcraft differed from its predecessors by harnessing the newly developed turboshaft engine instead of piston-based counterparts. During that year, construction of a prototype, powered by a pair of Lycoming T53 turboshaft engines, each one being capable of producing 877 shp (640\u00a0kW), commenced.\nOn 22 April 1958, the V-107 prototype performed its maiden flight. In order to garner publicity for the newly developed rotorcraft, it was decided to use the prototype to conduct a series of publicised flight demonstrations during a tour across the United States and several overseas nations. During June 1958, it was announced that the U.S. Army had awarded a contract to Vertol for the construction of ten production-standard aircraft based on the V-107, which were designated \"YHC-1A\". However, this order was later decreased to three helicopters; according to aviation author Jay P. Spenser, the cutback had been enacted in order that the U.S. Army would be able to divert funds for the development of the rival \"V-114\" helicopter, which was also a turbine-powered tandem rotor design but substantially larger than the V-107. All of the U.S. Army's three YHC-1As were powered by pairs of GE-T-58 engines. During August 1959, the first YHC-1A-model rotorcraft conducted its first flight; independently, it was shortly followed by the maiden flight of an improved model intended for the commercial and export markets, designated \"107-II\".\nDuring 1960, the U.S. Marine Corps evolved a requirement for a medium-lift, twin-turbine troop/cargo assault helicopter to replace the various piston-engined types that were then in widespread use with the service. That same year, American aviation company Boeing acquired Vertol, after which the group was consequently renamed Boeing Vertol. Following a competition between several competing designs, during early 1961, it was announced that Boeing Vertol had been selected to manufacture its model 107M for the U.S. Marine Corps, where it was designated \"HRB-1\". During 1962, the U.S. Air Force placed its own order for 12 \"XCH-46B Sea Knight\" helicopters, which used the \"XH-49A\" designation; however, the service later decided to cancel the order due to delays in its delivery; instead, the U.S. Air Force opted to procure the rival Sikorsky S-61R in its place.\nFollowing the Sea Knight's first flight in August 1962, the military designation was changed to \"CH-46A\". During November 1964, the introduction of the Marines' CH-46A and the Navy's UH-46As commenced. The UH-46A variant was a modified version of the rotorcraft to perform the vertical replenishment mission. The CH-46A was equipped with a pair of T58-GE8-8B turboshaft engines, each being rated at 1,250 shp (930\u00a0kW); these allowed the Sea Knight to carry up to 17 passengers or a maximum of 4,000 pounds (1,815\u00a0kg) of cargo.\nFurther developments.\nDuring 1966, production of the improved \"CH-46D\" commenced with deliveries following shortly thereafter. This model featured various improvements, including modified rotor blades and the adoption of more powerful T58-GE-10 turboshaft engines, rated at each. The increased power of these new engines allowed the CH-46D to carry an increased payload, such as up to 25 troops or a maximum of of cargo. During late 1967, the improved model was introduced to the Vietnam theater, where it supplemented the U.S. Marine Corps' existing CH-46A fleet, which had proven to be relatively unreliable and problematic in service. Along with the USMC's CH-46Ds, the U.S. Navy also acquired a small number of UH-46Ds for ship resupply purposes. In addition, approximately 33 CH-46As were progressively re-manufactured to the CH-46D standard.\nBetween 1968 and 1971, the U.S. Marine Corps received a number of CH-46F standard rotorcraft. This model retained the T58-GE-10 engines used on the CH-46D while featuring revised avionics and featured a number of other modifications. The CH-46F was the final production model of the type. During its service life, the Sea Knight received a variety of upgrades and modifications. Over time, the majority of the U.S. Marine Corps' Sea Knights were upgraded to the improved CH-46E standard. This model featured fiberglass rotor blades, reinforcement measures throughout the airframe, along with the refitting of further uprated T58-GE-16 engines, capable of producing each; in addition, several CH-46Es were modified to double their maximum fuel capacity. Starting in the mid-1990s, the Dynamic Component Upgrade (DCU) programmes was enacted, focusing on the implementation of strengthened drive systems and modified rotor controls.\nThe commercial variant, the \"BV 107-II\", was first ordered by New York Airways during 1960. During July 1962, they took delivery of their first three aircraft, which was configured to seat up to 25 passengers. During 1965, Boeing Vertol sold the manufacturing rights of the 107 to Japanese conglomerate Kawasaki Heavy Industries. Under this arrangement, all Model 107 civilian and military aircraft built in Japan were referred to by the \"KV 107\" designation. On 15 December 2006, Columbia Helicopters, Inc acquired the type certificate for the BV 107-II, and with the help of Piasecki eventually developed an original design, the \"Model 107-III\", remanufactured from older airframes. This model features new manufactured CT58-GE-16 engines, the commercial version of the upgraded engines used for the CH-46E as well as modernized avionics including a glass cockpit.\nDesign.\nThe \"Boeing Vertol CH-46 Sea Knight\" is a medium-lift tandem-rotor transport helicopter, furnished with a set of counter-rotating main rotors in a tandem-rotor configuration. It was typically powered by a pair of General Electric T58 turboshaft engines, which were mounted on each side of the rear rotor pedestal; power to the forward rotor was transferred from the rear-mounted engines via a drive shaft. For redundancy, both engines are coupled so that either one would be capable of powering both of the main rotors in the event of a single engine failure or a similar emergency situation. Each of the rotors feature three blades, which can be folded to better facilitate storage and naval operations. The CH-46 features a fixed tricycle landing gear, complete with twin wheels on all three legs of the landing gear; this configuration results in a nose-up stance, helping to facilitate cargo loading and unloading. Two of the main landing gear were installed within protruding rear sponsons; the free interior space of the sponsons are also used to house fuel tanks, possessing a total capacity of 350 US gallons (1,438 L).\nThe interior of the CH-46 was largely taken up by its cargo bay, complete with a rear loading ramp that could be removed or left open in flight for the carriage of extended cargoes or for parachute drops. Various furnishings were normally provided to aid in its use as a utility rotorcraft, such as an internal winch mounted within the forward cabin, which can be used to assisting loading by pulling external cargo on pallets into the aircraft via the ramp and rollers, and an optionally-attached belly-mounted cargo hook, which would be usually rated at for carrying cargoes externally underneath the Sea Knight; despite the hook having been rated at , this was safety restricted to less payload as they got older. When operated in a typical configuration, the CH-46 would usually be operated by a crew of three; a larger crew could be accommodated when required, which would be dependent upon mission specifics. For example, a search and rescue (SAR) variant would usually carry a crew of five (Pilot, Co-Pilot, Crew Chief, Swimmer, and Medic) to facilitate all aspects of such operations. For self-defense, a pintle-mounted 0.50 in (12.7\u00a0mm) M2 Browning machine gun could be mounted on each side of the helicopter. Service in southeast Asia resulted in the addition of armor along with the machine guns.\nThe CH-46 was a partially amphibious helicopter, and could land directly on water and rest for up to two hours in calm water.\nOperational history.\nUnited States.\nKnown colloquially as the \"Phrog\", the Sea Knight was used in all U.S. Marine operational environments between its introduction during the Vietnam War and its retirement in 2015. The type's longevity and reputation for reliability led to mantras such as \"phrogs phorever\" and \"never trust a helicopter under 30\". CH-46s transported personnel, evacuated wounded, supplied forward arming and refueling points (FARP), performed vertical replenishment, search and rescue, recovered downed aircraft and crews and other tasks.\nVietnam War.\nDuring the Vietnam War, the CH-46 was one of the prime US Marine troop transport helicopters in the theater, slotting between the smaller Bell UH-1 Iroquois and larger Sikorsky CH-53 Sea Stallion and progressively replacing the UH-34. CH-46 operations were plagued by major technical problems; the engines, being prone to foreign object damage (FOD) from debris being ingested when hovering close to the ground and subsequently suffering a compressor stall, had a lifespan as low as 85 flight hours; on 21 July 1966, all CH-46s were grounded until more efficient filters had been fitted.\nOn 3 May 1967, a CH-46D at Marine Corps Air Facility Santa Ana crashed, killing all four members of the crew. Within three days the accident investigators had determined that the mounting brackets of the main transmission had failed, allowing the front and rear overlapping rotors to intermesh. All CH-46s were temporarily grounded for inspection. On 13 May, a CH-46A crashed off the coast of Vietnam when the tail pylon containing the engines, main transmission and aft rotors broke off in flight. All four crew members were killed. On 20 June, another CH-46A crashed, though two of the four-man crew survived. Once again, even though the aircraft was not recovered from the water, failure of some sort in the rear pylon was suspected. On 30 June a CH-46D at Santa Ana crashed when a rotor blade separated from the aircraft, all three of the crew survived. As a result of this latest accident, all CH-46Ds were immediately grounded, but the CH-46As continued flying. On 3 July another CH-46A crashed in Vietnam, killing all four Marines of its crew. The cause of the crash again was traced to failure of the main transmission.\nOn 31 August 1967, a CH-46A on a medical evacuation mission to disintegrated in midair killing all its occupants. The following day another CH-46A experienced a similar incident at Marble Mountain Air Facility leading to the type being grounded for all except emergency situations and cutting Marine airlift capacity in half. An investigation conducted by a joint Naval Air Systems Command/Boeing Vertol accident investigation team revealed that structural failures were occurring in the area of the rear pylon resulting in the rear rotor tearing off in flight and may have been the cause of several earlier losses. The team recommended structural and systems modifications to reinforce the rear rotor mount as well as installation of an indicator to detect excessive strain on critical parts of the aircraft. 80 CH-46As were shipped to Marine Corps Air Station Futenma, Okinawa where they received the necessary modifications by a combined force of Marine and Boeing Vertol personnel. The modified CH-46As began returning to service in December 1967 and all had been returned to service by February 1968.\nDuring the 1972 Easter Offensive, Sea Knights saw heavy use to convey US and South Vietnamese ground forces to and around the front lines. Marine CH-46s participated in Operation Frequent Wind, the evacuation of Saigon, in April 1975 and the last helicopter to leave the roof of the US embassy was a CH-46 of HMM-164. By the end of US military operations in Vietnam, over a hundred Sea Knights had been lost to enemy fire.\nPost-Vietnam.\nIn February 1968 the Marine Corps Development and Education Command obtained several CH-46s to perform herbicide dissemination tests using HIDAL (Helicopter, Insecticide Dispersal Apparatus, Liquid) systems; testing indicated the need for redesign and further study. Tandem-rotor helicopters were often used to transport nuclear warheads; the CH-46A was evaluated to deploy Naval Special Forces with the Special Atomic Demolition Munition (SADM). Nuclear Weapon Accident Exercise 1983 (NUWAX-83), simulating the crash of a Navy CH-46E carrying 3 nuclear warheads, was conducted at the Nevada Test Site on behalf of several federal agencies; the exercise, which used real radiological agents, was depicted in a Defense Nuclear Agency-produced documentary.\nU.S. Marine CH-46s were used to deploy the 8th Marine Regiment into Grenada during Operation Urgent Fury, evacuated the surviving crewmember of a downed AH-1 Cobra, and then carried infantry from the 75th Ranger Regiment to secure and evacuate U.S. students at St. George's University, though one crashed after colliding with a palm tree.\nCH-46E Sea Knights were also used by the U.S. Marine Corps during the 2003 invasion of Iraq. In one incident on 1 April 2003, Marine CH-46Es and CH-53Es carried U.S. Army Rangers and Special Operations troops on an extraction mission for captured Army Private Jessica Lynch from an Iraqi hospital. During the subsequent occupation of Iraq and counter-insurgency operations, the CH-46E was heavily used in the CASEVAC role, being required to maintain 24/7 availability regardless of conditions. According to authors Williamson Murray and Robert H Scales, the Sea Knight displayed serious reliability and maintenance problems during its deployment to Iraq, as well as \"limited lift capabilities\". Following the loss of numerous US helicopters in the Iraqi theatre, the Marines opted to equip their CH-46s with more advanced anti-missile countermeasures.\nThe U.S. Navy retired the type on 24 September 2004, replacing it with the MH-60S Seahawk; the Marine Corps maintained its fleet as the MV-22 Osprey was fielded. In March 2006 Marine Medium Helicopter Squadron 263 (HMM-263) was deactivated and redesignated VMM-263 to serve as the first MV-22 squadron. The replacement process continued through the other medium helicopter squadrons into 2014. On 5 October 2014, the Sea Knight performed its final service flight with the U.S. Marine Corps at Marine Corps Air Station Miramar. HMM-364 was the last squadron to use it outside the United States, landing it aboard on her maiden transit. On 9 April 2015, the CH-46 was retired by the Marine Medium Helicopter Training Squadron 164, the last Marine Corps squadron to transition to the MV-22. The USMC retired the CH-46 on 1 August 2015 in a ceremony at the Udvar-Hazy Center near Washington DC.\nBeginning in April 2011 the Navy's Fleet Readiness Center East began refurbishing retired USMC CH-46Es for service with the United States Department of State Air Wing. A number of CH-46s from HMX-1 were transferred to the Air Wing in late 2014. In Afghanistan the CH-46s were used by Embassy Air for secure transport of State Department personnel. The CH-46s were equipped with missile warning sensors and flare dispensers and could be armed with M240D or M2 Browning machine guns. A report in September 2019 by the State Department Inspector General found that a seat on a CH-46 for a seven-minute flight cost US$1,500 (~$ in 2024).\nEvacuation of Afghanistan.\nSeven of the State Department Air Wing CH-46s took part in the 2021 Kabul Airlift. Prior to the complete withdrawal of U.S. forces, all seven were rendered unusable and abandoned at Kabul International Airport and are seen in many videos and pictures online. One of the CH-46s that was abandoned (BuNo 154038, c/n 2389) also took part in Operation Frequent Wind 46 years earlier. The U.S. State Department drew criticism for leaving behind the aircraft. Commenting on the issue, the U.S. State Department claimed that the helicopters were already being phased out of State Department Air Wing due to their age and the inability to support them. The seven CH-46s left behind were the only U.S. State Department aircraft left behind at Kabul International Airport.\nCanada.\nThe Royal Canadian Air Force procured six CH-113 Labrador helicopters for the SAR role and the Canadian Army acquired 12 of the similar CH-113A Voyageur for the medium-lift transport role. The RCAF Labradors were delivered first with the first one entering service on 11 October 1963. When the larger CH-147 Chinook was procured by the Canadian Forces in the mid-1970s, the Voyageur fleet was converted to Labrador specifications to undertake SAR missions. The refurbished Voyageurs were re-designated as CH-113A Labradors, thus a total of 15 Labradors were ultimately in service.\nThe Labrador was fitted with a watertight hull for marine landings, a 5,000 kilogram cargo hook and an external rescue hoist mounted over the right front door. It featured a 1,110 kilometer flying range, emergency medical equipment and an 18-person passenger capacity. In multiple instances throughout the 1970s and 1980s, this increased range provided the capability of the CH-113 to provide assistance to U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) missions or perform long range medevacs over distances the USCG helicopters at the time simply could not reach.\nIn 1981, a mid-life upgrade of the fleet was carried out by Boeing Canada in Arnprior, Ontario. Known as the SAR-CUP (Search and Rescue Capability Upgrade Program), the refit scheme included new instrumentation, a nose-mounted weather radar, a tail-mounted auxiliary power unit, a new high-speed rescue hoist mounted over the side door and front-mounted searchlights. A total of six CH-113s and five CH-113As were upgraded with the last delivered in 1984. Nonetheless, as a search and rescue helicopter it endured heavy use and hostile weather conditions; which had begun to take their toll on the Labrador fleet by the 1990s, resulting in increasing maintenance costs and the need for prompt replacement.\nIn 1992, it was announced that the Labradors were to be replaced by 15 new helicopters, a variant of the AgustaWestland EH101, designated \"CH-149 Chimo\". The order was subsequently cancelled by the Jean Chr\u00e9tien Liberal government in 1993, resulting in cancellation penalties, as well as extending the service life of the Labrador fleet. However, in 1998, a CH-113 from CFB Greenwood crashed on Quebec's Gasp\u00e9 Peninsula while returning from a SAR mission, resulting in the deaths of all crewmembers on board. The crash placed pressure upon the government to procure a replacement, thus an order was placed with the manufacturers of the EH101 for 15 aircraft to perform the search-and-rescue mission, designated \"CH-149 Cormorant\". CH-149 deliveries began in 2003, allowing the last CH-113 to be retired in 2004. In October 2005 Columbia Helicopters of Aurora, Oregon purchased eight of the retired CH-113 Labradors to add to their fleet of 15 Vertol 107-II helicopters.\nSweden.\nIn 1963, Sweden procured ten UH-46Bs from the US as a transport and anti-submarine helicopter for the Swedish Armed Forces, designated Hkp 4A. In 1973, a further eight Kawasaki-built KV-107s, which were accordingly designated Hkp 4B, were acquired to replace the older Piasecki H-21. During the Cold War, the fleet's primary missions were anti-submarine warfare and troop transportation. They were also frequently employed in the search and rescue role, most famously during the rescue operation of the MS \"Estonia\" after it sank in the Baltic Sea on 28 September 1994. In the 1980s, the Hkp 4A was phased out, having been replaced by the Eurocopter AS332 Super Puma; the later Kawasaki-built Sea Knights continued in operational service until 2011, they were replaced by the UH-60 Black Hawk and NH90.\nArgentina.\nOn 15 September 2023, Argentina's Air Force chief Gen. Xavier Issac briefed the media that Argentina had sent a letter requesting the US to approve the refurbishment of surplus CH-46s currently stored with the 309th Aerospace Maintenance and Regeneration Group in Arizona. The availability of civilian-operated CH-46s was also being explored. They would be used to support Argentina's Antarctic bases. The CH-46s would replace two Mil Mi-171E helicopters acquired in 2010, but now not able to be repaired by Russia due to sanctions from the Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nCivilian and others.\nThe civilian version, designated as the BV 107-II \"Vertol\", was developed prior to the military CH-46. It was operated commercially by New York Airways, Pan American World Airways and later on by Columbia Helicopters. Among the diversity of tasks was commuter service in the mid-1960s from the roof of the Pan Am skyscraper in Manhattan to JFK Airport in Queens, pulling a hover barge, and constructing transmission towers for overhead power lines.\nIn December 2006, Columbia Helicopters purchased the type certificate of the Model 107 from Boeing, with the aim of eventually producing new-build aircraft themselves. In 2023, Columbia Helicopters began a program of purchasing older Model 107-II and CH-46E airframes, and refurbishing them into Model 107-IIs for sale. Columbia Helicopters has also updated old airframes into the \"Model 107-III\".\nUtility transport version, one built from Boeing-supplied kits.\nCommercial airline version, nine built from Boeing-supplied kits.\nImproved version of the KV-107/II-2, three built.\nMinesweeping version for the Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force (JMSDF), two built.\nUprated version of the KV-107/II-3, seven built.\nAssault and utility transport version for the Japan Ground Self-Defense Force (JGSDF), 41 built.\nVIP version of the KV-107/II-4, one built.\nUprated version of the KV-107/II-4, 18 built.\nLong-range SAR version for the Japan Air Self-Defense Force (JASDF), 17 built.\nUprated version of the KV-107II-5, 35 built.\nVIP transport version, one built.\nHKP 4C for Swedish Navy. Powered by Rolls-Royce Gnome H.1200 turboshaft engines, eight built.\nLong-range transport version for the Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department, one built.\nFirefighting helicopter for Saudi Arabia, seven built.\nAeromedical and rescue helicopter for Saudi Arabia, four built.\nVIP transport helicopter for Saudi Arabia, two built.\nAir ambulance helicopter for Saudi Arabia, three built.\nOperators.\nFormer operators.\n Thailand\nAircraft on display.\nA variety of CH-46 are on display at museums in Canada, Japan, Sweden, and the United States.\nSpecifications (CH-46E).\n\"Data from\" The International Directory of Military Aircraft, 2002/2003, The Complete Encyclopedia of World Aircraft : Boeing Vertol Model 107 (H-46 Sea Knight), Encyclopedia of world military aircraft : Volume OneGeneral characteristics* Crew: 5: two pilots, one crew chief, one aerial gunner/observer, one tail gunner* Capacity: \nPerformance* Maximum speed: Mach * Endurance: * g limits: * Roll rate: \nArmament\nSee also.\nRelated development\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nRelated lists\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7774", "revid": "1316005912", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7774", "title": "Chief of Naval Operations", "text": "Highest-ranking officer of the United States Navy\nThe chief of naval operations (CNO) is the highest-ranking officer of the United States Navy. The position is a statutory office (\u00a0https://) held by an admiral who is a military adviser and deputy to the secretary of the Navy. The CNO is also a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (\u00a0https://) and in this capacity, a military adviser to the National Security Council, the Homeland Security Council, the secretary of defense, and the president.\nDespite the title, the CNO does not have operational command authority over naval forces. The CNO is an administrative position based in the Pentagon, and exercises supervision of Navy organizations as the designee of the secretary of the Navy. Operational command of naval forces falls within the purview of the combatant commanders who report to the secretary of defense.\nAs of 25 August 2025, the 34th chief of naval operations is Admiral Daryl Caudle.\nAppointment, rank, and responsibilities.\nThe chief of naval operations (CNO) is typically the highest-ranking officer on active duty in the U.S. Navy unless the chairman and/or the vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff are naval officers. The CNO is nominated for appointment by the president, for a four-year term of office, and must be confirmed by the Senate. A requirement for being Chief of Naval Operations is having significant experience in joint duty assignments, which includes at least one full tour of duty in a joint duty assignment as a flag officer. However, the president may waive those requirements if he determines that appointing the officer is necessary for the national interest. The chief can be reappointed to serve one additional term, but only during times of war or national emergency declared by Congress. By statute, the CNO is appointed as a four-star admiral.\nAs per \u00a0https://, whenever there is a vacancy for the chief of naval operations or during the absence or disability of the chief of naval operations, and unless the president directs otherwise, the vice chief of naval operations performs the duties of the chief of naval operations until a successor is appointed or the absence or disability ceases.\nDepartment of the Navy.\nThe CNO also performs all other functions prescribed under \u00a0https://, such as presiding over the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations (OPNAV), exercising supervision of Navy organizations, and other duties assigned by the secretary or higher lawful authority, or the CNO delegates those duties and responsibilities to other officers in OPNAV or in organizations below.\nActing for the secretary of the Navy, the CNO also designates naval personnel and naval forces available to the commanders of unified combatant commands, subject to the approval of the secretary of defense.\nJoint Chiefs of Staff.\nThe CNO is a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff as prescribed by \u00a0https:// and \u00a0https://. Like the other members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the CNO is an administrative position, with no operational command authority over the United States Navy forces.\nMembers of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, individually or collectively, in their capacity as military advisers, shall provide advice to the president, the National Security Council (NSC), or the secretary of defense (SECDEF) on a particular matter when the president, the NSC, or SECDEF requests such advice. Members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (other than the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff) may submit to the chairman advice or an opinion in disagreement with, or advice or an opinion in addition to, the advice presented by the chairman to the president, NSC, or SECDEF.\nWhen performing their JCS duties, the CNO is responsible directly to the SECDEF, but keeps SECNAV fully informed of significant military operations affecting the duties and responsibilities of the SECNAV, unless SECDEF orders otherwise.\nHistory.\nEarly attempts and the Aide for Naval Operations (1900\u20131915).\nIn 1900, administrative and operational authority over the Navy was concentrated in the secretary of the Navy and bureau chiefs, with the General Board holding only advisory powers. Critics of the lack of military command authority included Charles J. Bonaparte, Navy secretary from 1905 to 1906, then-Captain Reginald R. Belknap and future admiral William Sims.\nRear Admiral George A. Converse, commander of the Bureau of Navigation (BuNav) from 1905 to 1906, reported:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[W]ith each year that passes the need is painfully apparent for a military administrative authority under the secretary, whose purpose would be to initiate and direct the steps necessary to carry out the Department's policy, and to coordinate the work of the bureaus and direct their energies toward the effective preparation of the fleet for war.\nHowever, reorganization attempts were opposed by Congress due to fears of a Prussian-style general staff and inadvertently increasing the powers of the Navy secretary, which risked infringing on legislative authority. Senator Eugene Hale, chairman of the Senate Committee on Naval Affairs, disliked reformers like Sims and persistently blocked attempts to bring such ideas to debate.\nTo circumvent the opposition, George von Lengerke Meyer, Secretary of the Navy under William Howard Taft implemented a system of \"aides\" on 18 November 1909. These aides lacked command authority and instead served as principal advisors to the Navy secretary. The aide for operations was deemed by Meyer to be the most important one, responsible for devoting \"his entire attention and study to the operations of the fleet,\" and drafting orders for the movement of ships on the advice of the General Board and approval of the secretary in times of war or emergency.\nThe successes of Meyer's first operations aide, Rear Admiral Richard Wainwright, factored into Meyer's decision to make his third operations aide, Rear Admiral Bradley A. Fiske his \"de facto\" principal advisor on 10 February 1913. Fiske retained his post under Meyer's successor, Josephus Daniels, becoming the most prominent advocate for what would become the office of CNO.\nCreating the position of Chief of Naval Operations (1915).\nIn 1914, Fiske, frustrated at Daniels' ambivalence towards his opinion that the Navy was unprepared for the possibility of entry into World War I, bypassed the secretary to collaborate with Representative Richmond P. Hobson, a retired Navy admiral, to draft legislation providing for the office of \"a chief of naval operations\". The preliminary proposal (passed off as Hobson's own to mask Fiske's involvement), in spite of Daniels' opposition, passed Hobson's subcommittee unanimously on 4 January 1915, and passed the full House Committee on Naval Affairs on 6 January.\nFiske's younger supporters expected him to be named the first chief of naval operations, and his versions of the bill provided for the minimum rank of the officeholder to be a two-star rear admiral.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There shall be a Chief of Naval Operations, who shall be an officer on the active list of the Navy not below the grade of Rear Admiral, appointed for a term of four years by the President, by and with the advice of the Senate, who, under the Secretary of the Navy, shall be responsible for the readiness of the Navy for war and be charged with its general direction.\u2014\u200a\nIn contrast, Daniels' version, included in the final bill, emphasized the office's subordination to the Navy secretary, allowed for the selection of the CNO from officers of the rank of captain, and denied it authority over the Navy's general direction:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There shall be a Chief of Naval Operations, who shall be an officer on the active list of the Navy appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, from the officers of the line of the Navy not below the grade of Captain for a period of four years, who shall, under the direction of the Secretary, be charged with the operations of the fleet, and with the preparation and readiness of plans for its use in war.\u2014\u200a\nFiske's \"end-running\" of Daniels eliminated any possibility of him being named the first CNO. Nevertheless, satisfied with the change he had helped enact, Fiske made a final contribution: elevating the statutory rank of the CNO to admiral with commensurate pay. The Senate passed the appropriations bill creating the CNO position and its accompanying office on 3 March 1915, simultaneously abolishing the aides system promulgated under Meyer.\nBenson, the first CNO (1915\u20131919).\nCaptain William S. Benson was promoted to the temporary rank of rear admiral and became the first CNO on 11 May 1915. He further assumed the rank of admiral after the passage of the 1916 Naval Appropriations Bill with Fiske's amendments, second only to Admiral of the Navy George Dewey and explicitly senior to the commanders-in-chief of the Atlantic, Pacific and Asiatic Fleets.\nUnlike Fiske, who had campaigned for a powerful, aggressive CNO sharing authority with the Navy secretary, Benson demonstrated personal loyalty to Secretary Daniels and subordinated himself to civilian control, yet maintained the CNO's autonomy where necessary. While alienating reformers like Sims and Fiske (who retired in 1916), Benson's conduct gave Daniels immense trust in his new CNO, and Benson was delegated greater resources and authority.\nAchievements.\nAmong the organizational efforts initiated or recommended by Benson included an advisory council to coordinate high-level staff activities, composed of himself, the SECNAV and the bureau chiefs which \"worked out to the great satisfaction\" of Daniels and Benson; the reestablishment of the Joint Army and Navy Board in 1918 with Benson as its Navy member; and the consolidation of all matters of naval aviation under the authority of the CNO.\nBenson also revamped the structure of the naval districts, transferring authority for them from SECNAV to the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations under the Operations, Plans, Naval Districts division. This enabled closer cooperation between naval district commanders and the uniformed leadership, who could more easily handle communications between the former and the Navy's fleet commanders.\nIn the waning years of his tenure, Benson set regulations for officers on shore duty to have temporary assignments with the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations to maintain cohesion between the higher-level staff and the fleet.\nEstablishing OPNAV.\nUntil 1916, the CNO's office was chronically understaffed. The formal establishment of the CNO's \"general staff\", the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations (OPNAV), originally called the Office for Operations, was exacerbated by Eugene Hale's retirement from politics in 1911, and skepticism of whether the CNO's small staff could implement President Wilson's policy of \"preparedness\" without violating American neutrality in World War I.\nBy June 1916, OPNAV was organized into eight divisions: Operations, Plans, Naval Districts; Regulations; Ship Movements; Communications; Publicity; and Materiel. Operations provided a link between fleet commanders and the General Board, Ship Movements coordinated the movement of Navy vessels and oversaw navy yard overhauls, Communications accounted for the Navy's developing radio network, Publicity conducted the Navy's public affairs, and the Materiel section coordinated the work of the naval bureaus.\nNumbering only 75 staffers in January 1917, OPNAV increased in size following the American entry into World War I, as it was deemed of great importance to manage the rapid mobilization of forces to fight in the war. By war's end, OPNAV employed over 1462 people. The CNO and OPNAV thus gained influence over Navy administration but at the expense of the Navy secretary and bureau chiefs.\nAdvisor to the president.\nIn 1918, Benson became a military advisor to Edward M. House, an advisor and confidant of President Wilson, joining him on a trip to Europe as the 1918 armistice with Germany was signed. His stance that the United States remain equal to Great Britain in naval power was very useful to House and Wilson, enough for Wilson to insist Benson remain in Europe until after the Treaty of Versailles was signed in July 1919.\nEnd of tenure.\nBenson's tenure as CNO was slated to end on 10 May 1919, but this was delayed by the president at Secretary Daniels' insistence; Benson instead retired on 25 September 1919. Admiral Robert Coontz replaced Benson as CNO on 1 November 1919.\nInterwar period (1919\u20131939).\nThe CNO's office faced no significant changes in authority during the interwar period, largely due to the Navy secretaries opting to keep executive authority within their own office. Innovations during this period included encouraging coordination in war planning process, and compliance with the Washington Naval Treaty while still keeping to the shipbuilding plan authorized by the Naval Act of 1916. and implementing the concept of naval aviation into naval doctrine.\nCNO Pratt, relationship with the General Board and Army-Navy relations.\nWilliam V. Pratt became the fifth Chief of Naval Operations on 17 September 1930, after the resignation of Charles F. Hughes. He had previously served as assistant chief of naval operations under CNO Benson. A premier naval policymaker and supporter of arms control under the Washington Naval Treaty, Pratt, despite otherwise good relations, clashed with President Herbert Hoover over building up naval force strength to treaty levels, with Hoover favoring restrictions in spending due to financial difficulties caused by the Great Depression. Under Pratt, such a \"treaty system\" was needed to maintain a compliant peacetime navy.\nPratt opposed centralized management of the Navy, and encouraged diversity of opinion between the offices of the Navy secretary, CNO and the Navy's General Board. To this effect, Pratt removed the CNO as an \"ex officio\" member of the General Board, concerned that the office's association with the Board could hamper diversities of opinion between the former and counterparts within the offices of the Navy secretary and OPNAV. Pratt's vision of a less powerful CNO also clashed with Representative Carl Vinson of Georgia, chair of the House Naval Affairs Committee from 1931 to 1947, a proponent of centralizing power within OPNAV. Vinson deliberately delayed many of his planned reorganization proposals until Pratt's replacement by William H. Standley to avoid the unnecessary delays that would otherwise have happened with Pratt.\nPratt also enjoyed a good working relationship with Army chief of staff Douglas MacArthur, and negotiated several key agreements with him over coordinating their services' radio communications networks, mutual interests in coastal defense, and authority over Army and Navy aviation.\nCNO Standley and the Vinson-Trammell act.\nWilliam H. Standley, who succeeded Pratt in 1933, had a weaker relationship with President Franklin D. Roosevelt than Pratt enjoyed with Hoover. Often in direct conflict with Navy secretary Claude A. Swanson and assistant secretary Henry L. Roosevelt, Standley's hostility to the latter was described as \"poisonous\".\nConversely, Standley successfully improved relations with Congress, streamlining communications between the Department of the Navy and the naval oversight committees by appointing the first naval legislative liaisons, the highest-ranked of which reported to the judge advocate general. Standley also worked with Representative Vinson to pass the Vinson-Trammell Act, considered by Standley to be his most important achievement as CNO. The Act authorized the President:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u201cto suspend\u201d construction of the ships authorized by the law \u201c\"as may be necessary to bring the naval armament of the United States within the limitation so agreed upon, except that such suspension shall not apply to vessels actually under construction on the date of the passage of this act.\"\u201d\nThis effectively provided security for all Navy vessels under construction; even if new shipbuilding projects could not be initiated, shipbuilders with new classes under construction could not legally be obliged to cease operations, allowing the Navy to prepare for World War II without breaking potential limits from future arms control conferences. The Act also granted the CNO \"soft oversight power\" of the naval bureaus which nominally lay with the secretary of the Navy, as Standley gradually inserted OPNAV into the ship design process. Under Standley, the \"treaty system\" created by Pratt was abandoned.\nCNO Leahy.\nOutgoing commander, Battle Force William D. Leahy succeeded Standley as CNO on 2 January 1937. Leahy's close personal friendship with President Roosevelt since his days as Navy assistant secretary, as well as good relationships with Representative Vinson and Secretary Swanson brought him to the forefront of potential candidates for the post. Unlike Standley, who tried to dominate the bureaus, Leahy preferred to let the bureau chiefs function autonomously as per convention, with the CNO acting as a \"primus inter pares\". Leahy's views of the CNO's authority led to clashes with his predecessor; Standley even attempted to block Leahy from being assigned a fleet command in retaliation. Leahy, on his part, continued Standley's efforts to insert the CNO into the ship design process.\nSwanson's ill health and assistant secretary Henry Roosevelt's death on 22 February 1936 gave Leahy unprecedented influence. Leahy had private lunches with the President frequently; during his tenure as CNO, Roosevelt had 52 meetings with him, compared with 12 with his Army counterpart, General Malin Craig, none of which were private lunches.\nLeahy retired from the Navy on 1 August 1939 to become Governor of Puerto Rico, a month before the invasion of Poland.\nOfficial residence.\nNumber One Observatory Circle, located on the northeast grounds of the United States Naval Observatory in Washington, DC, was built in 1893 for its superintendent. The chief of naval operations liked the house so much that in 1923 he took over the house as his own official residence. It remained the residence of the CNO until 1974, when Congress authorized its transformation to an official residence for the vice president. The chief of naval operations currently resides in Quarters A in the Washington Naval Yard.\nOffice of the Chief of Naval Operations.\nThe chief of naval operations presides over the Navy Staff, formally known as the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations (OPNAV). \nThe Office of the Chief of Naval Operations is a statutory organization within the executive part of the Department of the Navy, and its purpose is to furnish professional assistance to the secretary of the Navy (SECNAV) and the CNO in carrying out their responsibilities.\nUnder the authority of the CNO, the director of the Navy Staff (DNS) is responsible for day-to-day administration of the Navy Staff and coordination of the activities of the deputy chiefs of naval operations, who report directly to the CNO. The office was previously known as the assistant vice chief of naval operations (AVCNO) until 1996, when CNO Jeremy Boorda ordered its redesignation to its current name. Previously held by a three-star vice admiral, the position became a civilian's billet in 2018. The present DNS is a Vice Admiral Michael Boyle, a former 3rd Fleet commander.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7775", "revid": "1316957389", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7775", "title": "Clara Petacci", "text": "Mistress of the Italian dictator Benito Mussolini (1912\u20131945)\nClara \"Claretta\" Petacci (; 28 February 1912 \u2013 28 April 1945) was a mistress of the Italian dictator Benito Mussolini. She was killed by Italian partisans during Mussolini's summary execution.\nEarly life.\nDaughter of Giuseppina Persichetti (1888\u20131962) and the physician Francesco Saverio Petacci (1883\u20131970), Clara Petacci was born into a privileged and religious family in Rome in 1912. Her father, a physician of the Holy Apostolic Palaces, became a supporter of fascism. A child when Mussolini rose to power in the 1920s, Clara Petacci idolised him from an early age. After Violet Gibson attempted to assassinate the dictator in April 1926, the 14-year-old Petacci wrote to him commenting \"O, Duce, why was I not with you?\u00a0... Could I not have strangled that murderous woman?\"\nRelationship with Mussolini.\nPetacci had a long-standing relationship with Mussolini while he was married to Rachele Mussolini. Petacci was 28 years younger than Mussolini. They met for the first time in April 1932 when Mussolini, driving with an aide to Ostia, overtook a car occupied by the twenty-year-old Petacci and family members. She called out, \"Duce! Duce!\" and when he stopped, told him that she had been writing to him since her early teens. \nIn 1934, Petacci married Italian Air Force officer Riccardo Federici, but she parted ways with her husband when he was sent to Tokyo as Air Attach\u00e9 in 1936. Petacci then became the mistress of the fifty-three-year-old Mussolini, visiting his large headquarters in the , where a private apartment was reserved for her. Her infatuation with Mussolini appears to have been genuine and permanent. The affair became widely known and members of the Petacci family, notably her brother, Marcello, were able to benefit financially and professionally by influence-selling. \nPart of Petacci and Mussolini's correspondence has not been released on the grounds of privacy.\nDeath.\nOn 27 April 1945, Mussolini and Petacci were captured by partisans while traveling with a \"Luftwaffe\" convoy retreating to Germany. The German column included a number of Italian Social Republic members.\nOn 28 April, she and Mussolini were taken to Mezzegra and executed. One source alleges Petacci's execution was not planned and that she died throwing herself on Mussolini in a vain attempt to protect him from the bullets. On the following day, the bodies of Mussolini and Petacci were taken to Piazzale Loreto in Milan and hung upside down in front of a petrol station. The bodies were photographed as a crowd vented their rage upon them. On the same day, Clara's brother, Marcello Petacci, was also killed in Dongo by the partisans, along with fifteen other people complicit in Mussolini's escape. \nFollowing the war, Petacci's family began civil and criminal court cases against Walter Audisio for Petacci's unlawful killing. After a lengthy legal process, an investigating judge eventually closed the case in 1967. Audisio was acquitted of murder and embezzlement on the grounds that the actions complained of occurred as an act of war against the Germans and the fascists during a period of enemy occupation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7778", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7778", "title": "CVBG", "text": ""}
{"id": "7780", "revid": "2766075", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7780", "title": "Costa Smeralda", "text": "Coastal area in Sardinia, Italy\nThe Costa Smeralda (, lit.\u2009'Emerald Coast'; ; ) is a coastal area and tourist destination in northern Sardinia, Italy, with a length of some 20\u00a0km, although the term originally designated only a small stretch in the commune of Arzachena. \nWith white sand beaches, golf clubs, private jet and helicopter services, and exclusive hotels, the area has drawn celebrities, business and political leaders, and other affluent visitors. \nCosta Smeralda is one of the most expensive locations in Europe. Prime home prices in the area increased by 18% in 2023, while prime rents were double their pre-Covid levels. On a per square metre basis, prime residential prices in Sardinia reached nearly \u20ac12,500.\nThe main towns and villages in the area, built according to a detailed urban plan, are Porto Cervo, Liscia di Vacca, Capriccioli, and Romazzino. Archaeological sites include the necropolis of Li Muri.\nEach September the Sardinia Cup sailing regatta is held off the coast. Polo matches are held between April and October at Gershan near Arzachena. \nDevelopment of the area started in 1961, and was financed by a consortium of companies led by Prince Karim Aga Khan. Spiaggia del Principe, one of the beaches along the Costa Smeralda, was named after this Ishmaelite prince. Architects involved in the project included Michele Busiri Vici, Jacques Cou\u00eblle, Savin Cou\u00eblle, and Vietti.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7781", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7781", "title": "Chianti", "text": "Regional variety of Italian wine\nChianti is an Italian red wine produced in the Chianti region of central Tuscany, principally from the Sangiovese grape. It was historically associated with a squat bottle enclosed in a straw basket, called a \"fiasco\" (\"flask\"; pl.: \"fiaschi\"). However, the \"fiasco\" is now only used by a few makers of the wine; most Chianti is bottled in more standard-shaped wine bottles. In the late 19th century, Baron Bettino Ricasoli (later Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Italy) helped establish Sangiovese as the blend's dominant grape variety, creating the blueprint for today's Chianti wines.\nThe first definition of a wine area called \"Chianti\" was made in 1716. It described the area near the villages of Gaiole, Castellina and Radda; the so-called \"Lega del Chianti\" and later \"Provincia del Chianti\" (Chianti province). In 1932 the Chianti area was completely redrawn and divided into seven sub-areas: Classico, Colli Aretini, Colli Fiorentini, Colline Pisane, Colli Senesi, Montalbano and R\u00f9fina. Most of the villages that in 1932 were added to the newly defined Chianti Classico region added \"in Chianti\" to their names, for example Greve in Chianti, which amended its name in 1972. Wines labelled Chianti Classico come from the largest sub-area of Chianti, which includes the original Chianti heartland. Only Chianti from this sub-zone may display the black rooster (\"gallo nero\") seal on the neck of the bottle, which indicates that the producer of the wine is a member of the Chianti Classico Consortium, the local association of producers. Other variants, with the exception of Rufina north-east of Florence and Montalbano south of Pistoia, originate in the named provinces: Siena for the Colli Senesi, Florence for the Colli Fiorentini, Arezzo for the Colli Aretini and Pisa for the Colline Pisane. In 1996 part of the Colli Fiorentini sub-area was renamed \"Montespertoli\".\nDuring the 1970s producers started to reduce the quantity of white grapes in Chianti. In 1995 it became legal to produce a Chianti with 100% Sangiovese. For a wine to retain the name of Chianti it must be produced with at least 80% Sangiovese grapes. Aged Chianti (at least 6 months in barrel and 3 more in bottle before release, instead of 6 months aging without barreling necessary) may be labelled as Riserva. Chianti that meets more stringent requirements (lower yield, higher alcohol content and dry extract) may be labelled as Chianti Superiore, although Chianti from the Classico sub-area is not allowed in any event to be labelled as Superiore.\nHistory.\nThe earliest documentation of a \"Chianti wine\" dates back to the 14th century, when viticulture was known to flourish in the \"Chianti Mountains\" around Florence. A military league called \"Lega del Chianti\" (League of Chianti) was formed around 1250 between the townships of Castellina, Gaiole and Radda, which would lead to the wine from this area taking on a similar name. In 1398 the earliest-known record notes Chianti as a white wine, though the red wines of Chianti were also discussed around the same time in similar documents. \nThe first attempt to classify Chianti wine in any way came in 1427, when Florence developed a tariff system for the wines of the surrounding countryside, including an area referred to as \"Chianti and its entire province\". In 1716 Cosimo III de' Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany, issued an edict legislating that the three villages of the \"Lega del Chianti\" (Castellina in Chianti, Gaiole in Chianti and Radda in Chianti) as well as the village of Greve and a of hillside north of Greve near as the only officially recognised producers of Chianti. This delineation existed until July 1932, when the Italian government expanded the Chianti zone to include the outlying areas of Barberino Val d'Elsa, Chiocchio, , San Casciano in Val di Pesa and . Subsequent expansions in 1967 would eventually result in the Chianti zone covering a very large area all over central Tuscany.\nBy the 18th century Chianti was widely recognised as a red wine, but the exact composition and grape varieties used to make Chianti at this point is unknown. Ampelographers find clues about which grape varieties were popular at the time in the writings of Italian writer Cosimo Villifranchi, who noted that Canaiolo was a widely planted variety in the area along with Sangiovese, Mammolo and Marzemino. It was not until the work of the Italian statesman Bettino Ricasoli that the modern Chianti recipe as a Sangiovese-based wine would take shape. \nPrior to Ricasoli, Canaiolo was emerging as the dominant variety in the Chianti blend with Sangiovese and Malvasia Bianca Lunga playing supporting roles. In the mid-19th century, Ricasoli developed a recipe for Chianti that was based primarily on Sangiovese. Though he is often credited with creating and disseminating a specific formula (typically reported as 70% Sangiovese, 20% Canaiolo, 10% Malvasia Bianca Lunga), a review of his correspondence of the time does not corroborate this. In addition, his efforts were quickly corrupted by other local winemakers (for example, replacing Malvasia with Trebbiano Toscano, or relying too heavily on the latter), leading to further misunderstanding of the \"Ricasoli formula\". In 1967, the \"Denominazione di origine controllata\" (DOC) regulation set by the Italian government was based on a loose interpretation of Ricasoli's \"recipe\", calling for a Sangiovese-based blend with 10\u201330% Malvasia and Trebbiano.\nThe late 19th century saw a period of economic and political upheaval. First came oidium and then the phylloxera epidemic would take its toll on the vineyards of Chianti just as they had ravaged vineyards across the rest of Europe. The chaos and poverty following the \"Risorgimento\" heralded the beginning of the Italian diaspora that would take Italian vineyard workers and winemakers abroad as immigrants to new lands. Those that stayed behind and replanted choose high-yielding varieties like Trebbiano and Sangiovese clones such as the \"Sangiovese di Romagna\" from the nearby Romagna region. Following the Second World War, the general trend in the world wine market for cheap, easy-drinking wine saw a brief boom for the region. With over-cropping and an emphasis on quantity over quality, the reputation of Chianti among consumers eventually plummeted. By the 1950s, Trebbiano (which is known for its neutral flavours) made up to 30% of many mass-market Chiantis. \nBy the late 20th century, Chianti was often associated with basic Chianti sold in a squat bottle enclosed in a straw basket, called a \"fiasco\". However, during the same period, a group of ambitious producers began working outside the boundaries of DOC regulations to make what they believed would be a higher-quality wine. These wines eventually became known as the \"Super Tuscans\".\nMany of the producers behind the Super Tuscan movement were originally Chianti producers who were rebelling against what they felt were antiquated DOC regulations. Some of these producers wanted to make Chiantis that were 100% varietal Sangiovese. Others wanted the flexibility to experiment with blending French grape varieties such as Cabernet Sauvignon and Merlot or to not be required to blend in any white grape varieties. The late 20th century saw a flurry of creativity and innovation in the Chianti zones as producers experimented with new grape varieties and introduced modern wine-making techniques such as the use of new oak barrels. The prices and wine ratings of some Super Tuscans would regularly eclipse those of DOC-sanctioned Chiantis. The success of the Super Tuscans encouraged government officials to reconsider the DOC regulations in order to bring some of these wines back into the fold labelled as Chianti.\nChianti subregions.\nThe Chianti region covers a vast area of Tuscany and includes within its boundaries several overlapping \"Denominazione di origine controllata\" (DOC) and \"Denominazione di Origine Controllata e Garantita\" (DOCG) regions. Other well known Sangiovese-based Tuscan wines such as Brunello di Montalcino and Vino Nobile di Montepulciano could be bottled and labelled under the most basic designation of \"Chianti\" if their producers chose to do so. Within the collective Chianti region more than 8 million cases of wines classified as DOC-level or above are produced each year. Today, most Chianti falls under two major designations of Chianti DOCG, which includes basic level Chianti, as well as that from seven designated sub-zones, and Chianti Classico DOCG. Together, these two Chianti zones produce the largest volume of DOC/G wines in Italy.\nThe Chianti DOCG covers all the Chianti wine and includes a large stretch of land encompassing the western reaches of the province of Pisa near the coast of the Tyrrhenian Sea, the Florentine hills in the province of Florence to the north, to the province of Arezzo in the east and the Siena hills to the south. Within this regions are vineyards that overlap the DOCG regions of Brunello di Montalcino, Vino Nobile di Montepulciano and Vernaccia di San Gimignano. Any Sangiovese-based wine made according to the Chianti guidelines from these vineyards can be labelled and marked under the basic Chianti DOCG should the producer wish to use the designation.\nWithin the Chianti DOCG there are eight defined sub-zones that are permitted to affix their name to the wine label. Wines that are labelled as simply Chianti are made either from a blend from these sub-zones or include grapes from peripheral areas not within the boundaries of a sub-zone. The sub-zones are (clockwise from the north): the Colli Fiorentini which is located south of the city of Florence; Chianti Rufina in the northeastern part of the zone located around the commune of Rufina; Classico in the centre of Chianti, across the provinces of Florence and Siena; Colli Aretini in the Arezzo province to the east; Colli Senesi south of Chianti Classico in the Siena hills, which is the largest of the sub-zones and includes the Brunello di Montalcino and Vino Nobile di Montepulciano areas; Colline Pisane, the westernmost sub-zone in the province of Pisa; Montespertoli located within the Colli Fiorentini around the commune of Montespertoli; Montalbano in the north-west part of the zone which includes the Carmignano DOCG. \nAs of 2006[ [update]], there were under production in Montalbano, in the Colli Fiorentini, in Montespertoli, in Rufina, in the Colli Senesi, in Colline Pisane, in the Colli Aretini, and an additional in the peripheral areas that do not fall within one of the sub-zone classifications. Wines produced from these vineyards are labelled simply \"Chianti\".\nChianti Classico.\nThe original area dictated by the edict of Cosimo III de' Medici would eventually be considered the heart of the modern \"Chianti Classico\" subregion. As of 2006[ [update]], there were of vineyards in the Chianti Classico subregion. The Chianti Classico subregion covers an area of approximate between the city of Florence to the north and Siena to the south. The four communes of Castellina in Chianti, Gaiole in Chianti, Greve in Chianti and Radda in Chianti are located entirely within the boundaries of the Classico area with parts of Barberino Val d'Elsa, San Casciano in Val di Pesa and Tavarnelle Val di Pesa in the province of Florence as well as Castelnuovo Berardenga and Poggibonsi in the province of Siena included within the permitted boundaries of Chianti Classico.\nThe soil and geography of this subregion can be quite varied, with altitudes ranging from , and rolling hills producing differing macroclimates. There are two main soil types in the area: a weathered sandstone known as \"alberese\" and a bluish-gray chalky marlstone known as \"galestro\". The soil in the north is richer and more fertile with more \"galestro\", with the soil gradually becoming harder and stonier with more \"albarese\" in the south. In the north, the Arno River can have an influence on the climate, keeping the temperatures slightly cooler, an influence that diminishes further south in the warmer Classico territory towards Castelnuovo Berardenga.\nChianti Classico are premium Chianti wines that tend to be medium-bodied with firm tannins and medium-high to high acidity. Floral, cherry and light nutty notes are characteristic aromas with the wines expressing more notes on the mid-palate and finish than at the front of the mouth. As with Bordeaux, the different zones of Chianti Classico have unique characteristics that can be exemplified and perceived in some wines from those areas. According to Master of Wine Mary Ewing-Mulligan, Chianti Classico wines from the Castellina area tend to have a very delicate aroma and flavour, Castelnuovo Berardegna wines tend to be the most ripe and richest tasting, wines from Gaiole tend to have been characterised by their structure and firm tannins while wines from the Greve area tend to have very concentrated flavours.\nThe production of Chianti Classico is realised under the supervision of , a union of producers in the Chianti Classico subregion. The Consorzio was founded with the aim of promoting the wines of the subregion, improving quality and preventing wine fraud. Since the 1980s, the foundation has sponsored extensive research into the viticultural and winemaking practice of the Chianti Classico area, particularly in the area of clonal research. In the last three decades, more than 50% of the vineyards in the Chianti Classico subregion have been replanted with improved Sangiovese clones and modern vineyard techniques as part of the Consorzio Chianti Classico's project \"Chianti 2000\".\nIn 2014, a new category of Chianti Classico was introduced: Chianti Classico Gran Selezione. Gran Selezione is made exclusively from a winery's own grapes grown according to stricter regulations compared to regular Chianti Classico. Gran Selezione is granted to a Chianti Classico after it passes a suitability test conducted by authorised laboratories, and after it is approved by a special tasting committee. The creation of the Chianti Classico Gran Selezione DOCG has been criticized, with some describing it as being \"Needless; an extra layer of confusion created by marketing people hoping to help Chianti Classico out of a sales crisis.\"\nGreater Chianti region.\nOutside of the Chianti Classico area, the wines of the Chianti sub-zone of Rufina are among the most widely recognised and exported from the Chianti region. Located in the Arno valley near the town of Pontassieve, the Rufina region includes much area in the Pomino region, an area that has a long history of wine production. The area is noted for the cool climate of its elevated vineyards located up to . The vineyard soils of the area are predominantly marl and chalk. The Florentine merchant families of the Antinori and Frescobaldi own the majority of the vineyards in Rufina. Chianti from the Rufina area is characterised by its multi-layered complexity and elegance.\nThe Colli Fiorentini subregion has seen an influx of activity and new vineyard development in recent years as wealthy Florentine business people move to the country to plant vineyards and open wineries. Many foreign \"flying winemakers\" have had a hand in this development, bringing global viticulture and wine-making techniques to the Colli Fiorentini. Located in the hills between the Chianti Classico area and Arno valley, the wines of the Colli Fiorentini vary widely depending on producer, but tend to have a simple structure with strong character and fruit notes. The Montespertoli sub-zone was part of the Colli Fiorentini sub-zone until 2002 when it became its own tiny enclave.\nThe Montalbano subregion is located in the shadow of the Carmignano DOCG, with much of the best Sangiovese going to that wine. A similar situation exists in the Colli Senesi which includes the well known DOCG region of Vino Nobile di Montepulciano. Both regions rarely appear on wine labels that are exported out of Tuscany. The Colli Pisane area produces typical Chiantis with the lightest body and color. The Colli Aretini is a relatively new and emerging area that has seen an influx of investment and new winemaking in recent years.\nGrapes and classification.\nSince 1996 the blend for Chianti and Chianti Classico has been 75\u2013100% Sangiovese, up to 10% Canaiolo and up to 20% of any other approved red grape variety such as Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot or Syrah. Since 2006, the use of white grape varieties such as Malvasia and Trebbiano have been prohibited in Chianti Classico. Chianti Classico must have a minimum alcohol level of 12% with a minimum of 7 months aging in oak, while Chianti Classicos labeled \"riserva\" must be aged at least 24 months at the winery, with a minimum alcohol level of 12.5%. The harvest yields for Chianti Classico are restricted to no more than . For basic Chianti, the minimum alcohol level is 11.5% with yields restricted to .\nThe aging for basic Chianti DOCG is much less stringent with most varieties allowed to be released to the market on 1 March following the vintage year. The sub-zones of Colli Fiorentini, Montespertoli and Rufina must be aged for a further three months and not released until 1 June. All Chianti Classicos must be held back until 1 October in the year following the vintage.\nJancis Robinson notes that Chianti is sometimes called the \"Bordeaux of Italy\" but the structure of the wines is very different from any French wine. The flexibility in the blending recipe for Chianti accounts for some of the variability in styles among Chiantis. Lighter-bodied styles will generally have a higher proportion of white grape varieties blended in, while Chiantis that have only red grape varieties will be fuller and richer. While only 15% of Cabernet Sauvignon is permitted in the blend, the nature of the grape variety can have a dominant personality in the Chianti blend and be a strong influence in the wine.\nChianti Classico wines are characterised in their youth by their predominantly floral and cinnamon spicy bouquet. As the wine ages, aromas of tobacco and leather can emerge. Chiantis tend to have medium-high acidity and medium tannins. Basic level Chianti is often characterised by its juicy fruit notes of cherry, plum and raspberry and can range from simple quaffing wines to those approaching the level of Chianti Classico. Wine expert Tom Stevenson notes that these basic everyday-drinking Chiantis are at their peak drinking qualities often between three and five years after vintage, with premium examples having the potential to age for four to eight years. Well-made examples of Chianti Classico often have the potential to age and improve in the bottle for six to twenty years.\nChianti Superiore.\nChianti Superiore is an Italian DOCG wine produced in the provinces of Arezzo, Florence, Pisa, Pistoia, Prato and Siena, in Tuscany. Superiore is a specification for wines produced with a stricter rule of production than other Chianti wines. Chianti Superiore has been authorised since 1996. Chianti Superiore wines can be produced only from grapes cultivated in the Chianti wine areas except from those vineyards that are registered in the Chianti Classico sub-zone. Vineyards registered in Chianti sub-zones other than Classico can produce Chianti Superiore wines but must omit the sub-zone name on the label. Aging is calculated from 1 January after the picking. Chianti Superiore cannot be sold to the consumer before nine months of aging, of which three must be in the bottle. Therefore, it cannot be bottled before the June after picking or sold to consumers before the next September.\nSpecial editions.\nChianti Classico was promoted as the \"Official wine of the 2013 UCI Road World Championships\" and sold bottles dedicated to the Championships with special labels.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7783", "revid": "3125232", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7783", "title": "Coriolis force", "text": "Apparent force in a rotating reference frame\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn physics, the Coriolis force is a pseudo force that acts on objects in motion within a frame of reference that rotates with respect to an inertial frame. In a reference frame with clockwise rotation, the force acts to the left of the motion of the object. In one with anticlockwise (or counterclockwise) rotation, the force acts to the right. Deflection of an object due to the Coriolis force is called the Coriolis effect. Though recognized previously by others, the mathematical expression for the Coriolis force appeared in an 1835 paper by French scientist Gaspard-Gustave de Coriolis, in connection with the theory of water wheels. Early in the 20th century, the term \"Coriolis force\" began to be used in connection with meteorology.\nNewton's laws of motion describe the motion of an object in an inertial (non-accelerating) frame of reference. When Newton's laws are transformed to a rotating frame of reference, the Coriolis and centrifugal accelerations appear. When applied to objects with masses, the respective forces are proportional to their masses. The magnitude of the Coriolis force is proportional to the rotation rate, and the magnitude of the centrifugal force is proportional to the square of the rotation rate. The Coriolis force acts in a direction perpendicular to two quantities: the angular velocity of the rotating frame relative to the inertial frame and the velocity of the body relative to the rotating frame, and its magnitude is proportional to the object's speed in the rotating frame (more precisely, to the component of its velocity that is perpendicular to the axis of rotation). The centrifugal force acts outwards in the radial direction and is proportional to the distance of the body from the axis of the rotating frame. These additional forces are termed inertial forces, fictitious forces, or \"pseudo forces\". By introducing these fictitious forces to a rotating frame of reference, Newton's laws of motion can be applied to the rotating system as though it were an inertial system; these forces are correction factors that are not required in a non-rotating system.\nIn popular (non-technical) usage of the term \"Coriolis effect\", the rotating reference frame implied is almost always the Earth. Because the Earth rotates, Earth-bound observers need to account for the Coriolis force to correctly analyze the motion of objects. The Earth completes one rotation for each sidereal day, so for motions of everyday objects the Coriolis force is imperceptible; its effects become noticeable only for motions occurring over large distances and long periods of time, such as large-scale movement of air in the atmosphere or water in the ocean, or where high precision is important, such as artillery or missile trajectories. Such motions are constrained by the surface of the Earth, so only the horizontal component of the Coriolis force is generally important. This force causes moving objects on the surface of the Earth to be deflected to the right (with respect to the direction of travel) in the Northern Hemisphere and to the left in the Southern Hemisphere. The horizontal deflection effect is greater near the poles, since the effective rotation rate about a local vertical axis is largest there, and decreases to zero at the equator. Rather than flowing directly from areas of high pressure to low pressure, as they would in a non-rotating system, winds and currents tend to flow to the right of this direction north of the equator (\"clockwise\") and to the left of this direction south of it (\"anticlockwise\"). This effect is responsible for the rotation and thus formation of cyclones &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;.\nHistory.\nItalian scientist Giovanni Battista Riccioli and his assistant Francesco Maria Grimaldi described the effect in connection with artillery in the 1651 \"Almagestum Novum\", writing that rotation of the Earth should cause a cannonball fired to the north to deflect to the east. In 1674, Claude Fran\u00e7ois Milliet Dechales described in his \"Cursus seu Mundus Mathematicus\" how the rotation of the Earth should cause a deflection in the trajectories of both falling bodies and projectiles aimed toward one of the planet's poles. Riccioli, Grimaldi, and Dechales all described the effect as part of an argument against the heliocentric system of Copernicus. In other words, they argued that the Earth's rotation should create the effect, and so failure to detect the effect was evidence for an immobile Earth. The Coriolis acceleration equation was derived by Euler in 1749, and the effect was described in the tidal equations of Pierre-Simon Laplace in 1778.\nGaspard-Gustave de Coriolis published a paper in 1835 on the energy yield of machines with rotating parts, such as waterwheels. That paper considered the supplementary forces that are detected in a rotating frame of reference. Coriolis divided these supplementary forces into two categories. The second category contained a force that arises from the cross product of the angular velocity of a coordinate system and the projection of a particle's velocity into a plane perpendicular to the system's axis of rotation. Coriolis referred to this force as the \"compound centrifugal force\" due to its analogies with the centrifugal force already considered in category one. The effect was known in the early 20th century as the \"acceleration of Coriolis\", and by 1920 as \"Coriolis force\".\nIn 1856, William Ferrel proposed the existence of a circulation cell in the mid-latitudes with air being deflected by the Coriolis force to create the prevailing westerly winds.\nThe understanding of the kinematics of how exactly the rotation of the Earth affects airflow was partial at first. Late in the 19th century, the full extent of the large scale interaction of pressure-gradient force and deflecting force that in the end causes air masses to move along isobars was understood.\nFormula.\nIn Newtonian mechanics, the equation of motion for an object in an inertial reference frame is:\nformula_1\nwhere formula_2 is the vector sum of the physical forces acting on the object, formula_3 is the mass of the object, and formula_4 is the acceleration of the object relative to the inertial reference frame.\nTransforming this equation to a reference frame rotating about a fixed axis through the origin with angular velocity formula_5 having variable rotation rate, the equation takes the form:\nformula_6\nwhere the \"prime\" (') variables denote coordinates of the rotating reference frame (not a derivative) and:\nThe fictitious forces as they are perceived in the rotating frame act as additional forces that contribute to the apparent acceleration just like the real external forces. The fictitious force terms of the equation are, reading from left to right:\nAs seen in these formulas the Euler and centrifugal forces depend on the position vector formula_9 of the object, while the Coriolis force depends on the object's velocity formula_10 as measured in the rotating reference frame. As expected, for a non-rotating inertial frame of reference formula_17 the Coriolis force and all other fictitious forces disappear.\nDirection of Coriolis force for simple cases.\nAs the Coriolis force is proportional to a cross product of two vectors, it is perpendicular to both vectors, in this case the object's velocity and the frame's rotation vector. It therefore follows that:\nIntuitive explanation.\nFor an intuitive explanation of the origin of the Coriolis force, consider an object moving northward on the ground in the Northern Hemisphere. Viewed from outer space, the object does not appear to go due north, but has an eastward motion (it rotates around toward the right along with the surface of the Earth). The further north it travels, the smaller the \"radius of its parallel (latitude)\" (the minimum distance from the surface point to the axis of rotation, which is in a plane orthogonal to the axis), and so the slower the eastward motion of its surface. As the object moves north it has a tendency to maintain the eastward speed it started with (rather than slowing down to match the reduced eastward speed of local objects on the Earth's surface), so it veers east (i.e. to the right of its initial motion).\nThough not obvious from this example, which considers northward motion, the horizontal deflection occurs equally for objects moving eastward or westward (or in any other direction). However, the theory that the effect determines the rotation of draining water in a household bathtub, sink or toilet has been repeatedly disproven by modern-day scientists; the force is negligibly small compared to the many other influences on the rotation.\nLength scales and the Rossby number.\nThe time, space, and velocity scales are important in determining the importance of the Coriolis force. Whether rotation is important in a system can be determined by its Rossby number (Ro), which is the ratio of the velocity, \"U\", of a system to the product of the Coriolis parameter, formula_18, and the length scale, \"L\", of the motion:\nformula_19\nHence, it is the ratio of inertial to Coriolis forces; a small Rossby number indicates a system is strongly affected by Coriolis forces, and a large Rossby number indicates a system in which inertial forces dominate. For example, in tornadoes, the Rossby number is large, so the Coriolis force is negligible; the balance is between pressure and centrifugal forces. In low-pressure systems the Rossby number is low, as the centrifugal force is negligible; the balance is between Coriolis and pressure forces. In oceanic systems the Rossby number is often around 1, with all three forces comparable.\nAn atmospheric system moving at \"U\"\u00a0=\u00a0 occupying a spatial distance of \"L\"\u00a0=\u00a0, has a Rossby number of approximately 0.1.\nAn unguided missile can travel far enough and be in the air long enough to experience the effect of Coriolis force. Long-range shells in the Northern Hemisphere can land to the right of where they were aimed until the effect was noted (those fired in the Southern Hemisphere landed to the left.) It was this effect that first drew the attention of Coriolis himself.\nSimple cases.\nTossed ball on a rotating carousel.\nThe figures illustrate a ball tossed from 12:00\u00a0o'clock toward the center of a counter-clockwise rotating carousel. In the first figure, the ball is seen by a stationary observer above the carousel, and the ball travels in a straight line slightly to the right of the center, because it had an initial tangential velocity given by the rotation (blue arrow) and a radial velocity given by the thrower (green arrow). The resulting combined velocity is shown as a solid red line, and the trajectory is shown as a dotted red line. In the second figure, the ball is seen by an observer rotating with the carousel, so the ball-thrower appears to stay at 12:00\u00a0o'clock, and the ball trajectory has a slight curve.\nBounced ball.\nThe figure describes a more complex situation where the tossed ball on a turntable bounces off the edge of the carousel and then returns to the tosser, who catches the ball. The effect of Coriolis force on its trajectory is shown again as seen by two observers: an observer (referred to as the \"camera\") that rotates with the carousel, and an inertial observer. The figure shows a bird's-eye view based upon the same ball speed on forward and return paths. Within each circle, plotted dots show the same time points. In the left panel, from the camera's viewpoint at the center of rotation, the tosser (smiley face) and the rail both are at fixed locations, and the ball makes a very considerable arc on its travel toward the rail, and takes a more direct route on the way back. From the ball tosser's viewpoint, the ball seems to return more quickly than it went (because the tosser is rotating toward the ball on the return flight).\nOn the carousel, instead of tossing the ball straight at a rail to bounce back, the tosser must throw the ball toward the right of the target and the ball then seems to the camera to bear continuously to the left of its direction of travel to hit the rail (\"left\" because the carousel is turning \"clockwise\"). The ball appears to bear to the left from direction of travel on both inward and return trajectories. The curved path demands this observer to recognize a leftward net force on the ball. (This force is \"fictitious\" because it disappears for a stationary observer, as is discussed shortly.) For some angles of launch, a path has portions where the trajectory is approximately radial, and Coriolis force is primarily responsible for the apparent deflection of the ball (centrifugal force is radial from the center of rotation, and causes little deflection on these segments). When a path curves away from radial, however, centrifugal force contributes significantly to deflection.\nThe ball's path through the air is straight when viewed by observers standing on the ground (right panel). In the right panel (stationary observer), the ball tosser (smiley face) is at 12\u00a0o'clock and the rail the ball bounces from is at position\u00a01. From the inertial viewer's standpoint, positions\u00a01, 2, and 3 are occupied in sequence. At position\u00a02, the ball strikes the rail, and at position\u00a03, the ball returns to the tosser. Straight-line paths are followed because the ball is in free flight, so this observer requires that no net force is applied.\nApplied to the Earth.\nThe acceleration affecting the motion of air \"sliding\" over the Earth's surface is the horizontal component of the Coriolis term\nformula_20\nThis component is orthogonal to the velocity over the Earth surface and is given by the expression\nformula_21\nwhere\nIn the Northern Hemisphere, where the latitude is positive, this acceleration, as viewed from above, is to the right of the direction of motion. Conversely, it is to the left in the southern hemisphere.\nRotating sphere.\nConsider a location with latitude \"\u03c6\" on a sphere that is rotating around the north\u2013south axis. A local coordinate system is set up with the \"x\" axis horizontally due east, the \"y\" axis horizontally due north and the \"z\" axis vertically upwards. The rotation vector, velocity of movement and Coriolis acceleration expressed in this local coordinate system [listing components in the order east (e), north (n) and upward (u)] are:\nformula_24\nformula_25\nWhen considering atmospheric or oceanic dynamics, the vertical velocity is small, and the vertical component of the Coriolis acceleration (formula_26) is small compared with the acceleration due to gravity (g, approximately near Earth's surface). For such cases, only the horizontal (east and north) components matter. The restriction of the above to the horizontal plane is (setting \"vu\"\u00a0=\u00a00):\nformula_27\nwhere formula_18 is called the Coriolis parameter.\nBy setting \"v\"n = 0, it can be seen immediately that (for positive \"\u03c6\" and \"\u03c9\") a movement due east results in an acceleration due south; similarly, setting \"v\"e = 0, it is seen that a movement due north results in an acceleration due east. In general, observed horizontally, looking along the direction of the movement causing the acceleration, the acceleration always is turned 90\u00b0 to the right (for positive \"\u03c6\") and of the same size regardless of the horizontal orientation.\nIn the case of equatorial motion, setting \"\u03c6\" = 0\u00b0 yields:\nformula_29\nformula_30\n\u03a9 in this case is parallel to the north\u2013south axis.\nAccordingly, an eastward motion (that is, in the same direction as the rotation of the sphere) provides an upward acceleration known as the E\u00f6tv\u00f6s effect, and an upward motion produces an acceleration due west.\nMeteorology and oceanography.\nPerhaps the most important impact of the Coriolis effect is in the large-scale dynamics of the oceans and the atmosphere. In meteorology and oceanography, it is convenient to postulate a rotating frame of reference wherein the Earth is stationary. In accommodation of that provisional postulation, the centrifugal and Coriolis forces are introduced. Their relative importance is determined by the applicable Rossby numbers. Tornadoes have high Rossby numbers, so, while tornado-associated centrifugal forces are quite substantial, Coriolis forces associated with tornadoes are for practical purposes negligible.\nBecause surface ocean currents are driven by the movement of wind over the water's surface, the Coriolis force also affects the movement of ocean currents and cyclones as well. Many of the ocean's largest currents circulate around warm, high-pressure areas called gyres. Though the circulation is not as significant as that in the air, the deflection caused by the Coriolis effect is what creates the spiralling pattern in these gyres. The spiralling wind pattern helps the hurricane form. The stronger the force from the Coriolis effect, the faster the wind spins and picks up additional energy, increasing the strength of the hurricane.\nAir within high-pressure systems rotates in a direction such that the Coriolis force is directed radially inwards, and nearly balanced by the outwardly radial pressure gradient. As a result, air travels clockwise around high pressure in the Northern Hemisphere and anticlockwise in the Southern Hemisphere. Air around low-pressure rotates in the opposite direction, so that the Coriolis force is directed radially outward and nearly balances an inwardly radial pressure gradient.\nFlow around a low-pressure area.\nIf a low-pressure area forms in the atmosphere, air tends to flow in towards it, but is deflected perpendicular to its velocity by the Coriolis force. A system of equilibrium can then establish itself creating circular movement, or a cyclonic flow. Because the Rossby number is low, the force balance is largely between the pressure-gradient force acting towards the low-pressure area and the Coriolis force acting away from the center of the low pressure.\nInstead of flowing down the gradient, large scale motions in the atmosphere and ocean tend to occur perpendicular to the pressure gradient. This is known as geostrophic flow. On a non-rotating planet, fluid would flow along the straightest possible line, quickly eliminating pressure gradients. The geostrophic balance is thus very different from the case of \"inertial motions\" (see below), which explains why mid-latitude cyclones are larger by an order of magnitude than inertial circle flow would be.\nThis pattern of deflection, and the direction of movement, is called Buys-Ballot's law. In the atmosphere, the pattern of flow is called a cyclone. In the Northern Hemisphere the direction of movement around a low-pressure area is anticlockwise. In the Southern Hemisphere, the direction of movement is clockwise because the rotational dynamics is a mirror image there. At high altitudes, outward-spreading air rotates in the opposite direction. Cyclones rarely form along the equator due to the weak Coriolis effect present in this region.\nInertial circles.\nAn air or water mass moving with speed formula_31 subject only to the Coriolis force travels in a circular trajectory called an \"inertial circle\". Since the force is directed at right angles to the motion of the particle, it moves with a constant speed around a circle whose radius formula_32 is given by:\nformula_33\nwhere formula_34 is the Coriolis parameter formula_35, introduced above (where formula_36 is the latitude). The time taken for the mass to complete a full circle is therefore formula_37. The Coriolis parameter typically has a mid-latitude value of about 10\u22124\u00a0s\u22121; hence for a typical atmospheric speed of , the radius is with a period of about 17\u00a0hours. For an ocean current with a typical speed of , the radius of an inertial circle is . These inertial circles are clockwise in the Northern Hemisphere (where trajectories are bent to the right) and anticlockwise in the Southern Hemisphere.\nIf the rotating system is a parabolic turntable, then formula_34 is constant and the trajectories are exact circles. On a rotating planet, formula_34 varies with latitude and the paths of particles do not form exact circles. Since the parameter formula_34 varies as the sine of the latitude, the radius of the oscillations associated with a given speed are smallest at the poles (latitude of \u00b190\u00b0), and increase toward the equator.\nOther terrestrial effects.\nThe Coriolis effect strongly affects the large-scale oceanic and atmospheric circulation, leading to the formation of robust features like jet streams and western boundary currents. Such features are in geostrophic balance, meaning that the Coriolis and \"pressure gradient\" forces balance each other. Coriolis acceleration is also responsible for the propagation of many types of waves in the ocean and atmosphere, including Rossby waves and Kelvin waves. It is also instrumental in the so-called Ekman dynamics in the ocean, and in the establishment of the large-scale ocean flow pattern called the Sverdrup balance.\nE\u00f6tv\u00f6s effect.\nThe practical impact of the \"Coriolis effect\" is mostly caused by the horizontal acceleration component produced by horizontal motion.\nThere are other components of the Coriolis effect. Westward-traveling objects are deflected downwards, while eastward-traveling objects are deflected upwards. This is known as the E\u00f6tv\u00f6s effect. This aspect of the Coriolis effect is greatest near the equator. The force produced by the E\u00f6tv\u00f6s effect is similar to the horizontal component, but the much larger vertical forces due to gravity and pressure suggest that it is unimportant in the hydrostatic equilibrium. However, in the atmosphere, winds are associated with small deviations of pressure from the hydrostatic equilibrium. In the tropical atmosphere, the order of magnitude of the pressure deviations is so small that the contribution of the E\u00f6tv\u00f6s effect to the pressure deviations is considerable.\nIn addition, objects traveling upwards (i.e. \"out\") or downwards (i.e. \"in\") are deflected to the west or east respectively. This effect is also the greatest near the equator. Since vertical movement is usually of limited extent and duration, the size of the effect is smaller and requires precise instruments to detect. For example, idealized numerical modeling studies suggest that this effect can directly affect tropical large-scale wind field by roughly 10% given long-duration (2 weeks or more) heating or cooling in the atmosphere. Moreover, in the case of large changes of momentum, such as a spacecraft being launched into orbit, the effect becomes significant. The fastest and most fuel-efficient path to orbit is a launch from the equator that curves to a directly eastward heading.\nIntuitive example.\nImagine a train that travels through a frictionless railway line along the equator. Assume that, when in motion, it moves at the necessary speed to complete a trip around the world in one day (465\u00a0m/s). The Coriolis effect can be considered in three cases: when the train travels west, when it is at rest, and when it travels east. In each case, the Coriolis effect can be calculated from the rotating frame of reference on Earth first, and then checked against a fixed inertial frame. The image below illustrates the three cases as viewed by an observer at rest in a (near) inertial frame from a fixed point above the North Pole along the Earth's axis of rotation; the train is denoted by a few red pixels, fixed at the left side in the leftmost picture, moving in the others formula_41\nThis also explains why high-speed projectiles that travel west are deflected down, and those that travel east are deflected up. This vertical component of the Coriolis effect is called the E\u00f6tv\u00f6s effect.\nThe above example can be used to explain why the E\u00f6tv\u00f6s effect starts diminishing when an object is traveling westward as its tangential speed increases above Earth's rotation (465\u00a0m/s). If the westward train in the above example increases speed, part of the force of gravity that pushes against the track accounts for the centripetal force needed to keep it in circular motion on the inertial frame. Once the train doubles its westward speed at that centripetal force becomes equal to the force the train experiences when it stops. From the inertial frame, in both cases it rotates at the same speed but in the opposite directions. Thus, the force is the same cancelling completely the E\u00f6tv\u00f6s effect. Any object that moves westward at a speed above experiences an upward force instead. In the figure, the E\u00f6tv\u00f6s effect is illustrated for a object on the train at different speeds. The parabolic shape is because the centripetal force is proportional to the square of the tangential speed. On the inertial frame, the bottom of the parabola is centered at the origin. The offset is because this argument uses the Earth's rotating frame of reference. The graph shows that the E\u00f6tv\u00f6s effect is not symmetrical, and that the resulting downward force experienced by an object that travels west at high velocity is less than the resulting upward force when it travels east at the same speed.\nDraining in bathtubs and toilets.\nContrary to popular misconception, bathtubs, toilets, and other water receptacles do not drain in opposite directions in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres. This is because the magnitude of the Coriolis force is negligible at this scale. Forces determined by the initial conditions of the water (e.g. the geometry of the drain, the geometry of the receptacle, preexisting momentum of the water, etc.) are likely to be orders of magnitude greater than the Coriolis force and hence will determine the direction of water rotation, if any. For example, identical toilets flushed in both hemispheres drain in the same direction, and this direction is determined mostly by the shape of the toilet bowl.\nUnder real-world conditions, the Coriolis force does not influence the direction of water flow perceptibly. Only if the water is so still that the effective rotation rate of the Earth is faster than that of the water relative to its container, and if externally applied torques (such as might be caused by flow over an uneven bottom surface) are small enough, the Coriolis effect may indeed determine the direction of the vortex. Without such careful preparation, the Coriolis effect will be much smaller than various other influences on drain direction such as any residual rotation of the water and the geometry of the container.\nLaboratory testing of draining water under atypical conditions.\nIn 1962, Ascher Shapiro performed an experiment at MIT to test the Coriolis force on a large basin of water, across, with a small wooden cross above the plug hole to display the direction of rotation, covering it and waiting for at least 24 hours for the water to settle. Under these precise laboratory conditions, he demonstrated the effect and consistent counterclockwise rotation. The experiment required extreme precision, since the acceleration due to Coriolis effect is only formula_42 that of gravity. The vortex was measured by a cross made of two slivers of wood pinned above the draining hole. It takes 20 minutes to drain, and the cross starts turning only around 15 minutes. At the end it is turning at 1 rotation every 3 to 4 seconds.\nHe reported that,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Both schools of thought are in some sense correct. For the everyday observations of the kitchen sink and bath-tub variety, the direction of the vortex seems to vary in an unpredictable manner with the date, the time of day, and the particular household of the experimenter. But under well-controlled conditions of experimentation, the observer looking downward at a drain in the northern hemisphere will always see a counter-clockwise vortex, while one in the southern hemisphere will always see a clockwise vortex. In a properly designed experiment, the vortex is produced by Coriolis forces, which are counter-clockwise in the northern hemisphere.\nLloyd Trefethen reported clockwise rotation in the Southern Hemisphere at the University of Sydney in five tests with settling times of 18 h or more.\nBallistic trajectories.\nThe Coriolis force is important in external ballistics for calculating the trajectories of very long-range artillery shells. The most famous historical example was the Paris gun, used by the Germans during World War I to bombard Paris from a range of about . The Coriolis force minutely changes the trajectory of a bullet, affecting accuracy at extremely long distances. It is adjusted for by accurate long-distance shooters, such as snipers. At the latitude of Sacramento, California, a northward shot would be deflected to the right. There is also a vertical component, explained in the E\u00f6tv\u00f6s effect section above, which causes westward shots to hit low, and eastward shots to hit high.\nThe effects of the Coriolis force on ballistic trajectories should not be confused with the curvature of the paths of missiles, satellites, and similar objects when the paths are plotted on two-dimensional (flat) maps, such as the Mercator projection. The projections of the three-dimensional curved surface of the Earth to a two-dimensional surface (the map) necessarily results in distorted features. The apparent curvature of the path is a consequence of the sphericity of the Earth and would occur even in a non-rotating frame.\nThe Coriolis force on a moving projectile depends on velocity components in all three directions, latitude, and azimuth. The directions are typically downrange (the direction that the gun is initially pointing), vertical, and cross-range.\nformula_43\nformula_44\nformula_45\nwhere\nVisualization.\nTo demonstrate the Coriolis effect, a parabolic turntable can be used.\nOn a flat turntable, the inertia of a co-rotating object forces it off the edge. However, if the turntable surface has the correct paraboloid (parabolic bowl) shape (see the figure) and rotates at the corresponding rate, the force components shown in the figure make the component of gravity tangential to the bowl surface exactly equal to the centripetal force necessary to keep the object rotating at its velocity and radius of curvature (assuming no friction). (See .) This carefully contoured surface allows the Coriolis force to be displayed in isolation.\nDiscs cut from cylinders of dry ice can be used as pucks, moving around almost frictionlessly over the surface of the parabolic turntable, allowing effects of Coriolis on dynamic phenomena to show themselves. To get a view of the motions as seen from the reference frame rotating with the turntable, a video camera is attached to the turntable so as to co-rotate with the turntable, with results as shown in the figure. In the left panel of the figure, which is the viewpoint of a stationary observer, the gravitational force in the inertial frame pulling the object toward the center (bottom ) of the dish is proportional to the distance of the object from the center. A centripetal force of this form causes the elliptical motion. In the right panel, which shows the viewpoint of the rotating frame, the inward gravitational force in the rotating frame (the same force as in the inertial frame) is balanced by the outward centrifugal force (present only in the rotating frame). With these two forces balanced, in the rotating frame the only unbalanced force is Coriolis (also present only in the rotating frame), and the motion is an \"inertial circle\". Analysis and observation of circular motion in the rotating frame is a simplification compared with analysis and observation of elliptical motion in the inertial frame.\nBecause this reference frame rotates several times a minute rather than only once a day like the Earth, the Coriolis acceleration produced is many times larger and so easier to observe on small time and spatial scales than is the Coriolis acceleration caused by the rotation of the Earth.\nIn a manner of speaking, the Earth is analogous to such a turntable. The rotation has caused the planet to settle on a spheroid shape, such that the normal force, the gravitational force and the centrifugal force exactly balance each other on a \"horizontal\" surface. (See equatorial bulge.)\nThe Coriolis effect caused by the rotation of the Earth can be seen indirectly through the motion of a Foucault pendulum.\nIn other areas.\nCoriolis flow meter.\nA practical application of the Coriolis effect is the mass flow meter, an instrument that measures the mass flow rate and density of a fluid flowing through a tube. The operating principle involves inducing a vibration of the tube through which the fluid passes. The vibration, though not completely circular, provides the rotating reference frame that gives rise to the Coriolis effect. While specific methods vary according to the design of the flow meter, sensors monitor and analyze changes in frequency, phase shift, and amplitude of the vibrating flow tubes. The changes observed represent the mass flow rate and density of the fluid.\nMolecular physics.\nIn polyatomic molecules, the molecule motion can be described by a rigid body rotation and internal vibration of atoms about their equilibrium position. As a result of the vibrations of the atoms, the atoms are in motion relative to the rotating coordinate system of the molecule. Coriolis effects are therefore present, and make the atoms move in a direction perpendicular to the original oscillations. This leads to a mixing in molecular spectra between the rotational and vibrational levels, from which Coriolis coupling constants can be determined.\nInsect flight.\nFlies (Diptera) and some moths (Lepidoptera) exploit the Coriolis effect in flight with specialized appendages and organs that relay information about the angular velocity of their bodies. Coriolis forces resulting from linear motion of these appendages are detected within the rotating frame of reference of the insects' bodies. In the case of flies, their specialized appendages are dumbbell shaped organs located just behind their wings called \"halteres\".\nThe fly's halteres oscillate in a plane at the same beat frequency as the main wings so that any body rotation results in lateral deviation of the halteres from their plane of motion.\nIn moths, their antennae are known to be responsible for the \"sensing\" of Coriolis forces in the similar manner as with the halteres in flies. In both flies and moths, a collection of mechanosensors at the base of the appendage are sensitive to deviations at the beat frequency, correlating to rotation in the pitch and roll planes, and at twice the beat frequency, correlating to rotation in the yaw plane.\nLagrangian point stability.\nIn astronomy, Lagrangian points are five positions in the orbital plane of two large orbiting bodies where a small object affected only by gravity can maintain a stable position relative to the two large bodies. The first three Lagrangian points (L1, L2, L3) lie along the line connecting the two large bodies, while the last two points (L4 and L5) each form an equilateral triangle with the two large bodies. The L4 and L5 points, although they correspond to maxima of the effective potential in the coordinate frame that rotates with the two large bodies, are stable due to the Coriolis effect. The stability can result in orbits around just L4 or L5, known as tadpole orbits, where trojans can be found. It can also result in orbits that encircle L3, L4, and L5, known as horseshoe orbits.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPhysics and meteorology.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistorical.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7786", "revid": "8660314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7786", "title": "Challenger Deep", "text": "Deepest known point of Earth's seabed\nThe Challenger Deep is the deepest known point of the seabed of Earth, located in the western Pacific Ocean at the southern end of the Mariana Trench, in the ocean territory of the Federated States of Micronesia.\nThe GEBCO Gazetteer of Undersea Feature Names indicates that the feature is situated at and has an approximated maximum depth of below sea level. A 2011 study placed the depth at with a 2021 study revising the value to at a 95% confidence level. \nThe depression is named after the British Royal Navy survey ships , whose expedition of 1872\u20131876 first located it, and HMS \"Challenger II\", whose expedition of 1950\u20131952 established its record-setting depth. The first descent by any vehicle was conducted by the United States Navy using the bathyscaphe \"Trieste\" in January 1960. As of July\u00a02022[ [update]], there were 27 people who have descended to the Challenger Deep.\nTopography.\nThe Challenger Deep is a relatively small slot-shaped depression in the bottom of a considerably larger crescent-shaped oceanic trench, which itself is an unusually deep feature in the ocean floor. The Challenger Deep consists of three basins, each long, wide, and over in depth, oriented in echelon from west to east, separated by mounds between the basins higher. The three basins feature extends about west to east if measured at the isobath. Both the western and eastern basins have recorded depths (by sonar bathymetry) in excess of , while the center basin is slightly less deep. The closest land to the Challenger Deep is Fais Island (one of the outer islands of Yap), southwest, and Guam, to the northeast.\nDetailed sonar mapping of the western, center and eastern basins in June 2020 by the DSSV \"Pressure Drop\" combined with manned descents revealed that they undulate with slopes and piles of rocks above a bed of pelagic ooze. This conforms with the description of Challenger Deep as consisting of an elongated seabed section with distinct sub-basins or sediment-filled pools.\nSurveys and bathymetry.\nOver many years, the search for, and investigation of, the location of the maximum depth of the world's oceans has involved many different vessels, and continues into the twenty-first century.\nThe accuracy of determining geographical location, and the beamwidth of (multibeam) echosounder systems, limits the horizontal and vertical bathymetric sensor resolution that hydrographers can obtain from onsite data. This is especially important when sounding in deep water, as the resulting footprint of an acoustic pulse gets large once it reaches a distant sea floor. Further, sonar operation is affected by variations in sound speed, particularly in the vertical plane. The speed is determined by the water's bulk modulus, mass, and density. The bulk modulus is affected by temperature, pressure, and dissolved impurities (usually salinity).\n1875 \u2013 HMS \"Challenger\".\nIn 1875, during her transit from the Admiralty Islands in the Bismarck Archipelago to Yokohama in Japan, the three-masted sailing corvette HMS \"\"Challenger\" \"attempted to make landfall at Spanish Marianas (now Guam), but was set to the west by \"baffling winds\" preventing her crew from \"visiting either the Carolines or the Ladrones.\" Their altered path took them over the undersea canyon which later became known as the Challenger Deep. Depth soundings were taken by Baillie-weighted marked rope, and geographical locations were determined by celestial navigation (to an estimated accuracy of two nautical miles). One of their samples was taken within fifteen miles of the deepest spot in all of Earth's oceans. On 23 March 1875, at sample station number #225, HMS \"Challenger\" recorded the bottom at deep, (the deepest sounding of her three-plus-year eastward circumnavigation of the Earth) at \u2013 and confirmed it with a second sounding at the same location. The serendipitous discovery of Earth's deepest depression by history's first major scientific expedition devoted entirely to the emerging science of oceanography, was incredibly good fortune, and especially notable when compared to the Earth's third deepest site (the Sirena Deep only 150 nautical miles east of the Challenger Deep), which would remain undiscovered for another 122 years.\n1951 \u2013 SV HMS \"Challenger II\".\nSeventy-five years later, the 1,140-ton British survey vessel HMS \"Challenger II\", on her three-year westward circumnavigation of Earth, investigated the extreme depths southwest of Guam reported in 1875 by her predecessor, HMS \"Challenger\". On her southbound track from Japan to New Zealand (May\u2013July 1951), \"Challenger II\" conducted a survey of the Marianas Trench between Guam and Ulithi atoll, using seismic-sized bomb-soundings and recorded a maximum depth of . The depth was beyond \"Challenger II\"'s echo sounder capability to verify, so they resorted to using a taut wire with \"140\u00a0lbs of scrap iron\", and documented a depth of . The Senior Scientist aboard \"Challenger II\", Thomas Gaskell, recalled: [I]t took from ten past five in the evening until twenty to seven, that is an hour and a half, for the iron weight to fall to the sea-bottom.\u00a0It was almost dark by the time the weight struck, but great excitement greeted the reading...In New Zealand, the \"Challenger II\" team gained the assistance of the Royal New Zealand Dockyard, \"who managed to boost the echo sounder to record at the greatest depths\". They returned to the \"Marianas Deep\" (sic) in October 1951. Using their newly improved echo sounder, they ran survey lines at right angles to the axis of the trench and discovered \"a considerable area of a depth greater than \" \u2013 later identified as the Challenger Deep's \"western\" basin. The greatest depth recorded was , at . Navigational accuracy of several hundred meters was attained by celestial navigation and LORAN-A. As Gaskell explained, the measurement was not more than 50 miles from the spot where the nineteenth-century \"Challenger\" found her deepest depth [...] and it may be thought fitting that a ship with the name \"Challenger\" should put the seal on the work of that great pioneering expedition of oceanography.The term \"Challenger Deep\" came into use after this 1951\u201352 \"Challenger\" circumnavigation, and commemorates both British ships of that name involved with the discovery of the deepest basin of the world's oceans.\n1957\u20131958 \u2013 RV \"Vityaz\".\nIn August 1957, the Soviet 3,248-ton Vernadsky Institute of Geochemistry research vessel recorded a maximum depth of at in the western basin of the Challenger Deep during a brief transit of the area on Cruise #25. She returned in 1958, Cruise #27, to conduct a detailed single beam bathymetry survey involving over a dozen transects of the Deep, with an extensive examination of the western basin and a quick peek into the eastern basin. Fisher records a total of three \"Vityaz\" sounding locations on Figure 2 \"Trenches\" (1963), one within yards of the 142\u00b011.5' E location, and a third at , all with depth. The depths were considered statistical outliers, and a depth greater than 11,000 m has never been proven. Taira reports that if \"Vityaz\"'s depth was corrected with the same methodology used by the Japanese RV \"Hakuho Maru\" expedition of December 1992, it would be presented as , as opposed to modern depths from multibeam echosounder systems greater than with the NOAA accepted maximum of in the western basin.\n1959 \u2013 RV \"Stranger\".\nThe first definitive verification of both the depth and location of the Challenger Deep (western basin) was determined by Dr. R. L. Fisher from the Scripps Institution of Oceanography, aboard the 325-ton research vessel \"Stranger\". Using explosive soundings, they recorded at/near in July 1959. \"Stranger\" used celestial and LORAN-C for navigation. LORAN-C navigation provided geographical accuracy of or better. According to another source RV \"Stranger\" using bomb-sounding surveyed a maximum depth of at . Discrepancies between the geographical location (lat/long) of \"Stranger\"'s deepest depths and those from earlier expeditions (\"Challenger II\" 1951; \"Vityaz\" 1957 and 1958) \"are probably due to uncertainties in fixing the ships' positions\". \"Stranger\"'s north-south zig-zag survey passed well to the east of the eastern basin southbound, and well to the west of the eastern basin northbound, thus failed to discover the eastern basin of the Challenger Deep. The maximum depth measured near longitude 142\u00b030'E was , about 10\u00a0km west of the eastern basin's deepest point. This was an important gap in information, as the eastern basin was later reported as deeper than the other two basins.\n\"Stranger\" crossed the center basin twice, measuring a maximum depth of in the vicinity of 142\u00b022'E. At the western end of the central basin (approximately 142\u00b018'E), they recorded a depth of .\nThe western basin received four transects by \"Stranger\", recording depths of toward the central basin, near where \"Trieste\" dived in 1960 (vicinity , and where \"Challenger II\", in 1950, recorded . At the far western end of the \"western\" basin (about 142\u00b011'E), the \"Stranger\" recorded , some 6\u00a0km south of the location where \"Vityaz\" recorded in 1957\u20131958. Fisher stated: \"differences in the \"Vitiaz\" [sic] and \"Stranger\"\u2013\"Challenger II\" depths can be attributed to the [sound] velocity correction function used\". \nAfter investigating the Challenger Deep, \"Stranger\" proceeded to the Philippine Trench and transected the trench over twenty times in August 1959, finding a maximum depth of , and thus established that the Challenger Deep was about deeper than the Philippine Trench. The 1959 \"Stranger\" surveys of the Challenger Deep and of the Philippine Trench informed the U.S. Navy as to the appropriate site for \"Trieste\"'s record dive in 1960.\n1962 \u2013 RV \"Spencer F. Baird\".\nThe \"Proa Expedition, Leg 2\", returned Fisher to the Challenger Deep on 12\u201313 April 1962 aboard the Scripps research vessel \"Spencer F. Baird\" (formerly the steel-hulled US Army large tug \"LT-581\") and employed a Precision Depth Recorder (PDR) to verify the extreme depths previously reported. They recorded a maximum depth of (location not available). Additionally, at location \"H-4\" in the Challenger Deep, the expedition cast three taut-wire soundings: on 12 April, the first cast was to 5,078 fathoms (corrected for wire angle) at in the central basin (Up until 1965, US research vessels recorded soundings in fathoms). The second cast, also on 12 April, was to 5,000+ fathoms at in the central basin. On 13 April, the final cast recorded 5,297 fathoms (corrected for wire angle) at (the western basin). They were chased off by a hurricane after only two days on-site. Once again, Fisher entirely missed the eastern basin of the Challenger Deep, which later proved to contain the deepest depths.\n1975\u20131980 \u2013 RV \"Thomas Washington\".\nThe Scripps Institution of Oceanography deployed the 1,490-ton Navy-owned, civilian-crewed research vessel \"Thomas Washington\" (AGOR-10) to the Mariana Trench on several expeditions from 1975 to 1986. The first of these was the \"Eurydice Expedition, Leg 8\" which brought Fisher back to the Challenger Deep's western basin from 28\u201331 March 1975. \"Thomas Washington\" established geodetic positioning by (SATNAV) with Autolog Gyro and EM Log. Bathymetrics were by a 12\u00a0kHz Precision Depth Recorder (PDR) with a single 60\u00b0 beam. They mapped one, \"possibly two\", axial basins with a depth of . Five dredges were hauled 27\u201331 March, all into or slightly north of the deepest depths of the western basin. Fisher noted that this survey of the Challenger Deep (western basin) had \"provided nothing to support and much to refute recent claims of depths there greater than .\" While Fisher missed the eastern basin of the Challenger Deep (for the third time), he did report a deep depression about 150 nautical miles east of the western basin. The 25 March dredge haul at encountered , which pre-shadowed by 22 years the discovery of HMRG Deep/Sirena Deep in 1997. The deepest waters of the HMRG Deep/Sirena Deep at are centered at/near , approximately 2.65\u00a0km from Fisher's 25 March 1975 dredge haul.\nOn Scripps Institution of Oceanography's \"INDOPAC Expedition Leg 3\", the chief scientist, Dr. Joseph L. Reid, and oceanographer Arnold W. Mantyla made a hydrocast of a free vehicle (a special-purpose benthic lander (or \"baited camera\") for measurements of water temperature and salinity) on 27 May 1976 into the western basin of the Challenger Deep, \"Station 21\", at at about depth. On \"INDOPAC Expedition Leg 9\", under chief scientist A. Aristides Yayanos, \"Thomas Washington\" spent nine days from 13\u201321 January 1977 conducting an extensive and detailed investigation of the Challenger Deep, mainly with biological objectives. \"Echo soundings were carried out primarily with a 3.5 kHz single-beam system, with a 12 kHz echosounder operated in addition some of the time\" (the 12\u00a0kHz system was activated for testing on 16 January). A benthic lander was put into the western basin () on 13 January, bottoming at and recovered 50 hours later in damaged condition. Quickly repaired, it was again put down on the 15th to depth at . It was recovered on the 17th with excellent photography of amphipods (shrimp) from the Challenger Deep's western basin. The benthic lander was put down for the third and last time on the 17th, at , in the central basin at a depth of . The benthic lander was not recovered and may remain on the bottom in the vicinity of . Free traps and pressure-retaining traps were put down at eight locations from 13 to 19 January into the western basin, at depths ranging from . Both the free traps and the pressure-retaining traps brought up good sample amphipods for study. While the ship briefly visited the area of the eastern basin, the expedition did not recognize it as potentially the deepest of the three Challenger Deep basins.\n\"Thomas Washington\" returned briefly to the Challenger Deep on 17\u201319 October 1978 during \"Mariana Expedition Leg 5\" under chief scientist James W. Hawkins. The ship tracked to the south and west of the eastern basin, and recorded depths between . Another miss. On \"Mariana Expedition Leg 8\", under chief scientist Yayanos, \"Thomas Washington\" was again involved, from 12\u201321 December 1978, with an intensive biological study of the western and central basins of the Challenger Deep. Fourteen traps and pressure-retaining traps were put down to depths ranging from ; the greatest depth was at . All of the 10,900-plus m recordings were in the western basin. The depth was furthest east at 142\u00b026.4' E (in the central basin), about 17\u00a0km west of the eastern basin. Again, focused efforts on the known areas of extreme depths (the western and central basins) were so tight that the eastern basin again was missed by this expedition.\nFrom 20 to 30 November 1980, \"Thomas Washington\" was on site at the western basin of the Challenger Deep, as part of \"Rama Expedition Leg 7\", again with chief-scientist Dr. A. A. Yayanos. Yayanos directed \"Thomas Washington\" in arguably the most extensive and wide-ranging of all single-beam bathymetric examinations of the Challenger Deep ever undertaken, with dozens of transits of the western basin, and ranging far into the backarc of the Challenger Deep (northward), with significant excursions into the Pacific Plate (southward) and along the trench axis to the east. They hauled eight dredges in the western basin to depths ranging from , and between hauls, cast thirteen free vertical traps. The dredging and traps were for biological investigation of the bottom. In the first successful retrieval of a live animal from the Challenger Deep, on 21 November 1980 in the western basin at , Yayanos recovered a live amphipod from about 10,900 meters depth with a pressurized trap. Once again, other than a brief look into the eastern basin, all bathymetric and biological investigations were into the western basin.\n1976\u20131977 \u2013 RV \"Kana Keoki\".\nOn Leg 3 of the Hawaii Institute of Geophysics' (HIG) expedition 76010303, the research vessel \"Kana Keoki\" departed Guam primarily for a seismic investigation of the Challenger Deep area, under chief scientist Donald M. Hussong. The ship was equipped with air guns (for seismic reflection soundings deep into the Earth's mantle), magnetometer, gravimeter, 3.5\u00a0kHz and 12\u00a0kHz sonar transducers, and precision depth recorders. They ran the Deep from east to west, collecting single beam bathymetry, magnetic and gravity measurements, and employed the air guns along the trench axis, and well into the backarc and forearc, from 13 to 15 March 1976. Thence they proceeded south to the Ontong Java Plateau. All three deep basins of the Challenger Deep were covered, but \"Kana Keoki\" recorded a maximum depth of . Seismic information developed from this survey was instrumental in gaining an understanding of the subduction of the Pacific Plate under the Philippine Sea Plate. In 1977, \"Kana Keoki\" returned to the Challenger Deep area for wider coverage of the forearc and backarc.\n1984 \u2013 SV \"Takuyo\".\nThe Hydrographic Department, Maritime Safety Agency, Japan (JHOD) deployed the newly commissioned 2,600-ton survey vessel \"Takuyo\" (HL 02) to the Challenger Deep 17\u201319 February 1984. \"Takuyo\" was the first Japanese ship to be equipped with the new narrowbeam SeaBeam multi-beam sonar echosounder, and was the first survey ship with multi-beam capability to survey the Challenger Deep. The system was so new that JHOD had to develop their own software for drawing bathymetric charts based on the SeaBeam digital data. In just three days, they tracked 500 miles of sounding lines, and covered about 140\u00a0km2 of the Challenger Deep with multibeam ensonification. Under chief scientist Hideo Nishida, they used CTD temperature and salinity data from the top of the water column to correct depth measurements, and later conferred with Scripps Institution of Oceanography (including Fisher), and other GEBCO experts to confirm their depth correction methodology. They employed a combination of NAVSAT, LORAN-C and OMEGA systems for geodetic positioning with accuracy better than . The deepest location recorded was at ; for the first time documenting the eastern basin as the deepest of the three en echelon pools. In 1993, GEBCO recognized the report as the deepest depth of the world's oceans. Technological advances such as improved multi-beam sonar would be the driving force in uncovering the mysteries of the Challenger Deep into the future.\n1986 \u2013 RV \"Thomas Washington\".\nThe Scripps research vessel \"Thomas Washington\"'s returned to the Challenger Deep in 1986 during the \"Papatua Expedition, Leg 8\", mounting one of the first commercial multi-beam echosounders capable of reaching into the deepest trenches, i.e. the 16-beam Seabeam \"Classic\". This allowed chief scientist Yayanos an opportunity to transit the Challenger Deep with the most modern depth-sounding equipment available. During the pre-midnight hours of 21 April 1986, the multibeam echosounder produced a map of the Challenger Deep bottom with a swath of about 5\u20137 miles wide. The maximum depth recorded was (location of depth is not available). Yayanos noted: \"The lasting impression from this cruise comes from the thoughts of the revolutionary things that Seabeam data can do for deep biology.\"\n1988 \u2013 RV \"Moana Wave\".\nOn 22 August 1988, the U.S. Navy-owned 1,000-ton research vessel \"Moana Wave\" (AGOR-22), operated by the Hawaii Institute of Geophysics (HIG), University of Hawai\u02bbi, under the direction of chief scientist Robert C. Thunell from the University of South Carolina, transited northwesterly across the central basin of the Challenger Deep, conducting a single-beam bathymetry track by their 3.5\u00a0kHz narrow (30-degs) beam echosounder with a Precision Depth Recorder. In addition to sonar bathymetry, they took 44 gravity cores and 21 box cores of bottom sediments. The deepest echosoundings recorded were , with the greatest depth at 11\u00b022\u2032N 142\u00b025\u2032E in the central basin. This was the first indication that all three basins contained depths in excess of .\n1992 \u2013 RV \"Hakuh\u014d Maru\".\nThe 3,987-ton Japanese research vessel \"Hakuh\u014d Maru\", an Ocean Research Institute \u2013 University of Tokyo sponsored ship, on cruise KH-92-5 cast three Sea-Bird SBE-9 ultra-deep CTD (conductivity-temperature-depth) profilers in a transverse line across the Challenger Deep on 1 December 1992. The center CTD was located at , in the eastern basin, at by the SeaBeam depth recorder and by the CTD. The other two CTDs were cast 19.9\u00a0km to the north and 16.1\u00a0km to the south. \"Hakuh\u014d Maru\" was equipped with a narrow beam SeaBeam 500 multi-beam echosounder for depth determination, and had an Auto-Nav system with inputs from NAVSAT/NNSS, GPS, Doppler Log, EM log and track display, with a geodetic positioning accuracy approaching . When conducting CTD operations in the Challenger deep, they used the SeaBeam as a single beam depth recorder. At the corrected depth was , and at the depth was ; both in the \"eastern\" basin. This may demonstrate that the basins might not be flat sedimentary pools but rather undulate with a difference of or more. Taira revealed, \"We considered that a trough deeper than \"Vitiaz\"'s record by was detected. There is a possibility that a depth exceeding with a horizontal scale less than the beam width of measurements exists in the Challenger Deep. Since each SeaBeam 2.7-degree beam width sonar ping expands to cover a circular area about in diameter at depth, dips in the bottom that are less than that size would be difficult to detect from a sonar-emitting platform seven miles above.\n1996 \u2013 RV \"Yokosuka\".\nFor most of 1995 and into 1996, the Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology (JAMSTEC) employed the 4,439-ton Research Vessel \"Yokosuka\" to conduct the testing and workup of the 11,000-meter remotely-operated vehicle (ROV) \"Kaik\u014d\", and the 6,500 meter ROV \"Shinkai.\" It was not until February 1996, during \"Yokosuka\"'s cruise Y96-06, that \"Kaik\u014d\" was ready for its first full depth dives. On this cruise, JAMSTEC established an area of the Challenger Deep (11\u00b010'N to 11\u00b030'N, by 141\u00b050'E to 143\u00b000'E\u00a0\u2013 which later was recognized as containing three separate pools/basins en echelon, each with depths in excess of ) toward which JAMSTEC expeditions would concentrate their investigations for the next two decades. The Yokosuka employed a 151-beam SeaBeam 2112 12\u00a0kHz multibeam echosounder, allowing search swaths 12\u201315\u00a0km in width at depth. The depth accuracy of \"Yokosuka\"'s Seabeam was about 0.1% of water depth (i.e. \u00b1 for depth). The ship's dual GPS systems attained geodetic positioning within double digit meter ( or better) accuracy.\n1998, 1999 and 2002 \u2013 RV \"Kairei\".\nCruise KR98-01 sent JAMSTEC's two-year-old 4,517-ton Deep Sea Research Vessel RV \"Kairei\" south for a quick but thorough depth survey of the Challenger Deep, 11\u201313 January 1998, under chief scientist Kantaro Fujioka. Tracking largely along the trench axis of 070\u2013250\u00b0 they made five 80-km bathymetric survey tracks, spaced about 15 km apart, overlapping their SeaBeam 2112-004 (which now allowed sub-bottom profiling penetrating as much as 75 m below the bottom) while gaining gravity and magnetic data covering the entire Challenger Deep: western, central, and eastern basins.\n\"Kairei\" returned in May 1998, cruise KR98-05, with ROV \"Kaik\u014d\", under the direction of chief scientist Jun Hashimoto with both geophysical and biological goals. Their bathymetric survey from 14\u201326 May was the most intensive and thorough depth and seismic survey of the Challenger Deep performed to date. Each evening, \"Kaik\u014d\" deployed for about four hours of bottom time for biological-related sampling, plus about seven hours of vertical transit time. When \"Kaik\u014d\" was onboard for servicing, \"Kairei\" conducted bathymetric surveys and observations. \"Kairei\" gridded a survey area about 130\u00a0km N\u2013S by 110\u00a0km E\u2013W. \"Kaik\u014d\" made six dives (#71\u201375) all to the same location, (11\u00b020.8' N, 142\u00b012.35' E), near the bottom contour line in the western basin.\nThe regional bathymetric map made from the data obtained in 1998 shows that the greatest depths in the eastern, central, and western depressions are , , and , respectively, making the eastern depression the deepest of the three.\nIn 1999, \"Kairei\" revisited the Challenger Deep during cruise KR99-06. The results of the 1998\u20131999 surveys include the first recognition that the Challenger Deep consists of three \"right-stepping en echelon individual basins bounded by the depth contour line. The size of [each of] the deeps are almost identical, 14\u201320 km long, 4\u00a0km wide\". They concluded with the proposal \"that these three individual elongated deeps constitute the 'Challenger Deep', and [we] identify them as the East, Central and West Deep. The deepest depth we obtained during the swath mapping is in the West Deep (11\u00b020.34' N, 142\u00b013.20 E).\" The depth was \"obtained during swath mapping\u00a0... confirmed in both N\u2013S and E-W swaths.\" Speed of sound corrections were from XBT to , and CTD below .\nThe cross track survey of the 1999 \"Kairei\" cruise shows that the greatest depths in the eastern, central, and western depressions are , , and , respectively, which supports the results of the previous survey.\nIn 2002 \"Kairei\" revisited the Challenger Deep 16\u201325 October 2002, as cruise KR02-13 (a cooperative Japan-US-South Korea research program) with chief scientist Jun Hashimoto in charge; again with Kazuyoshi Hirata managing the ROV \"Kaik\u014d\" team. On this survey, the size of each of the three basins was refined to 6\u201310\u00a0km long by about 2\u00a0km wide and in excess of deep. In marked contrast to the \"Kairei\" surveys of 1998 and 1999, the detailed survey in 2002 determined that the deepest point in the Challenger Deep is located in the eastern basin around , with a depth of , located about southeast of the deepest site determined by the survey vessel \"Takuyo\" in 1984. The 2002 surveys of both the western and eastern basins were tight, with especially meticulous cross-gridding of the eastern basin with ten parallel tracks N\u2013S and E\u2013W less than 250 meters apart. On the morning of 17 October, ROV \"Kaik\u014d\" dive #272 began and recovered over 33 hours later, with the ROV working at the bottom of the western basin for 26 hours (vicinity of 11\u00b020.148' N, 142\u00b011.774 E at ). Five \"Kaik\u014d\" dives followed on a daily basis into the same area to service benthic landers and other scientific equipment, with dive #277 recovered on 25 October. Traps brought up large numbers of amphipods (sea fleas), and cameras recorded holothurians (sea cucumbers), White polychaetes (bristle worms), tube worms, and other biological species. During its 1998, 1999 surveys, \"Kairei\" was equipped with a GPS satellite-based radionavigation system. The United States government lifted the GPS selective availability in 2000, so during its 2002 survey, \"Kairei\" had access to non-degraded GPS positional services and achieved single-digit meter accuracy in geodetic positioning.\n2001 \u2013 RV \"Melville\".\nThe 2.516-ton research vessel \"Melville\", at the time operated by the Scripps Institution of Oceanography, took the Cook Expedition, Leg 6 with chief scientist Patricia Fryer of the University of Hawai\u02bbi from Guam on 10 February 2001 to the Challenger Deep for a survey titled \"Subduction Factory Studies in the Southern Mariana\", including HMR-1 sonar mapping, magnetics, gravity measurements, and dredging in the Mariana arc region. They covered all three basins, then tracked lines of bathymetry East-West, stepping northward from the Challenger Deep in sidesteps, covering more than north into the backarc with overlapping swaths from their SeaBeam 2000 12\u00a0kHz multi-beam echosounder and MR1 towed system. They also gathered magnetic and gravity information, but no seismic data. Their primary survey instrument was the MR1 towed sonar, a shallow-towed 11/12\u00a0kHz bathymetric sidescan sonar developed and operated by the Hawaii Mapping Research Group (HMRG), a research and operational group within University of Hawai\u02bbi's School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology (SOEST) and the Hawaii Institute of Geophysics and Planetology (HIGP). The MR1 is full-ocean-depth capable, providing both bathymetry and sidescan data.\nLeg 7 of the Cook Expedition continued the MR-1 survey of the Mariana Trench backarc from 4 March to 12 April 2001 under chief scientist Sherman Bloomer of Oregon State University.\n2009 \u2013 RV \"Kilo Moana\".\nIn May/June 2009, the US Navy-owned 3,064-ton twin-hulled research vessel \"Kilo Moana\" (T-AGOR 26) was sent to the Challenger Deep area to conduct research. \"Kilo Moana\" is civilian-crewed and operated by SOEST. It is equipped with two multibeam echosounders with sub-bottom profiler add-ons (the 191-beam 12\u00a0kHz Kongsberg Simrad EM120 with SBP-1200, capable of accuracies of 0.2\u20130.5% of water depth across the entire swath), gravimeter, and magnetometer. The EM-120 uses 1 by 1 degree sonar-emissions at the sea surface. Each 1 degree beam width sonar ping expands to cover a circular area about in diameter at depth. Whilst mapping the Challenger Deep the sonar equipment indicated a maximum depth of at an undisclosed position.&lt;ref name=\"Daily Reports for R/V KILO MOANA\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"Scientic Equipment aboard the R/V KILO MOANA\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Navigation equipment includes the Applanix POS MV320 V4, rated at accuracies of 0.5\u20132\u00a0m. RV \"Kilo Moana\" was also used as the support ship of the hybrid remotely operated underwater vehicle (HROV) \"Nereus\" that dived three times to the Challenger Deep bottom during the May/June 2009 cruise and did not confirm the sonar established maximum depth by its support ship.\n2009 \u2013 RV \"Yokosuka\".\nCruise YK09-08 brought the JAMSTEC 4,429-ton research vessel \"Yokosuka\" back to the Mariana Trough and to the Challenger Deep June\u2013July 2009. Their mission was a two-part program: surveying three hydrothermal vent sites in the southern Mariana Trough backarc basin near 12\u00b057'N, 143\u00b037'E about 130 nmi northeast of the central basin of the Challenger Deep, using the autonomous underwater vehicle \"Urashima\". AUV \"Urashima\" dives #90\u201394, were to a maximum depth of 3500 meters, and were successful in surveying all three sites with a Reson SEABAT7125AUV multibeam echosounder for bathymetry, and multiple water testers to detect and map trace elements spewed into the water from hydrothermal vents, white smokers, and hot spots. Kyoko OKINO from the Ocean Research Institute, University of Tokyo, was principal investigator for this aspect of the cruise.\nThe second goal of the cruise was to deploy a new \"10K free fall camera system\" called \"Ashura\", to sample sediments and biologics at the bottom of the Challenger Deep. The principal investigator at the Challenger Deep was Taishi Tsubouchi of JAMSTEC. The lander \"Ashura\" made two descents: on the first, 6 July 2009, \"Ashura\" bottomed at at . The second descent (on 10 July 2009) was to at . The 270\u00a0kg \"Ashura\" was equipped with multiple baited traps, a HTDV video camera, and devices to recover sediment, water, and biological samples (mostly amphipods at the bait, and bacteria and fungus from the sediment and water samples).\n2010 \u2013 USNS \"Sumner\".\nOn 7 October 2010, further sonar mapping of the Challenger Deep area was conducted by the US Center for Coastal &amp; Ocean Mapping/Joint Hydrographic Center (CCOM/JHC) aboard the 4,762-ton \"Sumner\". The results were reported in December 2011 at the annual American Geophysical Union fall meeting. Using a Kongsberg Maritime EM 122 multi-beam echosounder system coupled to positioning equipment that can determine latitude and longitude up to accuracy, from thousands of individual soundings around the deepest part the CCOM/JHC team preliminary determined that the Challenger Deep has a maximum depth of at , with an estimated vertical uncertainty of \u00b1 at two standard deviations (i.e. \u2248 95.4%) confidence level. A secondary deep with a depth of was located at approximately to the east at in the eastern basin of the Challenger Deep.\n2010 \u2013 RV \"Yokosuka\".\nJAMSTEC returned \"Yokosuka\" to the Challenger Deep with cruise YK10-16, 21\u201328 November 2010. The chief scientist of this joint Japanese-Danish expedition was Hiroshi Kitazato of the Institute of Biogeosciences, JAMSTEC. The cruise was titled \"Biogeosciences at the Challenger Deep: relict organisms and their relations to biogeochemical cycles\". The Japanese teams made five deployments of their 11,000-meter camera system (three to 6,000 meters \u2013 two into the central basin of the Challenger Deep) which returned with 15 sediment cores, video records and 140 scavenging amphipod specimens. The Danish Ultra Deep Lander System was employed by Ronnie Glud et al on four casts, two into the central basin of the Challenger Deep and two to 6,000 m some 34 nmi west of the central basin. The deepest depth recorded was on 28 November 2010 \u2013 camera cast CS5 \u2013 }, at a corrected depth of (the central basin).\n2013 \u2013 RV \"Yokosuka\".\nWith JAMSTEC Cruises YK13-09 and YK13-12, \"Yokosuka\" hosted chief scientist Hidetaka Nomaki for a trip to New Zealand waters (YK13-09), with the return cruise identified as YK13-12. The project name was QUELLE2013; and the cruise title was: \"In situ experimental &amp; sampling study to understand abyssal biodiversity and biogeochemical cycles\". They spent one day on the return trip at the Challenger Deep to obtain DNA/RNA on the large amphipods inhabiting the Deep (\"Hirondellea gigas\"). Hideki Kobayashi (Biogeos, JAMSTEC) and the team deployed a benthic lander on 23 November 2013 with eleven baited traps (three bald, five covered by insulating materials, and three automatically sealed after nine hours) into the central basin of the Challenger Deep at , depth . After an eight-hour, 46-minute stay at the bottom, they recovered some 90 individual \"Hirondellea gigas\".\n2014 \u2013 RV \"Kairei\".\nJAMSTEC deployed \"Kairei\" to the Challenger Deep again 11\u201317 January 2014, under the leadership of chief scientist Takuro Nunora. The cruise identifier was KR14-01, titled: \"Trench biosphere expedition for the Challenger Deep, Mariana Trench\". The expedition sampled at six stations transecting the central basin, with only two deployments of the \"11-K camera system\" lander for sediment cores and water samples to \"Station C\" at the deepest depth, i.e. , at . The other stations were investigated with the \"Multi-core\" lander, both to the backarc northward, and to the Pacific Plate southward. The 11,000-meter capable crawler-driven ROV \"ABIMSO\" was sent to 7,646 m depth about 20 nmi due north of the central basin (ABISMO dive #21) specifically to identify possible hydrothermal activity on the north slope of the Challenger Deep, as suggested by findings from \"Kairei\" cruise KR08-05 in 2008. \"AMISMO\"'s dives #20 and #22 were to 7,900 meters about 15 nmi north of the deepest waters of the central basin. Italian researchers under the leadership of Laura Carugati from the Polytechnic University of Marche, Italy (UNIVPM) were investigating the dynamics in virus/prokaryotes interactions in the Mariana Trench.\n2014 \u2013 RV \"Falkor\".\nFrom 16\u201319 December 2014, the Schmidt Ocean Institute's 2,024-ton research vessel \"Falkor\", under chief scientist Douglas Bartlett from the Scripps Institution of Oceanography, deployed four different untethered instruments into the Challenger Deep for seven total releases. Four landers were deployed on 16 December into the central basin: the baited video-equipped lander \"Leggo\" for biologics; the lander \"ARI\" to for water chemistry; and the probes \"Deep Sound 3\" and \"Deep Sound 2\". Both Deep Sound probes recorded acoustics floating at depth, until \"Deep Sound 3\" imploded at the depth of (about above the bottom) at . The \"Deep Sound 2\" recorded the implosion of \"Deep Sound 3\", providing a unique recording of an implosion within the Challenger Deep depression. In addition to the loss of the \"Deep Sound 3\" by implosion, the lander \"ARI\" failed to respond upon receiving its instruction to drop weights, and was never recovered. On 16/17 December, \"Leggo\" was returned to the central basin baited for amphipods. On the 17th, RV \"Falkor\" relocated 17 nms eastward to the eastern basin, where they again deployed both the \"Leggo\" (baited and with its full camera load), and the \"Deep Sound 2\". \"Deep Sound 2\" was programmed to drop to and remain at that depth during its recording of sounds within the trench. On 19 December \"Leggo\" landed at at a uncorrected depth of according to its pressure sensor readings. This reading was corrected to depth. \"Leggo\" returned with good photography of amphipods feeding on the lander's mackerel bait and with sample amphipods. \"Falknor\" departed the Challenger Deep on 19 December en route the Marianas Trench Marine National Monument to the Sirena Deep. RV \"Falkor\" had both a Kongsberg EM302 and EM710 multibeam echosounder for bathymetry, and an Oceaneering C-Nav 3050 global navigation satellite system receiver, capable of calculating geodetic positioning with an accuracy better than horizontally and vertically.\n2015 \u2013 USCGC \"Sequoia\".\nFrom 10 to 13 July 2015, the Guam-based 1,930-ton US Coast Guard Cutter \"Sequoia\" (WLB 215) hosted a team of researchers, under chief scientist Robert P. Dziak, from the NOAA Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory (PMEL), the University of Washington, and Oregon State University, in deploying PMEL's \"Full-Ocean Depth Mooring\", a 45-meter-long moored deep-ocean hydrophone and pressure sensor array into the western basin of the Challenger Deep. A 6-hour descent into the western basin anchored the array at of water depth, at , about 1\u00a0km northeast of \"Sumner\"'s deepest depth, recorded in 2010. After 16 weeks, the moored array was recovered on 2\u20134 November 2015. \"Observed sound sources included earthquake signals (T phases), baleen and odontocete cetacean vocalizations, ship propeller sounds, airguns, active sonar and the passing of a Category 4 typhoon.\" The science team described their results as \"the first multiday, broadband record of ambient sound at Challenger Deep, as well as only the fifth direct depth measurement\".\n2016 \u2013 RV \"Xiangyanghong 09\".\nThe 3,536-ton research vessel \"Xiangyanghong 09\" deployed on Leg II of the 37th China Cruise Dayang (DY37II) sponsored by the National Deep Sea Center, Qingdao and the Institute of Deep-Sea Science and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences (Sanya, Hainan), to the Challenger Deep western basin area (11\u00b022' N, 142\u00b025' E) 4 June \u2013 12 July 2016. As the mother ship for China's manned deep submersible \"Jiaolong\", the expedition carried out an exploration of the Challenger Deep to investigate the geological, biological, and chemical characteristics of the hadal zone. The diving area for this leg was on the southern slope of the Challenger Deep, at depths from about . The submersible completed nine piloted dives on the northern backarc and south area (Pacific plate) of the Challenger Deep to depths from . During the cruise, \"Jiaolong\" regularly deployed gas-tight samplers to collect water near the sea bottom. In a test of navigational proficiency, \"Jiaolong\" used an Ultra-Short Base Line (USBL) positioning system at a depth more than to retrieve sampling bottles.\n2016 \u2013 RV \"Tansuo 01\".\nFrom 22 June to 12 August 2016 (cruises 2016S1 and 2016S2), the Chinese Academy of Sciences' 6,250-ton submersible support ship \"Tansuo 1\" (meaning: to explore) on her maiden voyage deployed to the Challenger Deep from her home port of Sanya, Hainan Island. On 12 July 2016, the ROV \"Haidou-1\" dived to a depth of in the Challenger Deep area. They also cast a free-drop lander, rated free-drop ocean-floor seismic instruments (deployed to ), obtained sediment core samples, and collected over 2000 biological samples from depths ranging from . The \"Tansuo 01\" operated along the 142\u00b030.00' longitude line, about 30 nmi east of the earlier DY37II cruise survey (see \"Xiangyanghong 09\" above).\n2016 \u2013 RV \"Sonne\".\nIn November 2016 sonar mapping of the Challenger Deep area was conducted by the Royal Netherlands Institute for Sea Research (NIOZ)/GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel aboard the 8,554-ton Deep Ocean Research Vessel \"Sonne\". The results were reported in 2017. Using a Kongsberg Maritime EM 122 multi-beam echosounder system coupled to positioning equipment that can determine latitude and longitude the team determined that the Challenger Deep has a maximum depth of at (), with an estimated vertical uncertainty of \u00b1 at one standard deviation (\u2248 68.3%) confidence level. The analysis of the sonar survey offered a grid resolution at bottom depth, so small dips in the bottom that are less than that size would be difficult to detect from the 0.5 by 1 degree sonar-emissions at the sea surface. Each 0.5-degree beam width sonar ping expands to cover a circular area about in diameter at depth. The horizontal position of the grid point has an uncertainty of \u00b1, depending on along-track or across-track direction. This depth () and position (about to the northeast) measurements differ significantly from the deepest point determined by the Gardner et al. (2014) study. The observed depth discrepancy with the 2010 sonar mapping and Gardner et al 2014 study are related to the application of differing sound velocity profiles, which are essential for accurate depth determination. \"Sonne\" used CTD casts about 1.6\u00a0km west of the deepest sounding to near the bottom of the Challenger Deep that were used for sound velocity profile calibration and optimization. Likewise, the impact of using different projections, datum and ellipsoids during data acquisition can cause positional discrepancies between surveys.\n2016 \u2013 RV \"Shyian 3\".\nIn December 2016, the CAS 3,300-ton research vessel \"Shiyan 3\" deployed 33 broadband seismometers onto both the backarc northwest of the Challenger Deep, and onto the near southern Pacific Plate to the southeast, at depths of up to . This cruise was part of a $12 million Chinese-U.S. initiative, led by co-leader Jian Lin of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution; a 5-year effort (2017\u20132021) to image in fine detail the rock layers in and around the Challenger Deep.\n2016 \u2013 RV \"Zhang Jian\".\nThe newly launched 4,800-ton research vessel (and mothership for the \"Rainbow Fish\" series of deep submersibles), the \"Zhang Jian\" departed Shanghai on 3 December. Their cruise was to test three new deep-sea landers, one uncrewed search submersible and the new \"Rainbow Fish\" 11,000-meter manned deep submersible, all capable of diving to 10,000 meters. From 25 to 27 December, three deep-sea landing devices descended into the trench. The first Rainbow Fish lander took photographs, the second took sediment samples, and the third took biological samples. All three landers reached over 10,000 meters, and the third device brought back 103 amphipods. Cui Weicheng, director of Hadal Life Science Research Center at Shanghai Ocean University, led the team of scientists to carry out research at the Challenger Deep in the Mariana Trench. The ship is part of China's national marine research fleet but is owned by a Shanghai marine technology company.\n2017 \u2013 RV \"Tansuo-1\".\nCAS' Institute of Deep-sea Science and Engineering sponsored \"Tansuo-1\"'s return to the Challenger Deep 20 January \u2013 5 February 2017 (cruise TS03) with baited traps for the capture of fish and other macrobiology near the Challenger and Sirena Deeps. On 29 January they recovered photography and samples of a new species of snailfish from the Northern slope of the Challenger Deep at , newly designated \"Pseudoliparis swirei\". They also placed four or more CTD casts into the \"central\" and \"eastern\" basins of the Challenger Deep, as part of the World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE).\n2017 \u2013 RV \"Shinyo Maru\".\nTokyo University of Marine Science and Technology dispatched the research vessel \"Shinyo Maru\" to the Mariana Trench from 20 January to 5 February 2017 with baited traps for the capture of fish and other macrobiology near the Challenger and Sirena Deeps. On 29 January they recovered photography and samples of a new species of snailfish from the Northern slope of the Challenger Deep at , which has been newly designated \"Pseudoliparis swirei\".\n2017 \u2013 RV \"Kexue 3\".\nWater samples were collected at Challenger Deep from 11 layers of the Mariana Trench in March 2017. Seawater samples from 4 to 4,000 m were collected by Niskin bottles mounted to a Seabird SBE25 CTDs; whereas water samples at depths from 6,050 m to 8,320 m were collected by a self-designed acoustic-controlled full ocean depth water samplers. In this study, scientists studied the RNA of pico- and nano-plankton from the surface to the hadal zone.\n2017 \u2013 RV \"Kairei\".\nJAMSTEC deployed \"Kairei\" to the Challenger Deep in May 2017 for the express purpose of testing the new full-ocean depth ROV \"UROV11K\" (Underwater ROV 11,000-meter-capable), as cruise KR 17-08C, under chief scientist Takashi Murashima. The cruise title was: \"Sea trial of a full depth ROV \"UROV11K\" system in the Mariana Trench\". \"UROV11K\" carried a new 4K High Definition video camera system, and new sensors to monitor the hydrogen-sulfide, methane, oxygen, and hydrogen content of the water. Unfortunately, on \"UROV11K\"'s ascent from (at about 11\u00b022.30'N 142\u00b035.8 E, in the \"eastern\" basin) on 14 May 2017, the ROV's buoyancy failed at depth, and all efforts to retrieve the ROV were unsuccessful. The rate of descent and drift is not available, but the ROV bottomed to the east of the deepest waters of the eastern basin as revealed by the ship's maneuvering on 14 May. Murashima then directed the Kairei to a location about 35 nmi east of the eastern basin of the Challenger Deep to test a new \"Compact Hadal Lander\" which made three descents to depths from 7,498 to 8,178 m for testing the Sony 4K camera and for photography of fish and other macro-biologics.\n2018 \u2013 RV \"Shen Kuo\".\nOn its maiden voyage, the 2,150-ton twin-hulled scientific research vessel \"Shen Kuo\" (also \"Shengkuo\", \"Shen Ko\", or \"Shen Quo\"), departed Shanghai on 25 November 2018 and returned on 8 January 2019. They operated in the Mariana Trench area, and on 13 December tested a system of underwater navigation at a depth exceeding 10,000 metres, during a field trial of the \"Tsaihungyuy\" (ultra-short baseline) system. Project leader Tsui Veichen stated that, with the Tsaihungyuy equipment at depth, it was possible to obtain a signal and determine exact geolocations. The research team from Shanghai Ocean University and Westlake University was led by Cui Weicheng, director of Shanghai Ocean University's Hadal Science and Technology Research Center (HSRC).\nThe equipment to be tested included a piloted submersible (not full ocean depth \u2013 depth achieved not available) and two deep-sea landers, all capable of diving to depths of 10,000 meters, as well as an ROV that can go to 4,500 meters. They took photographs and obtained samples from the trench, including water, sediment, macro-organisms and micro-organisms. Cui says, \"If we can take photos of fish more than 8,145 meters under water, ... we will break the current world record. We will test our new equipment including the landing devices. They are second generation. The first generation could only take samples in one spot per dive, but this new second generation can take samples at different depths in one dive. We also tested the ultra short baseline acoustic positioning system on the manned submersible, the future of underwater navigation.\"\n2019 \u2013 RV \"Sally Ride\".\nIn November 2019, as cruise SR1916, a NIOZ team led by chief scientist Hans van Haren, with Scripps technicians, deployed to the Challenger Deep aboard the 2,641-ton research vessel , to recover a mooring line from the western basin of the Challenger Deep. The long mooring line in the Challenger Deep consisted of top-floatation positioned around depth, two sections of Dyneema neutrally buoyant line, two Benthos acoustic releases and two sections of self-contained instrumentation to measure and store current, salinity and temperature. Around the depth position two current meters were mounted below a long array of 100 high-resolution temperature sensors. In the lower position starting above the sea floor 295 specially designed high-resolution temperature sensors were mounted, the lowest of which was above the trench floor. The mooring line was deployed and left by the NIOZ team during the November 2016 RV \"Sonne\" expedition with the intention to be recovered in late 2018 by \"Sonne\". The acoustic commanded release mechanism near the bottom of the Challenger Deep failed at the 2018 attempt. RV \"Sally Ride\" was made available exclusively for a final attempt to retrieve the mooring line before the release mechanism batteries expired. \"Sally Ride\" arrived at the Challenger Deep on 2 November. This time a 'deep release unit' lowered by one of \"Sally Ride\"'s winch-cables to around 1,000 m depth pinged release commands and managed to contact the near-bottom releases. After being submerged for nearly three years, mechanical problems occurred in 15 of the 395 temperature sensors. The first results indicate the occurrence of internal waves in the Challenger Deep.\nStudy of the depth and location of the Challenger Deep.\nSince May 2000, with the help of non-degraded signal satellite navigation, civilian surface vessels equipped with professional dual-frequency capable satellite navigation equipment can measure and establish their geodetic position with an accuracy in the order of meters to tens of meters whilst the western, central and eastern basins are kilometers apart.\nIn 2014, a study was conducted regarding the determination of the depth and location of the Challenger Deep based on data collected previous to and during the 2010 sonar mapping of the Mariana Trench with a Kongsberg Maritime EM 122 multibeam echosounder system aboard USNS \"Sumner\". This study by James. V. Gardner et al. of the Center for Coastal &amp; Ocean Mapping-Joint Hydrographic Center (CCOM/JHC), Chase Ocean Engineering Laboratory of the University of New Hampshire splits the measurement attempt history into three main groups: early single-beam echo sounders (1950s\u20131970s), early multibeam echo sounders (1980s \u2013 21st century), and modern (i.e., post-GPS, high-resolution) multibeam echo sounders. Taking uncertainties in depth measurements and position estimation into account, the raw data of the 2010 bathymetry of the Challenger Deep vicinity consisting of 2,051,371 soundings from eight survey lines was analyzed. The study concludes that with the best of 2010 multibeam echosounder technologies after the analysis a depth uncertainty of \u00b1 (95% confidence level) on 9 degrees of freedom and a positional uncertainty of \u00b1 (2drms) remain and the location of the deepest depth recorded in the 2010 mapping is at . The depth measurement uncertainty is a composite of measured uncertainties in the spatial variations in sound-speed through the water volume, the ray-tracing and bottom-detection algorithms of the multibeam system, the accuracies and calibration of the motion sensor and navigation systems, estimates of spherical spreading, attenuation throughout the water volume, and so forth.\nBoth the RV \"Sonne\" expedition in 2016, and the RV \"Sally Ride\" expedition in 2019 expressed strong reservations concerning the depth corrections applied by the Gardner et al. study of 2014, and serious doubt concerning the accuracy of the deepest depth calculated by Gardner (in the \"western\" basin), of after analysis of their multibeam data on a grid. Dr. Hans van Haren, chief scientist on the RV \"Sally Ride\" cruise SR1916, indicated that Gardner's calculations were too deep due to the \"sound velocity profiling by Gardner et al. (2014).\"\nIn 2018-2019, the deepest points of each ocean were mapped using a full-ocean depth Kongsberg EM 124 multibeam echosounder aboard \"DSSV Pressure Drop\". In 2021, a data paper was published by Cassandra Bongiovanni, Heather A. Stewart and Alan J. Jamieson regarding the gathered data donated to GEBCO. The deepest depth recorded in the 2019 Challenger Deep sonar mapping was \u00b1 at in the eastern basin. This depth closely agrees with the deepest point ( \u00b1) determined by the Van Haren et al. sonar bathymetry. The geodetic position of the deepest depth according to the Van Haren et al. significantly differs (about to the west) with the 2021 paper. After post-processing the initial depth estimates by application of a full-ocean depth sound velocity profile Bongiovanni et al. report an (almost) as deep point at in the western basin that geodetically differs about with the deepest point position determined by Van Haren et al. ( in the western basin). After analysis of their multibeam data on a grid, the Bongiovanni et al. 2021 paper states the technological accuracy does not currently exist on low-frequency ship-mounted sonars required to determine which location was truly the deepest, nor does it currently exist on deep-sea pressure sensors.\nIn 2021, a study by Samuel F. Greenaway, Kathryn D. Sullivan, Samuel H. Umfress, Alice B. Beittel and Karl D. Wagner was published presenting a revised estimate of the maximum depth of the Challenger Deep based on a series of submersible dives conducted in June 2020. These depth estimates are derived from acoustic echo sounding profiles referenced to in-situ direct pressure measurements and corrected for observed oceanographic properties of the water-column, atmospheric pressure, gravity and gravity-gradient anomalies, and water-level effects. The study concludes according to their calculations the deepest observed seafloor depth was \u00b1 below mean sea level at a 95% confidence level at in the eastern basin. For this estimate, the error term is dominated by the uncertainty of the employed pressure sensor, but Greenaway et al. show that the gravity correction is also substantial. The Greenaway et al. study compares its results with other recent acoustic and pressure-based measurements for the Challenger Deep and concludes the deepest depth in the western basin is very nearly as deep as the eastern basin. The disagreement between the maximum depth estimates and their geodetic positions between post-2000 published depths however exceed the accompanying margins of uncertainty, raising questions regarding the measurements or the reported uncertainties.\nAnother 2021 paper by Scott Loranger, David Barclay and Michael Buckingham, besides a December 2014 implosion shock wave based depth estimate of , which is among the deepest estimated depths, also treatises the differences between various maximum depth estimates and their geodetic positions.\nDirect measurements.\nThe 2010 maximal sonar mapping depths reported by Gardner et al. in 2014 and Greenaway et al. study in 2021 have not been confirmed by direct descent (pressure gauge/manometer) measurements at full-ocean depth. Expeditions have reported direct measured maximal depths in a narrow range.\nDescents.\nManned descents.\n1960 \u2013 \"Trieste\".\nOn 23 January 1960, the Swiss-designed \"Trieste\", originally built in Italy and acquired by the U.S. Navy, supported by the USS \"Wandank\" (ATF 204) and escorted by the USS \"Lewis\" (DE 535), descended to the ocean floor in the trench piloted by Jacques Piccard (who co-designed the submersible along with his father, Auguste Piccard) and USN Lieutenant Don Walsh. Their crew compartment was inside a spherical pressure vessel \u2013 measuring 2.16 metres in diameter suspended beneath a buoyancy tank 18.4 metres in length \u2013 which was a heavy-duty replacement (of the Italian original) built by Krupp Steel Works of Essen, Germany. The steel walls were thick and designed to withstand pressure of up to .\nTheir descent took almost five hours and the two men spent barely twenty minutes on the ocean floor before undertaking the three-hour-and-fifteen-minute ascent. Their early departure from the ocean floor was due to their concern over a crack in the outer window caused by the temperature differences during their descent.\n\"Trieste\" dived at/near , bottoming at \u00b1 into the Challenger Deep's \"western\" basin, as measured by an onboard manometer. Another source states the measured depth at the bottom was measured with a manometer at \u00b1.\nNavigation of the support ships was by celestial and LORAN-C with an accuracy of or less. Fisher noted that the \"Trieste\"'s reported depth \"agrees well with the sonic sounding.\"\n2012 \u2013 \"Deepsea Challenger\".\nOn 26 March 2012 (local time), Canadian film director James Cameron made a solo descent in the DSV \"Deepsea Challenger\" to the bottom of the Challenger Deep.\nAt approximately 05:15 ChST on 26 March (19:15 UTC on 25 March), the descent began.\nAt 07:52 ChST (21:52 UTC), \"Deepsea Challenger\" arrived at the bottom. The descent lasted 2 hours and 36 minutes and the recorded depth was when \"Deepsea Challenger\" touched down.\nCameron had planned to spend about six hours near the ocean floor exploring but decided to start the ascent to the surface after only 2 hours and 34 minutes. The time on the bottom was shortened because a hydraulic fluid leak in the lines controlling the manipulator arm obscured the visibility out of the only viewing port. It also caused the loss of the submersible's starboard thrusters. At around 12:00 ChST (02:00 UTC on 26 March), the Deepsea Challenger website says the sub resurfaced after a 90-minute ascent, although Paul Allen's tweets indicate the ascent took only about 67 minutes. During a post-dive press conference Cameron said: \"I landed on a very soft, almost gelatinous flat plain. Once I got my bearings, I drove across it for quite a distance ... and finally worked my way up the slope.\" The whole time, Cameron said, he didn't see any fish, or any living creatures more than an inch (2.54\u00a0cm) long: \"The only free swimmers I saw were small amphipods\" \u2013 shrimplike bottom-feeders.\n2019 \u2013 \"Five Deeps Expedition / DSV Limiting Factor\".\nThe Five Deeps Expedition's objective was to thoroughly map and visit the deepest points of all five of the world's oceans by the end of September 2019. On 28 April 2019, explorer Victor Vescovo descended to the \"Eastern Pool\" of the Challenger Deep in the Deep-Submergence Vehicle \"Limiting Factor\" (a Triton 36000/2 model submersible). Between 28 April and 4 May 2019, the \"Limiting Factor\" completed four dives to the bottom of Challenger Deep. The fourth dive descended to the slightly less deep \"Central Pool\" of the Challenger Deep (crew: Patrick Lahey, Pilot; John Ramsay, Sub Designer). The Five Deeps Expedition estimated maximum depths of \u00b1 and \u00b1 at () by direct CTD pressure measurements and a survey of the operating area by the support ship, the Deep Submersible Support Vessel \"DSSV \"Pressure Drop\"\", with a Kongsberg SIMRAD EM124 multibeam echosounder system. The CTD measured pressure at of seawater depth was . Due to a technical problem the (uncrewed) ultra-deep-sea lander \"Skaff\" used by the Five Deeps Expedition stayed on the bottom for two and half days before it was salvaged by the \"Limiting Factor\" (crew: Patrick Lahey, Pilot; Jonathan Struwe, DNV GL Specialist) from an estimated depth of . The gathered data was published with the caveat that it was subject to further analysis and could possibly be revised in the future. The data will be donated to the GEBCO Seabed 2030 initiative. Later in 2019, following a review of bathymetric data, and multiple sensor recordings taken by the DSV \"Limiting Factor\" and the ultra-deep-sea landers \"Closp\", \"Flere\" and \"Skaff\", the Five Deeps Expedition revised the maximum depth to \u00b1.\n2020 \u2013 \"Ring of Fire Expedition / DSV Limiting Factor\".\nCaladan Oceanic's \"Ring of Fire\" expedition in the Pacific included six manned descents and twenty-five lander deployments into all three basins of the Challenger Deep all piloted by Victor Vescovo and further topographical and marine life survey of the entire Challenger Deep. The expedition craft used are the Deep Submersible Support Vessel DSSV \"Pressure Drop\", Deep-Submergence Vehicle DSV \"Limiting Factor\" and the ultra-deep-sea landers \"Closp\", \"Flere\" and \"Skaff\".\nDuring the first manned dive on 7 June 2020 Victor Vescovo and former US astronaut (and former NOAA Administrator) Kathryn D. Sullivan descended to the \"Eastern Pool\" of the Challenger Deep in the Deep-Submergence Vehicle \"Limiting Factor\".\nOn 12 June 2020, Victor Vescovo and mountaineer and explorer Vanessa O'Brien descended to the \"Eastern Pool\" of the Challenger Deep spending three hours mapping the bottom. O'Brien said her dive scanned about a mile of desolate bottom terrain, finding that the surface is not flat, as once was thought, but sloping by about per mile, subject to verification.\nOn 14 June 2020, Victor Vescovo and John Rost descended to the \"Eastern Pool\" of the Challenger Deep in the Deep-Submergence Vehicle \"Limiting Factor\" spending four hours at depth and transiting the bottom for nearly 2 miles.\nOn 20 June 2020, Victor Vescovo and Kelly Walsh descended to the \"Western Pool\" of the Challenger Deep in the Deep-Submergence Vehicle \"Limiting Factor\" spending four hours at the bottom. They reached a maximum depth of . Kelly Walsh is the son of the \"Trieste's\" captain Don Walsh who descended there in 1960 with Jacques Piccard.\nOn 21 June 2020, Victor Vescovo and Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution researcher Ying-Tsong Lin descended to the \"Central Pool\" of the Challenger Deep in the Deep-Submergence Vehicle \"Limiting Factor\". They reached a maximum depth of \u00b1.\nOn 26 June 2020 Victor Vescovo and Jim Wigginton descended to the \"Eastern Pool\" of the Challenger Deep in the Deep-Submergence Vehicle \"Limiting Factor\".\n2020 \u2013 \"Fendouzhe\".\n\"Fendouzhe\" (\u594b\u6597\u8005, \"Striver\") is a manned Chinese deep-sea submersible developed by the China Ship Scientific Research Center (CSSRC). Between 10 October and 28 November, 2020, it carried out thirteen dives in the Mariana Trench as part of a test programme. Of these, eight led to depths of more than . On 10 November 2020, the bottom of the Challenger Deep was reached by \"Fendouzhe\" with three Chinese scientists (Zh\u0101ng W\u011bi \u5f20\u4f1f [pilot], Zh\u00e0o Y\u00e1ng \u8d75\u6d0b, and W\u00e1ng Zh\u00ecqi\u00e1ng \u738b\u6cbb\u5f3a) onboard whilst live-streaming the descent to a reported depth of . This makes the \" Fendouzhe \" the fourth manned submersible vehicle achieving a successful descent. The pressure hull of \"Fendouzhe\", made from a newly developed titanium alloy, offers space for three people in addition to technical equipment. \"Fendouzhe\" is equipped with cameras made by the Norwegian manufacturer Imenco.\nAccording to Ye Cong \u53f6\u806a, the chief designer of the submersible, China's goals for the dive aren't just scientific investigation but also the future use of deep-sea seabed resources.\n2021 \u2013 \"Ring of Fire 2 Expedition / DSV Limiting Factor\".\nOn 28 February 2021 Caladan Oceanic's \"Ring of Fire 2\" expedition arrived over the Challenger Deep and conducted manned descents and lander deployments into the Challenger Deep. At the start the (uncrewed) ultra-deep-sea lander \"Skaff\" was deployed to collect water column data by CTD for the expedition. The effects of the Pacific subducting plate crashing into the Philippine Plate was among the things researched onsite.\nOn 1 March 2021, the first manned descent to the eastern pool was made by Victor Vescovo and Richard Garriott. Garriott became the 17th person to descend to the bottom.\nOn 2 March 2021, a descent to the eastern pool was made by Victor Vescovo and Michael Dubno.\nOn 5 March a descent to the eastern pool was made by Victor Vescovo and Hamish Harding. They traversed the bottom of Challenger Deep.\nOn 11 March 2021 a descent to the Western Pool was made by Victor Vescovo and marine botanist Nicole Yamase.\nOn 13 April 2021 a descent was made by deep water submersible operations expert Rob McCallum and Tim Macdonald who piloted the dive.\nA 2021 descent with a Japanese citizen is planned.\nAll manned descents were conducted in the Deep-Submergence Vehicle \"DSV Limiting Factor\".\n2022 - \"Ring of Fire 3 Expedition / DSV Limiting Factor\".\nIn July 2022 for the fourth consecutive year, Caladan Oceanic's deep submergence system, consisting of the deep submersible DSV \"Limiting Factor\" supported by the mother ship DSSV \"Pressure Drop\", returned to the Challenger Deep for dives into the Challenger Deep.\nIn early July 2022, Victor Vescovo was joined by Aaron Newman as a mission specialist for a dive into the Central pool. On 5 July 2022, Tim Macdonald as pilot and Jim Kitchen as mission specialist for a dive into the Eastern pool. On 8 July 2022 Victor Vescovo was joined by Dylan Taylor as mission specialist for a dive into the Eastern pool.\nVictor Vescovo (for his 15th dive into the Challenger Deep) was joined by geographer and oceanographer Dawn Wright as mission specialist on the 12 July 2022 dive to in the Western Pool. Wright operated the world's first sidescan sonar to ever operate at full-ocean depth to capture detailed imagery along short transects of the southern wall of the Western Pool.\nUncrewed descents by ROVs.\n1996 and 1998 \u2013 \"Kaik\u014d\".\nThe remotely operated vehicle (ROV) \"Kaik\u014d\" made many uncrewed descents to the Mariana Trench from its support ship RV \"Yokosuka\" during two expeditions in 1996 and 1998.\nFrom 29 February to 4 March the ROV \"Kaiko\" made three dives into the \"central\" basin, \"Kaiko\" #21 \u2013 \"Kaiko\" #23, . Depths ranged from at , to at ; dives #22 &amp; #23 to the north, and dive #21 northeast of the deepest waters of the \"central\" basin. During the 1996 measurements the temperature (water temperature increases at great depth due to adiabatic compression), salinity and water pressure at the sampling station was , 34.7\u2030 and , respectively at depth. The Japanese robotic deep-sea probe \"Kaik\u014d\" broke the depth record for uncrewed probes when it reached close to the surveyed bottom of the Challenger Deep. Created by the Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology (JAMSTEC), it was one of the few uncrewed deep-sea probes in operation that could dive deeper than . The manometer measured depth of \u00b1 at for the Challenger Deep is believed to be the most accurate measurement taken up to then.\nAnother source states the greatest depth measured by \"Kaik\u014d\" in 1996 was at and at in 1998.\nThe ROV \"Kaiko\" was the first vehicle to visit to the bottom of the Challenger Deep since the bathyscaph \"Trieste\"'s dive in 1960, and the first success in sampling the trench bottom sediment/mud, from which \"Kaiko\" obtained over 360 samples. Approximately 3,000 different microbes were identified in the samples.\n\"Kaik\u014d\" was lost at sea off Shikoku Island during Typhoon Chan-Hom on 29 May 2003.\n2009 \u2013 \"Nereus\".\nFrom 2 May to 5 June 2009, the RV \"Kilo Moana\" hosted the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) hybrid remotely operated vehicle (HROV) \"Nereus\" team for the first operational test of the \"\" in its 3-ton tethered ROV mode. The \"Nereus\" team was headed by the Expedition Leader Andy Bowen of WHOI, Louis Whitcomb of Johns Hopkins University, and Dana Yoerger, also of WHOI. The expedition had co-chief scientists: biologist Tim Shank of WHOI, and geologist Patricia Fryer of the University of Hawai\u02bbi, to head the science team exploiting the ship's bathymetry and organizing the science experiments deployed by the \"Nereus\". From \"Nereus\" dive #007ROV to just south of Guam, to dive #010ROV into the Nero Deep at , the testing gradually increased depths and complexities of activities at the bottom.\nDive #011ROV, on 31 May 2009, saw the \"Nereus\" piloted on a 27.8-hour underwater mission, with about ten hours transversing the \"eastern\" basin of the Challenger Deep \u2013 from the south wall, northwest to the north wall \u2013 streaming live video and data back to its mothership. A maximum depth of was registered at . The \"\" then relocated to the \"western\" basin, where a 19.3-hour underwater dive found a maximum depth of on dive #012ROV, and on dive #014ROV in the same area (11\u00b019.59 N, 142\u00b012.99 E) encountered a maximum depth of . The \"Nereus\" was successful in recovering both sediment and rock samples from the \"eastern\" and the \"western\" basins with its manipulator arm for further scientific analysis. The HROV's final dive was about to the north of the Challenger Deep, in the backarc, where they dived at the TOTO Caldera (12\u00b042.00 N, 143\u00b031.5 E). Nereus thus became the first vehicle to reach the Mariana Trench since 1998 and the deepest-diving vehicle then in operation. Project manager and developer Andy Bowen heralded the achievement as \"the start of a new era in ocean exploration\". \"Nereus\", unlike \"Kaik\u014d\", did not need to be powered or controlled by a cable connected to a ship on the ocean surface.&lt;ref name=\"Daily Reports for R/V KILO MOANA April and May 2009\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nThe HROV \"Nereus\" was lost on 10 May 2014 while conducting a dive at in depth in the Kermadec Trench.\nUncrewed descents near the Challenger Deep.\n2008 \u2013 \"ABISMO\".\nIn June 2008, the Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology (JAMSTEC) deployed the research vessel \"Kairei\" to the area of Guam for cruise KR08-05 Leg 1 and Leg 2.\nOn 1\u20133 June 2008, during Leg 1, the Japanese robotic deep-sea probe \"ABISMO\" (Automatic Bottom Inspection and Sampling Mobile) on dives 11\u201313 almost reached the bottom about east of the Challenger Deep: \"Unfortunately, we were unable to dive to the sea floor because the legacy primary cable of the Kaiko system was a little bit short. The 2-m long gravity core sampler was dropped in free fall, and sediment samples of 1.6m length were obtained. Twelve bottles of water samples were also obtained at various depths...\" ABISMO's dive #14 was into the TOTO caldera (12\u00b042.7777 N, 143\u00b032.4055 E), about 60 nmi northeast of the deepest waters of the \"central\" basin of the Challenger Deep, where they obtained videos of the hydrothermal plume. Upon successful testing to , JAMSTEC' ROV \"ABISMO\" became, briefly, the only full-ocean-depth rated ROV in existence. On 31 May 2009, the ABISMO was joined by the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution's HROV \"Nereus\" as the only two operational full ocean depth capable remotely operated vehicles in existence. During the ROV \"ABISMO's\" deepest sea trails dive its manometer measured a depth of \u00b1 in \"Area 1\" (vicinity of 12\u00b043' N, 143\u00b033' E).\nLeg 2, under chief scientist Takashi Murashima, operated at the Challenger Deep 8\u20139 June 2008, testing JAMSTEC's new full ocean depth \"Free Fall Mooring System,\" i.e. a lander. The lander was successfully tested twice to depth, taking video images and sediment samplings at , in the \"central\" basin of the Challenger Deep.\n2016 \u2013 \"Haidou-1\".\nOn 23 May 2016, the Chinese submersible \"Haidou-1\" dived to a depth of at an undisclosed position in the Mariana Trench, making China the third country after Japan (ROV \"Kaik\u014d\"), and the US (HROV \"Nereus\"), to deploy a full-ocean-depth ROV. This autonomous and remotely operated vehicle has a design depth of .\n2020 \u2013 \"Vityaz-D\".\nOn 8 May 2020, the Russian submersible \"Vityaz-D\" dived to a depth of at an undisclosed position in the Mariana Trench.\nLifeforms.\nThe summary report of the expedition lists unicellular life forms from the two dredged samples taken when the Challenger Deep was first discovered. These (\"Nassellaria\" and \"Spumellaria\") were reported in the Report on Radiolaria (1887) written by Ernst Haeckel.\nOn their 1960 descent, the crew of the \"Trieste\" noted that the floor consisted of diatomaceous ooze and reported observing \"some type of flatfish\" lying on the seabed.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And as we were settling this final fathom, I saw a wonderful thing. Lying on the bottom just beneath us was some type of flatfish, resembling a sole, about long and across. Even as I saw him, his two round eyes on top of his head spied us\u00a0\u2013 a monster of steel\u00a0\u2013 invading his silent realm. Eyes? Why should he have eyes? Merely to see phosphorescence? The floodlight that bathed him was the first real light ever to enter this hadal realm. Here, in an instant, was the answer that biologists had asked for the decades. Could life exist in the greatest depths of the ocean? It could! And not only that, here apparently, was a true, bony teleost fish, not a primitive ray or elasmobranch. Yes, a highly evolved vertebrate, in time's arrow very close to man himself. Slowly, extremely slowly, this flatfish swam away. Moving along the bottom, partly in the ooze and partly in the water, he disappeared into his night. Slowly too\u00a0\u2013 perhaps everything is slow at the bottom of the sea\u00a0\u2013 Walsh and I shook hands.\nMany marine biologists are now skeptical of this supposed sighting, and it is suggested that the creature may instead have been a sea cucumber. The video camera on board the \"Kaiko\" probe spotted a sea cucumber, a scale worm and a shrimp at the bottom. At the bottom of the Challenger Deep, the \"Nereus\" probe spotted one polychaete worm (a multi-legged predator) about an inch long.\nAn analysis of the sediment samples collected by \"Kaiko\" found large numbers of simple organisms at . While similar lifeforms have been known to exist in shallower ocean trenches (&gt; 7,000 m) and on the abyssal plain, the lifeforms discovered in the Challenger Deep possibly represent taxa distinct from those in shallower ecosystems.\nMost of the organisms collected were simple, soft-shelled foraminifera (432 species according to National Geographic), with four of the others representing species of the complex, multi-chambered genera \"Leptohalysis\" and \"Reophax\". Eighty-five per cent of the specimens were organic, soft-shelled allogromiids, which is unusual compared to samples of sediment-dwelling organisms from other deep-sea environments, where the percentage of organic-walled foraminifera ranges from 5% to 20%. As small organisms with hard, calcareous shells have trouble growing at extreme depths because of the high solubility of calcium carbonate in the pressurized water, scientists theorize that the preponderance of soft-shelled organisms in the Challenger Deep may have resulted from the typical biosphere present when the Challenger Deep was shallower than it is now. Over the course of six to nine million years, as the Challenger Deep grew to its present depth, many of the species present in the sediment died out or were unable to adapt to the increasing water pressure and changing environment.\nOn 17 March 2013, researchers reported data that suggested piezophilic microorganisms thrive in the Challenger Deep. Other researchers reported related studies that microbes thrive inside rocks up to below the sea floor under of ocean off the coast of the northwestern United States. According to one of the researchers, \"You can find microbes everywhere\u00a0\u2013 they're extremely adaptable to conditions, and survive wherever they are.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7787", "revid": "39494085", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7787", "title": "Claude Louis Berthollet", "text": "French chemist (1748\u20131822)\nClaude Louis Berthollet (, 9 December 1748 \u2013 6 November 1822) was a Savoyard-French chemist who became vice president of the French Senate in 1804. He is known for his scientific contributions to the theory of chemical equilibria via the mechanism of reverse chemical reactions, and for his contribution to modern chemical nomenclature. On a practical basis, Berthollet was the first to demonstrate the bleaching action of chlorine gas, and was first to develop a solution of sodium hypochlorite as a modern bleaching agent.\nBiography.\nClaude Louis Berthollet was born in Talloires, near Annecy, then part of the Duchy of Savoy, in 1749.\nHe started his studies at Chamb\u00e9ry and then in Turin where he graduated in medicine. Berthollet's great new developments in works regarding chemistry made him, in a short period of time, an active participant of the Academy of Science in 1780.\nBerthollet, along with Antoine Lavoisier and others, devised a chemical nomenclature, or a system of names, which serves as the basis of the modern system of naming chemical compounds.\nHe also carried out research into dyes and bleaches, being first to introduce the use of chlorine gas as a commercial bleach in 1785. He first produced a modern bleaching liquid in 1789 in his laboratory on the quay Javel in Paris, France, by passing chlorine gas through a solution of sodium carbonate. The resulting liquid, known as \"Eau de Javel\" (\"Javel water\"), was a weak solution of sodium hypochlorite. Another strong chlorine oxidant and bleach which he investigated and was the first to produce, potassium chlorate (KClO3), is known as \"Berthollet's Salt\".\nBerthollet first determined the elemental composition of the gas ammonia, in 1785.\nBerthollet was one of the first chemists to recognize the characteristics of a reverse reaction, and hence, chemical equilibrium.\nBerthollet was engaged in a long-term battle with another French chemist, Joseph Proust, on the validity of the law of definite proportions. While Proust believed that chemical compounds are composed of a fixed ratio of their constituent elements irrespective of the methods of production, Berthollet believed that this ratio can change according to the ratio of the reactants initially taken. Although Proust proved his theory by accurate measurements, his theory was not immediately accepted partially due to Berthollet's authority. His law was finally accepted when Berzelius confirmed it in 1811, but it was found later that Berthollet was not completely wrong because there exists a class of compounds that do not obey the law of definite proportions. These non-stoichiometric compounds are also named \"berthollides\" in his honor.\nBerthollet was one of several scientists who went with Napoleon to Egypt and was a member of the physics and natural history section of the Institut d'\u00c9gypte.\nAwards and honours.\nIn April 1789 Berthollet was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of London. In 1801, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. In 1809, Berthollet was elected an associate member first class of the Royal Institute of the Netherlands, predecessor of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. He was elected an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1820 and a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1822.\nClaude-Louis Berthollet's 1788 publication entitled \"M\u00e9thode de Nomenclature Chimique\", published with colleagues Antoine Lavoisier, Louis Bernard Guyton de Morveau, and Antoine Fran\u00e7ois, comte de Fourcroy, was honored by a Citation for Chemical Breakthrough Award from the Division of History of Chemistry of the American Chemical Society, presented at the Acad\u00e9mie des Sciences (Paris) in 2015.\nA French High School located in Annecy is named after him (Lyc\u00e9e Claude Louis Berthollet).\nPersonal life.\nBerthollet married Marie Marguerite Baur in 1788. Their son, Am\u00e9d\u00e9e-Barth\u00e9l\u00e9my Berthollet, died in 1811 of carbon monoxide poisoning via charcoal-burning suicide in which he had recorded his physiological and psychological experiences as a final scientific contribution before losing consciousness and succumbing to the fumes.\nBerthollet was accused of being an atheist.\nHe died in Arcueil, France in 1822.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7788", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7788", "title": "C. L. Berthollet", "text": ""}
{"id": "7790", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7790", "title": "Chasidic Judaism", "text": ""}
{"id": "7791", "revid": "24841344", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7791", "title": "Chilean Constitution of 1980", "text": "Democratic constitution of Chile\nThe Political Constitution of the Republic of Chile of 1980 () is the fundamental law in force in Chile. It was approved and promulgated under the military dictatorship headed by Augusto Pinochet, being ratified by the Chilean citizenry through a referendum on September 11, 1980, although being held under restrictions and without electoral registers. While 69% of the population was reported to have voted yes, the vote was questioned by hundreds of denunciations of irregularities and fraud. The constitutional text took effect, in a transitory regime, on March 11, 1981, and then entered into full force on March 11, 1990, with the return to electoral democracy. It was amended for the first time in 1989 (through a referendum), and afterward in 1991, 1994, 1997, each year from 1999 to 2001, 2003, each year from 2007 to 2015, and each year from 2017 to 2021, with the last three amendments concerning the constituent process of 2020\u20132022. In September 2005, under Ricardo Lagos's presidency, a large amendment of the Constitution was approved by parliamentarians, removing from the text some of the less democratic dispositions coming from Pinochet's regime, such as senators-for-life and appointed senators, as well as the armed forces' warranty of the democratic regime.\nOn November 15, 2019, following a series of popular protests in October 2019, a political agreement between parties with parliamentary representation called for a national referendum on the proposal of writing a new Constitution and on the mechanism to draft it. A plebiscite held on October 25, 2020, approved drafting a new fundamental charter, as well as choosing by popular vote delegates to a Constitutional Convention which was to fulfill this objective. The members of the convention were elected in May 2021, and first convened on July 4, 2021. However, on September 4, 2022, voters rejected the new constitution in the constitutional referendum. Following the rejection, the Expert Commission drafted another new constitution for the Constitutional Council to amend. However, on December 15, 2023, voters rejected the constitution in the 2023 Chilean constitutional referendum.\nBackground.\nThe Commission for the Study of the New Political Constitution of the Republic of Chile', commonly known as the Ort\u00fazar Commission', was a body established in 1973 by the Military Government Junta that ruled the country during the military dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet, following the coup against the Socialist President Salvador Allende. Its purpose was to draft the preliminary project for the 1980 Constitution. It met from September 24, 1973, to October 5, 1978. The name \"Ort\u00fazar Commission\" is due to its chairman, Enrique Ort\u00fazar Escobar, who previously served as Minister of Justice and Minister of Foreign Affairs during the administration of Jorge Alessandri.\nThe following people were part of the commission: Rafael Eyzaguirre Echeverr\u00eda (secretary), Sergio Diez Urz\u00faa, Enrique Evans de la Cuadra, Jaime Guzm\u00e1n Err\u00e1zuriz, Gustavo Lorca Rojas, Jorge Ovalle Quiroz, Alejandro Silva Bascu\u00f1\u00e1n, Alicia Romo Rom\u00e1n, Ra\u00fal Gormaz Molina and later on Luz Bulnes Aldunate, Ra\u00fal Bertelsen Repetto, Juan de Dios Carmona.\nDespite what is commonly believed, the Ort\u00fazar Commission was not a constituent assembly and did not draft the 1980 Constitution; rather, it merely prepared a preliminary draft that was subsequently reviewed by the Council of State and the Government Junta before being formally submitted for popular approval via a plebiscite.\nNevertheless, there is no denying the importance of the discussion carried out by the Ort\u00fazar Commission regarding the final text of the 1980 Constitution. Although many of the commission's proposals were not adopted by the Council of State and the Government Junta, a large portion of the new Constitution's text was analyzed and debated within the commission.\nLegitimacy.\nAccording to the law professor Camel Cazor Aliste, the Constitution of 1980 has problems of legitimacy stemming from two facts. First, the constitutional commission was not representative of the political spectrum of Chile: its members had been handpicked by the Pinochet dictatorship, and opponents of the regime had been deliberately excluded. Secondly, the constitution's approval was achieved by the government in a controversial and tightly controlled referendum in 1980. Campaigning for the referendum was irregular, with the government calling people to vote positively on the reform, and also using radio and television commercial spots, while the opposition urging people to vote negatively were only able of doing small public demonstrations, without access to television time and limited radio access. There was no electoral roll for this vote, as the register had been burned during the dictatorship. There were multiple cases of double voting, with at least 3000 CNI agents doing so.\nSince the return to democracy, the constitution has been amended nearly 60 times.\nA document from September 13, 1973, shows that Jaime Guzm\u00e1n had by then already been tasked by the Junta to study the creation of a new constitution.\nIt has been argued the 1980 Constitution was designed to favor the election of right-wing legislative majorities. Several rounds of constitutional amendments have been enacted since 1989 to address this concern.\nA referendum held in 2020 after waves of popular protests approved the drafting of a new constitution. In September 2022, a proposed left-wing replacement constitution was rejected, 62% to 38%. Following a second process, in December 2023, a proposed right-wing replacement was also rejected, 55.8% to 44.2%. These outcomes effectively granted the 1980 charter democratic legitimacy.\nAttempted replacement.\nIn July 2022, a proposed replacement constitution was submitted for national debate and general referendum, but it was rejected on September 4 despite having had the support of left-leaning President Gabriel Boric. The document had faced intense criticism that it was \"too long, too left-wing and too radical\", and was rejected by a margin of 62% to 38%.\nOn March 6, 2023, a group of experts appointed by Congress began a second attempt to prepare a preliminary draft of a new constitution. The group, with lawyer Veronica Undurraga serving as its president, was scheduled to work for three months on 12 institutional bases agreed to by lawmakers, after which the draft would be given to an elected Constitutional Council, whose members would be voted upon on May 7, 2023. At the same time, a 14-member Technical Admissibility Committee began serving as arbitrator.\nOn December 17, 2023, Chileans voted 55.8% to 44.2% against the second proposed constitution. President Boric stated that he would not seek a third referendum; this outcome effectively guaranteed the 1980 charter would remain in effect.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7793", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7793", "title": "Cave Tetra", "text": ""}
{"id": "7794", "revid": "45173454", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7794", "title": "Crystallography", "text": "Scientific study of crystal structures\nCrystallography is the branch of science devoted to the study of molecular and crystalline structure and properties. The word \"crystallography\" is derived from the Ancient Greek word (; \"clear ice, rock-crystal\"), and (; \"to write\"). In July 2012, the United Nations recognised the importance of the science of crystallography by proclaiming 2014 the International Year of Crystallography.\nCrystallography is a broad topic, and many of its subareas, such as X-ray crystallography, are themselves important scientific topics. Crystallography ranges from the fundamentals of crystal structure to the mathematics of crystal geometry, including those that are not periodic or quasicrystals. At the atomic scale it can involve the use of X-ray diffraction to produce experimental data that the tools of X-ray crystallography can convert into detailed positions of atoms, and sometimes electron density. At larger scales it includes experimental tools such as orientational imaging to examine the relative orientations at the grain boundary in materials. Crystallography plays a key role in many areas of biology, chemistry, and physics, as well as in emerging developments in these fields.\nHistory and timeline.\nBefore the 20th century, the study of crystals was based on physical measurements of their geometry using a goniometer. This involved measuring the angles of crystal faces relative to each other and to theoretical reference axes (crystallographic axes), and establishing the symmetry of the crystal in question. The position in 3D space of each crystal face is plotted on a stereographic net such as a Wulff net or Lambert net. The pole to each face is plotted on the net. Each point is labelled with its Miller index. The final plot allows the symmetry of the crystal to be established.\nThe discovery of X-rays and electrons in the last decade of the 19th century enabled the determination of crystal structures on the atomic scale, which brought about the modern era of crystallography. The first X-ray diffraction experiment was conducted in 1912 by Max von Laue, while electron diffraction was first realized in 1927 in the Davisson\u2013Germer experiment and parallel work by George Paget Thomson and Alexander Reid. These developed into the two main branches of crystallography, X-ray crystallography and electron diffraction. The quality and throughput of solving crystal structures greatly improved in the second half of the 20th century, with the developments of customized instruments and phasing algorithms. Nowadays, crystallography is an interdisciplinary field, supporting theoretical and experimental discoveries in various domains. Modern-day scientific instruments for crystallography vary from laboratory-sized equipment, such as diffractometers and electron microscopes, to dedicated large facilities, such as photoinjectors, synchrotron light sources and free-electron lasers.\nMethodology.\nCrystallographic methods depend mainly on analysis of the diffraction patterns of a sample targeted by a beam of some type. X-rays are most commonly used; other beams used include electrons or neutrons. Crystallographers often explicitly state the type of beam used, as in the terms \"X-ray diffraction, neutron diffraction\" and \"electron diffraction\". These three types of radiation interact with the specimen in different ways.\nIt is hard to focus x-rays or neutrons, but since electrons are charged they can be focused and are used in electron microscopes to produce magnified images. There are many ways that transmission electron microscopy and related techniques such as scanning transmission electron microscopy, high-resolution electron microscopy can be used to obtain images with in many cases atomic resolution from which crystallographic information can be obtained. There are also other methods such as low-energy electron diffraction, low-energy electron microscopy and reflection high-energy electron diffraction which can be used to obtain crystallographic information about surfaces.\nApplications in various areas.\nMaterials science.\nCrystallography is used by materials scientists to characterize different materials. In single crystals, the effects of the crystalline arrangement of atoms is often easy to see macroscopically because the natural shapes of crystals reflect the atomic structure. In addition, physical properties are often controlled by crystalline defects. The understanding of crystal structures is an important prerequisite for understanding crystallographic defects. Most materials do not occur as a single crystal, but are poly-crystalline in nature (they exist as an aggregate of small crystals with different orientations). As such, powder diffraction techniques, which take diffraction patterns of samples with a large number of crystals, play an important role in structural determination.\nOther physical properties are also linked to crystallography. For example, the minerals in clay form small, flat, platelike structures. Clay can be easily deformed because the platelike particles can slip along each other in the plane of the plates, yet remain strongly connected in the direction perpendicular to the plates. Such mechanisms can be studied by crystallographic texture measurements. Crystallographic studies help elucidate the relationship between a material's structure and its properties, aiding in developing new materials with tailored characteristics. This understanding is crucial in various fields, including metallurgy, geology, and materials science. Advancements in crystallographic techniques, such as electron diffraction and X-ray crystallography, continue to expand our understanding of material behavior at the atomic level.\nIn another example, iron transforms from a body-centered cubic (bcc) structure called ferrite to a face-centered cubic (fcc) structure called austenite when it is heated. The fcc structure is a close-packed structure unlike the bcc structure; thus the volume of the iron decreases when this transformation occurs.\nCrystallography is useful in phase identification. When manufacturing or using a material, it is generally desirable to know what compounds and what phases are present in the material, as their composition, structure and proportions will influence the material's properties. Each phase has a characteristic arrangement of atoms. X-ray or neutron diffraction can be used to identify which structures are present in the material, and thus which compounds are present. Crystallography covers the enumeration of the symmetry patterns which can be formed by atoms in a crystal and for this reason is related to group theory.\nBiology.\nX-ray crystallography is the primary method for determining the molecular conformations of biological macromolecules, particularly protein and nucleic acids such as DNA and RNA. The first crystal structure of a macromolecule was solved in 1958, a three-dimensional model of the myoglobin molecule obtained by X-ray analysis. Neutron crystallography is often used to help refine structures obtained by X-ray methods or to solve a specific bond; the methods are often viewed as complementary, as X-rays are sensitive to electron positions and scatter most strongly off heavy atoms, while neutrons are sensitive to nucleus positions and scatter strongly even off many light isotopes, including hydrogen and deuterium.\nElectron diffraction has been used to determine some protein structures, most notably membrane proteins and viral capsids.\nMacromolecular structures determined through X-ray crystallography (and other techniques) are housed in the Protein Data Bank (PDB)\u2013a freely accessible repository for the structures of proteins and other biological macromolecules. There are many molecular graphics codes available for visualising these structures.\nReference literature.\nThe \"International Tables for Crystallography\" is an eight-book series that outlines the standard notations for formatting, describing and testing crystals. The series contains books that covers analysis methods and the mathematical procedures for determining organic structure through x-ray crystallography, electron diffraction, and neutron diffraction. The International tables are focused on procedures, techniques and descriptions and do not list the physical properties of individual crystals themselves. Each book is about 1000 pages and the titles of the books are:\nVol A - \"Space Group Symmetry\",\nVol A1 - \"Symmetry Relations Between Space Groups\",\nVol B - \"Reciprocal Space\",\nVol C - \"Mathematical, Physical, and Chemical Tables\",\nVol D - \"Physical Properties of Crystals\",\nVol E - \"Subperiodic Groups\",\nVol F - \"Crystallography of Biological Macromolecules\", and\nVol G - \"Definition and Exchange of Crystallographic Data\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7796", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7796", "title": "Claude Auchinleck", "text": "British field marshal (1884\u20131981)\nField Marshal Sir Claude John Eyre Auchinleck, ( ; 21 June 1884 \u2013 23 March 1981) was a British Indian Army commander who saw active service during the world wars. A career soldier who spent much of his military career in India, he rose to become commander-in-chief of the Indian Army by early 1941 during the Second World War. In July 1941 he was appointed commander-in-chief of the Middle East Theatre, but after initial successes the war in North Africa turned against the British-led forces under his command and he was relieved of the post in August 1942 during the North African campaign.\nIn June 1943, he was once again appointed Commander-in-Chief, India, where his support through the organisation of supply, maintenance and training for General William Slim's Fourteenth Army played an important role in its success. He served as commander-in-chief, India, until the Partition in 1947, when he assumed the role of supreme commander of all British forces in India and Pakistan until late 1948.\nEarly life and career.\nBorn at 89 Victoria Road in Aldershot, Hampshire, the son of John Claud Alexander Auchinleck and Mary Eleanor (Eyre) Auchinleck. His father, a colonel in the Royal Horse Artillery of the British Army, was posted to Bangalore in British India, with his family accompanying him, while Claude was very young. It was from here that he developed a love for the country that would last for most of his life. Returning to England after the death of his father in 1892, Auchinleck attended Eagle House School at Crowthorne and then Wellington College on scholarships. From there he went on to the Royal Military College, Sandhurst and was commissioned as an unattached second lieutenant in the Indian Army on 21 January 1903, and joined the 62nd Punjabis in April 1904. He soon learned several Indian languages, and, able to speak fluently with his soldiers, he absorbed a knowledge of local dialects and customs: this familiarity engendered a lasting mutual respect, enhanced by his own personality.\nHe was promoted to lieutenant on 21 April 1905, and then spent the next two years in Tibet and Sikkim before moving to Benares in 1907 where he caught diphtheria. After briefly serving with the Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers at Aldershot he returned to Benares in 1909 and became adjutant of the 62nd Punjabis with promotion to captain on 21 January 1912. Auchinleck was an active freemason.\nFirst World War.\nAuchinleck saw active service in the First World War and was deployed with his regiment to defend the Suez Canal: in February 1915 he was in action against the Turks at Ismailia. His regiment moved into Aden to counter the Turkish threat there in July 1915. The 6th Indian Division, of which the 62nd Punjabis were a part, was landed at Basra on 31 December 1915 for the Mesopotamian campaign. In July 1916 Auchinleck was promoted acting major and made second in command of his battalion. He took part in a series of fruitless attacks on the Turks at the Battle of Hanna in January 1916 and was one of the few British officers in his regiment to survive these actions.\nHe became acting commanding officer of his battalion in February 1917 and led his regiment at the Second Battle of Kut in February 1917 and the Fall of Baghdad in March 1917. Having been mentioned in despatches and having received the Distinguished Service Order in 1917 for his service in Mesopotamia, he was promoted to the substantive rank of major on 21 January 1918, to temporary lieutenant-colonel on 23 May 1919 and to brevet lieutenant-colonel on 15 November 1919 for his \"distinguished service in Southern and Central Kurdistan\" on the recommendation of the Commander-in-Chief of the Mesopotamia Expeditionary Force.\nBetween the world wars.\nAuchinleck attended the Staff College, Quetta, between 1920 and 1921. As a lieutenant colonel, he outranked most of his fellow students and even some members of the staff. Despite performing well there \u2013 passing the course and being among the top ten students \u2013 he was critical of many aspects of the college, which he believed to be too theoretical and with little emphasis being placed on matters such as supply and administration, both of which he thought had been mishandled in the campaign in Mesopotamia. He married Jessie Stewart in 1921. Jessie had been born in 1900 in Tacoma, Washington, to Alexander Stewart, head of the Blue Funnel Line that plied the west coast of the United States. When he died about 1919, their mother took her, her twin brother Alan and her younger brother Hepburne back to Bun Rannoch, the family estate at Innerhadden in Perthshire. Holidaying at Grasse on the French Riviera, Auchinleck, who was on leave from India at the time, met Jessie on the tennis courts. She was a high-spirited, blue-eyed beauty. Things moved quickly, and they were married within five months. Sixteen years younger than Auchinleck, Jessie became known as 'the little American girl' in India, but adapted readily to life there. They had no children.\nAuchinleck became temporary deputy assistant quartermaster general at Army Headquarters in February 1923 and then second-in-command of his regiment, which in the 1923 reorganisation of the Indian Army had become the 1st Punjab Regiment, in September 1925. He attended the Imperial Defence College in 1927 and, having been promoted to the permanent rank of lieutenant-colonel on 21 January 1929 he was appointed to command his regiment. Promoted to full colonel on 1 February 1930 with seniority from 15 November 1923, he became an instructor at the Staff College, Quetta in February 1930 where he remained until April 1933.\nHe was promoted to temporary brigadier on 1 July 1933 and given command of the Peshawar Brigade, which was active in the pacification of the adjacent tribal areas during the Mohmand and Bajaur Operations between July and October 1933: during his period of command he was mentioned in despatches. He led a second punitive expedition during the Second Mohmand Campaign in August 1935 for which he was again mentioned in despatches, promoted to major-general on 30 November 1935 and appointed a Companion of the Order of the Star of India on 8 May 1936.\nOn leaving his brigade command in April 1936, Auchinleck was on the unemployed list (on half pay) until September 1936 when he was appointed Deputy Chief of the General Staff and Director of Staff Duties in Delhi. He was then appointed to command the Meerut District in India in July 1938. In 1938 Auchinleck was appointed to chair a committee to consider the modernisation, composition and re-equipment of the British Indian Army: the committee's recommendations formed the basis of the 1939 Chatfield Report which outlined the transformation of the Indian Army \u2013 it grew from 183,000 in 1939 to over 2,250,000 men by the end of the war.\nSecond World War.\nNorway 1940.\nOn the outbreak of war, Auchinleck was appointed to command the Indian 3rd Infantry Division, but in January 1940 was summoned to the United Kingdom to command IV Corps, the only time in the war that a wholly British corps was commanded by an Indian Army officer. He received promotion to acting lieutenant general on 1 February 1940 and to the substantive rank of lieutenant general on 16 March 1940. In May 1940 Auchinleck took over command of the Anglo-French ground forces during the Norwegian campaign, a military operation that was doomed to fail.\nAuchinleck arrived in Greenock, after the fall of Norway, on 12 June, by which time the Battle of France was nearing its end, with the majority of the BEF in France having been evacuated from the port of Dunkirk, with the French surrender only a few days away. Due to these reasons, all attention was now given to the defence of the UK which many believed would soon be invaded by the Germans (see Operation Sea Lion). In mid-June he was given command of the recently established V Corps, then serving in Southern Command under Lieutenant General Sir Alan Brooke. His stay was not to be for very long, however, as, just a few weeks later, Brooke succeeded General Sir Edmund Ironside as Commander-in-Chief, Home Forces, with Auchinleck succeeding Brooke as GOC-in-C of Southern Command, responsible for the defence of Southern England, where the expected invasion would come from. The recently vacated V Corps was taken over by Lieutenant General Bernard Montgomery, who disliked Auchinleck intensely, possibly due to his disdain for the Indian Army and its officers. The relationship between the two future field marshals was not easy, with Montgomery later writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the 5th Corps I first served under Auchinleck, who had the Southern Command; I cannot recall that we ever agreed on anything.\nMany of Montgomery's actions in the next few weeks and months could be considered as insubordination, with one incident in particular standing out, when Montgomery went over Auchinleck's head directly to the Adjutant-General on issues related to officers and men being transferred to and from Montgomery's V Corps. Auchinleck was not to deal with this behaviour for long as in December he was ordered to succeed his friend, General Sir Robert Cassels, as Commander-in-Chief, India. By now known throughout the army as \"the Auk\", he was destined to encounter Montgomery again, although the circumstances there would not be at all pleasant.\nIndia and Iraq January\u2013May 1941.\nPromoted to full general on 26 December, Auchinleck returned to India in January 1941 to assume his new appointment, in which position he was also appointed to the Executive Council of the Viceroy of India and appointed ADC General to the King, a ceremonial position he was to hold until after the end of the war. In April he succeeded Lieutenant General Sir Travers Clarke as colonel of the Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers.\nIn April 1941, RAF Habbaniya was threatened by the new pro-Axis regime of Rashid Ali. This large Royal Air Force station was west of Baghdad in Iraq and General Archibald Wavell, Commander-in-Chief Middle East Command, was reluctant to intervene, despite the urgings of Winston Churchill, because of his pressing commitments in the Western Desert and Greece. Auchinleck, however, acted decisively, sending the 1st Battalion of the King's Own Royal Regiment (Lancaster) by air to Habbaniya and shipping the 10th Indian Infantry Division by sea to Basra. Wavell was prevailed upon by London to send \"Habforce\", a relief column, from the British Mandate of Palestine but by the time it arrived in Habbaniya on 18 May the Anglo-Iraqi War was virtually over.\nNorth Africa July 1941 \u2013 August 1942.\nFollowing the see-saw of Allied and Axis successes and reverses in North Africa, Auchinleck was appointed to succeed General Sir Archibald Wavell as Commander-in-Chief Middle East Command in July 1941; Wavell took up Auchinleck's post as Commander-in-Chief of the Indian Army, swapping jobs with him.\nAs Commander-in-Chief Middle East, Auchinleck, based in Cairo, held responsibility not just for North Africa but also for Persia and the Middle East. He launched an offensive in the Western Desert, Operation Crusader, in November 1941: despite some tactical reverses during the fighting which resulted in Auchinleck replacing the Eighth Army commander Alan Cunningham with Neil Ritchie, by the end of December the besieged garrison of Tobruk had been relieved and Rommel obliged to withdraw to El Agheila. Auchinleck appears to have believed that the enemy had been defeated, writing on 12 January 1942 that the Axis forces were \"beginning to feel the strain\" and were \"hard pressed\".\nIn fact the Axis forces had managed to withdraw in good order and a few days after Auchinleck's optimistic appreciation, having reorganised and been reinforced, struck at the dispersed and weakened British forces, driving them back to the Gazala positions near Tobruk. The British Chief of the Imperial General Staff (CIGS), General Sir Alan Brooke, wrote in his diary that it was \"nothing less than bad generalship on the part of Auchinleck. He has been overconfident and has believed everything his overoptimistic [DMI] Shearer has told him\". Brooke commented that Auchinleck \"could have been one of the finest of commanders\" but lacked the ability to select the men to serve him. Brooke sent him one of his best armoured division commanders Richard McCreery, whose advice was ignored in favour of that of Auchinleck's controversial chief of operations, Major-General Dorman-Smith.\nRommel's attack at the Battle of Gazala of 26 May 1942 resulted in a significant defeat for the British. Auchinleck's appreciation of the situation written to Ritchie on 20 May had suggested that the armoured reserves be concentrated in a position suitable to meet both a flanking attack around the south of the front or a direct attack through the centre (which was the likelihood more favoured by Auchinleck). In the event, Ritchie chose a more dispersed and rearward positioning of his two armoured divisions and when the attack in the centre came, it proved to be a diversion and the main attack, by Rommel's armoured formations, came round the southern flank. Poor initial positioning and subsequent handling and coordination of Allied formations by Ritchie and his corps commanders resulted in their heavy defeat and the Eighth Army retreating into Egypt; Tobruk fell to the Axis on 21 June 1942.\nOn 24 June Auchinleck stepped in to take direct command of the Eighth Army, having lost confidence in Neil Ritchie's ability to control and direct his forces. Auchinleck discarded Ritchie's plan to stand at Mersa Matruh, deciding to fight only a delaying action there, while withdrawing to the more easily defendable position at El Alamein. Here Auchinleck tailored a defence that took advantage of the terrain and the fresh troops at his disposal, stopping the exhausted German/Italian advance in the First Battle of El Alamein. Enjoying a considerable superiority of material and men over the weak German/Italian forces, Auchinleck organised a series of counter-attacks. Poorly conceived and badly coordinated, these attacks achieved little.\n\"The Auk\", as he was known, appointed a number of senior commanders who proved to be unsuitable for their positions, and command arrangements were often characterised by bitter personality clashes. Auchinleck was an Indian Army officer and was criticised for apparently having little direct experience or understanding of British and Dominion troops. Dorman-Smith was regarded with considerable distrust by many of the senior commanders in Eighth Army. By July 1942 Auchinleck had lost the confidence of Dominion commanders and relations with his British commanders had become strained.\nLike his foe Rommel (and his predecessor Wavell and successor Montgomery), Auchinleck was subjected to constant political interference, having to weather a barrage of hectoring telegrams and instructions from Prime Minister Churchill throughout late 1941 and the spring and summer of 1942. Churchill constantly sought an offensive from Auchinleck, and was downcast at the military reverses in Egypt and Cyrenaica. Churchill was desperate for some sort of British victory before the planned Allied landings in North Africa, Operation Torch, scheduled for November 1942. He badgered Auchinleck immediately after the Eighth Army had all but exhausted itself after the first battle of El Alamein. Churchill and the Chief of the Imperial General Staff, Sir Alan Brooke, flew to Cairo in early August 1942 to meet Auchinleck, where it emerged he had lost the confidence of both men. He was replaced as Commander-in-Chief Middle East Command by General Sir Harold Alexander (later Field Marshal The Earl Alexander of Tunis).\nJoseph M. Horodyski and Maurice Remy both praise Auchinleck as an underrated military leader who contributed the most to the successful defence of El Alamein and consequently the final defeat of Rommel in Africa. The two historians also criticize Churchill for the unreasonable decision to put the blame on Auchinleck and to relieve him.\nIndia 1942\u20131945.\nChurchill offered Auchinleck command of the newly created Persia and Iraq Command (this having been separated from Alexander's command), but Auchinleck declined this post, as he believed that separating the area from the Middle East Command was not good policy and the new arrangements would not be workable. He set his reasons out in his letter to the Chief of the Imperial General Staff dated 14 August 1942. Instead he returned to India, where he spent almost a year \"unemployed\" before in June 1943 being again appointed Commander-in-Chief of the Indian Army.\nGeneral Wavell meanwhile having been appointed Viceroy, on this appointment it was announced that responsibility for the prosecution of the war with Japan would move from the Commander-in-Chief India to a newly created South East Asia Command. However, the appointment of the new command's Supreme Commander, Acting Vice Admiral Lord Louis Mountbatten, was not announced until August 1943 and until Mountbatten could set up his headquarters and assume control (in November), Auchinleck retained responsibility for operations in India and Burma while conducting a review and revision of Allied plans based on the decisions taken by the Allied Combined Chiefs of Staff at the Quadrant Conference, which ended in August.\nFollowing Mountbatten's arrival, Auchinleck, as Commander-in-Chief India once more, was responsible for the internal security of India, the defence of the North West Frontier and the buildup of India as a base, including most importantly the reorganisation of the Indian Army, the training of forces destined for SEAC and the lines of communication carrying men and material to the forward areas and to China. Auchinleck made the supply of Fourteenth Army, with probably the worst lines of communication of the war, his immediate priority; as Sir William Slim, commander of the Fourteenth Army, was later to write:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was a good day for us when he [Auchinleck] took command of India, our main base, recruiting area and training ground. The Fourteenth Army, from its birth to its final victory, owed much to his unselfish support and never-failing understanding. Without him and what he and the Army of India did for us we could not have existed, let alone conquered.\nDivorce.\nAuchinleck suffered a personal disappointment when his wife Jessie left him for his friend, Air Chief Marshal Sir Richard Peirse. Peirse and Auchinleck had been students together at the Imperial Defence College, but that was long before. Peirse was now Allied Air Commander-in-Chief, South-East Asia, and also based in India. The affair became known to Mountbatten in early 1944, and he passed the information to the chief of the RAF, Sir Charles Portal, hoping that Peirse would be recalled. The affair was common knowledge by September 1944, and Peirse was neglecting his duties. Mountbatten sent Peirse and Lady Auchinleck back to England on 28 November 1944, where they lived together at a Brighton hotel. Peirse had his marriage dissolved, and Auchinleck obtained a divorce in 1946. Auchinleck was reportedly very badly affected. According to his sister, he was never the same after the break-up. He always carried a photograph of Jessie in his wallet even after the divorce.\nThere is scholarly dispute whether Auchinleck was homosexual. His biographer, Philip Warner, addressed the rumours but dismissed them; however historian Ronald Hyam has alleged that \"sexually based moral-revulsion\" was the reason for Montgomery's inability to get on with Auchinleck, and further, that Auchinleck was \"let off with a high-level warning\" over his relationships with Indian boys.\nPartition of India and later years.\nAuchinleck continued as Commander-in-Chief of the Indian Army after the end of the war helping, though much against his own convictions, to prepare the future Indian and Pakistani armies for the Partition of India: in November 1945 he was forced to commute the more serious judicial sentences awarded against officers of the Indian National Army in face of growing unease and unrest both within the Indian population, and the British Indian Army. On 1 June 1946 he was promoted to field marshal, but he refused to accept a peerage, lest he be thought associated with a policy (i.e. Partition) that he thought fundamentally dishonourable.\nSending a report to the British Government on 28 September 1947, Field Marshal Auchinleck wrote: \"I have no hesitation, whatever, in affirming that the present Indian Cabinet are implacably determined to do all in their power to prevent the establishment of the Dominion of Pakistan on firm basis.\" He stated in the second, political part of his assessment, \"Since 15th August, the situation has steadily deteriorated and the Indian leaders, cabinet ministers, civil officials and others have persistently tried to obstruct the work of partition of the armed forces.\"\nWhen partition was effected in August 1947, Auchinleck was appointed Supreme Commander of all British forces remaining in India and Pakistan and remained in this role until the winding up and closure of the Supreme H.Q. at the end of November 1947. This marked his effective retirement from the army (although technically field marshals in the British Army never retire, remaining on the active list on half pay). He left India on 1 December.\nAfter a brief period in Italy in connection with an unsuccessful business project, Auchinleck retired to London, where he occupied himself with a number of charitable and business interests and became a respectably skilled watercolour painter. In 1960 he settled in Beccles in the county of Suffolk, remaining there for seven years until, at the age of eighty-four, he decided to emigrate and set up home in Marrakesh, where he died on 23 March 1981.\nMemorials.\nAuchinleck is buried in Ben M'Sik European Cemetery, Casablanca, in the Commonwealth War Graves Commission plot in the cemetery, next to the grave of Raymond Steed who was the second youngest non-civilian Commonwealth casualty of the Second World War.\nA memorial plaque was erected in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral. A bronze statue of Auchinleck can be seen on Broad Street adjacent to Auchinleck House, Five Ways, Birmingham.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7797", "revid": "1300641720", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7797", "title": "Camilla Hall", "text": "Symbionese Liberation Army member (1945\u20131974)\nCamilla Christine Hall (March 24, 1945 \u2013 May 17, 1974) was a member of the Symbionese Liberation Army (SLA), a small, far-left militant group that committed violent acts between 1973 and 1975. They assassinated Marcus Foster, Superintendent of the Oakland Public Schools and the first black superintendent of any major school system, kidnapped heiress Patty Hearst, and committed armed robbery of banks. \nHall, one of the majority of white members in the group, died on May 17, 1974, with five other SLA members in a shootout with the Los Angeles Police Department in that city. During this, the house where the SLA members were making their stand caught fire. Police fatally shot both Hall and Nancy Ling Perry as they left the house.\nEarly life.\nOn March 24, 1945, Camilla Christine Hall was born in Saint Peter, Minnesota. Both her parents, George Fridolph Hall (1908\u20132000) and Lorena (Daeschner) Hall (1911\u20131995), were academics with positions at Gustavus Adolphus College in Saint Peter from 1938 to 1952. In addition, her father was a minister in the Augustana Evangelical Lutheran Church and later the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America. Her mother, Lorena (Daeschner) Hall, helped found Gustavus Adolphus College's Art Department and served as the department head. \nCamilla Hall was the only surviving child of four. Firstborn son Terry died of congenital heart disease in 1948; Peter died in 1951, and Nan died in 1962, both of a congenital kidney disease. The family seemed burdened by grief.\nIn 1952, the Hall family moved to what is now Tanzania in East Africa. George and Lorena Hall taught in schools and did mission work, while Camilla and Nan played with the native children. In 1954, when Camilla was nine, the family returned to Saint Peter because of seven-year-old Nan's poor health. While Camilla attended elementary school in Minnesota and lived with relatives, her birth family moved to Montclair, New Jersey. \nIn Minnesota, Hall attended Washburn High School in Minneapolis, where she was involved in many activities. The 1963 Washburn Yearbook states, \"Candy was a member of Blue Tri, Class Play, Poplars Staff, Quill Club, Forensics, Pep Club, and Hall of Fame\". Blue Tri club was an organization that encouraged Christian ideals and put together service projects. In addition, Camilla Hall was voted class clown in high school. In 1963, she graduated from Washburn High School.\nEducation.\nHall attended Gustavus Adolphus College in St. Peter, Minnesota. She transferred to the University of Minnesota after her freshman year. On June 10, 1967, Hall graduated with a humanities degree. \nPost-college.\nAfter graduation, Hall moved to Duluth, Minnesota, where she started as a caseworker for social services in St. Louis County. She also began to participate in Democratic Party activities. In early 1968, she was elected to carry the Eugene McCarthy banner for the St. Louis County precinct, in support of McCarthy's presidential campaign that year. \nAlthough Hall enjoyed helping people in her work, she found it difficult to keep distance from some of their problems while being a caseworker. For her job in Duluth, Hall used her musical and poetic talents in an advertising campaign.\nIn June 1968, Hall returned to Minneapolis, where she was a caseworker for the Hennepin County, Minnesota welfare office. Co-workers and friends of Hall described her as witty, sympathetic, helpful, and compassionate. She had an outgoing personality and had a passion for literature. At the same time, Hall frequently talked with family and friends about philosophy and how she was disappointed with the state of welfare. In 1968, Hall was 23 years old. She carefully monitored the political situation in America, including the 1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago where there was so much violence. She was active in the peace movement and food boycotts, including the Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam. Despite Hall's participating in political activities, urging social change, and working to aid individuals and families, her mother could see that Camilla became dissatisfied with her work.\nMove to California.\nIn November 1969, Hall moved to Topanga, a northern suburb of Los Angeles, California. In March, she moved into Los Angeles proper in west Los Angeles. According to Rachael Hanel, \"She lived off her savings, interest income from a trust, money from her parents, and selling her simple, Rubenesque line drawings.\" Although Hall didn't express dissatisfaction at being an artist, she decided to move again.\nHall moved to Berkeley in northern California in February 1971, which had become a center of political activism and social movements. In May 1971, Hall moved into an apartment complex on Channing Way where she met Patricia Soltysik. The two women began a lesbian relationship, which was the first time Hall had done so publicly. Hall wrote about Soltysik in a love poem named \"Mizmoon\", and nicknamed her that.\nIn Berkeley, Hall continued being politically active. She participated in the People's Park reoccupation during the summer of 1972, following the shootings there the year before. She and Soltysik became involved with the Venceremos prison outreach project, through which they became associates of two white men, Russ Little and Willie Wolfe, who were also assisting in prisoner outreach. \nIn October 1972, Hall traveled to Europe. She stayed with friends while she traveled for three months. Once she returned to California, she continued being politically active. Through her association with Soltysik, Little, and Wolfe, she became a founding member of the Symbionese Liberation Army, a small, radical leftist group. Joe Remiro and Thero Wheeler trained the other members in handling weapons and explosives. Remiro was a veteran of Vietnam.\nThe SLA gained notoriety in November 1973 by claiming credit for the assassination of Marcus Foster, Superintendent of the Oakland Public Schools and the first black to be superintendent of any major city's school district. Three \"soldiers\" also wounded his deputy. In January 1974 the SLA base was moved to Concord, California, where Nancy Ling Perry rented a house under an assumed name. Russ Little and Joe Remiro were arrested after a police stop and confrontation, convicted and sentenced to prison.\nIn February 1974 the SLA kidnapped heiress Patty Hearst. They indoctrinated her and she said she chose to join them. Hall and Hearst were identified from security camera images as participants in the April 15, 1974, armed robbery of the Hibernia Bank in San Francisco. Two civilians were shot during the robbery.\nLA shootout.\nThe police kept up pressure on the group, which moved to a house in Los Angeles. There Hall died in a shootout (May 17, 1974) with police in which five other SLA members also died. As their hideout burned, Hall and Nancy Ling Perry exited from the back door. Police claimed that Perry came out firing a revolver and Hall was firing an automatic pistol. Police shot them immediately, killing both. Perry was shot twice. One shot hit her right lung, the other shot severed her spine. Hall was shot once in the forehead. Angela Atwood, another SLA member, pulled Hall's body back into the burning house. Atwood died in the fire. \nInvestigators working for Hall's parents claimed that Perry had walked out of the house intending to surrender.\nFuneral.\nHall's parents held a funeral for their daughter on May 23, 1974, at St. John's Lutheran Church, in Lincolnwood, Illinois, a Chicago suburb, where he was pastor. Seven of his fellow Lutheran ministers conducted the service. Camilla Hall's name was not mentioned. Her ashes were buried on August 19, 1974, in a small country graveyard where her late siblings were buried, who each died before she was 16. Her parents also have plots there.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7800", "revid": "11630810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7800", "title": "Clone", "text": "Clone or Clones or Cloning or Cloned or The Clone may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "7801", "revid": "21086645", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7801", "title": "Critical psychology", "text": "Perspective on psychology\nCritical psychology is a perspective on psychology that draws extensively on critical theory. Critical psychology challenges the assumptions, theories and methods of mainstream psychology and attempts to apply psychological understandings in different ways.\nThe field of critical psychology does not fall under a monolithic category. One\u00a0can observe different starting points of critiques, similarities,\u00a0as well as substantial differences. Thus, critical psychology should be perceived as an \u201cumbrella term\u201d that includes\u00a0various critiques against the status quo of mainstream psychology. A common theme of critical approaches in psychology is the assessment of the social effects of psychological theories and practices. Critical psychology is a movement that challenges psychology to work towards emancipation and social justice, and that opposes the uses of psychology to perpetuate oppression and injustice.\nCritical psychologists believe that mainstream psychology fails to consider how power differences and discrimination between social classes and groups can impact an individual's or a group's mental and physical well-being. Mainstream psychology does this only in part by attempting to explain behavior at the individual level. However, it largely ignores institutional racism, postcolonialism and deficits in social justice for minority groups based on differences in observable characteristics such as gender, ethnicity, religious minority, sexual orientation, or disability.\nOrigins.\nPsychology, draws a history filled with theoretical and political conflict. Within its history various stream of critiques have emerged, some of them sharing similarities, as well as different starting points and substantial differences. Criticisms of mainstream psychology consistent with current critical psychology usage have existed since psychology's modern development in the late 19th century. Use of the term \"critical psychology\" started in the 1970s at the Freie Universit\u00e4t Berlin. The German branch of critical psychology predates and has developed largely separately from the rest of the field. As of May 2007, only a few works have been translated into English. The German Critical Psychology movement is rooted in the post-war student revolt of the late 1960s; see German student movement. Marx's \"Critique of Political Economy\" played an important role in the German branch of the student revolt, which was centered in West Berlin. At that time, the capitalist city of West Berlin was surrounded by communist-ruled East Germany, and represented a \"hot spot\" of political and ideological controversy for the revolutionary German students. The sociological foundations of critical psychology are decidedly Marxist.\nKlaus Holzkamp.\nOne of the most important and sophisticated books in the German development of the field is the (\"Foundations of Psychology\") by Klaus Holzkamp, who might be considered the theoretical founder of German critical psychology. Holzkamp wrote two books on theory of science and one on sensory perception before publishing the in 1983. Holzkamp believed his work provided a solid paradigm for psychological research because he viewed psychology as a pre-paradigmatic scientific discipline (T.S. Kuhn had used the term \"pre-paradigmatic\" for social science).\nHolzkamp mostly based his sophisticated attempt to provide a comprehensive and integrated set of categories defining the field of psychological research on Aleksey Leontyev's approach to cultural\u2013historical psychology and activity theory. Leontyev had seen human action as a result of biological as well as cultural evolution and, drawing on Marx's materialist conception of culture, stressed that individual cognition is always part of social action which in turn is mediated by man-made tools (cultural artifacts), language and other man-made systems of symbols, which he viewed as a major distinguishing feature of human culture and, thus, human cognition. Another important source was Lucien S\u00e9ve's theory of personality, which provided the concept of \"social activity matrices\" as mediating structure between individual and social reproduction. At the same time, the systematically integrated previous specialized work done at Free University of Berlin in the 1970s by critical psychologists who also had been influenced by Marx, Leontyev, and Seve. This included books on animal behavior/ethology, sensory perception, motivation and cognition. He also incorporated ideas from Freud's psychoanalysis and Merleau-Ponty's phenomenology into his approach.\nOne core result of Holzkamp's historical and comparative analysis of human reproductive action, perception and cognition is a very specific concept of meaning that identifies symbolic meaning as historically and culturally constructed, purposeful conceptual structures that humans create in close relationship to material culture and within the context of historically specific formations of social reproduction.\nComing from this phenomenological perspective on culturally mediated and socially situated action, Holzkamp launched a methodological attack on behaviorism (which he termed S\u2013R (stimulus\u2013response) psychology) based on linguistic analysis, showing in minute detail the rhetorical patterns by which this approach to psychology creates the illusion of \"scientific objectivity\" while at the same time losing relevance for understanding culturally situated, intentional human actions. Against this approach, he developed his own approach to generalization and objectivity, drawing on ideas from Kurt Lewin in Chapter 9 of \"\".\nHis last major publication before his death in 1995 was about learning. It appeared in 1993 and contained a phenomenological theory of learning from the standpoint of the subject. One important concept Holzkamp developed was \"reinterpretation\" of theories developed by conventional psychology. This meant to look at these concepts from the standpoint of the paradigm of critical psychology, thereby integrating their useful insights into critical psychology while at the same time identifying and criticizing their limiting implications, which in the case of S\u2013R psychology were the rhetorical elimination of the subject and intentional action, and in the case of cognitive psychology which did take into account subjective motives and intentional actions, methodological individualism.\nThe first part of the book thus contains an extensive look at the history of psychological theories of learning and a minute re-interpretation of those concepts from the perspective of critical psychology, which focuses on intentional action situated in specific socio-historical/cultural contexts. The conceptions of learning he found most useful in his own detailed analysis of \"classroom learning\" came from cognitive anthropologists Jean Lave (situated learning) and Edwin Hutchins (distributed cognition).\nThe book's second part contained an extensive analysis on the modern state's institutionalized forms of \"classroom learning\" as the cultural\u2013historical context that shapes much of modern learning and socialization. In this analysis, he heavily drew upon Michel Foucault's \"Discipline and Punish\". Holzkamp felt that classroom learning as the historically specific form of learning does not make full use of student's potentials, but rather limits her or his learning potentials by a number of \"teaching strategies.\" Part of his motivation for the book was to look for alternative forms of learning that made use of the enormous potential of the human psyche in more fruitful ways. Consequently, in the last section of the book, Holzkamp discusses forms of \"expansive learning\" that seem to avoid the limitations of classroom learning, such as apprenticeship and learning in contexts other than classrooms.\nThis search culminated in plans to write a major work on \"life leadership\" in the specific historical context of modern (capitalist) society. Due to his death in 1995, this work never got past the stage of early (and premature) conceptualizations, some of which were published in the journals \"Forum Kritische Psychologie\" and \"Argument\".\n1960s\u20131970s.\nIn the 1960s and 1970s the term \"radical psychology\" was used by psychologists internationally to denote a branch of the field which rejected mainstream psychology's focus on the individual as the basic unit of analysis and sole source of psychopathology. Instead, radical psychologists examined the role of society in causing and treating problems and looked towards social change as an alternative to therapy to treat mental illness and as a means of preventing psychopathology. Within psychiatry the term \"anti-psychiatry\" was often used and now British activists prefer the term \"critical psychiatry\". \"Critical psychology\" is currently the preferred term for the discipline of psychology keen to find alternatives to the way the discipline of psychology reduces human experience to the level of the individual and thereby strips away possibilities for radical social change.\n1990s.\nStarting in the 1990s a new wave of books started to appear on critical psychology, the most influential being the edited book \"Critical Psychology\" by Dennis Fox and Isaac Prilleltensky. Various introductory texts to critical psychology written in the United Kingdom have tended to focus on discourse, but this has been seen by some proponents of critical psychology as a reduction of human experience to language which is as politically dangerous as the way mainstream psychology reduces experience to the individual mind. Attention to language and ideological processes, others would argue, is essential to effective critical psychology \u2013 it is not simply a matter of applying mainstream psychological concepts to issues of social change.\nIan Parker.\nIn 1999 Ian Parker published an influential manifesto in both the online journal \"Radical Psychology\" and the \"Annual Review of Critical Psychology\". This manifesto argues that critical psychology should include the following four components:\nCritical psychology today.\nThere are a few international journals devoted to critical psychology and critical discussions in Psychology, including \"Psychology in Society\", \"Theory &amp; Psychology\", \"Culture &amp; Psychology\", \"Feminism &amp; Psychology\", \"Human Development\", \"Annual Review of Critical Psychology and\" the no longer published \"International Journal of Critical Psychology\" (continued in the journal \"Subjectivity\") and \"Radical Psychology Journal\" (published for ten years until its final issue in 2011). The journals still tend to be directed to an academic audience, though the \"Annual Review of Critical Psychology\" and \"Psychology in Society\" runs as an open-access online journal. There are close links between critical psychologists and critical psychiatrists in Britain through the Asylum Collective. David Smail was one of the founders of The Midlands Psychology Group, a critical psychology collective who produced a manifesto for a social materialist psychology of distress. Critical psychology courses and research concentrations are available at Manchester Metropolitan University, York St John University, the University of East London, the University of Edinburgh, the University of KwaZulu Natal, the City University of New York Graduate Center, the University of West Georgia, Point Park University, University of Guelph, York University, and Prescott College. Undergraduate concentrations can also be found at the California Institute of Integral Studies, Prescott College, and at the University of Notre Dame Australia (Fremantle).\nExtensions.\nLike many critical applications, critical psychology has expanded beyond Marxist and feminist roots to benefit from other critical approaches. Consider ecopsychology and transpersonal psychology. Critical psychology and related work has also sometimes been labelled \"radical psychology\" and \"liberation psychology\". In the field of developmental psychology, the work of Erica Burman has been influential.\nVarious sub-disciplines within psychology have begun to establish their own critical orientations. Perhaps the most extensive are critical health psychology, community psychology, and social psychology.\nAims of Critical Psychology.\nCentral themes of critical psychology is the concept of \u201coppression\u201d and \u201cemancipation\u201d. Critical psychology reflects not only on the connection of mainstream psychology with power, but also work toward emancipation (or liberation). Oppression refers to\u00a0 \u201ca state of asymmetric power relations characterized by domination, subordination, and resistance, where the dominating persons or groups exercise their power by restricting access to material resources and by implanting in the subordinated persons or groups fear or self-deprecating views about themselves\u201d. Emancipation (or liberation) refer to the possibilities of individuals within the social inequalities, doing justice to both, individual and societal domains. Consequently, the aims of critical psychology is the understanding of \u201coppression\u201d and \u201cliberation\u201d in relation with \u201cPower\u201d.\nThe spectrum through which the aims of critical psychology is expressed is divided into three different levels of intervention : The micro-level, meso-level, and macro level. Micro-level context refer to the relation of psychology with individuals and groups, the meso-level context refer to the critical reflections of critical psychology on psychology and the re-formation of a psychology not \"about\" but \"for\" the people, and the macro-level context refer to interventions of critical psychology\u00a0 to create a more equitable society, inviting larger social-agents. A similar reflection is the one that divides possibilities of liberation in relation with power into: aesthetic, interaction, and labor dimension. Aesthetic dimension refer to very personal and individual possibility of liberation through self-expression, the dimension of interaction refer to the deconstruction of oppression in the symbolic and communicative dimension of power (e.g. books, \u00a0texts, media) and labor refer to liberation from larger socio-political expressions of power (schools, work, health-care). To sum-up, power is practiced in a spectrum from individual- to larger societal level, and thus oppression and possibilities of liberation is also identified within this spectrum. Thus, the aims of critical psychology toward emancipation exceeds from the individual, to the larger societal level of reflection and action.\nForms of Critical Psychology.\nUnderstanding and action, is an ongoing debate in the field of critical psychology. The understanding of oppression and the \"praxis\" of emancipation is two different domains, which is the domain of theory and the domain of action. For this reason it is proposed to divide Critical Psychology into four different forms : (a) critical theoretical psychology, (b) critical theoretical psychology with a practical emancipatory intention, (c) critical empirical psychology, and (d) critical applied psychology. Critical theoretical psychology (a), and critical empirical psychology (c) refers to the theoretical understanding and development of the field, while critical theoretical psychology with practical emancipatory intention, (b) and critical applied psychology (d), has to do with practice and move toward a social change.\nInternationally.\nAn early international overview of critical psychology perspectives can be found in \"Critical Psychology: Voices for Change\", edited by Tod Sloan (Macmillan, 2000). In 2015, Ian Parker edited the \"Handbook of Critical Psychology\".\nGermany.\nAt FU-Berlin, critical psychology was not really seen as a division of psychology and followed its own methodology, trying to reformulate traditional psychology on an unorthodox Marxist base and drawing from Soviet ideas of cultural\u2013historical psychology, particularly Aleksey Leontyev. Some years ago the department of critical psychology at FU-Berlin was merged into the traditional psychology department.\nAn April 2009 issue of the journal \"Theory &amp; Psychology\" (edited by Desmond Painter, Athanasios Marvakis, and Leendert Mos) is devoted to an examination of German critical psychology.\nSouth Africa.\nThe complex sociopolitical history of South Africa, and its relationship with mainstream psychology, created a setting in which critical psychology could be impactful. South Africa is a good example of a context in which mainstream psychology positioned itself alongside neo-colonialism, racism, and capitalist exploitation - during the country's Apartheid era - which led to the need for critical alternatives within the field that could challenge ideological complicities. During apartheid, mainstream psychology supported the oppressive political system - some psychologists actively and others passively. In the early 1980s, at the height of apartheid, progressive white psychologists and a growing number of black psychologists began to research and practice alternative programmes to critique and resist mainstream psychology's role in perpetuating apartheid in South Africa. In this way, critical psychology started to develop in South Africa.\nAs is the case in other parts of the world, critical psychology in South Africa was born from interrogating psychology in relation to politics. Firstly, psychology was accused of being a product of, and supporter of, an oppressive political system in which its supposed neutrality and scientific objectivity were informed by the sectors of society that benefited from the ideological and economic dominance that it upheld. Secondly, once critical psychologists in South Africa revealed the ideological flaws in mainstream psychology within the country's context, work began to reconfigure the field as a progressive and socially relevant practice with theoretical and methodological approaches that could benefit all members of South African society.\nThe establishment of critical psychology in South Africa took various forms between 1980 and 1994. Although the field was not necessarily fully formalised during this time, spaces and organisations were created for its ideas to be expressed and developed: such as in the University of Cape Town's (UCT) psychology department, the formation of the Organisation for Appropriate Social Services in South Africa (OASSSA), Psychologists Against Apartheid, the South African Health and Social Services Organisation (SAHSSO), and the establishment of the academic journal \"Psychology in Society (PINS)\". Some of the main theoretical and practical achievements of these developments were: the forging of a way to critique the categories of class, race, gender, and other structural factors impacting the discipline of psychology, the encouragement of students to think critically about the politics of psychology, and rebuilding international links as well as relationships with other social and health sciences in South Africa.\nHowever, not all these initiatives continued after the end of political struggle and the transition to democracy. After 1994, professional psychology in South Africa was reorganised through the establishment of the Professional Board for Psychology that exists within the Health Professions Council of South Africa (HPCSA). This statutory body regulates the profession with its systems of licensing and certification. Within these systems, critical psychology is more of an approach to the field than it is a professional category on its own. From the 2000s until recent times, critical psychology moved more toward studying certain domains, such as gender or race, and in the process, the overarching project of establishing a formalised field of critical psychology has either been discarded or broadened to refer to anything that is 'non-mainstream' in psychology. Critical psychology in South Africa is therefore mostly applied as a theoretical approach.\nUnited States and Canada.\nThe doctoral program in Critical Social/Personality Psychology and Environmental Psychology at the CUNY Graduate Center and the doctoral program in Critical Psychology at Point Park University, in Pittsburgh, PA are the only critical psychology specific doctoral programs in the United States. Prescott College in Prescott, Arizona offers an online Master's program in Critical Psychology and Human Services and has a critically oriented undergraduate program. The California Institute of Integral Studies in San Francisco also offers the Bachelor's Completion Program with a minor in Critical Psychology, and critical perspectives are sometimes encountered in traditional universities, perhaps especially within community psychology programs. The University of West Georgia offers a Ph.D. in Consciousness and Society with critical psychology being one of the main three theoretical orientations. North American efforts include the 1993 founding of RadPsyNet, the 1997 publication of \"Critical Psychology: An Introduction\" (edited by Dennis Fox and Isaac Prilleltensky; expanded 2009 edition edited by Dennis Fox, Isaac Prilleltensky, and Stephanie Austin), the 2001 Monterey Conference on Critical Psychology, and in underlying themes of many contributions to the \"Journal of Social Action in Counseling and Psychology\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7803", "revid": "23939382", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7803", "title": "Crossfire", "text": "Deliberately overlapping arcs of fire\nA crossfire (also known as interlocking fire) is a military term for the siting of weapons (often automatic weapons such as assault rifles or sub-machine guns) so that their arcs of fire overlap. This tactic came to prominence in World War I.\nSiting weapons this way is an example of the application of the defensive principle of \"mutual support\". The advantage of siting weapons that mutually support one another is that it is difficult for an attacker to find a covered approach to any one defensive position. Use of armour, air support, indirect fire support, and stealth are tactics that may be used to assault a defensive position. However, when combined with land mines, snipers, barbed wire, and air cover, crossfire became a difficult tactic to counter in the early 20th century.\nEarly modern warfare.\nThe concept of overlapping arcs of fire drove major developments in the use of cannon in early modern Europe. The star fort forced attackers approaching the walls into the overlapping enfilade of the protruding bastions; attempts to achieve a similar effect through maneuver on the battlefield were limited by the weight and size of the artillery of the time. The earliest experiments in mobile artillery, such as the leather cannon, were generally flawed due to the limitations of the materials science of the period, but eventually gave rise to the regimental gun.\nPerhaps the most famous example of crossfire tactics in early modern warfare occurred in the final stages of the First Battle of Breitenfeld. Swedish cavalry under Gustavus Adolphus outflanked and seized the artillery pieces of the Imperial army. As the battle had progressed, the Imperial guns were now well-positioned to fire upon the bulk of the Imperial army, and the crossfire of Swedish and captured cannon shattered the Imperial forces.\nTrench warfare.\nThe tactic of using overlapping arcs of fire came to prominence during World War I where it was a feature of trench warfare. Machine guns were placed in groups, called machine-gun nests, and they protected the front of the trenches. Many people died in futile attempts to charge across the no man's land where these crossfires were set up. After these attacks many bodies could be found in the no man's land. \n\"Caught in the crossfire\".\nTo be \"caught in the crossfire\" is an expression that often refers to unintended casualties (bystanders, etc.) who were killed or wounded by being exposed to the gunfire of a battle or gun fight, such as in a position to be hit by bullets of either side. The phrase has come to mean any injury, damage or harm (physical or otherwise) caused to a third party due to the action of belligerents (collateral damage).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7805", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7805", "title": "CNO", "text": "CNO may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "7806", "revid": "49291118", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7806", "title": "Cruising (maritime)", "text": "Traveling by boat for pleasure\nCruising is a maritime activity that involves staying aboard a watercraft for extended periods of time when the vessel is traveling on water at a steady speed. Cruising generally refers to leisurely trips on yachts and luxury cruiseships, with durations varying from day-trips to months-long round-the-world voyages.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The sea, the great unifier, is man's only hope. Now, as never before,&lt;br&gt; the old phrase has a literal meaning: We are all in the same boat.\"\nJacques Cousteau\nBoats were almost exclusively used for working purposes prior to the nineteenth century. In 1857, the philosopher Henry David Thoreau, with his book \"Canoeing in Wilderness\" chronicling his canoe voyaging in the wilderness of Maine, is considered the first to convey the enjoyment of spiritual and lifestyle aspects of cruising.\nThe modern conception of cruising for pleasure was first popularised by the Scottish explorer and sportsman John MacGregor. He was introduced to the canoes and kayaks of the Native Americans on a camping trip in 1858, and on his return to the United Kingdom constructed his own 'double-ended' canoe in Lambeth. The boat, nicknamed 'Rob Roy' after a famous relative of his, was built of lapstrake oak planking, decked in cedar covered with rubberized canvas with an open cockpit in the center. He cruised around the waterways of Britain, Europe and the Middle East and wrote a popular book about his experiences, \"A Thousand Miles in the Rob Roy Canoe\".\nIn 1866, Macgregor was a moving force behind the establishment of the Royal Canoe Club, the first club in the world to promote pleasure cruising. The first recorded regatta was held on April 27, 1867, and it received Royal patronage in 1873. The latter part of the century saw cruising for leisure being enthusiastically taken up by the middle class. The author Robert Louis Stevenson wrote \"An Inland Voyage\" in 1877 as a travelogue on his canoeing trip through France and Belgium. Stevenson and his companion, Sir Walter Grindlay Simpson travelled in two 'Rob Roys' along the Oise River and witnessed the Romantic beauty of rural Europe.\nThe Canadian-American Joshua Slocum was one of the first people to carry out a long-distance sailing voyage for pleasure, circumnavigating the world between 1895 and 1898. Despite opinion that such a voyage was impossible, Slocum rebuilt a derelict sloop \"Spray\" and sailed her single-handed around the world. His book \"Sailing Alone Around the World\" was a classic adventure, and inspired many others to take to the seas.\nOther cruising authors have provided both inspiration and instruction to prospective cruisers. Key among these during the post World War II period are Electa and Irving Johnson, Miles and Beryl Smeeton, Bernard Moitessier, Peter Pye, and Eric and Susan Hiscock. During the 1970s - 1990s Robin Lee Graham, Lin and Larry Pardey, Annie Hill, Herb Payson, Linda and Steve Dashew, Margaret and Hal Roth, and Beth Leonard &amp; Evans Starzinger have provided inspiration for people to set off voyaging.\nThe development of ocean crossing rallies, most notably the ARC (Atlantic Rally for Cruisers), have encouraged less experienced sailors to undertake ocean crossings. These rallies provide a group of sailors crossing the same ocean at the same time with safety inspections, weather information and social functions.\nTypes of boats used.\nCruising is done on both sail and power boats, monohulls and multihulls although sail predominates over longer distances, as ocean-going power boats are considerably more expensive to purchase and operate. The size of the typical cruising boat has increased over the years and is currently in the range of 10 to 15 metres (33 to 50 feet) although smaller boats have been used in around-the-world trips, but are generally not recommended given the dangers involved. Many cruisers are \"long term\" and travel for many years, the most adventurous among them circle the globe over a period of three to ten years. Many others take a year or two off from work and school for shorter trips and the chance to experience the cruising lifestyle.\nTypes.\nBlue-water and coastal cruising.\nBlue-water cruising which is defined as long term open sea cruising is more involved and inherently more dangerous than coastal cruising. \nBefore embarking on an open-ocean voyage, planning and preparation will include studying charts, weather reports/warnings, almanacs and navigation books of the route to be followed. In addition, supplies need to be stocked (including fresh water and fuel), navigation instruments checked and the ship itself needs to be inspected and the crew needs to be given exact instruction on the jobs are expected to perform (e.g. the watch, which is generally 4 hours on and 4 hours off, navigation, steering, rigging sails, ...). In addition, the crew needs to be well trained at working together and with the ship in question. Finally, the sailor must be mentally prepared for dealing with harsh situations. There have been many well-documented cases where sailors had to be rescued simply because they were not sufficiently prepared (the sailors as well as the ship) or lacked experience for their venture and ran into serious trouble.\nSailing near the coast (coastal cruising) gives a certain amount of safety. A ship is always granted 'innocent passage' through the country (most countries usually claim up to off the coast). When this method is practiced however, if the ship needs to stop (e.g. for repairs), a trip to a customs checkpoint to have passports checked would be required.\nRiver cruising.\nVoyages along inland waterways are called river cruises, which often involved stopping at multiple ports along the way. As many cities and towns are built around rivers and historically have relied on maritime transport, river cruise docks are frequently located in the center of cities and towns.\nAccording to Douglas Ward, \"A river cruise represents life in the slow lane, sailing along at a gentle pace, soaking up the scenery, with plentiful opportunities to explore riverside towns and cities en route. It is a supremely calming experience, an antidote to the pressures of life in a fast-paced world, in surroundings that are comfortable without being fussy or pretentious, with good food and enjoyable company.\"\nRiver cruising is a major component of the tourist industry in many parts of the world.\nEquipment.\nCruisers use a variety of equipment and techniques to make their voyages possible, or simply more comfortable. The use of wind vane self-steering was common on long-distance cruising yachts but is increasingly being supplemented or replaced by electrical auto-pilots.\nThough in the past many cruisers had no means of generating electricity on board and depended on kerosene and dry-cell batteries, today electrical demands are much higher and nearly all cruisers have electrical devices such as lights, communications equipment and refrigeration. Although most boats can generate power from their inboard engines, an increasing number carry auxiliary generators. Carrying sufficient fuel to power engine and generator over a long voyage can be a problem, so many cruising boats are equipped with other ancillary generating devices such as solar panels, wind turbines and towed turbines. Cruisers choosing to spend extended time in very remote locations with minimal access to marinas can opt to equip their vessels with watermakers (reverse-osmosis seawater desalination units) used to convert sea water to potable fresh water.\nSatellite communications are becoming more common on cruising boats. Many boats are now equipped with satellite telephone systems; however, these systems can be expensive to use, and may operate only in certain areas. Many cruisers still use short wave maritime SSB and amateur radio, which has no running costs. These radios provide two-way voice communications, can receive weather fax graphics or GRIB files via a laptop computer, and with a compatible modem (e.g. PACTOR) can send and receive email at very slow speed. Such emails are usually limited to basic communication using plain text, without HTML formatting or attachments.\nAwareness of impending weather conditions is particularly important to cruising sailors who are often far from safe harbours and need to steer clear of dangerous weather conditions. Most cruising boats are equipped with a barometer or a weather station that records barometric pressure as well as temperature and provides rudimentary forecasting. For more sophisticated weather forecasting, cruisers rely on their ability to receive forecasts by radio, phone or satellite.\nIn order to avoid collisions with other vessels, cruisers rely on a maintaining a regular watch schedule. At night, color-coded running lights help determine the position and orientation of vessels. Radar and AIS systems are often employed to detect vessels positions and movement in all conditions (day, night, rain and fog).\nCruisers navigate using paper charts and radar. Modern yachts are often also equipped with a chartplotter which enables the use of electronic charts and is linked to GPS satellites that provide position reports. Some chartplotters have the ability to interface charts and radar images. Those that still wish to work with traditional charts as well as with GPS may do so using a Yeoman Plotter. Certain advanced sailing vessels have a completely automated sailing system which includes a plotter, as well as course correcting through a link with the ship's steering organs (e.g. sails, propeller). One such device can be found at the Maltese Falcon.\nThere are also sails made with cruising in mind. Sailing downwind is always enjoyable, but there is a vast difference as to how easy it is to manage - especially short-handed. This is where furling sails come into play, and these vary from the more specialized types of https:// spinnakers to combined products such as the blue water runner-type of sails.\nExpense.\nPurchasing and maintaining a yacht can be costly. Most cruising sailors do not own a house and consider their boat their home during the duration of their cruise. Many cruisers find they spend, on average, 4% of their boat's purchase price annually on boat maintenance.\nLike living a conventional life on land, the cost of cruising is variable. How much a person ends up spending depends largely on their spending habits (for example, eating out a lot and frequenting marinas vs. preparing local foods aboard and anchoring out) and the type of boat (fancy modern production boats are very expensive to purchase and maintain, while low-key cruising boats often involve much lower expenses). Most long-term cruisers prefer to live a simple life, usually with far lower expenses than people who live ashore.\nAn alternative solution is to sail on someone else's yacht. Those who know how to sail can sometimes find boats looking for an extra crewmember for a long trip, while some non-sailors are also able to find boats willing to carry a hitch-hiker. Crew-finding websites exist to help match-up people looking for a crossing with yachts with a berth available or looking for a temporary crewmember, Find a Crew for example. Another common tactic for finding a yacht is to visit local yacht clubs and marinas and get to know the sailors there, in the hope that one of them will be able to provide a berth.\nSafety.\nTravel by water brings hazards: collision, weather, and equipment failure can lead to dangerous situations such as a sinking or severely disabled and dangerous vessel. For this reason many long-distance cruising yachts carry with them emergency equipment such as SARTs, EPIRBs and liferafts or proactive lifeboats. Medical emergencies are also of concern, as a medical emergency can occur on a long passage when the closest port is over a week away. For this reason before going cruising many people go through first aid training and carry medical kits. In some parts of the world (e.g., near the Horn of Africa) piracy can be a problem.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "7807", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7807", "title": "Cavitation", "text": "Low-pressure voids formed in liquids\nCavitation in fluid mechanics and engineering normally is the phenomenon in which the static pressure of a liquid reduces to below the liquid's vapor pressure, leading to the formation of small vapor-filled cavities in the liquid. When subjected to higher pressure, these cavities, called \"bubbles\" or \"voids\", collapse and can generate shock waves that may damage machinery. As a concrete propeller example: The pressure on the suction side of the propeller blades can be very low and when the pressure falls to that of the vapour pressure of the working liquid, cavities filled with gas vapour can form. The process of the formation of these cavities is referred to as cavitation. If the cavities move into the regions of higher pressure (lower velocity), they will implode or collapse. These shock waves are strong when they are very close to the imploded bubble, but rapidly weaken as they propagate away from the implosion. Cavitation collapse is therefore a significant cause of wear in some engineering contexts. Collapsing voids that implode near to a hard surface cause cyclic stress through repeated implosion. This results in surface fatigue of the material, causing a type of damage also called \"cavitation damage\" or\"cavitation erosion\". The most common examples of this kind of wear are to pump impellers, and pipe bends where a sudden change in the direction of fast moving liquid occurs. \nCavitation is usually divided into two classes of behavior. \"Inertial (or transient) cavitation\" is the process in which a void or bubble in a liquid rapidly collapses, producing a shock wave. It occurs in nature in the strikes of mantis shrimp and pistol shrimp, as well as in the vascular tissues of plants. In manufactured objects, it can occur in control valves, pumps, propellers and impellers.\n\"Non-inertial cavitation\" is the process in which a bubble in a fluid is forced to oscillate in size or shape due to some form of energy input, such as an acoustic field. The gas in the bubble may contain a portion of a different gas than the vapor phase of the liquid. Such cavitation is often employed in ultrasonic cleaning baths and can also be observed in pumps, propellers, etc.\nSince the shock waves formed by collapse of the voids are strong enough to cause significant damage to parts, cavitation is typically an undesirable phenomenon in machinery. It may be desirable if intentionally used, for example, to sterilize contaminated surgical instruments, break down pollutants in water purification systems, emulsify tissue for cataract surgery or kidney stone lithotripsy, or homogenize fluids. It is very often specifically prevented in the design of machines such as turbines or propellers, and eliminating cavitation is a major field in the study of fluid dynamics. However, it is sometimes useful and does not cause damage when the bubbles collapse away from machinery surfaces, such as in supercavitation.\nPhysics.\nInertial cavitation.\nInertial cavitation was first observed in the late 19th century, considering the collapse of a spherical void within a liquid. When a volume of liquid is subjected to a sufficiently low pressure, it may rupture and form a cavity. This phenomenon is coined \"cavitation inception\" and may occur behind the blade of a rapidly rotating propeller or on any surface vibrating in the liquid with sufficient amplitude and acceleration. A fast-flowing river can cause cavitation on rock surfaces, particularly when there is a drop-off, such as on a waterfall.\nVapor gases evaporate into the cavity from the surrounding medium; thus, the cavity is not a vacuum at all, but rather a low-pressure vapor (gas) bubble. Once the conditions which caused the bubble to form are no longer present, such as when the bubble moves downstream, the surrounding liquid begins to implode due its higher pressure, building up momentum as it moves inward. As the bubble finally collapses, the inward momentum of the surrounding liquid causes a sharp increase of pressure and temperature of the vapor within. The bubble eventually collapses to a minute fraction of its original size, at which point the gas within dissipates into the surrounding liquid via a rather violent mechanism which releases a significant amount of energy in the form of an acoustic shock wave and as visible light. At the point of total collapse, the temperature of the vapor within the bubble may be several thousand Kelvin, and the pressure several hundred atmospheres.\nThe physical process of cavitation inception is similar to boiling. The major difference between the two is the thermodynamic paths that precede the formation of the vapor. Boiling occurs when the local temperature of the liquid reaches the saturation temperature, and further heat is supplied to allow the liquid to sufficiently phase change into a gas. Cavitation inception occurs when the local pressure falls sufficiently far below the saturated vapor pressure, a value given by the tensile strength of the liquid at a certain temperature.\nIn order for cavitation inception to occur, the cavitation \"bubbles\" generally need a surface on which they can nucleate. This surface can be provided by the sides of a container, by impurities in the liquid, or by small undissolved microbubbles within the liquid. It is generally accepted that hydrophobic surfaces stabilize small bubbles. These pre-existing bubbles start to grow unbounded when they are exposed to a pressure below the threshold pressure, termed Blake's threshold. The presence of an incompressible core inside a cavitation nucleus substantially lowers the cavitation threshold below the Blake threshold.\nThe vapor pressure here differs from the meteorological definition of vapor pressure, which describes the partial pressure of water in the atmosphere at some value less than 100% saturation. Vapor pressure as relating to cavitation refers to the vapor pressure in equilibrium conditions and can therefore be more accurately defined as the equilibrium (or saturated) vapor pressure.\nNon-inertial cavitation is the process in which small bubbles in a liquid are forced to oscillate in the presence of an acoustic field, when the intensity of the acoustic field is insufficient to cause total bubble collapse. This form of cavitation causes significantly less erosion than inertial cavitation, and is often used for the cleaning of delicate materials, such as silicon wafers.\nOther ways of generating cavitation voids involve the local deposition of energy, such as an intense focused laser pulse (optic cavitation) or with an electrical discharge through a spark. These techniques have been used to study the evolution of the bubble that is actually created by locally boiling the liquid with a local increment of temperature.\nHydrodynamic cavitation.\nHydrodynamic cavitation is the process of vaporisation, bubble generation and bubble implosion which occurs in a flowing liquid as a result of a decrease and subsequent increase in local pressure. Cavitation will only occur if the local pressure declines to some point below the saturated vapor pressure of the liquid and subsequent recovery above the vapor pressure. If the recovery pressure is not above the vapor pressure then flashing is said to have occurred. In pipe systems, cavitation typically occurs either as the result of an increase in the kinetic energy (through an area constriction) or an increase in the pipe elevation.\nHydrodynamic cavitation can be produced by passing a liquid through a constricted channel at a specific flow velocity or by mechanical rotation of an object through a liquid. In the case of the constricted channel and based on the specific (or unique) geometry of the system, the combination of pressure and kinetic energy can create the hydrodynamic cavitation cavern downstream of the local constriction generating high energy cavitation bubbles.\nBased on the thermodynamic phase change diagram, an increase in temperature could initiate a known phase change mechanism known as boiling. However, a decrease in static pressure could also help one pass the multi-phase diagram and initiate another phase change mechanism known as cavitation. On the other hand, a local increase in flow velocity could lead to a static pressure drop to the critical point at which cavitation could be initiated (based on Bernoulli's principle). The critical pressure point is vapor saturated pressure. In a closed fluidic system where no flow leakage is detected, a decrease in cross-sectional area would lead to velocity increment and hence static pressure drop. This is the working principle of many hydrodynamic cavitation based reactors for different applications such as water treatment, energy harvesting, heat transfer enhancement, food processing, etc.\nThere are different flow patterns detected as a cavitation flow progresses: inception, developed flow, supercavitation, and choked flow. Inception is the first moment that the second phase (gas phase) appears in the system. This is the weakest cavitating flow captured in a system corresponding to the highest cavitation number. When the cavities grow and becomes larger in size in the orifice or venturi structures, developed flow is recorded. The most intense cavitating flow is known as supercavitation where theoretically all the nozzle area of an orifice is filled with gas bubbles. This flow regime corresponds to the lowest cavitation number in a system. After supercavitation, the system is not capable of passing more flow. Hence, velocity does not change while the upstream pressure increase. This would lead to an increase in cavitation number which shows that choked flow occurred.\nThe process of bubble generation, and the subsequent growth and collapse of the cavitation bubbles, results in very high energy densities and in very high local temperatures and local pressures at the surface of the bubbles for a very short time. The overall liquid medium environment, therefore, remains at ambient conditions. When uncontrolled, cavitation is damaging; by controlling the flow of the cavitation, however, the power can be harnessed and non-destructive. Controlled cavitation can be used to enhance chemical reactions or propagate certain unexpected reactions because free radicals are generated in the process due to disassociation of vapors trapped in the cavitating bubbles.\nOrifices and venturi are reported to be widely used for generating cavitation. A venturi has an inherent advantage over an orifice because of its smooth converging and diverging sections, such that it can generate a higher flow velocity at the throat for a given pressure drop across it. On the other hand, an orifice has an advantage that it can accommodate a greater number of holes (larger perimeter of holes) in a given cross sectional area of the pipe.\nThe cavitation phenomenon can be controlled to enhance the performance of high-speed marine vessels and projectiles, as well as in material processing technologies, in medicine, etc. Controlling the cavitating flows in liquids can be achieved only by advancing the mathematical foundation of the cavitation processes. These processes are manifested in different ways, the most common ones and promising for control being bubble cavitation and supercavitation. The first exact classical solution should perhaps be credited to the well-known solution by Hermann von Helmholtz in 1868. The earliest distinguished studies of academic type on the theory of a cavitating flow with free boundaries and supercavitation were published in the book \"Jets, wakes and cavities\" followed by \"Theory of jets of ideal fluid\". Widely used in these books was the well-developed theory of conformal mappings of functions of a complex variable, allowing one to derive a large number of exact solutions of plane problems. Another venue combining the existing exact solutions with approximated and heuristic models was explored in the work \"Hydrodynamics of Flows with Free Boundaries\" that refined the applied calculation techniques based on the principle of cavity expansion independence, theory of pulsations and stability of elongated axisymmetric cavities, etc. and in \"Dimensionality and similarity methods in the problems of the hydromechanics of vessels\".\nA natural continuation of these studies was recently presented in \"The Hydrodynamics of Cavitating Flows\" \u2013 an encyclopedic work encompassing all the best advances in this domain for the last three decades, and blending the classical methods of mathematical research with the modern capabilities of computer technologies. These include elaboration of nonlinear numerical methods of solving 3D cavitation problems, refinement of the known plane linear theories, development of asymptotic theories of axisymmetric and nearly axisymmetric flows, etc. As compared to the classical approaches, the new trend is characterized by expansion of the theory into the 3D flows. It also reflects a certain correlation with current works of an applied character on the hydrodynamics of supercavitating bodies.\nHydrodynamic cavitation can also improve some industrial processes. For instance, cavitated corn slurry shows higher yields in ethanol production compared to uncavitated corn slurry in dry milling facilities.\nThis is also used in the mineralization of bio-refractory compounds which otherwise would need extremely high temperature and pressure conditions since free radicals are generated in the process due to the dissociation of vapors trapped in the cavitating bubbles, which results in either the intensification of the chemical reaction or may even result in the propagation of certain reactions not possible under otherwise ambient conditions.\nAcoustic cavitation and ultrasonic cavitation.\nInertial cavitation can also occur in the presence of an acoustic field. Microscopic gas bubbles that are generally present in a liquid will be forced to oscillate due to an applied acoustic field. If the acoustic intensity is sufficiently high, the bubbles will first grow in size and then rapidly collapse. Hence, inertial cavitation can occur even if the rarefaction in the liquid is insufficient for a Rayleigh-like void to occur.\nUltrasonic cavitation inception will occur when the acceleration of the ultrasound source is enough to produce the needed pressure drop. This pressure drop depends on the value of the acceleration and the size of the affected volume by the pressure wave. The dimensionless number that predicts ultrasonic cavitation is the Garcia-Atance number. High power ultrasonic horns produce accelerations high enough to create a cavitating region that can be used for homogenization, dispersion, deagglomeration, erosion, cleaning, milling, emulsification, extraction, disintegration, and sonochemistry.\nApplications.\nWater transport.\nIn supercavitation, cavitation is intentionally induced around high-speed submerged objects to reduce skin drag. \nChemical engineering.\nIn industry, cavitation is often used to homogenize, or mix and break down, suspended particles in a colloidal liquid compound such as paint mixtures or milk. Many industrial mixing machines are based upon this design principle. It is usually achieved through impeller design or by forcing the mixture through an annular opening that has a narrow entrance orifice with a much larger exit orifice. In the latter case, the drastic decrease in pressure as the liquid accelerates into a larger volume induces cavitation. This method can be controlled with hydraulic devices that control inlet orifice size, allowing for dynamic adjustment during the process, or modification for different substances. The surface of this type of mixing valve, against which surface the cavitation bubbles are driven causing their implosion, undergoes tremendous mechanical and thermal localized stress; they are therefore often constructed of extremely strong and hard materials such as stainless steel, Stellite, or even polycrystalline diamond (PCD).\nCavitating water purification devices have also been designed, in which the extreme conditions of cavitation can break down pollutants and organic molecules. Spectral analysis of light emitted in sonochemical reactions reveal chemical and plasma-based mechanisms of energy transfer. The light emitted from cavitation bubbles is termed sonoluminescence.\nUse of this technology has been tried successfully in alkali refining of vegetable oils.\nHydrophobic chemicals are attracted underwater by cavitation as the pressure difference between the bubbles and the liquid water forces them to join. This effect may assist in protein folding.\nBiomedical.\nCavitation plays an important role for the destruction of kidney stones in shock wave lithotripsy. Currently, tests are being conducted as to whether cavitation can be used to transfer large molecules into biological cells (sonoporation). Nitrogen cavitation is a method used in research to lyse cell membranes while leaving organelles intact.\nCavitation plays a key role in non-thermal, non-invasive fractionation of tissue for treatment of a variety of diseases and can be used to open the blood-brain barrier to increase uptake of neurological drugs in the brain.\nCavitation also plays a role in HIFU, a thermal non-invasive treatment methodology for cancer.\nIn wounds caused by high velocity impacts (like for example bullet wounds) there are also effects due to cavitation. The exact wounding mechanisms are not completely understood yet as there is temporary cavitation, and permanent cavitation together with crushing, tearing and stretching. Also the high variance in density within the body makes it hard to determine its effects.\nUltrasound sometimes is used to increase bone formation, for instance in post-surgical applications.\nIt has been suggested that the sound of \"cracking\" knuckles derives from the collapse of cavitation in the synovial fluid within the joint.\nCavitation can also form Ozone micro-nanobubbles which shows promise in dental applications.\nCleaning.\nIn industrial cleaning applications, cavitation has sufficient power to overcome the particle-to-substrate adhesion forces, loosening contaminants. The threshold pressure required to initiate cavitation is a strong function of the pulse width and the power input. This method works by generating acoustic cavitation in the cleaning fluid, picking up and carrying contaminant particles away in the hope that they do not reattach to the material being cleaned (which is a possibility when the object is immersed, for example in an ultrasonic cleaning bath). The same physical forces that remove contaminants also have the potential to damage the target being cleaned.\nFood and beverage.\nEggs.\nCavitation has been applied to egg pasteurization. A hole-filled rotor produces cavitation bubbles, heating the liquid from within. Equipment surfaces stay cooler than the passing liquid, so eggs do not harden as they did on the hot surfaces of older equipment. The intensity of cavitation can be adjusted, making it possible to tune the process for minimum protein damage.\nVegetable oil production.\nCavitation has been applied to vegetable oil degumming and refining since 2011 and is considered a proven and standard technology in this application. The implementation of hydrodynamic cavitation in the degumming and refining process allows for a significant reduction in process aid, such as chemicals, water and bleaching clay, use.\nBiofuels.\nBiodiesel.\nCavitation has been applied to Biodiesel production since 2011 and is considered a proven and standard technology in this application. The implementation of hydrodynamic cavitation in the transesterification process allows for a significant reduction in catalyst use, quality improvement and production capacity increase.\nCavitation damage.\nCavitation is usually an undesirable occurrence. In devices such as propellers and pumps, cavitation causes a great deal of noise, damage to components, vibrations, and a loss of efficiency. Noise caused by cavitation can be particularly undesirable in naval vessels where such noise may render them more easily detectable by passive sonar. Cavitation has also become a concern in the renewable energy sector as it may occur on the blade surface of tidal stream turbines.\nWhen the cavitation bubbles collapse, they force energetic liquid into very small volumes, thereby creating spots of high temperature and emitting shock waves, the latter of which are a source of noise. The noise created by cavitation is a particular problem for military submarines, as it increases the chances of being detected by passive sonar.\nAlthough the collapse of a small cavity is a relatively low-energy event, highly localized collapses can erode metals, such as steel, over time. The pitting caused by the collapse of cavities produces great wear on components and can dramatically shorten a propeller's or pump's lifetime.\nAfter a surface is initially affected by cavitation, it tends to erode at an accelerating pace. The cavitation pits increase the turbulence of the fluid flow and create crevices that act as nucleation sites for additional cavitation bubbles. The pits also increase the components' surface area and leave behind residual stresses. This makes the surface more prone to stress corrosion.\nPumps and propellers.\nMajor places where cavitation occurs are in pumps, on propellers, or at restrictions in a flowing liquid.\nAs an impeller's (in a pump) or propeller's (as in the case of a ship or submarine) blades move through a fluid, low-pressure areas are formed as the fluid accelerates around and moves past the blades. The faster the blade moves, the lower the pressure can become around it. As it reaches vapor pressure, the fluid vaporizes and forms small bubbles of gas. This is cavitation. When the bubbles collapse later, they typically cause very strong local shock waves in the fluid, which may be audible and may even damage the blades.\nCavitation in pumps may occur in two different forms: suction cavitation and discharge cavitation.\nSuction cavitation.\nSuction cavitation occurs when the pump suction is under a low-pressure/high-vacuum condition where the liquid turns into a vapor at the eye of the pump impeller. This vapor is carried over to the discharge side of the pump, where it no longer sees vacuum and is compressed back into a liquid by the discharge pressure. This imploding action occurs violently and attacks the face of the impeller. An impeller that has been operating under a suction cavitation condition can have large chunks of material removed from its face or very small bits of material removed, causing the impeller to look spongelike. Both cases will cause premature failure of the pump, often due to bearing failure. Suction cavitation is often identified by a sound like gravel or marbles in the pump casing.\nCommon causes of suction cavitation can include clogged filters, pipe blockage on the suction side, poor piping design, pump running too far right on the pump curve, or conditions not meeting NPSH (net positive suction head) requirements.\nIn automotive applications, a clogged filter in a hydraulic system (power steering, power brakes) can cause suction cavitation making a noise that rises and falls in synch with engine RPM. It is fairly often a high pitched whine, like set of nylon gears not quite meshing correctly.\nDischarge cavitation.\nDischarge cavitation occurs when the pump discharge pressure is extremely high, normally occurring in a pump that is running at less than 10% of its best efficiency point. The high discharge pressure causes the majority of the fluid to circulate inside the pump instead of being allowed to flow out the discharge. As the liquid flows around the impeller, it must pass through the small clearance between the impeller and the pump housing at extremely high flow velocity. This flow velocity causes a vacuum to develop at the housing wall (similar to what occurs in a venturi), which turns the liquid into a vapor. A pump that has been operating under these conditions shows premature wear of the impeller vane tips and the pump housing. In addition, due to the high pressure conditions, premature failure of the pump's mechanical seal and bearings can be expected. Under extreme conditions, this can break the impeller shaft.\nDischarge cavitation in joint fluid is thought to cause the popping sound produced by bone joint cracking, for example by deliberately cracking one's knuckles.\nCavitation solutions.\nSince all pumps require well-developed inlet flow to meet their potential, a pump may not perform or be as reliable as expected due to a faulty suction piping layout such as a close-coupled elbow on the inlet flange. When poorly developed flow enters the pump impeller, it strikes the vanes and is unable to follow the impeller passage. The liquid then separates from the vanes causing mechanical problems due to cavitation, vibration and performance problems due to turbulence and poor filling of the impeller. This results in premature seal, bearing and impeller failure, high maintenance costs, high power consumption, and less-than-specified head and/or flow.\nTo have a well-developed flow pattern, pump manufacturer's manuals recommend about (10 diameters?) of straight pipe run upstream of the pump inlet flange. Unfortunately, piping designers and plant personnel must contend with space and equipment layout constraints and usually cannot comply with this recommendation. Instead, it is common to use an elbow close-coupled to the pump suction which creates a poorly developed flow pattern at the pump suction.\nWith a double-suction pump tied to a close-coupled elbow, flow distribution to the impeller is poor and causes reliability and performance shortfalls. The elbow divides the flow unevenly with more channeled to the outside of the elbow. Consequently, one side of the double-suction impeller receives more flow at a higher flow velocity and pressure while the starved side receives a highly turbulent and potentially damaging flow. This degrades overall pump performance (delivered head, flow and power consumption) and causes axial imbalance which shortens seal, bearing and impeller life.\nTo overcome cavitation:\nIncrease suction pressure if possible.\nDecrease liquid temperature if possible.\nThrottle back on the discharge valve to decrease flow-rate.\nVent gases off the pump casing.\nControl valves.\nCavitation can occur in control valves. If the actual pressure drop across the valve as defined by the upstream and downstream pressures in the system is greater than the sizing calculations allow, pressure drop flashing or cavitation may occur. The change from a liquid state to a vapor state results from the increase in flow velocity at or just downstream of the greatest flow restriction which is normally the valve port. To maintain a steady flow of liquid through a valve the flow velocity must be greatest at the vena contracta or the point where the cross sectional area is the smallest. This increase in flow velocity is accompanied by a substantial decrease in the fluid pressure which is partially recovered downstream as the area increases and flow velocity decreases. This pressure recovery is never completely to the level of the upstream pressure. If the pressure at the vena contracta drops below the vapor pressure of the fluid bubbles will form in the flow stream. If the pressure recovers after the valve to a pressure that is once again above the vapor pressure, then the vapor bubbles will collapse and cavitation will occur.\nSpillways.\nWhen water flows over a dam spillway, the irregularities on the spillway surface will cause small areas of flow separation in a high-speed flow, and, in these regions, the pressure will be lowered. If the flow velocities are high enough the pressure may fall to below the local vapor pressure of the water and vapor bubbles will form. When these are carried downstream into a high pressure region the bubbles collapse giving rise to high pressures and possible cavitation damage.\nExperimental investigations show that the damage on concrete chute and tunnel spillways can start at clear water flow velocities of between , and, up to flow velocities of , it may be possible to protect the surface by streamlining the boundaries, improving the surface finishes or using resistant materials.\nWhen some air is present in the water the resulting mixture is compressible and this damps the high pressure caused by the bubble collapses. If the flow velocities near the spillway invert are sufficiently high, aerators (or aeration devices) must be introduced to prevent cavitation. Although these have been installed for some years, the mechanisms of air entrainment at the aerators and the slow movement of the air away from the spillway surface are still challenging.\nThe spillway aeration device design is based upon a small deflection of the spillway bed (or sidewall) such as a ramp and offset to deflect the high flow velocity flow away from the spillway surface. In the cavity formed below the nappe, a local subpressure beneath the nappe is produced by which air is sucked into the flow. The complete design includes the deflection device (ramp, offset) and the air supply system.\nEngines.\nSome larger diesel engines suffer from cavitation due to high compression and undersized cylinder walls. Vibrations of the cylinder wall induce alternating low and high pressure in the coolant against the cylinder wall. The result is pitting of the cylinder wall, which will eventually let cooling fluid leak into the cylinder and combustion gases to leak into the coolant.\nIt is possible to prevent this from happening with the use of chemical additives in the cooling fluid that form a protective layer on the cylinder wall. This layer will be exposed to the same cavitation, but rebuilds itself. Additionally a regulated overpressure in the cooling system (regulated and maintained by the coolant filler cap spring pressure) prevents the forming of cavitation.\nFrom about the 1980s, new designs of smaller gasoline engines also displayed cavitation phenomena. One answer to the need for smaller and lighter engines was a smaller coolant volume and a correspondingly higher coolant flow velocity. This gave rise to rapid changes in flow velocity and therefore rapid changes of static pressure in areas of high heat transfer. Where resulting vapor bubbles collapsed against a surface, they had the effect of first disrupting protective oxide layers (of cast aluminium materials) and then repeatedly damaging the newly formed surface, preventing the action of some types of corrosion inhibitor (such as silicate based inhibitors). A final problem was the effect that increased material temperature had on the relative electrochemical reactivity of the base metal and its alloying constituents. The result was deep pits that could form and penetrate the engine head in a matter of hours when the engine was running at high load and high speed. These effects could largely be avoided by the use of organic corrosion inhibitors or (preferably) by designing the engine head in such a way as to avoid certain cavitation inducing conditions.\nIn nature.\nGeology.\nSome hypotheses relating to diamond formation posit a possible role for cavitation\u2014namely cavitation in the kimberlite pipes providing the extreme pressure needed to change pure carbon into the rare allotrope that is diamond. The loudest three sounds ever recorded, during the 1883 eruption of Krakatoa, are now understood as the bursts of three huge cavitation bubbles, each larger than the last, formed in the volcano's throat. Rising magma, filled with dissolved gasses and under immense pressure, encountered a different magma that compressed easily, allowing bubbles to grow and combine.\nVascular plants.\nCavitation can occur in the xylem of vascular plants. The sap vaporizes locally so that either the vessel elements or tracheids are filled with water vapor. Plants are able to repair cavitated xylem in a number of ways. For plants less than 50\u00a0cm tall, root pressure can be sufficient to redissolve the vapor. Larger plants direct solutes into the xylem via \"ray cells\", or in tracheids, via osmosis through bordered pits. Solutes attract water, the pressure rises and vapor can redissolve. In some trees, the sound of the cavitation is audible, particularly in summer, when the rate of evapotranspiration is highest. Some deciduous trees have to shed leaves in the autumn partly because cavitation increases as temperatures decrease.\nSpore dispersal in plants.\nCavitation plays a role in the spore dispersal mechanisms of certain plants. In ferns, for example, the fern sporangium acts as a catapult that launches spores into the air. The charging phase of the catapult is driven by water evaporation from the annulus cells, which triggers a pressure decrease. When the compressive pressure reaches approximately 9MPa, cavitation occurs. This rapid event triggers spore dispersal due to the elastic energy released by the annulus structure. The initial spore acceleration is extremely large \u2013 up to 105 times the gravitational acceleration.\nMarine life.\nJust as cavitation bubbles form on a fast-spinning boat propeller, they may also form on the tails and fins of aquatic animals. This primarily occurs near the surface of the ocean, where the ambient water pressure is low.\nCavitation may limit the maximum swimming speed of powerful swimming animals like dolphins and tuna. Dolphins may have to restrict their speed because collapsing cavitation bubbles on their tail are painful. Tuna have bony fins without nerve endings and do not feel pain from cavitation. They are slowed down when cavitation bubbles create a vapor film around their fins. Lesions have been found on tuna that are consistent with cavitation damage.\nSome sea animals have found ways to use cavitation to their advantage when hunting prey. The pistol shrimp snaps a specialized claw to create cavitation, which can kill small fish. The mantis shrimp (of the \"smasher\" variety) uses cavitation as well in order to stun, smash open, or kill the shellfish that it feasts upon.\nThresher sharks use 'tail slaps' to debilitate their small fish prey and cavitation bubbles have been seen rising from the apex of the tail arc.\nCoastal erosion.\nIn the last half-decade, coastal erosion in the form of inertial cavitation has been generally accepted. Bubbles in an incoming wave are forced into cracks in the cliff being eroded. Varying pressure decompresses some vapor pockets which subsequently implode. The resulting pressure peaks can blast apart fractions of the rock.\nHistory.\nAs early as 1754, the Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler (1707\u20131783) speculated about the possibility of cavitation. In 1859, the English mathematician William Henry Besant (1828\u20131917) published a solution to the problem of the dynamics of the collapse of a spherical cavity in a fluid, which had been presented by the Anglo-Irish mathematician George Stokes (1819\u20131903) as one of the Cambridge University Senate-house problems and riders for the year 1847. In 1894, Irish fluid dynamicist Osborne Reynolds (1842\u20131912) studied the formation and collapse of vapor bubbles in boiling liquids and in constricted tubes.\nThe term \"cavitation\" first appeared in 1895 in a paper by John Isaac Thornycroft (1843\u20131928) and Sydney Walker Barnaby (1855\u20131925)\u2014son of Sir Nathaniel Barnaby (1829 \u2013 1915), who had been Chief Constructor of the Royal Navy\u2014to whom it had been suggested by the British engineer Robert Edmund Froude (1846\u20131924), third son of the English hydrodynamicist William Froude (1810\u20131879). Early experimental studies of cavitation were conducted in 1894\u20135 by Thornycroft and Barnaby and by the Anglo-Irish engineer Charles Algernon Parsons (1854\u20131931), who constructed a stroboscopic apparatus to study the phenomenon. Thornycroft and Barnaby were the first researchers to observe cavitation on the back sides of propeller blades.\nIn 1917, the British physicist Lord Rayleigh (1842\u20131919) extended Besant's work, publishing a mathematical model of cavitation in an incompressible fluid (ignoring surface tension and viscosity), in which he also determined the pressure in the fluid. The mathematical models of cavitation which were developed by British engineer Stanley Smith Cook (1875\u20131952) and by Lord Rayleigh revealed that collapsing bubbles of vapor could generate very high pressures, which were capable of causing the damage that had been observed on ships' propellers. Experimental evidence of cavitation causing such high pressures was initially collected in 1952 by Mark Harrison (a fluid dynamicist and acoustician at the U.S. Navy's David Taylor Model Basin at Carderock, Maryland, USA) who used acoustic methods and in 1956 by Wernfried G\u00fcth (a physicist and acoustician of G\u00f6ttigen University, Germany) who used optical Schlieren photography.\nIn 1944, Soviet scientists Mark Iosifovich Kornfeld (1908\u20131993) and L. Suvorov of the Leningrad Physico-Technical Institute (now: the Ioffe Physical-Technical Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg, Russia) proposed that during cavitation, bubbles in the vicinity of a solid surface do not collapse symmetrically; instead, a dimple forms on the bubble at a point opposite the solid surface and this dimple evolves into a jet of liquid. This jet of liquid damages the solid surface. This hypothesis was supported in 1951 by theoretical studies by Maurice Rattray Jr., a doctoral student at the California Institute of Technology. Kornfeld and Suvorov's hypothesis was confirmed experimentally in 1961 by Charles F. Naud\u00e9 and Albert T. Ellis, fluid dynamicists at the California Institute of Technology.\nA series of experimental investigations of the propagation of strong shock wave (SW) in a liquid with gas bubbles, which made it possible to establish the basic laws governing the process, the mechanism for the transformation of the energy of the SW, attenuation of the SW, and the formation of the structure, and experiments on the analysis of the attenuation of waves in bubble screens with different acoustic properties were begun by pioneer works of Soviet scientist prof.V.F. Minin at the Institute of Hydrodynamics (Novosibirsk, Russia) in 1957\u20131960, who examined also the first convenient model of a screen - a sequence of alternating flat one-dimensional liquid and gas layers. In an experimental investigations of the dynamics of the form of pulsating gaseous cavities and interaction of SW with bubble clouds in 1957\u20131960 V.F. Minin discovered that under the action of SW a bubble collapses asymmetrically with the formation of a cumulative jet, which forms in the process of collapse and causes fragmentation of the bubble.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7808", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7808", "title": "Cyprinodontiformes", "text": "Order of fishes\nCyprinodontiformes is an order of ray-finned fish, comprising mostly small, freshwater fish. Many popular aquarium fish, such as killifish and live-bearers, are included. They are closely related to the Atheriniformes and are occasionally included with them. A colloquial term for the order as a whole is toothcarps, though they are not actually close relatives of the true carps \u2013 the latter belong to the superorder Ostariophysi, while the toothcarps are Acanthopterygii.\nThe families of Cyprinodontiformes can be informally divided into three groups based on reproductive strategy: viviparous and ovoviviparous (all species give live birth), and oviparous (all species are egg-laying). The live-bearing groups differ in whether the young are carried to term within (ovoviviparous) or without (viviparous) an enclosing eggshell. Phylogenetically however, one of the two suborders \u2013 the Aplocheiloidei \u2013 contains oviparous species exclusively, as do two of the four superfamilies of the other suborder (the Cyprinodontoidea and Valencioidea of the Cyprinodontoidei). Vivipary and ovovivipary have evolved independently from oviparous ancestors, the latter possibly twice.\nThe oldest fossil record of the group is the extinct ?\"Cyprinodon primulus\", a \"nomen vanum\" known from isolated fossil scales from the Late Paleocene of Argentina. Its exact taxonomic identity is uncertain, although it is generally considered to at least be a true cyprinodontiform.\nDescription.\nSome members of this order are notable for inhabiting extreme environments, such as saline or very warm waters, heavily polluted waters, rain water pools devoid of minerals and made acidic by decaying vegetation, or isolated situations where no other types of fish occur.\nThey are typically carnivores, and often live near the surface, where the oxygen-rich water compensates for environmental disadvantages. Scheel (1968) observed the gut contents were invariably ants, others have reported insects, worms and aquatic crustaceans. Aquarium specimens are invariably seen eating protozoans from the water column and the surfaces of leaves, however these are not apparent as stomach contents. Many members of the family Cyprinodontidae (the pupfishes) eat plant material as well and some have adapted to a diet very high in algae to the point where one, the Flagfish also known as American flagfish, is a renowned algae eater in the aquarium, in spite of belonging to an order of fishes that do not generally consume any plant material. In addition, killifish derive some of the carotenoids and other chemicals required to make their body pigments from pollen grains on the surface of and in the gut of insects they eat from the surface of the water; this can be simulated in culture by the use of special color enhancing foods that contain these compounds.\nAlthough the Cyprinodontiformes are a diverse group, most species contained within are small to medium-sized fish, with small mouths, large eyes, a single dorsal fin, and a rounded caudal fin. The largest species is the \"cuatro ojos\" (\"Anableps dowei\"), which measures in length, while the smallest, the least killifish (\"Heterandria formosa\"), is just long as an adult.\nSystematics.\nBased on \"Eschmeyer's Catalog of Fishes\" (2025):\nCYPRINODONTIFORMES\nThe family Aplocheilidae has been expanded by some authorities to include all the killifishes with three subfamilies, Aplocheilinae, Cynolebiinae and Nothobranchiinae, but this is not the classification adopted in the 5th Edition of \"Fishes of the World\".\nPhylogeny.\nBased on:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "7810", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7810", "title": "Church of the Holy Sepulchre", "text": "Church in Jerusalem\nThe Church of the Holy Sepulchre, also known as the Church of the Resurrection, is a fourth-century church in the Christian Quarter of the Old City of Jerusalem. The church is simultaneously the seat of the Armenian Patriarchate of Jerusalem, Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Jerusalem, and the Catholic Latin Patriarchate of Jerusalem. It is the holiest site in Christianity and it has been an important pilgrimage site for Christians since the fourth century.\nAccording to traditions dating to the fourth century, the church contains both the site where Jesus was crucified at Calvary, or Golgotha, and the location of Jesus's empty tomb, where he was buried and, resurrected. Both locations are considered immensely holy sites by most Christians. The church and rotunda was built under Constantine the Great in the 4th century and destroyed by al-Hakim in 1009. Al-Hakim's son allowed Emperor Constantine IX Monomachos to reconstruct the church, which was completed in 1048. After it was captured by the crusaders in 1099, it continued to undergo modifications, resulting in a significant departure from the original structure. Several renovations and restorations were made under the Ottomans. The tomb itself is enclosed by a 19th-century shrine called the Aedicule.\nWithin the church proper are the last four stations of the Cross of the Via Dolorosa, representing the final episodes of the Passion of Jesus. The church has been a major Christian pilgrimage destination since its creation in the fourth century, as the traditional site of the resurrection of Christ, thus its original Greek name, Church of the Anastasis ('Resurrection').\nThe Status Quo, an understanding between religious communities dating to 1757, applies to the site. Control of the church itself is shared among several Christian denominations and secular entities in complicated arrangements essentially unchanged for over 160 years, and some for much longer. The main denominations sharing property over parts of the church are the Catholic, Greek Orthodox, Armenian Apostolic, Coptic, Syriac, and Ethiopian Orthodox churches. Directly adjacent to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre is the Church of the Redeemer, marking a Lutheran presence at the site.\nName.\nThe Church of the Holy Sepulchre is also known as the Basilica of the Holy Sepulchre or simply as the Holy Sepulchre, named for the tomb of Jesus, which is at the focal point of his resurrection according to Christians. Eastern Christians also directly call it the Church of the Resurrection or the Church of the Anastasis\u00a0\u2013 () being Greek for 'resurrection'.\nHistory.\nBackground (1st\u20134th centuries).\nAfter the siege of Jerusalem in AD 70 during the First Jewish\u2013Roman War, Jerusalem had been reduced to ruins. In AD\u00a0130, the Roman emperor Hadrian began the building of a Roman colony, the new city of , on the site. About AD\u00a0135, he ordered that a cave containing a rock-cut tomb be filled in to make a flat foundation for a temple dedicated to Jupiter or Venus. The temple remained until the early fourth century.\nConstantine and Macarius: context for the first sanctuary.\nAfter seeing a vision of a cross in the sky in 312, Constantine the Great began to favour Christianity and signed the Edict of Milan legalizing the religion. The Bishop of Jerusalem Macarius asked Constantine for permission to dig for the tomb. With the help of Eusebius (a Bishop of Caesarea) and Macarius, three crosses were found near a tomb; one, which was said to have cured people near death, was presumed to be the True Cross, on which Jesus was crucified, leading the Romans to believe that they had found Calvary.\nAbout 326, Constantine ordered that the temple to Jupiter or Venus be replaced by a church. After the temple was torn down and its ruins removed, the soil was removed from the cave, revealing a rock-cut tomb that Macarius identified as the burial site of Jesus.\nFirst sanctuary (4th century).\nA shrine was built on the site of the tomb Macarius had identified as that of Jesus, enclosing the rock tomb walls within its own.\nThe Church of the Holy Sepulchre, planned by the architect Zenobius, was built as separate constructs over two holy sites:\nThe Church of the Holy Sepulchre site has been recognized since early in the fourth century as the place where Jesus was crucified, buried, and rose from the dead. The church was consecrated on 13 September 335.\nIn 327, Constantine and Helena separately commissioned the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem to commemorate the birth of Jesus.\nDamage and destruction (614\u20131009).\nThe Constantinian sanctuary in Jerusalem was destroyed by a fire in May of 614, when the Sassanid Empire, under Khosrow II, invaded Jerusalem and captured the True Cross. In 630, the Emperor Heraclius rebuilt the church after recapturing the city.\nAfter Jerusalem came under Islamic rule, it remained a Christian church, with the early Muslim rulers protecting the city's Christian sites, prohibiting their destruction or use as living quarters. A story reports that the caliph Umar ibn al-Khattab visited the church and stopped to pray on the balcony, but at the time of prayer, turned away from the church and prayed outside. He feared that future generations would misinterpret this gesture, taking it as a pretext to turn the church into a mosque. Eutychius of Alexandria adds that Umar wrote a decree saying that Muslims would not inhabit this location. The building suffered severe damage from an earthquake in 746.\nEarly in the ninth century, another earthquake damaged the dome of the Anastasis. The damage was repaired in 810 by Patriarch Thomas I. In 841, the church suffered a fire. In 935, the Christians prevented the construction of a Muslim mosque adjacent to the Church. In 938, a new fire damaged the inside of the basilica and came close to the rotunda. In 966, due to a defeat of Muslim armies in the region of Syria, a riot broke out, which was followed by reprisals. The basilica was burned again. The doors and roof were burnt, and Patriarch John VII was murdered.\nOn 18 October 1009, Fatimid caliph al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah ordered the complete destruction of the church as part of a more general campaign against Christian places of worship in Palestine and Egypt. The damage was extensive, with few parts of the early church remaining, and the roof of the rock-cut tomb damaged; the original shrine was destroyed. The tomb itself was almost completely destroyed, with only portions of the northern wall containing the burial bench and the southern wall surviving. Some partial repairs followed. Christian Europe reacted with shock: it was a spur to expulsions of Jews and, later on, used as a justification for the Crusades.\nReconstruction (11th century).\nIn wide-ranging negotiations between the Fatimids and the Byzantine Empire in 1027\u20131028, an agreement was reached whereby the new Caliph Ali az-Zahir (al-Hakim's son) agreed to allow the rebuilding and redecoration of the church. The rebuilding was finally completed during the tenures of Emperor Constantine IX Monomachos and Patriarch Nicephorus of Jerusalem in 1048. As a concession, the mosque in Constantinople was reopened and the khutba sermons were to be pronounced in az-Zahir's name. Muslim sources say a by-product of the agreement was the renunciation of Islam by many Christians who had been forced to convert under al-Hakim's persecutions. In addition, the Byzantines, while releasing 5,000 Muslim prisoners, made demands for the restoration of other churches destroyed by al-Hakim and the reestablishment of a patriarch in Jerusalem. Contemporary sources credit the emperor with spending vast sums in an effort to restore the Church of the Holy Sepulchre after this agreement was made. Still, \"a total replacement was far beyond available resources. The new construction was concentrated on the rotunda and its surrounding buildings: the great basilica remained in ruins.\"\nThe rebuilt church site consisted of \"a court open to the sky, with five small chapels attached to it.\" The chapels were east of the court of resurrection (when reconstructed, the location of the tomb was under open sky), where the western wall of the great basilica had been. They commemorated scenes from the passion, such as the location of the prison of Christ and his flagellation, and presumably were so placed because of the difficulties of free movement among shrines in the city streets. The dedication of these chapels indicates the importance of the pilgrims' devotion to the suffering of Christ. They have been described as \"a sort of Via Dolorosa in miniature\" since little or no rebuilding took place on the site of the great basilica. Western pilgrims to Jerusalem during the 11th century found much of the sacred site in ruins. Control of Jerusalem, and thereby the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, continued to change hands several times between the Fatimids and the Seljuk Turks (loyal to the Abbasid caliph in Baghdad) until the Crusaders' arrival in 1099.\nCrusader period (1099\u20131244).\nBackground.\nMany historians maintain that the main concern of Pope Urban II, when calling for the First Crusade, was the threat to Constantinople from the Seljuk invasion of Asia Minor in response to the appeal of Byzantine Emperor Alexios I Komnenos. Historians agree that the fate of Jerusalem and thereby the Church of the Holy Sepulchre was also of concern, if not the immediate goal of papal policy in 1095. The idea of taking Jerusalem gained more focus as the Crusade was underway. The rebuilt church site was taken from the Fatimids (who had recently taken it from the Abbasids) by the knights of the First Crusade on 15 July 1099.\nThe First Crusade was envisioned as an armed pilgrimage, and no crusader could consider his journey complete unless he had prayed as a pilgrim at the Holy Sepulchre. The classical theory is that Crusader leader Godfrey of Bouillon, who became the first Latin ruler of Jerusalem, decided not to use the title \"king\" during his lifetime, and declared himself ('Protector [or Defender] of the Holy Sepulchre').\nAccording to the German priest and pilgrim Ludolf von Sudheim, the keys of the Chapel of the Holy Sepulchre were in hands of the \"ancient Georgians\", and the food, alms, candles and oil for lamps were given to them by the pilgrims at the south door of the church.\nCrusaders: reconstruction (12th century) and ownership.\nBy the Crusader period, a cistern under the former basilica was rumoured to have been where Helena had found the True Cross, and began to be venerated as such; the cistern later became the , but there is no evidence of the site's identification before the 11th century, and modern archaeological investigation has now dated the cistern to 11th-century repairs by Monomachos.\nWilliam of Tyre, chronicler of the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem, reports on the rebuilding of the church in the mid-12th century. The Crusaders investigated the eastern ruins on the site, occasionally excavating through the rubble, and while attempting to reach the cistern, they discovered part of the original ground level of Hadrian's temple enclosure; they transformed this space into a chapel dedicated to Helena, widening their original excavation tunnel into a proper staircase.\nThe Crusaders began to refurnish the church in Romanesque style and added a bell tower. These renovations unified the small chapels on the site and were completed during the reign of Queen Melisende in 1149, placing all the holy places under one roof for the first time.\nThe church became the seat of the first Latin patriarchs and the site of the kingdom's scriptorium.\nEight 11th- and 12th-century Crusader leaders (Godfrey, Baldwin I, Baldwin II, Fulk, Baldwin III, Amalric, Baldwin IV and Baldwin V \u2013 the first eight rulers of the Kingdom of Jerusalem) were buried in the south transept and inside the Chapel of Adam. \nThe royal tombs were looted during the Khwarizmian sack of Jerusalem in 1244 but probably remained mostly intact until 1808 when a fire damaged the church. The tombs may have been destroyed by the fire, or during renovations by the Greek Orthodox custodians of the church in 1809\u20131810. The remains of the kings may still be in unmarked pits under the church's pavement.\nThe church was lost to Saladin, along with the rest of the city, in 1187, although the treaty established after the Third Crusade allowed Christian pilgrims to visit the site. Emperor Frederick II (r. 1220\u201350) regained the city and the church by treaty in the 13th century while under a ban of excommunication, with the consequence that the holiest church in Christianity was laid under interdict. The church seems to have been largely in the hands of Greek Orthodox patriarch Athanasius II of Jerusalem (c.\u00a01231\u201347) during the last period of Latin control over Jerusalem. Both city and church were captured by the Khwarezmians in 1244.\nOttoman period.\nThere was certainly a recognisable Nestorian (Church of the East) presence at the Holy Sepulchre from the years 1348 through 1575, as contemporary Franciscan accounts indicate. The Franciscan friars renovated the church in 1555, as it had been neglected despite increased numbers of pilgrims. The Franciscans rebuilt the Aedicule, extending the structure to create an antechamber. A marble shrine commissioned by Friar Boniface of Ragusa was placed to envelop the remains of Christ's tomb, probably to prevent pilgrims from touching the original rock or taking small pieces as souvenirs. A marble slab was placed over the limestone burial bed where Jesus's body is believed to have lain.\nAfter the renovation of 1555, control of the church oscillated between the Franciscans and the Orthodox, depending on which community could obtain a favourable \"firman\" from the \"Sublime Porte\" at a particular time, often through outright bribery. Violent clashes were not uncommon. There was no agreement about this question, although it was discussed at the negotiations to the Treaty of Karlowitz in 1699. During the Holy Week of 1757, Orthodox Christians reportedly took over some of the Franciscan-controlled church. This may have been the cause of the sultan's \"firman\" (decree) later developed into the Status Quo.\nA fire severely damaged again in 1808, causing the dome of the rotunda to collapse and smashing the Aedicule's exterior decoration. The rotunda and the Aedicule's exterior were rebuilt in 1809\u201310 by architect Nikolaos Ch. Komnenos of Mytilene in the contemporary Ottoman Baroque style. The interior of the antechamber, now known as the , was partly rebuilt to a square ground plan in place of the previously semicircular western end.\nAnother decree in 1853 from the sultan solidified the existing territorial division among the communities and solidified the Status Quo for arrangements to \"remain in their present state\", requiring consensus to make even minor changes.\nThe dome was restored by Catholics, Greeks, and Turks in 1868, being made of iron ever since.\nBritish Mandate period.\nBy the time of the British Mandate for Palestine following the end of World War I, the cladding of red limestone applied to the Aedicule by Komnenos had deteriorated badly and was detaching from the underlying structure; from 1947 until restoration work in 2016\u201317, it was held in place with an exterior scaffolding of iron girders installed by the British authorities.\nJordanian and Israeli periods.\nIn 1948, Jerusalem was divided between Israel and Jordan and where the church was located, in the Old City, were made part of Jordan. In 1967, Israeli forces captured East Jerusalem in the Six Day War, and that area has remained under Israeli control ever since. Under Israeli rule, legal arrangements relating to the churches of East Jerusalem were maintained in coordination with the Jordanian government. The dome at the Church of the Holy Sepulchre was restored again in 1994\u201397 as part of extensive modern renovations that have been ongoing since 1959. During the 1970\u201378 restoration works and excavations inside the building, and under the nearby Muristan bazaar, it was found that the area was originally a quarry, from which white \"meleke\" limestone was struck. Blocks of Meleke limestone were extracted from the quarry and their traces can be seen on the surfaces of floors, walls and the ceiling in the Chapel of St. Vartan\nChapel of St. Vartan.\nEast of the Chapel of Saint Helena, the excavators discovered a void containing a fourth-century drawing of a Roman pilgrim ship, two low walls supporting the platform of Hadrian's second-century temple, and a higher fourth-century wall built to support Constantine's basilica. After the excavations of the early 1970s, the Armenian authorities converted this archaeological space into the Chapel of Saint Vartan, and created an artificial walkway over the quarry on the north of the chapel, so that the new chapel could be accessed (by permission) from the Chapel of Saint Helena.\nAedicule restoration.\nAfter seven decades of being held together by steel girders, the Israel Antiquities Authority (IAA) declared the visibly deteriorating Aedicule structure unsafe. A restoration of the Aedicule was agreed upon and executed from May 2016 to March 2017. Much of the $4 million project was funded by the World Monuments Fund, as well as $1.3 million from Mica Erteg\u00fcn and a significant sum from King Abdullah II of Jordan. The existence of the original limestone cave walls within the Aedicule was confirmed, and a window was created to view this from the inside. The presence of moisture led to the discovery of an underground shaft resembling an escape tunnel carved into the bedrock, seeming to lead from the tomb. For the first time since at least 1555, on 26 October 2016, marble cladding that protects the supposed burial bed of Jesus was removed. Members of the National Technical University of Athens were present. Initially, only a layer of debris was visible. This was cleared in the next day, and a partially broken marble slab with a Crusader-style cross carved was revealed. By the night of 28 October, the original limestone burial bed was shown to be intact. The tomb was resealed shortly thereafter. Mortar from just above the burial bed was later dated to the mid-fourth century.\n2020 pandemic.\nOn 25 March 2020, Israeli health officials ordered the site closed to the public due to the COVID-19 pandemic. According to the keeper of the keys, it was the first such closure since 1349, during the Black Death. Clerics continued regular prayers inside the building, and it reopened to visitors two months later, on 24 May.\nCrusader altar slab discovered (2022).\nDuring church renovations in 2022, a stone slab covered in modern graffiti was moved from a wall, revealing Cosmatesque-style decoration on one face. According to an IAA archaeologist, the decoration was once inlaid with pieces of glass and fine marble; it indicates that the relic was the front of the church's high altar from the Crusader era (c.\u00a01149), which was later used by the Greek Orthodox until being damaged in the 1808 fire.\nDescription.\nParvis (courtyard).\n facing the entrance to the church is known as the parvis. Two streets open into the parvis: (west) and (east). Around the parvis are a few smaller structures.\nSouth of the parvis, opposite the churchBroken columns\u2014once forming part of an arcade\u2014stand opposite the church, at the top of a short descending staircase stretching over the entire breadth of the parvis. In the 13th century, the tops of the columns were removed and sent to Mecca by the Khwarezmids.\nOn the eastern side of the parvis, south to north:\nNorth of the parvis, in front of the church fa\u00e7ade or against it:\nA borders the parvis on its west side. They originally formed the baptistery complex of the Constantinian church. The southernmost chapel was the vestibule, the middle chapel the baptistery, and the north chapel the chamber in which the patriarch chrismated the newly baptized before leading them into the rotunda north of this complex. Now they are dedicated as (from south to north)\nBell tower.\nThe 12th-century Crusader is just south of the Rotunda, to the left of the entrance. Its upper level was lost in a 1545 collapse. In 1719, another two storeys were lost.\nFa\u00e7ade and entrance.\nThe wooden doors that compose the main entrance are the original, highly carved arched doors. Today, only the left-hand entrance is currently accessible, as the right doorway has long since been bricked up. The entrance to the church leads to the south transept, through the crusader fa\u00e7ade in the parvis of a larger courtyard. This is found past a group of streets winding through the outer Via Dolorosa by way of a souq in the Muristan. This narrow way of access to such a large structure has proven to be hazardous at times. For example, when a fire broke out in 1840, dozens of pilgrims were trampled to death.\nAccording to their own family lore, the Muslim Nuseibeh family has been responsible for opening the door as an impartial party to the church's denominations already since the seventh century. However, they themselves admit that the documents held by various Christian denominations only mention their role since the 12th century, in the time of Saladin, which is the date more generally accepted. After retaking Jerusalem from the Crusaders in 1187, Saladin entrusted the Joudeh family with the key to the church, which is made of iron and long; the Nuseibehs either became or remained its doorkeepers.\nThe 'immovable ladder' stands beneath a window on the fa\u00e7ade.\nCalvary (Golgotha).\nJust inside the church entrance is a stairway leading up to Calvary (Golgotha), traditionally regarded as the site of Jesus's crucifixion and the most lavishly decorated part of the church. The exit is via another stairway opposite the first, leading down to the ambulatory. Golgotha and its chapels are just south of the main altar of the catholicon.\nCalvary is split into two chapels: one Greek Orthodox and one Catholic, each with its own altar. On the left (north) side, the Greek Orthodox chapel's altar is placed over the supposed rock of Calvary (the of the Cross), which can be touched through a hole in the floor beneath the altar. The rock can be seen under protective glass on both sides of the altar. The softer surrounding stone was removed when the church was built. The Roman Catholic (Franciscan) Chapel of the Nailing of the Cross (the of the Cross) stretches to the south. \nBetween the Catholic Altar of the Nailing to the Cross and the Orthodox altar is the Catholic Altar of the Stabat Mater, which has a statue of Mary with an 18th-century bust; this middle altar marks the of the Cross.\nOn the ground floor, just underneath the Golgotha chapel, is the . According to tradition, Jesus was crucified over the place where Adam's skull was buried. According to some, the blood of Christ ran down the cross and through the rocks to fill Adam's skull. Through a window at the back of the 11th-century apse, the rock of Calvary can be seen with a crack traditionally held to be caused by the earthquake that followed Jesus's death; some scholars claim it is the result of quarrying against a natural flaw in the rock.\nBehind the Chapel of Adam is the (Treasury of the Greek Patriarch). Some of its relics, such as a 12th-century crystal mitre, were transferred to the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate Museum (the Patriarchal Museum) on .\nStone of Anointing.\nJust inside the entrance to the church is the (also Stone of the Anointing or Stone of Unction), which tradition holds to be where Jesus's body was prepared for burial by Joseph of Arimathea, though this tradition is only attested since the crusader era (notably by the Italian Dominican pilgrim Riccoldo da Monte di Croce in 1288), and the present stone was only added in the 1810 reconstruction.\nThe wall behind the stone is defined by its striking blue balconies and -bearing red banners (depicting the insignia of the Brotherhood of the Holy Sepulchre), and is decorated with lamps. along the wall depicts the anointing of Jesus's body, preceded on the right by the Descent from the Cross, and succeeded on the left by the Burial of Jesus.\nThe wall was a temporary addition to support the arch above it, which had been weakened after the damage in the 1808 fire; it blocks the view of the rotunda, separates the entrance from the catholicon, sits on top of four of the now empty and desecrated Crusader graves and is no longer structurally necessary. Opinions differ as to whether it is to be seen as the 13th Station of the Cross, which others identify as the lowering of Jesus from the cross and located between the 11th and 12th stations on Calvary.\nThe lamps that hang over the Stone of Unction, adorned with cross-bearing chain links, are contributed by Armenians, Copts, Greeks and Latins.\nImmediately inside and to the left of the entrance is (formerly a divan) that has traditionally been used by the church's Muslim doorkeepers, along with some Christian clergy, as well as electrical wiring. To the right of the entrance is a wall along the ambulatory containing the staircase leading to Golgotha. Further along the same wall is the entrance to the Chapel of Adam.\nRotunda and Aedicule.\nThe is the building of the larger dome located on the far west side. In the centre of the rotunda is a small chapel called the in English, from the Latin , in reference to a small shrine. The Aedicule has two rooms: the first holds a relic called the Angel's Stone, which is believed to be a fragment of the large stone that sealed the tomb; the second, smaller room contains the tomb of Jesus. Possibly to prevent pilgrims from removing bits of the original rock as souvenirs, by 1555, a surface of marble cladding was placed on the tomb to prevent further damage to the tomb. In October 2016, the top slab was pulled back to reveal an older, partially broken marble slab with a Crusader-style cross carved in it. Beneath it, the limestone burial bed was revealed to be intact.\nUnder the Status Quo, the Eastern Orthodox, Roman Catholic, and Armenian Apostolic Churches all have rights to the interior of the tomb, and all three communities celebrate the Divine Liturgy or Holy Mass there daily. It is also used for other ceremonies on special occasions, such as the Holy Saturday ceremony of the Holy Fire led by the Greek Orthodox patriarch (with the participation of the Coptic and Armenian patriarchs). To its rear, in the , constructed of iron latticework, lies the altar used by the Coptic Orthodox. Historically, the Georgians also retained the key to the Aedicule.\nTo the right of the sepulchre on the northwestern edge of the rotunda is the Chapel of the Apparition, which is reserved for Roman Catholic use.\nThough not within the Church of the Holy Sepulchre compound, directly adjacent to it is the Church of the Redeemer, marking a Lutheran presence at the site.\nCatholicon.\nIn the central nave of the Crusader-era church, just east of the larger rotunda, is the Crusader structure housing the main altar of the Church, today the Greek Orthodox \"catholicon\". Its dome is in diameter, and is set directly over the centre of the transept crossing of the choir where the \"compas\" is situated, an omphalos (\"navel\") stone once thought to be the center of the world and still venerated as such by Orthodox Christians (associated with the site of the Crucifixion and the Resurrection).\nSince 1996 this dome is topped by the monumental Golgotha Crucifix, which the Greek Patriarch Diodoros I of Jerusalem consecrated. It was at the initiative of Israeli professor Gustav K\u00fchnel to erect a new crucifix at the church that would not only be worthy of the singularity of the site, but that would also become a symbol of the efforts of unity in the community of Christian faith.\nThe catholicon's iconostasis demarcates the Orthodox sanctuary behind it, to its east.\nThe iconostasis is flanked to the front by two episcopal thrones: the southern seat (cathedra) is the patriarchal throne of the Greek Orthodox patriarch of Jerusalem, and the northern seat is for an archbishop or bishop. (There is also a popular claim that both are patriarchal thrones, with the northern one being for the patriarch of Antioch \u2013 which has been described as a misstatement, however.)\nArmenian monastery south of the Aedicule.\nSouth of the Aedicule is the \"Place of the Three Marys\", marked by a stone canopy (the ) and a large modern . From here one can enter the Armenian monastery, which stretches over the ground and first upper floor of the church's southeastern part.\nSyriac Chapel with Tomb of Joseph of Arimathea.\nWest of the Aedicule, to the rear of the Rotunda, is the with the Tomb of Joseph of Arimathea, located in a Constantinian apse and containing an opening to an ancient Jewish rock-cut tomb. This chapel is where the Syriac Orthodox celebrate their Liturgy on Sundays.\nThe Syriac Orthodox Chapel of Saint Joseph of Arimathea and Saint Nicodemus. On Sundays and feast days it is furnished for the celebration of Mass. It is accessed from the Rotunda, by a door west of the Aedicule.\nFirst-century tomb.\nOn the far side of the chapel is the low entrance to an almost complete first-century Jewish tomb, initially holding six \"kokh\"-type funeral shafts radiating from a central chamber, two of which are still exposed. Although this space was discovered relatively recently and contains no identifying marks, some believe that Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus were buried here. Since Jews always buried their dead outside the city, the presence of this tomb seems to prove that the Holy Sepulchre site was outside the city walls at the time of the crucifixion.\nArches of the Virgin.\nThe are seven arches (an arcade) at the northern end of the north transept, which is to the catholicon's north. \nDisputed by the Orthodox and the Latin, the area is used to store ladders. \nOver the years the Greek-Orthodox patriarchate placed several icons along the arcade. Dating mostly to the 19th century and designed in Orthodox Post-Byzantine style, they were restored in 2021.\nPrison of Christ.\nIn the northeast side of the complex, there is the , alleged to be where Jesus was held. The Greek Orthodox are showing pilgrims yet another place where Jesus was allegedly held, the similarly named Prison of Christ in their Monastery of the Praetorium, located near the Church of Ecce Homo, between the Second and Third Stations of the Via Dolorosa. The Armenians regard a recess in the Monastery of the Flagellation at the Second Station of the Via Dolorosa as the Prison of Christ. A cistern among the ruins beneath the Church of St. Peter in Gallicantu on Mount Zion is also alleged to have been the Prison of Christ. To reconcile the traditions, some allege that Jesus was held in the Mount Zion cell in connection with his trial by the Jewish high priest, at the Praetorium in connection with his trial by the Roman governor Pilate, and near the Golgotha before crucifixion.\nAmbulatory.\nThe chapels in the ambulatory are, from north to south: the Greek (named after Longinus), the Armenian , the entrance to the Chapel of Saint Helena, and the Greek .\nStatus Quo.\nOttoman decrees.\nAn Ottoman decree of 1757 helped establish a \"status quo\" upholding the state of affairs for various Holy Land sites.\nThe \"status quo\" was upheld in Sultan Abd\u00fclmecid\u00a0I's \"firman\" (decree) of 1852/53, which pinned down the now-permanent statutes of property and the regulations concerning the roles of the different denominations and other custodians.\nThe primary custodians are the Roman Catholic, Greek Orthodox and Armenian Apostolic churches. The Greek Orthodox act through the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate as well as through the Brotherhood of the Holy Sepulchre. Roman Catholics act through the Franciscan Custody of the Holy Land. In the 19th century, the Coptic Orthodox, the Ethiopian Orthodox and the Syriac Orthodox also acquired lesser responsibilities, which include shrines and other structures in and around the building.\nNone of these controls the main entrance. In 1192, Saladin assigned door-keeping responsibilities to the Muslim Nusaybah family. The wooden doors that compose the main entrance are the original, highly carved doors. The Joudeh al-Goudia (al-Ghodayya) family were entrusted as custodian to the keys of the Holy Sepulchre by Saladin in 1187. Despite occasional disagreements, religious services take place in the Church with regularity and coexistence is generally peaceful. An example of concord between the Church custodians is the full restoration of the Aedicule from 2016 to 2017.\nInterdenominational issues.\nThe establishment of the modern Status Quo in 1853 did not halt controversy and occasional violence. \nIn 1902, 18 friars were hospitalized and some monks were jailed after the Franciscans and Greeks disagreed over who could clean the lowest step of the Chapel of the Franks. In the aftermath, the Greek patriarch, Franciscan custos, Ottoman governor and French consul general signed a convention that both denominations could sweep it.\nOn a hot summer day in 2002, a Coptic monk moved his chair from its agreed spot into the shade. This was interpreted as a hostile move by the Ethiopians and eleven were hospitalized after the resulting fight. In another incident in 2004, during Orthodox celebrations of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, a door to the Franciscan chapel was left open. This was taken as a sign of disrespect by the Orthodox and a fistfight broke out. Some people were arrested, but no one was seriously injured.\nOn Palm Sunday, in April 2008, a brawl broke out when a Greek monk was ejected from the building by a rival faction. Police were called to the scene but were also attacked by the enraged brawlers. On Sunday, 9 November 2008, a clash erupted between Armenian and Greek monks during celebrations for the Feast of the Cross.\nIssues with Israeli authorities.\nTax and land disputes.\nIn February 2018, the church was closed following a tax dispute over 152 million euros of uncollected taxes on church properties. The city hall stressed that the Church of the Holy Sepulchre and all other churches are exempt from the taxes, with the changes only affecting establishments like \"hotels, halls and businesses\" owned by the churches.\nThere was a lock-in protest against an Israeli legislative proposal which would expropriate church lands that had been sold to private companies since 2010, a measure which church leaders assert constitutes a serious violation of their property rights and the Status Quo. In a joint official statement the church authorities protested what they considered to be the peak of a systematic campaign in:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;a discriminatory and racist bill that targets solely the properties of the Christian community in the Holy Land ... This reminds us all of laws of a similar nature which were enacted against the Jews during dark periods in Europe.\nThe 2018 taxation affair does not cover any church buildings or religious related facilities (because they are exempt by law), but commercial facilities such as the Notre Dame Hotel which was not paying the municipal property tax, and any land which is owned and used as a commercial land. The church holds the rights to land where private homes have been constructed, and some of the disagreement had been raised after the Knesset had proposed a bill that will make it harder for a private company not to extend a lease for land used by homeowners. The church leaders have said that such a bill will make it harder for them to sell church-owned lands. According to \"The Jerusalem Post\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLand sale to Israeli settlers.\nIn 2017, NPR reported that the Greek Orthodox Church owns many properties across Jerusalem, Israel and the West Bank. It owns some 30% of the land in the Old City. But, due to property sales, these properties are diminishing every year. The decision to sell is made by Greek leaders, even though most local followers of the church are Arab Palestinians. The Palestinian Christians have raised concerns about selling these properties to Israeli settler-affiliated organizations.\nIn June 2019, a number of Christian denominations in Jerusalem raised their voice against the Supreme Court's decision to uphold the sale of three properties by the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate to Ateret Cohanim \u2013 an organization that seeks to increase the number of Jews living in the Old City and East Jerusalem. The church leaders warned that if the organization gets to control the sites, Christians could lose access to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre. In June 2022, the Supreme Court upheld the sale and ended the legal battle.\nConnection to Roman temple.\nThe site of the church had been a temple to Jupiter or Venus built by Hadrian before Constantine's edifice was built. Hadrian's temple had been located there because it was the junction of the main north\u2013south road with one of the two main east\u2013west roads and directly adjacent to the forum (now the location of the Muristan, which is smaller than the former forum). The forum itself had been placed, as is traditional in Roman towns, at the junction of the main north\u2013south road with the other main east\u2013west road (which is now El-Bazar/David Street). The temple and forum together took up the entire space between the two main east\u2013west roads (a few above-ground remains of the east end of the temple precinct still survive in the Alexander Nevsky Church complex of the \"Russian Mission in Exile\").\nFrom the archaeological excavations in the 1970s, it is clear that construction took over most of the site of the earlier temple enclosure and that the \"Triportico\" and \"Rotunda\" roughly overlapped with the temple building itself; the excavations indicate that the temple extended at least as far back as the Aedicule, and the temple enclosure would have reached back slightly further. Virgilio Canio Corbo, a Franciscan priest and archaeologist, who was present at the excavations, estimated from the archaeological evidence that the western retaining wall of the temple itself would have passed extremely close to the east side of the supposed tomb; if the wall had been any further west any tomb would have been crushed under the weight of the wall (which would be immediately above it) if it had not already been destroyed when foundations for the wall were made.\nOther archaeologists have criticized Corbo's reconstructions. Dan Bahat, the former city archaeologist of Jerusalem, regards them as unsatisfactory, as there is no known temple of Aphrodite (Venus) matching Corbo's design, and no archaeological evidence for Corbo's suggestion that the temple building was on a platform raised high enough to avoid including anything sited where the Aedicule is now; indeed Bahat notes that many temples to Aphrodite have a rotunda-like design, and argues that there is no archaeological reason to assume that the present rotunda was not based on a rotunda in the temple previously on the site.\nLocation.\nThe New Testament describes Jesus's tomb as being outside the city wall, as was normal for burials across the ancient world, which were regarded as unclean. Today, the site of the Church is within the current walls of the old city of Jerusalem. It has been well documented by archaeologists that in the time of Jesus, the walled city was smaller and the wall then was to the east of the current site of the Church. In other words, the city had been much narrower in Jesus's time, with the site then having been outside the walls; since Herod Agrippa (41\u201344) is recorded by history as extending the city to the north (beyond the present northern walls), the required repositioning of the western wall is traditionally attributed to him as well.\nA recent archeological excavation conducted by Professor Francesca Romana Stasolla, found remains of olive trees and grapevines that are approximately 2,000 years old. These plant remnants, seeds and pollen, were discovered via archaeobotanical analysis performed on soil samples that had been extracted from beneath the stone floor of the church.\nThe area immediately to the south and east of the sepulchre was a quarry and outside the city during the early first century as excavations under the Lutheran Church of the Redeemer across the street demonstrated. \nThe church is a part of the UNESCO World Heritage Site Old City of Jerusalem.\nThe Christian Quarter and the (also Christian) Armenian Quarter of the Old City of Jerusalem are both located in the northwestern and western part of the Old City, due to the fact that the Holy Sepulchre is located close to the northwestern corner of the walled city. The adjacent neighbourhood within the Christian Quarter is called the Muristan, a term derived from the Persian word for hospital \u2013 Christian pilgrim hospices have been maintained in this area near the Holy Sepulchre since at least the time of Charlemagne.\nInfluence.\nFrom the ninth century onward, the construction of churches inspired by the Anastasis was extended across Europe. One example is Santo Stefano in Bologna, Italy, an agglomeration of seven churches recreating shrines of Jerusalem.\nSeveral churches and monasteries in Europe, for instance, in Germany and Russia, and at least one church in the United States have been wholly or partially modelled on the Church of the Resurrection, some even reproducing other holy places for the benefit of pilgrims who could not travel to the Holy Land. They include the Heiliges Grab (\"Holy Tomb\") of G\u00f6rlitz, constructed between 1481 and 1504, the New Jerusalem Monastery in Moscow Oblast, constructed by Patriarch Nikon between 1656 and 1666, and Mount St. Sepulchre Franciscan Monastery built by the Franciscans in Washington, DC in 1898.\nAuthor Andrew Holt writes that the church was the most important in all Christendom at the time of the Crusades.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nCustodians\nVirtual tours"}
{"id": "7811", "revid": "49636717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7811", "title": "Cernunnos", "text": "Celtic horned god\nCernunnos is a Celtic god whose name is only clearly attested once, on the 1st-century CE Pillar of the Boatmen from Paris, where it is associated with an image of an aged, antlered figure with torcs around his horns.\nThrough the Pillar of the Boatmen, the name \"Cernunnos\" has been used to identify the members of an iconographic cluster, consisting of depictions of an antlered god (often aged and with crossed legs) associated with torcs, ram-horned (or ram-headed) serpents, symbols of fertility, and wild beasts (especially deer). The use of the name this way is common, though not uncontroversial. As many as 25 depictions of the Cernunnos-type have been identified. Though this iconographic group is best attested in north-eastern Gaul, depictions of the god have been identified as far off as Italy (Val Camonica) and Denmark (Gundestrup).\nCernunnos has been variously interpreted as a god of fertility, of the underworld, and of bi-directionality. His cult (attested iconographically as early as the 4th century BCE) seems to have been largely unaffected by the Roman conquest of Gaul, during which he remained unassimilated to the Roman pantheon. Cernunnos has been tentatively linked with Conall Cernach, a hero of medieval Irish mythology, and some later depictions of cross-legged and horned figures in medieval art.\nName.\nPillar of the Boatmen.\nThe Pillar of the Boatmen is a Gallo-Roman carved pillar discovered in 1711 under the choir of Notre-Dame de Paris. It is a religious monument, with depictions of Roman gods (Jupiter, Vulcan, and Castor and Pollux) alongside native Gaulish deities (such as Esus and Smertrios), dedicated by a corporation of boatmen from the city of Lutetia (Roman Paris). The dedication dates it to the reign of Tiberius (14-37 CE). Legends below the images identify the Roman and Gaulish deities by name. In fact, this is the only monument on which Celtic deities are identified by name with captions.\nOn one block from the pillar, a frowning, bearded figure is depicted from the shoulder up. His face is human, but his upper head is animal-like: hairless and bulging. Atop his head is a pair of bifid deer's antlers, with two short, pointed extrusions (perhaps ears or bull's horns) between them. A torc hangs on each of his antlers. The lower half of the block is lost, but given its original height, the figure could not have been standing. Therefore (in line with other figures identified as Cernunnos) the panel is often believed to have originally shown him cross-legged.\nAbove the antlered figure is a one-word legend. When information about the pillar was published in 1711, this legend was reported as \"Cernunnos\". However, the block is now badly damaged. Many of the letters are only partially visible; the letter \"C\" is entirely gone. Joshua Whatmough has gone as far as to say that in its present state \"only 'nn' is certain\". The reading from 1711 has sometimes been mistrusted. Joseph Vendryes and Whatmough argue (following the Dacia inscription) that it read \"Cernennos\". Fran\u00e7oise Le Roux was sceptical about the existence of the final \"s\".\nPossible other attestations.\nA capital found in Aumes, France is inscribed with a short Gaulish text in Greek letters. Michel Lejeune has interpreted this inscription as a dedication to a god (translit. ; in English, \"Carnonos\"), whom he tentatively connects with the god Cernunnos. However, both Lejeune's reading and his interpretation of this inscription have been contested. Whatmough and D. Ellis Evans prefer the reading (translit. ); and Emmanuel Dupraz has argued that the inscription states that an object (translit. ) is being offered, rather than giving the name of a god.\nA wax tablet from Dacia records a decree of 167 CE dissolving one (\"collegium of Jupiter Cernenus\"), a funerary association. David Fickett-Wilbar identifies this as a reference to Cernunnos, though he comments that it \"tells us nothing about the deity other than his name\". Theodor Mommsen suggested the byname derived from the name of nearby Korna, a hypothesis that has been followed my Michael Altjohann. Le Roux is also sceptical that it is a reference to Cernunnos, as she thinks the \"interpretatio\" of Cernunnos as the Roman god Jupiter is unlikely.\nA bronze tabula ansata from Steinsel, Luxembourg, dating between the late 2nd and early 3rd century CE, is dedicated to one (\"god Cerunincus\"). Though close in name to Cernunnos, the editors of \"L'Ann\u00e9e \u00e9pigraphique\" argue that the form of the name entails that it must be another (probably Treverian) god.\nEtymology.\nThe earliest etymology, proposed by Alfred Holder, connected Cernunnos's name with a Celtic word for horn, a reflex of proto-Indo-European * (\"horn, hoof\"). Hence, Holder analysed the name as \"The Horned God\". This etymology has the advantage of a close link with Cernunnos's iconography. However, Ernst Windisch and Leo Weisgerber pointed out that ablaut form of the proto-Indo-European root in Celtic is rather than .\nWeisgerber proposed that the theonym derived from proto-Celtic (\"angle, excrescence\"), a reflex of the same proto-Indo-European root. Le Roux concurred with Weisgerber; she associated proto-Celtic with the meaning \"top of the head\", and argued that Cernunnos's name should be interpreted as \"the one who has the top of his head like a deer\". Vendryes suggested that the name was cognate with the Old Irish word (\"hero\").\nIconography.\nA large number of images of an antlered figure, similar to that depicted on the Pillar of the Boatmen, have been found. These depict a male figure, often aged, with crossed legs, with antlers atop his head, who is associated with ram-horned (or ram-headed) serpents, torcs, symbols of fertility, and wild beasts (especially deer). It is conventional to apply to the name of \"Cernunnos\" to images which fit within this cluster of attributes. At least twenty-five images have been connected with Cernunnos in this way. Some, such as William Sayers and T. G. E. Powell, have questioned whether the name given on the Pillar (which is so rare in epigraphy) is appropriate to apply to these images. Pierre Lambrechts and Michael Altjohann have even argued that no such well-defined cluster of attributes exists in the archaeological record.\nDistribution and history.\nThe majority of the images identified as of Cernunnos have been found in Gaul, clustered around Paris and Reims. A rock drawing in Valcamonica (Lombardy, Italy) and the figure on Plate A of the Gundestrup cauldron (found in Himmerland, Denmark) are conspicuous geographic exceptions. Engraved onto a rock at the prehistoric site of Val Camonica is a tall figure with antlers atop his head, arms in orans position, and a torc around his right arm. Besides him, on his right, are a ram-horned serpent and a smaller man (ithyphallic, arms in orans position). The detailed scene on Plate A of the Gundestrup cauldron has Cernunnos cross-legged, wielding a torc in one hand and a ram-horned serpent in the other. Around him are many animals: two bulls, a stag, a dolphin with a rider, griffins, and a hyena. The provenance and date of the Gundestrup cauldron have been the subject of much debate. Cernunnos has been tentatively connected with images over a large geographical range, including Britain, Spain, Austria, Slovenia, and Romania.\nThe earliest datable representations of Cernunnos in Gaul date, like the Pillar of the Boatmen, to the reign of Tiberius (i.e., 14-37 CE); the latest to the 3rd century CE. The archaeological evidence for images of deities in Gaul is scant before the Roman conquest. The God of Bouray, a bronze statuette probably produced not long before the Roman conquest, depicts a Gaulish god with crossed legs and hooves. The relationship of this god with Cernunnos is uncertain.\nOutside of Gaul, much earlier representations of Cernunnos are known. The drawing from Valcamonica dates to 4th century BCE. Jos\u00e9 Maria Bl\u00e1zquez has argued that a painted vase, dating to the 2nd century BCE, from the Celtiberian site of Numantia, gives another early representation of Cernunnos. The Gundestrup cauldron, of either Thracian or Celtic work, has been assigned to dates within a large range (from 200 BCE to 300 CE).\nAfter Christianisation, images of Cernunnos were the subject of iconoclastic destruction. A statue of Cernunnos from Verteuil (Charente, France) was beheaded and the horns of Cernunnos on the Reims altar seem to have been purposefully chipped off.\nSome scholars (such as Duval and Bober) have suggested that Cernunnos's distinctive iconography persisted into the medieval period. Cernunnos has been seen on Christian monuments from Ireland, such as the north cross at Clonmacnoise, the market cross at Kells, and a stele at Carndonagh. The figure identified as Cernunnos on the 9th-century Clonmacnoise north cross appears to have horns and crossed legs; Fickett-Wilbar argues that these are misidentified ornamental motifs. On the Continent, Cernunnos has been seen in the Stuttgart Psalter and on a capital of Parma Cathedral. A leaf from the c.\u2009820 Stuttgart Psalter depicts the Descent into Limbo, with a devil figure (perhaps Hades) whom Bober identifies as of the Cernunnos-type, \"complete with cross-legged posture, antlers, and even a ram-headed serpent\", though J. R. M. Galpern identifies the features on the devil's head as wings, and connects them with motifs from Late Antique and Roman funerary art.\nAttributes and associations.\nThe cross-legged pose of Cernunnos has occasioned much comment. Elaborate diffusionist theories have been proposed to explain the origin of this particular motif. A popular theory proposes that the pose represents the transmission of a Buddhist motif (the lotus pose) from India via Greco-Egyptian work. Against a diffusionist hypothesis, Robert Mowat argued that this pose reflected the normal sitting position of the Gauls; he cited the testimony of Strabo and Diodorus that the Gauls sat on the floor for meals. In religious iconography, the position does not seem to have been exclusively associated with Cernunnos. Statues from the pre-Roman Gaulish sanctuary of Roquepertuse assume the same pose; though clearly of religious significance, they are not representations of Cernunnos. Representations of Cernunnos standing are known (such as the early example from Val Camonica).\nCernunnos is often depicted with torcs adorning his body. Most commonly he grasps one, and wears another around his neck. Sometimes he holds another on his chest. The torc is a ubiquitous feature of Celtic art and garb. They seem to have been a symbol of religious significance in Celtic art and, after the Roman conquest, perhaps a symbol of native identity.\nThe ram-horned (or ram-headed) serpent is a hybrid beast peculiar to the Celts. The creature, which is associated with Cernunnos early as Val Camonica, appears to have had a significance independent of Cernunnos. In Gaul, ram-horned serpents are depicted alone or accompanying Mars or Mercury. Ram-horned serpents also feature on two other plates of the Gundestrup cauldron (C and E). Cernunnos is also sometimes accompanied by serpents without the attributes of a ram, as on the Vend\u0153uvres relief. The ram-horned serpent has been suggested to have a chthonic significance.\nSome scholars, such as Miranda Green, have connected Cernunnos with the Lord of the Animals motif through such depictions as the Gundestrup cauldron, where Cernunnos is placed centrally around a number of animals. The closest parallel to the Gundestrup scene is given on the Lyon cup, where Cernunnos is surrounded by a deer, a hound, and a (hornless) snake.\nOn various depictions, Cernunnos is associated with other deities. The significance of these associations is unclear. On three depictions, Cernunnos is paired with Mercury and Apollo; on the Lyon cup, he is paired with Mercury alone. Cernunnos is also depicted twice with Abundantia, Roman god of prosperity, and twice with Hercules. Three images of Cernunnos (among them, the Condat tricephal and \u00c9tang-sur-Arroux statuette) give Cernunnos three heads or faces. Bober argued that these images represent the syncretisation of Cernunnos with the (poorly understood) tricephalic god of Gaul.\nInterpretation.\nBecause of his persistent association with the natural world (for example, on the Gundestrup cauldron, where he is surrounded by various beasts), some scholars describe Cernunnos as the lord of animals or wild things. Miranda Green describes him as a \"peaceful god of nature and fruitfulness\".\nCernunnos is also associated with fertility and fecundity. Blazquez points out that the stag is a symbol of fertility across the Mediterranean. The association of Cernunnos with fertility is emphasised by other attributes. He is variously provided with a basket of fruit (as on the \u00c9tang-sur-Arroux statuette), a cornucopia (as on the Lyon cup), and a bag of coins (as on the Reims altar).\nIt has been suggested that Cernunnos carried a chthonic significance. Bober's study of the god concluded that Cernunnos was god of the underworld. She analyses the ram-horned serpent as the synthesis of two animals (the snake and the ram) of chthonic significance to the Celts. The rat above Cernunnos on the Reims altar and the association of Cernunnos with Mercury (guide of souls to the underworld) on several representations have also been thought to suggest an association with the underworld.\nFickett-Wilbar, in a recent study, has proposed that Cernunnos was a god of bi-directionality and mediator between opposites.\nCernunnos and \"interpretatio romana\".\nThe process of \"interpretatio romana\", by which the Romans identified and syncretised gods of foreign cults with gods of their own pantheon, is one which Cernunnos seems to have been peculiarly resistant to. He has been compared in this respect with Epona and Sucellus, other Gallo-Roman gods with distinctive iconographies, though unlike them his iconography predates the Roman conquest. Cernunnos is not paired with any Greco-Roman god in epigraphy, with the possible exception of the Dacia inscription. The iconography of Cernunnos occasionally borrows from that of Mercury, and the representation of Cernunnos on the Vend\u0153uvres relief seems to have been influenced by depictions of Jupiter Dolichenus. However, even when paired with Roman deities (as on the Reims altar), Cernunnos's iconography is distinctly Celtic. It has been suggested that this was because there was no clear Roman equivalent to Cernunnos.\nCernunnos does not appear in any ancient sources under his native name. Some passages from ancient authors referring to Celtic gods under Greek or Roman names (per the usual \"interpretatio romana\" or \"graeca\") have been tentatively connected with Cernunnos. Caesar's remark that the Gauls regarded themselves as descendants of a god he likened to Dis Pater (Roman god of the underworld) has occasioned much comment. Though Sucellus is the Gaulish god most commonly identified as behind Dis Pater in this passage, Cernunnos has also been considered as a candidate. Bober has argued that Cernunnos was a \"chthonic-fertility\" god, like Dis Pater, and therefore that this was a natural identification to make. A story about the Roman general Sertorius (reported by Plutarch, among others) describes Sertorius's attempts to take advantage of local Lusitanian religious feeling by declaring a white doe a gift of Artemis (Greek goddess of the hunt) and pretending he could use it for divination. The Lusitanians were Celts, and it has been suggested by David Rankin that the god behind this Lusitanian Artemis was Cernunnos. Rankin has also suggested that Cernunnos and Smertrios lay behind the Greek historian Timaeus's description of a cult of the Dioscuri among the oceanic Celts, though Andreas Hofeneder regards this as unprovable.\nCernunnos and later mythology.\nConall Cernach.\nConall is a hero of the Ulster Cycle of Irish mythology. The companion and foster brother of C\u00fachulainn, he appears in such stories as \"T\u00e1in B\u00f3 C\u00faailnge\", and several tales involving Fra\u00edch (such as \"T\u00e1in B\u00f3 Fra\u00edch\" and \"Fled Bricrenn\"). Conall's byname \"Cernach\" has been linked with Old Irish word (with the meanings of \"excrescence, angle\", \"plate\", and \"victory\"). Through this root, there have been attempts to connect Conall with Cernunnos.\nA brief passage involving Conall in the \"T\u00e1in B\u00f3 Fra\u00edch\" (\"The Cattle Raid on Fra\u00edch\") has been taken by Anne Ross as evidence that Conall bore a connection with Cernunnos. In this episode, Conall assists the protagonist Fra\u00edch in rescuing his wife and son, and reclaiming his cattle. The fort that Conall must penetrate is guarded by a mighty serpent. This fearsome serpent, instead of attacking Conall, darts to Conall's waist and girdles him as a belt. Rather than killing the serpent, Conall allows it to live, and then proceeds to attack and rob the fort of its great treasures the serpent previously protected. Ross explains the serpent's anticlimactic behaviour with reference to the images of Cernunnos with ram-horned serpents curled around him (as on the \u00c9tang-sur-Arroux statuette).\nOther mythologies.\nCernunnos has also been suggested to have survived in other legends. Justin Favrod suggests that a fertility festival (perhaps involving deer costumes), held on the 1 January in some Celtic countries and suppressed by the church after Christianisation, represented a festival to Cernunnos. Gwilherm Berthou equated Cernunnos with the mythical Breton Saint Corn\u00e9ly, protector of cattle. R. Lowe Thompson suggested that Herne the Hunter, an antlered ghost of English folklore first attested in Shakespeare, was cognate with Cernunnos.\nNeopaganism and Wicca.\nWithin Neopaganism, specifically the Wiccan tradition, the Horned God is a deity that is believed to be the equal to the Great Goddess and syncretizes various horned or antlered gods from various cultures. The name Cernunnos became associated with the Wiccan Horned God through the adoption of the writings of Margaret Murray, an Egyptologist and folklorist of the early 20th century. Murray, through her Witch-cult hypothesis, believed that the various horned deities found in Europe were expressions of a \"proto-horned god\" and in 1931 published her theory in \"The God of the Witches\". Her work was considered highly controversial at the time, but was adopted by Gerald Gardner in his development of the religious movement of Wicca.\nWithin the Wiccan tradition, the Horned God reflects the seasons of the year in an annual cycle of life, death and rebirth and his imagery is a blend of the Gaulish god Cernunnos, the Greek god Pan, The Green Man motif, and various other horned spirit imagery.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
