{"id": "2078", "revid": "41656442", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2078", "title": "Acorn Electron", "text": "Personal computer sold in Britain\nThe Acorn Electron (nicknamed the Elk inside Acorn and beyond) was introduced as a lower-cost alternative to the BBC Micro educational/home computer, also developed by Acorn Computers, to provide many of the features of that more expensive machine at a price more competitive with that of the ZX Spectrum. It has 32 kilobytes of RAM, and its ROM includes BBC BASIC II together with the operating system. Announced in 1982 for a possible release the same year, it was eventually introduced on 25 August 1983 priced at \u00a3199.\nThe Electron is able to save and load programs onto audio cassette via a cable, originally supplied with the computer, connecting it to any standard tape recorder with the appropriate sockets. It is capable of bitmapped graphics, and can use either a contemporary television set, a colour (RGB) monitor or a monochrome monitor as its display. Several expansions were made available to provide many of the capabilities omitted from the BBC Micro. Acorn introduced a general-purpose expansion unit, the Plus 1, offering analogue joystick and parallel ports, together with cartridge slots into which ROM cartridges, providing software, or other kinds of hardware expansions, such as disc interfaces, could be inserted. Acorn also produced a dedicated disc expansion, the Plus 3, featuring a disc controller and 3.5-inch floppy drive.\nFor a short period, the Electron was reportedly the best selling micro in the United Kingdom, with an estimated 200,000 to 250,000 machines sold over its entire commercial lifespan. With production effectively discontinued by Acorn as early as 1985, and with the machine offered in bundles with games and expansions, later being substantially discounted by retailers, a revival in demand for the Electron supported a market for software and expansions without Acorn's involvement. Its market for games also helped to sustain the continued viability of games production for the BBC Micro.\nHistory.\nAfter Acorn Computers released the BBC Micro, executives believed that the company needed a less expensive computer for the mass market. In May 1982, when asked about the recently announced Sinclair ZX Spectrum's potential to hurt sales of the BBC Micro, priced at \u00a3125 for the 16K model compared to around twice that price for the 16K BBC Model A, Acorn co-founder Hermann Hauser responded that in the third quarter of that year Acorn would release a new \u00a3120\u2013150 computer which \"will probably be called the Electron\", a form of \"miniaturised BBC Micro\", having 32 KB of RAM and 32 KB of ROM, with \"higher resolution graphics than those offered by the Spectrum\". Acorn co-founder Chris Curry also emphasised the Electron's role as being \"designed to compete with the Spectrum... to get the starting price very low, but not preclude expansion in the long term.\"\nDevelopment.\nIn order to reduce component costs, and to prevent cloning, the company reduced the number of chips in the Electron from the 102 on the BBC Micro's motherboard to \"something like 12 to 14 chips\"1 with most functionality on a single 2,400-gate Uncommitted Logic Array (ULA).\nThe operating system ROM locations 0xFC00-0xFFFF contain the details of some members of the Electron's design team, these differing somewhat from those listed in the corresponding message in the BBC Model B ROM:\n(C) 1983 Acorn Computers Ltd. Thanks are due to the following contributors to the development of the Electron (among others too numerous to mention):- Bob Austin, Astec, Harry Barman, Paul Bond, Allen Boothroyd, Ben Bridgewater, Cambridge, John Cox, Chris Curry, 6502 designers, Jeremy Dion, Tim Dobson, Joe Dunn, Ferranti, Steve Furber, David Gale, Andrew Gordon, Martyn Gilbert, Lawrence Hardwick, Hermann Hauser, John Herbert, Hitachi, Andy Hopper, Paul Jephcot, Brian Jones, Chris Jordan, Computer Laboratory, Tony Mann, Peter Miller, Trevor Morris, Steve Parsons, Robin Pain, Glyn Phillips, Brian Robertson, Peter Robinson, David Seal, Kim Spence-Jones, Graham Tebby, Jon Thackray, Topexpress, Chris Turner, Hugo Tyson, John Umney, Alex van Someren, Geoff Vincent, Adrian Warner, Robin Williamson, Roger Wilson.\nAdditionally, the last bytes of both the BASIC ROM and the Plus 3 interface's ADFS v1.0 ROM include the word \"Roger\", thought to be a reference to Roger Wilson. The case was designed by industrial designer Allen Boothroyd of Cambridge Product Design.\nRelease.\nReports during the second half of 1982 indicated a potential December release, with Curry providing qualified confirmation of such plans, together with an accurate depiction of the machine's form and capabilities, noting that the \"massive ULA\" would be the \"dominant factor\" in any pre-Christmas release. As the end of the year approached, the machine itself was pictured in press reports. With the ULA not ready for \"main production\", however, the launch of the Electron was to be delayed until the spring.\nBy June 1983, with the planned March release having passed, the launch of the Electron had been rescheduled for the \"Acorn User\" Exhibition in August 1983, and the machine was indeed launched at the event. The company expected to ship the Electron before Christmas, and sell 100,000 by February 1984. The price at launch\u00a0\u2013 \u00a3199\u00a0\u2013 remained unchanged from that stated in an announcement earlier in the year, with the machine's nickname within Acorn\u00a0\u2013 the \"Elk\"\u00a0\u2013 also being reported publicly for perhaps the first time.\nReviews were generally favourable, starting with positive impressions based on the physical design of the computer, with one reviewer noting, \"The Electron is beautifully designed and built\u00a0\u2013 quite a shock compared to the BBC. Its designer case will look great on the coffee table.\" Praise was also forthcoming for the Electron's keyboard which was regarded as being better than most of its low-cost peers, with only the VIC-20 being comparable. In one review, the keyboard was even regarded as better than the one in the BBC Micro. The provision of rapid BASIC keyword entry though the combination of the key with various letter keys was also welcomed as a helpful aid to prevent typing errors by \"most users\", while \"touch typists\" were still able to type out the keywords in full.\nReviewers also welcomed the machine's excellent graphics compared to its rivals, noting that \"the graphics are much more flexible and the maximum resolution is many times that of the Spectrum's\". The provision of screen modes supporting 80 columns of readable text and graphics resolutions of 640\u00d7256 was described as \"unrivalled by every machine up to the BBC Model B itself\", although the absence of a teletext mode was considered regrettable. Although valued for its low memory usage characteristics in the BBC Micro, one reviewer considered the absence of a \"software simulation of a teletext screen\" to be a \"lazy omission\" even if it would have to be \"awfully slow and take up piles of memory\".\nWhile its speed was acceptable compared to its immediate competition, the Electron was, however, rather slower than the BBC Micro with one review noting that games designed for the BBC Micro ran \"at less than half the speed, with very significant effects on their appeal\". The reduced performance can be attributed to the use of a 4-bit wide memory system instead of the 8-bit wide memory system of the BBC Micro to reduce cost. Due to needing two accesses to the memory instead of one to fetch each byte, along with contention with the video hardware also needing access, reading or writing RAM was much slower than on the BBC Micro.26 Reviewers were also disappointed by the single-channel sound, noting that \"BBC-style music\" and its \"imitations of various musical instruments\" would not be possible, the latter due to the inability of the sound system to vary the amplitude of sounds.\nDespite some uncertainty about Acorn's target demographic for the Electron, some noted the potential for the machine in education given its robustness, but also given its price, noting that the high price of BBC Model B machines seemed \"rarely justified by their actual practical applications in schools\". The introduction of the Electron was seen as potentially leading to competition between Acorn's different models within the schools market rather than creating a broader audience for them, although the potential for more computers in schools, giving more \"hands-on\" experience for students, was welcomed. Nevertheless, reviewers anticipated that the Electron would sell well at the lower end of the market, with projected sales of 100,000 units by Christmas 1983, helped by the Electron's software compatibility with the BBC Micro and the already established reputation of its predecessor. With parents potentially being convinced of the Electron's educational value, some reviewers foresaw a conflict between parents and \"discerning children\", the latter merely wanting to play games and preferring models with sound and graphics capabilities more appropriate for gaming.\nAlthough Acorn had based its expansion into the United States on the BBC Micro, the company did have plans to introduce the Electron at a later time, with Chris Curry having indicated \"a very heavy push overseas\" involving both the BBC Micro and Electron. A model for the US market was described in an official book, \"The Acorn Guide to the Electron\", but this model was never produced. The Electron was distributed in various other markets and was reviewed by home computing publications in countries such as Norway, West Germany, and New Zealand.\nProduction and volume delivery.\nProduction difficulties at Astec in Malaysia delayed the machine's introduction, forcing Acorn to look to other manufacturers such as AB Electronics in Wales and Wongs in Hong Kong (an original equipment manufacturer making over 30 million circuit boards a year, along with power supplies and plastic housings, for companies such as IBM, Xerox, Atari, and Apple, including units made for Acorn for the BBC Micro). By October 1983, Acorn had received orders for more than 150,000 units, but had production targets of only 25,000 a month before Christmas, meaning that the existing backlog would take more than six months to fulfil. Demand for the Electron was high but only two of WH Smith's London branches had inventory. Ultimately, manufacturing in Malaysia ceased with the anticipated but unspecified number of units having been produced, this having been originally reported as 100,000 units. Acorn's marketing manager, Tom Hohenberg, admitted in early 1984 that \"a lot of the trouble stemmed from the ULA\" in getting production to the desired levels, but that such difficulties had been resolved, although Acorn faced an order backlog of almost a quarter of a million units.\nAs the company increased production during 1984, however, the British home computer market greatly weakened. Hohenberg later noted that after the 1983 Christmas season, Electron deliveries had increased to meet a demand that was no longer there, with the market having \"completely dried up\".39 Acorn's Christmas 1984 sales were greatly below expectations and by March 1985 the company had reduced the Electron's price to \u00a3129. With the company's unsuccessful expansion into the United States abandoned, Acorn's financial situation had deteriorated sufficiently to prompt Olivetti to rescue the company by taking a 49.30% ownership stake. Renewed efforts were made to sell the machine, bundling it with Acorn's own expansions and software, such as one package adding the Plus 1 expansion, joysticks and a ROM cartridge game to the base machine for a total price of \u00a3219. Acorn committed to supporting the machine \"until the end of 1986\", continuing to supply it (as the Merlin M2105) to British Telecom as part of the Healthnet communications system, with small-scale manufacturing continuing while existing stocks were being run down.\nBy autumn, retailers appeared eager to discount the computer, with prices in stores as low as \u00a3100, reportedly less than the distributor prices of the summer months. As the Christmas season approached, Dixons Retail acquired the remaining Electron inventory to sell, bundled with a cassette recorder and software, at a retail price of \u00a399.95. This deal, from the perspective of a year later, apparently played a significant part in helping to reduce Acorn's unsold inventory from a value of \u00a318\u00a0million to around \u00a37.9\u00a0million, and in combination with \"streamlining corporate activities and reducing overheads\", had helped to reduce Acorn's losses from over \u00a320\u00a0million to less than \u00a33\u00a0million.\nThe deal effectively brought to an end Acorn's interest in the Electron and the lower-cost end of the home computing market, but empowered third-party suppliers whose \"inventiveness and initiative\" was noted as being in contrast with Acorn's lack of interest in the product and the \"false promises\" made to its users. However, Acorn subsequently released the Master Compact\u00a0\u2013 a model in the Master series of microcomputers with fewer BBC Micro-style ports and a similar expansion connector to that used by the Electron\u00a0\u2013 with the home audience specifically in mind. Indeed, prior to its release, the Master Compact had been perceived as the successor to the Electron. Superficial similarities between the Compact and Acorn Communicator, together with technical similarities between the Electron (particularly when expanded in the form of the Merlin M2105) and the Communicator, may also have driven rumours of an updated Electron model. A more substantial emphasis on the \"home, music and hobby sectors\" came with the appointment of a dedicated marketing manager in 1989 following the launch of the BBC A3000 in the Acorn Archimedes range.\nHardware.\nMuch of the core functionality of the BBC Micro\u00a0\u2013 the video and memory controller, cassette input/output, timers and sound generation\u00a0\u2013 was replicated using a single customised ULA chip designed by Acorn in conjunction with Ferranti, albeit with only one sound channel instead of three (and one noise channel), and without the character-based Teletext Mode 7.1\nThe keyboard includes a form of quick keyword input, similar to that used on the Sinclair ZX Spectrum, through use of the key in combination with other keys labelled with BASIC keywords. However, unlike the Spectrum, this method of rapid keyword entry is optional, and keywords can be entered manually if preferred.\nThe edge connector on the rear of the Electron exposes all address and data bus lines from the CPU, including the upper eight bits of the address bus, in contrast to the limited selection available via the BBC Micro's expansion ports, with the One Megahertz Bus as the principal mechanism for general purpose expansion on the BBC Micro only providing the lower eight bits of the address bus. In addition, various control signals provided by the CPU and ULA are exposed via the Electron's expansion connector.\nThe ULA mediates access to 32\u00a0KB of addressable RAM using four 4164 DRAMs (64\u00a0K\u00d71\u00a0bit), sharing the RAM between the CPU and the video signal generation (or screen refresh) performed by the ULA itself. Two accesses have to be made to the RAM to get each byte (albeit with a single RAS), delivering a maximum transfer rate to or from RAM of one byte per 2\u00a0MHz cycle. In generating the video signal, the ULA is able to take advantage of this 2\u00a0MHz bandwidth when producing the picture for the high-bandwidth screen modes.26 Due to signalling constraints, the CPU can only access RAM at 1\u00a0MHz, even when it is not competing with the video system.7\nWhen the ULA is consuming all of the RAM bandwidth during the active portion of a display line, the CPU is unable to access the RAM. (The Electron uses the Synertek variant of the 6502 processor as that allowed the clock to be stopped for this 40 microsecond period.)7 In other modes the CPU and video accesses are interleaved with each accessor acquiring bytes at 1\u00a0MHz.7\nIn contrast, the BBC Micro employs one or two sets of eight 16-kilobit devices, with the RAM running at twice the speed (4\u00a0MHz) of the CPU (2\u00a0MHz), allowing the video system (screen refresh) and CPU memory accesses to be interleaved, with each accessor able to transfer bytes at 2\u00a0MHz. The RAM access limitations imposed by the Electron's ULA therefore reduce the effective CPU speed by as much as a factor of four relative to the BBC Micro in the more demanding display modes, and as much as a factor of two otherwise. Byte transfers from ROM occur at 2\u00a0MHz, however.7\nFor issue 1\u20134 motherboards, the ULA had an issue similar to those experienced by other socketed CPUs. Over time, the thermal heating and cooling could cause the ULA to rise slightly out of its socket just enough to cause the machine to hang or freeze and for other issues to occur preventing the start-up of the machine, in some cases causing the initial beep or tone to sound continuously. This was despite a metal cover and a locking-bar mechanism designed to prevent this from occurring. Pushing down on the metal cover to reseat the ULA was normally sufficient to rectify these issues. Issue 5 and 6 boards utilized a different ULA type, this being known as the Aberdeen ULA (as opposed to the earlier Ferranti ULA) which was mounted on a board that was directly soldered to the main board, with the chip being covered by epoxy resin \"insulating material\". This arrangement dispensed with the 68-pin socket, and this new type of ULA was expected to be \"less prone to failure\". This type of ULA was also used on the German release of the Electron mainboard which is designated by the marking \"GERMAN ELECTRON Issue 1\" on the mainboard rather than just \"ELECTRON\" as for the UK model.\nTechnical specifications.\nThe hardware specification according to official documentation, combined with more technical documentation and analysis is as follows:\nThe composite video output provides a greyscale image on the standard machine, but an internal modification allows a colour image to be produced, albeit with a degradation in picture quality. Acorn ostensibly intended the composite output to be a high-quality output for monochrome monitors, with the RGB output being the preferred high-quality output for colour images.\nMerlin M2105.\nAn unusual variant of the Electron was sold by British Telecom Business Systems as the BT Merlin M2105 Communications Terminal, being previewed by British Telecom at the Communications '84 show. This consisted of a rebadged Electron plus a large expansion unit containing 32\u00a0KB of battery-backed RAM (making up 64\u00a0KB of RAM in total), up to 64\u00a0KB of ROM resident in four sockets (making up to 96\u00a0KB of ROM in total), a Centronics printer port, an RS423 serial port, a modem, and the speech generator previously offered for the BBC Micro. The ROM firmware provided dial-up communications facilities, text editing and text messaging functions. The complete product included a monitor and dot-matrix printer.\nInitially trialled in a six-month pilot at 50 florists, with the intention of rolling out to all 2,500 members of the UK network, these were used by the Interflora florists network in the UK for over a decade. Used mostly for sending messages, despite providing support for other applications, limited availability of the product led Interflora to look for alternatives after five years, although users appeared to be happy with the product as it was.\nThis generic product combination of the Electron and accompanying expansion was apparently known as the Chain during development, itself having a different board layout, with British Telecom having intended the M2105 to be a product supporting access to an online service known as Healthnet. This service aimed to improve and speed up communications within hospitals so that patients could be treated and discharged more quickly, and to facilitate transfers of information to doctors and health workers outside hospitals, with communications taking place over conventional telephone lines. The service was to be introduced in the Hammersmith and Fulham district health authority, with installation starting at Charing Cross Hospital. The Electron was said to be particularly suitable for deployment in this application in that it had a \"large expansion bus\", ostensibly making the machine amenable to the necessary adaptations required for the role, together with its \"price, and the fact it has a real keyboard\". As a Healthnet terminal, the M2105 was intended to support the exchange of forms, letters and memos.\nThe adoption of an Acorn product in this role was perhaps also unusual in that much of BT's Merlin range of this era had been supplied by ICL, notably the M2226 small business computer and M3300 \"communicating word processor\". Nevertheless, the M2105 offered interoperability with other BT products such as the QWERTYphone which was able to receive messages from the M2105 and the Merlin Tonto.280\nThe hardware specifications of the M2105, observed from manufactured units, include the 6502 CPU (SY6502 or R6502), ULA and 32\u00a0KB of dynamic RAM fitted in the Electron main unit, plus 32\u00a0KB of static RAM, two 6522 VIA devices for interfacing, AM2910PC modem, SCN2681A UART, and TMS5220 plus TMS6100 for speech synthesis. The speech synthesis was used for the \"voice response\" function which answered incoming voice calls by playing a synthesised message to the caller. The components chosen and the capabilities provided (excluding speech synthesis) are broadly similar to those featured by the Acorn Communicator which was another product of Acorn's custom systems division.\nThe product documentation indicates a specification with 48\u00a0KB of RAM plus 16\u00a0KB of \"non volatile CMOS RAM\" and 96\u00a0KB of ROM,87 although this particular composition of RAM is apparently contradicted by the RAM devices present on surviving M2105 machines. However, the earlier Chain variant of the board does appear to provide only 16\u00a0KB of static RAM using two HM6264LP-15 chips, also providing an extra 16\u00a0KB of dynamic RAM using eight MK4516-15 chips, suggesting that the product evolved during development.\nRecreations and emulators.\nSeveral emulators of the machine exist:\nElectron software is predominantly archived in the UEF file format.\nThere are also two publicly documented FPGA based recreations of the Acorn Electron hardware: ElectronFPGA for the Papilio Duo hardware and the Acorn-Electron core for the FPGA Arcade \"Replay\" board. In addition, an implementation of the ULA for the Lattice ICE40 series has been made available.\nSoftware.\nA range of titles were made available on cassette at the launch of the Electron through the Acornsoft publishing arm of Acorn, including a number of games, the Forth and Lisp languages, and a handful of other educational and productivity titles. Acorn's decision to provide the Electron with a degree of compatibility with the BBC Micro meant that a number of titles already available for the older machine could be expected to run on its new machine, with only minor cosmetic issues occurring when running some titles. Of the Acornsoft languages, the existing Forth and Lisp language releases worked on the Electron, these being re-released specially for the machine, together with BCPL and Microtext, an authoring system offering programming facilities, which remained BBC-only releases. Games such as Chess and Snooker, plus a number of other titles were also established as being compatible prior to launch. Various applications in Acornsoft's View suite, together with the languages COMAL, Logo and ISO Pascal, were reported as being compatible with the Electron, as were some titles from BBC Soft and other developers.\nLanguages.\nA significant selling point for the Electron was its built-in BBC BASIC interpreter, providing a degree of familiarity from the BBC Micro along with a level of compatibility with the earlier machine. However, as had been the case with the BBC Micro, support for other languages was quickly forthcoming, facilitated by the common heritage of the two systems.\nIn addition to the early releases, Forth and Lisp, Acornsoft released the Pascal subset, S-Pascal, on cassette and followed up with an ISO Pascal implementation on ROM cartridge, the latter providing two 16\u00a0KB ROMs containing a program editor and a Pascal compiler producing intermediate code that required Pascal run-time routines to be loaded. As a more minimal implementation, S-Pascal made use of the machine's built-in BASIC program editing facilities and provided a compiler generating assembly language that would then be assembled, generating machine code for direct execution. ISO Pascal had Oxford Pascal as a direct competitor offering a range of features differentiating it from Acornsoft's product, notably a compiler that could produce a stand-alone \"relocatable 6502 machine-code file\". Acornsoft later released the ISO Pascal Stand Alone Generator product for the BBC Micro and Master series, permitting the generation of executable programs embedding \"sections of the interpreter\" required by each program, with such executables being subject to various licensing restrictions.\nAcornsoft Forth, aiming for compliance with the Forth-79 standard, was regarded as \"an excellent implementation of the language\". It saw competition from Skywave Software's Multi-Forth 83 which was delivered on a ROM chip, supported the Forth-83 standard, and provided a multitasking environment. Future availability of Multi-Forth 83 on ROM cartridge was advertised.\nWith the launch of the Plus 1, Acornsoft Lisp was also made available on cartridge. This Lisp implementation provided only the \"bare essentials\" of a Lisp system that \"a small micro such as the Electron\" could hope to be able to support. However, with the interpreter and initialised workspace being loaded from cassette into RAM in the earlier release, one stated advantage of the ROM version was the availability of more memory for use by programs, with the immediacy of a Lisp system provided as a language ROM being an implicit benefit.\nAcornsoft provided two products offering different degrees of support for the Logo programming language. Turtle Graphics was a cassette-based product, available alongside Forth, Lisp and S-Pascal amongst the first titles released for the Electron, featuring a subset of Logo focused on the interactive aspects of the language. Acornsoft Logo was provided on ROM cartridge and offered a vocabulary of over 200 commands as part of a more comprehensive implementation of the language, exposing its list processing foundations. Turtle Graphics was substantially cheaper than Logo: by 1987, the former had been reportedly discounted to under \u00a33 whereas the latter cost \"less than \u00a330\". Unlike other Acornsoft language products, however, Logo was supplied with \"two thick manuals\".\nApplications.\nAcornsoft made a number of applications available for the Electron. In early 1985, the \"View\" word processor and \"ViewSheet\" spreadsheet applications, familiar from the BBC Micro, were released on ROM cartridge for use with the Electron expanded with a Plus 1, priced at \u00a349.50 each. By running directly from ROM, these applications were able to dedicate all of the machine's available RAM to their documents, and using general filing system mechanisms, documents could be loaded from and saved to cassette or disc, although disc users could also use commands that took advantage of that faster, random-access medium. Cassette-based operation was still regarded as \"perfectly feasible\" since the software itself did not need to be loaded, with loading and saving operations in View achieving about 800 words per minute and in ViewSheet achieving around 200 cells per minute.\nWhen using View in Mode 6, providing a 40-column, 25-line display occupying 8\u00a0KB of memory, around 20\u00a0KB of RAM was available to cassette-based systems or to disc-based systems using products such as the Cumana Floppy Disc System that also maintained PAGE at &amp;E00, this corresponding to about 10 or 11 A4 pages of text. In Mode 3, providing an 80-column, 25-line display occupying 16\u00a0KB, around 6 or 7 A4 pages of text could be retained in memory. Acorn's Plus 3 disc system reduced this workspace by a further 4\u00a0KB. However, documents could be broken up into sections to be processed individually by View. Operation in the 80-column Mode 0 and Mode 3 was reported as being \"sometimes slow\" due to the Electron's hardware architecture, but View supported horizontal scrolling across documents, permitting the use of a 40-column mode to edit wider documents.\nViewSheet could also operate in different display modes, with spreadsheets of approximately 1600 cells being editable in Mode 6 and around 800 cells in Mode 3. A windowing system was provided that permitted ten different views of a spreadsheet to be displayed on screen at once, and recalculation operations were reported to be \"around ten seconds for quite a large model\". Reviewers considered the View and ViewSheet applications to be \"professional\" and to \"compare well with similar software sold for much more expensive machines\" such as the IBM PC, with WordStar being noted as a broadly similar package to View. Compatibility with the same programs on the BBC Micro made a complete Electron-based system an attractive, low-cost, entry-level word processing and spreadsheet system. However, View's printing support was criticised as inadequate without the use of a companion printer driver program.\nAcornsoft did not release its \"ViewStore\" database program specifically for the Electron, but the software was reported as being compatible, albeit with function key combinations different to those documented for the BBC Micro. However, Acornsoft did release a product, \"Database\", on 3.5-inch diskette for use with the Electron upgraded with the Plus 3 expansion. The product provided a suite of programs for the creation, maintenance and analysis of structured data files, visualising records using a card index user interface metaphor, and supporting sorting and searching operations on the stored data.\nSlogger, an established provider of expansions, also produced productivity applications such as \"Starword\", a word processor, and \"Starstore\", a database. Starword provided separate command and editing modes familiar from Acornsoft's View, also supporting 132-column documents and horizontal scrolling for the editing of such wider documents. Along with other operations familiar from View, such as search and replace functions, block-based editing, and control over text justification, it had built-in support for customising documents for output using a mail merge function. Available on ROM for fitting to a ROM expansion such as Slogger's Rombox or inside a separately purchased ROM cartridge, and reportedly developed specifically for the Electron, Starword was considered \"comprehensive and powerful\".\nStarstore, also available on ROM, provided a database management suite primarily aimed at users of cassette storage, with databases being entirely resident in RAM. It supported database definition, data editing, searching, sorting and printing activities. Various features complemented Starword, such as mail merge integration. \"Starstore II\" followed on as an alternative to, as opposed to a direct successor of, the earlier Starstore product by requiring a disc-based system and permitting databases to be as large as the amount of free space on any given disc. Its user interface was improved over the earlier product, offering pop-up menus and cursor-based navigation.\nComputer Concepts' \"Wordwise Plus\", developed from the company's earlier Wordwise product for the BBC Micro and launched in early 1985, was made available for use with the Electron expanded with the E2P-6502 second processor cartridge. The original Wordwise product was incompatible with the Electron due to its use of Mode 7 (the BBC Micro's 40-column Teletext display mode), and being supplied on a ROM chip, it could also not be readily added to the Electron without appropriate expansions. Available from Permanent Memory Systems, producers of the E2P-6502 cartridge, the Electron version of the software was the Hi-Wordwise Plus variant, supplied on disc instead of ROM, and designed to run on the second processor and to use the expanded memory provided in that environment. The program used the Electron's 40-column Mode 6 display.\nExpansion manufacturers Advanced Computer Products and Slogger both made solutions available based on products from Advanced Memory Systems. ACP released a bundle of the \"AMX Mouse\" and \"AMX Art\" software for use with its Advanced Plus 5 expansion, also requiring a DFS-compatible disc system. Slogger produced a version of the desktop publishing package \"Stop Press\" for the Electron, requiring a DFS-compatible disc system, two spare ROM sockets, a mouse, and a suitable user port expansion, with Slogger producing its own user port expansion cartridge. Competing with these products but requiring only a disc system, AVP's \"Pixel Perfect\" offered a rudimentary desktop publishing solution, utilising the computer's high-resolution Mode 0 display.\nGames.\nOf the twelve software titles announced by Acornsoft for the Electron at the machine's launch, six were games titles: \"Snapper\", \"Monsters\" (a clone of Space Panic), \"Meteors\" (a clone of Asteroids), \"Starship Command\", \"Chess\", and the combined title \"Draughts and Reversi\". When the Plus 1 expansion was launched in 1984, three of these titles\u00a0\u2013 \"Hopper\", \"Snapper\" and \"Starship Command\"\u00a0\u2013 were among the six ROM cartridge titles available at launch, together with the adventure \"Countdown to Doom\". Acornsoft would continue to release games including those based on existing arcade games such as \"Arcadians\" (based on Galaxian) and \"Hopper\" (based on Frogger), as well as original titles such as \"Free Fall\" and \"Elite\".\nMicro Power, already an established BBC Micro games publisher, also entered the Electron market at a relatively early stage, offering ten initial titles either converted from the BBC Micro, in the case of \"Escape from Moonbase Alpha\" and \"Killer Gorilla\", or \"completely re-written\", in the case of \"Moonraider\" (due to differences in the screen handling between the machines). Superior Software, also a significant publisher for the BBC Micro, routinely released games for both machines, notably a licensed version of Atari's Tempest in 1985, but also successful original titles such as the \"Repton\" series of games, \"Citadel\", \"Thrust\" and \"Galaforce\". Superior's role in games publishing for the Acorn machines expanded in 1986 when the company acquired the right to use the Acornsoft brand, leading to the co-branding of games and compilations released by the company and the re-release of existing Acornsoft titles with this branding, Elite among them. The company would subsequently release another \"masterpiece\" with bundled novella\u00a0\u2013 the 1988 game \"Exile\"\u00a0\u2013 as well as numerous conversions and compilations.\nBy 1988, the \"big three\" full-price games publishers for the Acorn 8-bit market were identified as Superior Software, Audiogenic (ASL) and Tynesoft, with Top Ten and Alternative Software being the significant budget publishers, and other \"strong contenders\" being Godax, Mandarin and Bug Byte, this assessment made from the perspective of an established games author evaluating trustworthy publishers for aspiring authors. Commercial considerations motivated authors to make their games available for the Electron due to its importance in sales terms, representing \"around half of the Acorn market\", with it being regarded as \"almost compulsory for any mainstream game\" to have an Electron version \"unless your game is a state-of-the-art masterpiece\", with \"Revs\", \"Cholo\" and \"Sentinel\" cited as such BBC Micro exclusives. Although the Electron imposed additional technical constraints on authors accustomed to the BBC Micro, some authors were able to use this to their creative advantage. For instance, of \"Frak!\" it was noted that the \"Electron version is more popular, and considered better than the BBC version because it has a screen designer included\".\nAlthough not as well supported by the biggest software publishers as rivals like the Commodore 64 and Sinclair ZX Spectrum, a good range of games were available for the Electron including popular multi-format games such as \"Chuckie Egg\". There were also many popular games officially converted to the Electron from arcade machines (including \"Crystal Castles\", \"Tempest\", \"Commando\", \"Paperboy\", and \"Yie Ar Kung-Fu\") and other home computer systems (including \"Impossible Mission\", \"Jet Set Willy\", \"The Way of the Exploding Fist\", \"Tetris\", \"The Last Ninja\", \"Barbarian\", \"Ballistix\", \"Predator\", \"Hostages\" and \"SimCity\").\nDespite Acorn themselves effectively shelving the Electron in 1985, games continued to be developed and released by professional software houses until the early 1990s. There were around 1,400 games released for the Acorn Electron, several thousand extra public domain titles were released on disc through Public Domain libraries. Notable enterprises which produced discs of such software are BBC PD, EUG (Electron User Group) and HeadFirst PD.\nDevelopment considerations and techniques.\nLike the BBC Micro, the Electron is constrained by limited memory resources. Of the 32\u00a0KB RAM, 3\u00bd KB is allocated to the OS at startup and at least 10\u00a0KB is taken up by the display buffer in contiguous display modes.\nAlthough programs running on the BBC Micro can use the machine's 6522 chip to trigger interrupts at certain points in the update of each display frame, using these events to change the palette and potentially switching all colours to black, thus blanking regions of the screen and hiding non-graphical data that had been stored in screen memory, the Electron lacks such hardware capabilities as standard. However, it was found to be possible to take advantage of the characteristics of interrupts that were provided, permitting palette changes after the top 100 lines of each display frame, thus facilitating the blanking of either the top 100 or bottom 156 lines of the display. Many games took advantage of this, gaining storage by leaving non-graphical data in the disabled area.\nOther games would simply load non-graphical data into the display and leave it visible as regions of apparently randomly coloured pixels. One notable example is Superior Software's Citadel.\nAlthough page flipping is a hardware possibility, the limited memory forced most applications to do all their drawing directly to the visible screen, often resulting in graphical flicker or visible redraw. A notable exception is Players' \"Joe Blade\" series.\nA number of unusual techniques were employed by some developers to work around apparent limitations of the hardware.\nFiretrack: smooth vertical scrolling.\nAlthough programs can alter the position of the screen in memory, the non-linear format of the display means that vertical scrolling can only be done in blocks of 8 pixels without further work.\n\"Firetrack\", released on a compilation by Superior Software, exploits a division in the way the Electron handles its display\u00a0\u2013 of the seven available graphics modes, two are configured so that the final two of every ten scanlines are blank and are not based on the contents of RAM. If 16 scanlines of continuous graphical data are written to a character-block-aligned portion of the screen then they will appear as a continuous block in most modes but in the two non-continuous modes they will be displayed as two blocks of eight scanlines, separated in the middle by two blank scanlines.\nIn order to keep track of its position within the display, the Electron maintains an internal display address counter. The same counter is used in both the continuous and non-continuous graphics modes and switching modes mid-frame does not cause any adjustment to the counter.\n\"Firetrack\" switches from a non-continuous to a continuous graphics mode part way down the display. By using the palette to mask the top area of the display and taking care about when it changes mode it can shift the continuous graphics at the bottom of the display down in two pixel increments because the internal display counter is not incremented on blank scanlines during non-continuous graphics modes.\nExile: sampled speech.\n\"Exile\" turns the Electron's one channel output into a digital speaker for PCM output.\nThe speaker can be programmatically switched on or off at any time but is permanently attached to a hardware counter so is normally only able to output a square wave. But if set to a frequency outside the human audible range then the ear can't perceive the square wave, only the difference between the speaker being switched on and off. This gives the effect of a simple toggle speaker similar to that seen in the 48\u00a0KB Sinclair ZX Spectrum. \"Exile\" uses this to output 1-bit audio samples.\nFrak! and Zalaga: polyphonic music.\nAs part of their copy protection, illegal copies of Aardvark Software's \"Frak!\" and \"Zalaga\" would cause a pseudo-polyphonic rendition of Trumpet Hornpipe, the Captain Pugwash theme tune, to play endlessly rather than loading the game properly (Pugwash being a pirate). On the Electron version of Frak!, the tune was the main theme from \"Benny Hill\" (Boots Randolph's \"Yakety Sax\"). The polyphony was achieved via fast note-switching to achieve the necessary chords.\nHardware expansions.\nSince the Electron provides only a selection of video output ports, a cassette port and the expansion connector, a range of additional expansions were produced to offer ports and connections to various peripherals. The first expansions were largely joystick and printer interfaces or sideways ROM boards. For instance, First Byte Computers developed an interface and software which allowed a \"switched\" joystick to be used with the majority of software titles. This interface became very popular and was sold by W.H. Smiths, Boots, Comet and hundreds of independent computer dealers, selling as many as 23,000 units over a two-year period, helped by a bundling agreement with Dixons.\nAcorn's own expansion strategy was led by the Plus 1 which offered a combination of ports and cartridge connectors, followed by the Plus 3 disc drive unit, but by early 1986 the more general range of expansions had broadened to include floppy drive and RS423 interfaces, Teletext adapters, and other fundamental enhancements to the base machine.\nMulti-function expansions.\nSince the Electron's expansion connector was the basis of practically all external hardware expansions for the machine, unless an expansion propagated this connector to others, as was done by the Acorn Plus 3, the capabilities of any given expansion would limit the capabilities of the expanded machine. Thus, expansions offering a single function, such as joystick ports or a printer port, would need to be disconnected if other capabilities were needed, and then reconnected later. Consequently, multi-function expansions offering a combination of different capabilities offered a significant degree of convenience as well as avoiding wear on the expansion connector.\nAlongside announcements of Acorn's then-unreleased Plus 1, Solidisk previewed a General Purpose Interface for the Electron in early 1984 offering a Centronics printer port, switched joystick port, user port, sideways ROM sockets, and mini-cartridge sockets supported by the 6522 versatile interface adapter (VIA) chip. The Plus 1 itself was released in mid-1984, introducing the influential cartridge format for expansions ultimately used by several other companies.\nAcorn Plus 1.\nThe Acorn Plus 1 added two ROM cartridge slots, an analogue interface (supporting four channels) and a Centronics parallel port, priced at \u00a359.90. The analogue interface was normally used for joysticks, although trackball and graphics tablet devices were available, and the parallel interface was typically used to connect a printer. Game ROM cartridges would boot automatically. Languages in paged ROM cartridges would take precedence over BASIC. (The slot at the front of the interface took priority if both were populated.)\nAccess to ROM occurs at 2\u00a0MHz until RAM access is required, so theoretically programs released on ROM can run up to twice as fast as those released on tape or disc. Despite this, all of the games released on ROM were packaged as ROM filing system cartridges, from which the micro would load programs into main memory in exactly the same way as if it were loading from tape. This meant that programs did not need to be modified for their new memory location and could be written in BASIC but gave no execution speed benefits. Six ROM cartridge titles were announced for the launch of the Plus 1: three arcade games, one adventure game, one educational title, and the \"Lisp\" language implementation, the latter being a genuine language ROM that \"takes the place of the BASIC ROM\" and is instantly available when switching on.\nThe cartridge slots provide additional control lines (compared to the lines available via the edge connector on the rear of the Electron) to ease implementation of ROM cartridges. Acorn described the hardware extension possibilities in promotional literature, giving an RS423 cartridge as an example of this capability of the Plus 1.\nAdditional peripheral cartridges were produced by companies such as Advanced Computer Products (and subsequently PRES) whose Advanced ROM Adaptor (ARA) and Advanced Sideways RAM (ASR) products provided sideways ROM and RAM capabilities, allowing ROM- or EPROM-based software to be accessed to provide languages, utilities and applications. ROM or EPROM devices containing the software could be physically inserted into empty ZIF sockets, or the software would be loaded from ROM image files (typically provided on disk) into RAM devices fitted in such sockets. Such RAM could potentially be powered by a battery and thus be able to retain its contents when the computer itself was powered off. Both such arrangements exposed the software in the same sideways memory region.\nSuch cartridge support enabled the Electron to provide the same functionality as that offered by the expansion ROM slots under the keyboard and on the bottom-left of the BBC Micro B keyboard. However, the need to use cartridge sockets for other peripherals encouraged PRES to develop the Advanced Plus 6 (AP6): an internal RAM and ROM board for the Plus 1 providing six sockets that could be freely used for ROM, EPROM and RAM devices. Installation of the AP6 unit required some modifications to the Plus 1, undertaken either by the user or by PRES, and the product could also be enhanced with the Advanced Plus 7 offering battery-backed RAM support for two 16\u00a0KB banks.\nThe addition of the Plus 1 added a number of new *FX or OSBYTE calls that allowed the OS to read values from the analogue interface and write to the parallel interface.\nThe Plus 1 needed memory page &amp;D for its workspace, and the unit added some processing overhead when enabled, both of these things causing issues with the loading and running of software, particularly cassette-based games. To disable the Plus 1, after pressing BREAK, the following commands could be issued:\n *FX163,128,1\n ?&amp;212=&amp;D6\n ?&amp;213=&amp;F1\n ?&amp;2AC=0\nAn official application note described a similar set of commands to \"remove the Plus One completely from the address map disabling the Centronics and A/D ports (additionally disabling the RS423 cartridge if fitted)\".\nFurther developments.\nAfter Acorn's change of focus away from the Electron, and with a shortage of Plus 1 units available to purchase, Advanced Computer Products secured the rights to manufacture the unit under licence from Acorn, obtaining the injection moulds and tooling, thus restarting production in 1987 after Acorn's own production of the unit had ceased in November 1985. The Advanced Plus 2 (AP2) ROM was later sold by PRES as a replacement ROM for the Plus 1, of whose 8\u00a0KB utility ROM only 3\u00a0KB had been used, thus providing an opportunity for a more comprehensive ROM to be developed. The AP2 added ROM management commands familiar from the BBC Master series, support for various sideways RAM products from PRES, disc formatting and verification utilities for different ADFS versions, a command to disable the Plus 1 entirely, and improvements that made tape loading more reliable in \"high memory\" screen modes.\nSlogger Rombox Plus.\nFollowing on from Slogger's earlier Rombox product\u00a0\u2013 an expansion similar in profile to the Plus 1 but offering eight ROM sockets and propagating the expansion connector to other units\u00a0\u2013 the Rombox Plus was positioned more directly as a competitor to the Plus 1 in that it offered two cartridge slots and a Centronics print port alongside four ROM sockets. Priced at \u00a349.95, the unit was mostly compatible with cartridges designed for the Plus 1 although one reviewer reported physical issues with some expansion cartridges, suggesting some manufacturing inconsistencies given other users' more positive experiences, but indicated that it was still \"worth considering as an alternative to the Plus 1\". One review reported that the Cumana Electron Filing System cartridge had an edge connector that would not physically fit inside the slot in the Rombox Plus unit; this along with a perceived lack of robustness of the case being their only major reservations about the product. The product's support for utilising 8\u00a0KB RAM devices as a printer buffer, with buffer management provided by the built-in EPROM, was noted as a particular advantage over the Plus 1.\nSlogger Remote Expansion and Plus 2.\nIn early 1989, Slogger announced its \"remote expansion\" (RX) system for the Electron, providing a separate case with power supply to house expansions and disc drives, able to support the weight of a monitor or television. Intended for the RX system, the Plus 2 offered two ROM cartridge slots compatible with the Plus 1, three ROM sockets, and RS423 and user port capabilities. One application of the user port was to connect a mouse, utilised by Slogger's version of the Stop Press desktop publishing package by Advanced Memory Systems.\nSoftware Bargains Plus 1.\nIn mid-1989, Software Bargains announced an expansion providing different levels of Plus 1 functionality, offered as a bare printed circuit board without casing and in three different variants: the basic model offered one cartridge port and was bundled with View and Viewsheet cartridges for \u00a329.95; an extended model offered one cartridge port and a printer port with the two bundled cartridges for \u00a336.95; the full model offered two cartridge ports, printer port and the bundled cartridges for \u00a339.95. Various board upgrade options were also offered between the variants, with the product being described mainly as a vehicle to expose the bundled software packages to as many as 150,000 owners of the estimated 200,000 Electrons in the UK who \"have not yet been able to acquire or use View or Viewsheet\". The lack of casing was considered the most significant disadvantage, with the absence of the analogue port deemed less critical due to a general lack of support for joysticks in many games.\nCommunications and networking.\nTo support connectivity, Acorn announced a Plus 2 network interface with availability scheduled for early 1985, together with a RS423 cartridge for the Plus 1. Neither of these products were delivered as announced.\nAcorn Plus 2.\nThe Acorn Plus 2 interface was due to provide Econet capability. This interface did not make it to market. However, an Econet interface was produced by Barson Computers in Australia and possibly other individuals and businesses.\nAcorn Plus 4.\nThe Acorn Plus 4 interface was due to provide a modem communications capability.\nAndyk RS423 cartridge.\nAndyk announced an RS423 cartridge for the Plus 1 providing a serial port, alongside other products, in late 1985. It was priced at \u00a334.99.\nPace Tellstar/Nightingale.\nOriginally reported in mid-1985 as a collaboration between Acorn and Pace Micro Technology, but launched in early 1986, Pace offered a communications product consisting of a RS423 cartridge, bundled with a Nightingale modem and Tellstar communications software, retailing at around \u00a3161 but discounted to \u00a3145. The substantially reduced price of the Electron itself created an opportunity that Pace was \"exploiting nicely\" with its telecommunications bundle, described by one commentator as \"a marvellous opportunity to get a cheap Prestel set in addition to your normal computer\".\nJafa Systems RS423 cartridge.\nJafa Systems announced an RS423 cartridge in late 1989 to \"fill a two year gap in the market\", offering a serial connector compatible with the BBC Micro together with an on-board socket for 8\u00a0KB or 16\u00a0KB EPROM devices or for 32\u00a0KB RAM, the latter being configured to present two sideways RAM banks to the system. Write protect functionality was supported to prevent certain ROM software from attempting to overwrite itself if stored in RAM. The cartridge board itself was priced at around \u00a330, with a case costing \u00a35 extra, and an optional 32\u00a0KB RAM adding another \u00a320. Support for the E00 ADFS offered by PRES for that company's AP3 disc system was indicated as an application for the sideways RAM.\nSlogger Plus 2 RS423 interface.\nSlogger provided an RS423 interface as an option for its own Plus 2 expansion, announced in early 1989.\nDisc interfaces.\nThe first disc interface to be announced for the Electron was Pace's Le Box in 1984, offering a single-sided 100\u00a0KB floppy drive controlled by the 8271 controller and accessed using the Amcom Disc Filing System, with pricing at \u00a3299 plus VAT including the drive or around \u00a3199 without. The unit also provided eight sideways ROM sockets and was intended to sit under the Electron itself. The unit was connected via cabling to the expansion edge connector and included its own power supply, and other drives including switchable 40/80 track drives offering up to 400\u00a0KB capacity were dealer-supplied options. Although the product was meant to be on sale at the Acorn User Show in August 1984, and had been advertised, it was \"discontinued\" in early 1985 before getting to market, with a Pace representative indicating that prohibitive pricing of the 8271 chips (each at \"over \u00a380 at times\") had left the company considering a re-launch of the product should the pricing situation become more favourable.\nFollowing on from Acorn's Plus 3 interface, Cumana, Solidisk, Advanced Computer Products and Slogger all offered disc interfaces for the Electron. Unlike disc systems on the BBC Micro and the Acorn Plus 3, many of the systems released for the Electron did not claim RAM workspace (and raise the PAGE variable affecting applications above the default of &amp;E00), making it easier to use cassette-based software transferred to disc and to run larger programs from disc.\nLow-cost alternatives to disc systems, briefly made fashionable by press coverage of the Sinclair Microdrive, were reportedly under development by expansion suppliers such as Solidisk, and finished products such as the Phloopy looped tape system were offered for the Electron. Reliability issues were described with the Phloopy, and the product was apparently short-lived.\nAcorn Plus 3.\nLaunched in late 1984 for a price of \u00a3229, the Acorn Plus 3 was a hardware module that connected independently of the Plus 1 and provided a \"self contained disc interface and 3.5 inch single sided disc drive\" offering over 300\u00a0KB of storage per disc using the newly introduced Advanced Disc Filing System (ADFS). The Plus 3 was also reportedly produced with a double-sided drive fitted.\nAn expansion connector for a second 3.5- or 5.25-inch drive was also provided by the unit, with such drives needing to provide a Shugart-compatible connector and their own power supply.4 The original Electron edge connector was repeated on the back of the Plus 3, allowing the Plus 1 or other compatible expansion to be connected in conjunction with the Plus 3.5\nThe double-density drive of the Plus 3 was driven using a WD1770 drive controller by the ADFS. (The Plus 3 had been rumoured to offer Acorn's DFS and to feature an 8272 double-density disk controller before its launch.) Because the WD1770 is capable of single-density mode and uses the same IBM360-derived floppy disc format as the Intel 8271 found in the BBC Micro, it was also possible to use the Disc Filing System with an alternate ROM, such as the ACP 1770 DFS.\nThe Plus 3 reset PAGE to &amp;1D00, reducing the amount of free RAM available to the user.52 The ADFS system could be temporarily disabled (and PAGE reset to &amp;E00) via the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Kbd/styles.css\"&gt;&lt;/templatestyles&gt;*NOADFS command.15 Later products such as the PRES E00 ADFS remedied the memory demands of the ADFS, along with other issues suffered by the software as delivered with the Plus 3. If using the Plus 3 in screen modes 0\u20133, the pseudo-variable TIME would be thrown off, as the interrupts were disabled during disk access in these modes. The screen would also blank during disc accesses.\nDisks had to be manually mounted and dismounted using the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Kbd/styles.css\"&gt;&lt;/templatestyles&gt;*MOUNT / &lt;templatestyles src=\"Kbd/styles.css\"&gt;&lt;/templatestyles&gt;*DISMOUNT commands, or using the ++ key combination. Disks could also be booted from via the standard + key-combination, if the !BOOT file was present on the disk. This behaviour was the same as on the BBC Micro.18\nThe Plus 3 included an uprated square black power supply unit with mains cord, manufactured by STC, designed and manufactured in England to BS 415 and BS 5850, that was designed to power the Plus 3, in addition to the Electron and the Plus 1 interface as well. This replaced the original cream-coloured \"wall wart\" style power supply, designed to BS 415 and manufactured in Hong Kong.\nRepair note: If the internal power-supply connector, used to power the existing internal 3.5-inch drive is damaged, and requires replacement, then the original AMP 800-930 4-pin connector, which was already in short supply during the original production run, may be replaced with a Molex 5264 50-37-5043 \"Mini-SPOX\" connector as an alternative.\nAdvanced Plus 3.\nDesigned and produced by Baildon Electronics and sold by PRES, the Advanced Plus 3 (AP3) was a Plus 1 cartridge interface using the WD1770 controller, supplied with Acorn's ADFS and a single-sided 3\u00bd-inch disc drive for \u00a399 plus VAT, offering equivalent functionality to the Acorn Plus 3. Announced in late 1987, the product was made possible by an agreement between ACP and Acorn to license the ADFS software. As with many disc interfaces for the Electron, since the interface provided a connector for the drive, this made it possible to connect a 5\u00bc\" floppy disc drive (more common amongst BBC Micro owners) or the more typical 3\u00bd-inch drive.\nPRES later released a version of ADFS with support for PAGE at &amp;E00, this being achieved by using RAM provided by the Advanced Battery Backed RAM (ABR) cartridge. This version also fixed two notable bugs in Acorn's ADFS, eliminating unreliability when accessing the first tracks on a disc which had previously necessitated the writing of a file (ZYSYSHELP) as a workaround, and switching off the text cursor during disc compaction which had previously caused disc corruption (since the disc data would be processed using screen memory during this operation, and the cursor would modify that data when blinking). The ROM image was supplied on disc for \u00a317.19, whereas a bundle of the ROM image and ABR cartridge was \u00a350.95. A separate ADFS version 1.1 product, offered as a 16\u00a0KB ROM, also provided these bug fixes. Advertised slightly earlier than the E00 ADFS, it also replaced the Winchester hard drive support traditionally found in ADFS with \"'patches' for future enhancements\". Such patches, present in both of these ADFS variants, amounted to support for a 256\u00a0KB RAM disc provided by the company's Advanced Quarter Meg RAM cartridge.\nIn 1989, the Advanced Plus 3 Mark 2 was launched, offering a double-sided drive in place of the single-sided drive previously offered. This meant that the storage capacity of each disc was increased from the 320\u00a0KB of the original Plus 3 to 640\u00a0KB (this being supported by ADFS on the Master Compact). A \"complete package\" including double-sided, double-density floppy drive was advertised for just under \u00a3150 including VAT.\nCumana Floppy Disc System.\nEarly in 1985, Cumana released a cartridge-based interface providing support for double-density storage, a real-time clock and calendar for timestamping of files, and a spare ROM socket for user-fitted sideways ROMs. The filing system used was Cumana's own QFS, supporting 89 files per disc, PAGE at &amp;E00, a non-hierarchical catalogue, ten-character filenames, with a format not directly compatible with either of Acorn's DFS or ADFS. The interface itself cost \u00a3149.95 when originally announced, but settled at around \u00a3115.95 including VAT, also being offered in a promotional bundle with a 5\u00bc-inch drive for \u00a3224.15 including VAT. Later pricing put the interface at \u00a374.95 including VAT.\nSolidisk EFS.\nIn mid-1985, Solidisk released a cartridge-based interface with support for single and double density storage and providing Acorn DFS and ADFS compatibility, 16\u00a0KB of on-board sideways RAM, and a connector for a Winchester hard drive. The cartridge itself cost \u00a359, with a bundle including a double-sided, double-density, 3\u00bd-inch drive costing \u00a3200. A 20\u00a0MB hard drive was offered at a price of \u00a3805. PAGE was set to &amp;1900 when using the Solidisk system.\nAdvanced Plus 4.\nAnnounced in early 1986, the Advanced Plus 4 (AP4) from Advanced Computer Products was a cartridge-based interface employing the WD1770 controller and featuring ACP's 1770 DFS product, providing compatibility with Acorn's DFS from the BBC Micro and thereby supporting seven-character filenames and up to 31 files per disc. However, 8\u00a0KB of on-board static RAM was used as workspace for the filing system, keeping PAGE at &amp;E00. An extra ROM socket was provided for a user-fitted sideways ROM, and being a 1770-based interface, it was reported that Acorn's ADFS could be used instead, although since it was not aware of the additional RAM, PAGE would be raised to &amp;1D00 as it would be when using Acorn's Plus 3. The interface was priced at \u00a369.55 plus VAT.\nSlogger Electron Disc System and Pegasus 400.\nSlogger, an established producer of expansions and a reseller of other disc systems, introduced the Electron Disc System in early 1987, priced at \u00a374.95, featuring the Cumana Floppy Disc System interface, which was combined with an Acorn-compatible DFS, SEDFS, having the capability of reading 40-track discs on 80-track drives plus support for Slogger's tape-to-disc conversion products, and reported as offering \"virtual 100 per cent 8271 emulation\" for compatibility with traditional DFS software. The SEDFS ROM was also available separately for existing Cumana interface owners, priced at \u00a324.95.\nThe SEDFS was later bundled with Slogger's own cartridge-based interface and a 40/80-track switchable drive offering up to 400\u00a0KB storage per disc, with the bundle taking the Pegasus 400 name, introduced as part of a sales tour towards the end of 1987. This package of interface and drive cost \u00a3130. The precise DFS variant used by the Pegasus 400 system kept PAGE at &amp;E00 and introduced \"typeahead\" support, permitting keystroke buffering during disc activity on systems with the Turbo-Driver or Master RAM Board fitted and enabled.\nSlogger/Elektuur Turbo boards.\nAnnounced in early 1986, the Slogger Turbo-Driver was a professionally fitted upgrade priced at \u00a342. The board itself plugged into the CPU and BASIC ROM sockets on the main circuit board of the Electron, which merely involved removing socketed components on very early Electron models, but required desoldering work and therefore benefited from a fitting service for later units. The performance benefit of fitting the board was to make some programs, particularly those running in the high bandwidth modes (0 to 3), run up to three times faster.\nThe direct origins of the Slogger product appear to be a board designed by Andyk Limited, announced as the Fast Electron Board in late 1985 with a price of \u00a329.99, whereas the Elektuur modification was described in an article in Dutch Electronics magazine Elektuur and intended for users to perform at home.\nThe Slogger and Elektuur Turbo boards were born out of a hack initially devised at Acorn. By shadowing the lowest 8\u00a0KB of RAM with a static RAM chip outside of reach of the ULA, the CPU could always access it at 2\u00a0MHz. The tradeoff was that the screen could not be located in that 8\u00a0KB. In practice the operating system ROMs always put the screen into the top 20\u00a0KB and as a result this probably only broke compatibility with around 2% of software. Speeding up the low portion of memory is particularly useful on 6502 derived machines because that processor has a faster addressing for the first 256 bytes and so it is common for software to put any variables involved in time-critical sections of program into that region.\nThe cost of the 64 Kbit SRAM chip would have been more than that of doubling the four 64 Kbit DRAM chips to give 8-bit RAM access, fixing both the modest memory and poor performance issues of the Electron. Retail pricing of HM6264-15 devices, one of these being used in the expansion, was around $ in December 1983, in comparison to around $ for 150ns 4164 devices or $ for 200ns 4164 devices, four of the former thereby costing around $ in total. Thus, eight 4164 devices, at least at that time, would have cost $-$, whereas a combination of four 4164 devices rated at 150ns together with a static RAM device would have cost around $.\nSlogger Master RAM Board.\nIntroduced at around the start of 1987 and priced at \u00a364.95 fitted or \u00a354.95 as a kit, the Master RAM Board offered the familiar turbo mode from the Slogger Turbo-Driver alongside a shadow mode providing 32\u00a0KB of static RAM in addition to the existing 32\u00a0KB dynamic RAM, thus giving 64\u00a0KB in total RAM. Through the provision of 20\u00a0KB of shadow RAM, so-called \"legally written software\", this being software using the operating system calls and not writing directly to the screen, could function without significant modification, making substantially more memory available for BASIC, View, Viewsheet, language ROMs and many other applications. By providing extra storage this modification also allowed some games and applications intended for the BBC Micro to function on the Electron despite the lack of a native Mode 7. The RAM provided by the Master RAM Board was also \"fast RAM\", accessed by the CPU at 2\u00a0MHz.\nApplications could not directly address video memory in shadow mode without modification, so it was incompatible with most games, although there is no inherent reason why a game could not be written to function in shadow mode. A switch mounted through the case switched between normal, turbo and shadow modes. Despite providing an extra 32\u00a0KB, shadow mode potentially left up to 12\u00a0KB of the Electron's original dynamic RAM unused, with limited initial support provided for the use of this lower memory region. However, Slogger's modified operating system provided fundamental support for its use as a \"print buffer\", utilised by the company's own printer buffer software, and the programming interface concerned was elucidated in a series of magazine articles.\nTowards the end of the Electron's commercial lifetime, the Turbo-Driver and Master RAM Boards were offered already fitted to new Electrons in an attempt to increase sales. For a time, Jafa Systems manufactured their own equivalent of the Master RAM Board in order to support their own product range.\nMode 7 display expansions.\nOne of the features of the BBC Micro that was absent in the Electron was the Teletext-style \"Mode 7\" display. The omission of this display mode was remarkable because it had a very low memory requirement (just 1000 bytes) and many BBC programs used it to maximise available memory for program code and data while also providing a colourful 40-column textual display with simple low-resolution graphical decorations.90\nSuch display capabilities, desirable in their own right on low-memory computers, were also desirable for delivering content through low-bandwidth communications channels such as that from Teletext and Viewdata services. However, access to such services can be considered to be a separate capability, and the BBC Micro needed to be upgraded to complement its display capability with the Teletext or Prestel adapters to receive such over-the-air or online content.90\nJafa Systems provided a number of solutions to remedy the absence of a Teletext display capability. Morley Electronics instead chose to offer an expansion combining the display and reception capabilities.\nSir Computers.\nIn late 1984, Sir Computers announced a Mode 7 adapter unit that plugged into the Electron's expansion connector. Unfortunately, Sir Computers ceased trading before the product was brought to market.\nJafa Systems.\nReleased in 1987 at a price of \u00a389, the Mode 7 Mark 1 Display Unit was a separate unit \"about the size, shape and colour of the Plus One or a Slogger ROMbox\" that connected to the Electron's expansion connector and featured a Motorola 6845 display controller and Mullard SAA5050 character generator to replicate the main elements of the BBC Micro's Teletext display solution. This only used 1\u00a0KB of memory for the display, with the expansion listening to display memory write accesses and buffering the data in its own memory. A ROM was included to extend the operating system to allow activation of Mode 7 as a genuine screen mode and to provide extra commands and to support keyboard shortcuts used on the BBC Micro to emit Teletext control sequences. To support the output of both the Mode 7 display and the existing video output, a lead connected the Electron's RGB output to the expansion, with the expansion providing only RF (television) output.\nConscious of the relatively high price of the Mark 1 unit,19 John Wike of Jafa devised and, at the end of 1988, introduced a software-based \"Mode 7 Simulator\", priced at \u00a325, supplied on a ROM cartridge that rendered the Mode 7 display in a low-resolution, 8-colour graphics mode. Although cheap and effective in enabling use of some software that only used official operating system routines for text output, this solution proved very slow because the Electron had to be placed into the high-bandwidth Mode 2 display to be able to show eight colours at once. In doing so, the CPU spent a lot of time drawing representations of Mode 7 characters and graphics that in a hardware solution would be achieved without any demand on the CPU. It also used up 20\u00a0KB of RAM for the graphics display rather than the 1000 bytes of a hardware Mode 7.\nA conceptually similar predecessor to the software-based simulator was published by Electron User in early 1987, offering a monochrome Mode 4 simulation of the Teletext display, using the lower 25 character lines of the screen to show the Teletext output, reserving several lines at the top of the screen for a representation of Mode 7 used to prepare the eventual visual output. However, the program did not support direct access to Mode 7 memory locations. The author noted that a Mode 2 version would have been possible but would have required a redesigned character set and \"too much memory\".\nA further refinement of the hardware solution was introduced in 1989 with the Mode 7 Mark 2 Display Unit, which retained the SAA5050 character generator but omitted the 6845 display controller, and was fitted internally in the Electron itself instead of being housed in an external unit, although some kind of ROM expansion unit was needed to hold the driver/utilities ROM. It used software to ensure that the SAA5050 was fed with the correct character data. A software ROM would put the machine into a two-colour, 40-column graphics mode (thus providing one byte per character), and as the ULA read display data from memory in the usual fashion, the SAA5050 would listen to the data it was reading and produce a Mode 7 interpretation of the same information,3 this being achieved by fitting a board on top of the ULA connecting to its pins.20 When necessary the hardware would switch between the conventional Electron graphics output and the Mode 7 output being produced by the add-on, feeding it to the Electron's built-in video output sockets via the red, green and blue lines on the motherboard.22\nThe disadvantage to this system is that while the SAA5050 would expect to be repeatedly fed the same 40 bytes of data for every display scanline of each character row, the ULA would read a different set of 40 bytes for every display scanline in order to produce a full graphics display. A software ROM worked around this by duplicating the data intended for a Mode 7 display in memory. Although this produced a Mode 7 that had less of an impact upon CPU performance than a software solution, gave the same visual quality as the BBC Micro, and supported direct access to Mode 7 screen addresses as well as accesses via operating system routines, it still used 10\u00a0KB of memory for the display and reduced the amount of readily-usable application memory (as indicated by HIMEM) by another 6\u00a0KB.\nHowever, with users increasingly able to rely on expansions such as the Slogger Master RAM board to provide more memory, and with this combination of expansions acknowledged throughout the user manual, the emphasis of the Mode 7 Simulator and Mark 2 Display Unit was arguably to deliver the actual display capabilities for those applications that needed them, instead of using Mode 7 as a way of economising with regard to memory usage, and to do so at a reasonable price. In this latter regard, the Mark 2 model was available as a kit costing \u00a325 or as an assembled product (requiring some soldering) costing \u00a349, with a fitting service available for \u00a310.\nThe Jafa interfaces did not provide a Teletext or Viewdata reception capability, but the Mark 2 was explicitly stated to work in conjunction with the Morley Electronics Teletext Adapter.15 Meanwhile, the manual for the Mark 2 noted that the product would provide the functionality of a Viewdata terminal if combined with Jafa's RS423 cartridge.2\nMorley Electronics.\nMorley Electronics produced a Teletext Adaptor expansion for the BBC Micro and the Electron. Since the BBC Micro has the Mode 7 display capability, the model aimed at the BBC Micro merely provided the content reception capability needed to receive and decode Teletext signals, connecting to the user port and power supply. However, the Electron models provided both display and reception capabilities, doing so by routing either the RGB or UHF signals (depending on the model) through the unit in order to introduce the Mode 7 output produced by the unit, also connecting via a cartridge. The Teletext display capabilities in the Electron models exceeded those of the BBC Micro, with one reviewer noting that the enhanced capabilities permitted \"black text on a coloured background, something I've always wanted to do on my Beeb\".90 The UHF model of the Electron adapter also supported overlaying of Teletext onto video and framing of video.91\nSecond Processor expansions.\nAcorn did demonstrate a prototype \"Tube\" interface for the Electron alongside the Plus 3 interface at the Compec exhibition in November 1984, although this was never brought to market directly by Acorn.\nAdvanced Plus 5.\nDespite Acorn's withdrawal from the Electron peripheral market, Baildon Electronics developed the Advanced Plus 5 (AP5) expansion, featuring Tube, 1\u00a0MHz bus and user port interfaces, which plugged into a Plus 1 cartridge socket. This provided a sufficient level of compatibility that both the 6502 and Z80 second processor products from Acorn were shown to work, providing a Tube implementation that was \"as faithful as you can get\", with it also being noted that the Electron being available for as little as \u00a350 at that point in its commercial lifespan was a \"very cheap way of getting a CP/M machine\". Some differences in the memory map of the Electron meant that BBC Micro software would need modifications to work on the Electron with AP5. The price of the unit in late 1986 was \u00a366.70.\nThe additional facilities of the AP5 alongside the Tube interface permitted various expansions for the BBC Micro to be made available for the Electron. These included the Hybrid Music 5000 and the AMX Mouse.\nPMS Electron Second Processor.\nIn 1986, Permanent Memory Systems (PMS) announced a second processor product for the Electron, the PMS-E2P, as a self-contained cartridge for use with the Plus 1 containing a second 2\u00a0MHz 6502A processor plus 64\u00a0KB of RAM, priced at \u00a389. This was based on a product originally developed by John Wike of Jafa Systems. Available as a kit or in assembled form, it could even be adapted to connect directly to the Electron's expansion connector, thus avoiding the need to even have a Plus 1 expansion, although this would require the user to find other solutions for attaching peripherals. The implementation of the interface between the Electron and second processor was said to adhere closely to Acorn's recommendations, noting that any hardware or software compatibility issues were likely to be the fault of other vendors not similarly adhering to Acorn's guidelines. PMS supplied Acorn's Hi-BASIC with the E2P, permitting the use of as much as 44\u00a0KB of the second processor's RAM with BASIC programs. The company also made a version of Computer Concepts' Wordwise Plus available for the E2P, priced at \u00a339.95.\nSound system expansions.\nDespite the Electron having only limited sound generation capabilities, few expansions were offered to overcome the machine's limitations.\nMillsgrade Voxbox.\nAdvertised in late 1985, the Voxbox by Millsgrade Limited was an expansion connecting to the Electron's expansion connector that provided allophone-based speech synthesis, with driver software provided on cassette. The supplied software supported the definition of spoken words built up from the allophones\u00a0\u2013 these allophones or sounds being stored in the expansion's own ROM\u00a0\u2013 and for catalogues of words to be created and saved. A program was supplied that extended BASIC to allow the use of the synthesiser in user programs. The expansion used the General Instrument SP0256A-AL2 speech synthesis chip.\nSound Expansion cartridge.\nOriginally announced in 1987 by Project Expansions to be priced at around \u00a340, the Sound Expansion cartridge could be fitted in a Plus 1 (or compatible) slot and provide sound output equivalent to that of the BBC Micro, with Superior Software's Speech bundled as a \"limited offer\". A product of the same name and with similar functionality was subsequently sold by Complex Software for around \u00a355, employing its own adjustable speaker in the cartridge unit. Superior Software had announced a version of Speech for the unexpanded Acorn Electron in 1986, but this was never released.\nHybrid Music 5000.\nHybrid Technology's Music 5000 was adapted and released by PRES for use with the 1\u00a0MHz bus of the Advanced Plus 5 expansion, with the Music 5000 itself priced at \u00a3113.85. The only functional differences between the Electron adaptation and the original BBC Micro unit involved the use of Mode 6 for the display and the reduced performance of the Electron imposing some limitations on processing in programs written for the system, although this was not thought to prevent most programs for the system from working on the Electron version.\nLegacy.\nAlthough the Electron presented challenges to developers in terms of the amount of memory available to programs and, particularly for those writing or porting games to the machine, a reduction in hardware features useful for controlling or presenting content on the screen, developers often discovered creative workarounds to deliver commercially successful products, making the business of writing conversions a viable one for some developers.\nSeveral features that would later be associated with the BBC Master and Archimedes first appeared as features of Electron expansion units, including ROM cartridge slots and the Advanced Disc Filing System, a hierarchical improvement to the BBC's original Disc Filing System. Having been envisaged as the basis of a portable computer with \"a very strong emphasis on communications\" during its development, supporting both modem and Econet interfaces, the BT Merlin M2105 product subsequently combined the Electron with communications functionality, and the Acorn Communicator developed such concepts further, introducing networking support.\nThe availability of the Electron at discounted prices from 1985 onwards led to increased demand for third-party software and expansions for the machine. While it may not have been as popular as the Spectrum, Commodore 64 or Amstrad CPC, it did sell in sufficient numbers to ensure that new software titles from established producers were being produced right up until the early 1990s, with mainstream publications dedicated to the machine having effectively supported it for five years beyond the point at which Acorn's own support had ceased. One reviewer concluded that even at this point in 1990, \"Electron owners wishing to upgrade their machine will find themselves better served now than at any time in the machine\u2019s history.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2079", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2079", "title": "Autumn equinox", "text": ""}
{"id": "2080", "revid": "49333807", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2080", "title": "A Fire Upon the Deep", "text": "1992 science fiction novel by Vernor Vinge\nA Fire Upon the Deep is a 1992 science fiction novel by American writer Vernor Vinge. It is a space opera involving superhuman intelligences, aliens, variable physics, space battles, love, betrayal, genocide, and a communication medium resembling Usenet. \"A Fire Upon the Deep\" won the Hugo Award in 1993, sharing it with \"Doomsday Book\" by Connie Willis.\nBesides the normal print book editions, the novel was also included on a CD-ROM sold by ClariNet Communications along with the other nominees for the 1993 Hugo awards. The CD-ROM edition included numerous annotations by Vinge on his thoughts and intentions about different parts of the book, and was later released as a standalone e-book. It has a loose prequel, \"A Deepness in the Sky\", from 1999, and a direct sequel, \"The Children of the Sky\", from 2012.\nSetting.\nThe novel is set in various locations within the Milky Way. The galaxy is divided into four concentric volumes called the \"Zones of Thought\"; it is not clear to the novel's characters whether this is a natural phenomenon or an artificially created one. Each Zone has fundamental differences in basic physical laws. One of the main consequences of these differences is the effect on intelligence. Artificial intelligence and automation is most directly affected, in that advanced hardware and software from the Beyond or the Transcend will work less and less well as a ship descends towards the Unthinking Depths. Biological intelligence is affected to a lesser degree.\nThe four zones are spoken of in terms of \"low\" to \"high\" as follows:\nPlot.\nAn expedition from Straumli Realm, a human civilization in the High Beyond, investigates a newly discovered data archive in the Low Transcend. The expedition's facility, High Lab, is gradually compromised by a superintelligence that is accidentally awoken by the researchers. This superintelligence is later known as the Blight. Shortly before the Blight's final \"flowering\", two self-aware entities, created similarly to the Blight, plot to aid the humans before the Blight can gain its full powers. Finally recognizing their danger, the High Lab researchers attempt to flee in two ships. The Blight destroys one ship; a second ship, carrying many High Lab children in coldsleep boxes, escapes.\nThis ship lands on a distant planet at the Bottom of the Beyond. The planet is occupied by dog-like creatures, dubbed \"Tines\", who live in packs as group minds. The Tines have a level of technology comparable to the human Middle Ages. Upon landing, however, the two surviving adults, Arne and Sjana Olnsdot, are ambushed and killed by Tine fanatics known as Flenserists, in whose realm they have landed. The Flenserists capture their children, Jefri and Johanna. Johanna is rescued by a Tine named Peregrine and taken to a neighboring kingdom ruled by Woodcarver.\nA distress signal from the Straumli ship eventually reaches Relay, a major information provider for the Net. A Transcendent being named \"Old One\" contacts Relay, seeking information about the Blight and the humans who released it. Old One then reconstitutes a human man named Pham Nuwen from the wreckage of a spaceship to act as its agent. Pham remains unsure if he is a construct or if his memories are real. Ravna Bergsndot, the only human Relay employee, traces the Straumli ship's signal to the Tines' world and persuades her employer to investigate. Ravna contracts the merchant vessel \"Out of Band II\" to transport her and Pham. The ship is owned by two Skroderiders, Blueshell and Greenstalk.\nBefore the mission is launched, the Blight launches a surprise attack on Relay and kills Old One. As Old One dies, it downloads its anti-Blight information into Pham. Pham, Ravna and the Skroderiders barely escape Relay's destruction in the \"Out of Band II\". During their journey to Tine's World, Ravna communicates with Jefri. Jefri is manipulated to believe that Woodcarver is his enemy. The Flenserist leaders, Steel and Tyrathect, use Ravna's information to develop advanced technology such as cannon and radio communication. Meanwhile, Johanna and the knowledge stored in her dataset device help Woodcarver rapidly develop as well.\nThe Blight expands, taking over several civilizations, brainwashing their populations, and seizing archives in the Beyond. On the Net, some claim that humans are the means by which the Blight is able to spread. Anti-human fanatics destroy the entire civilization of Sjandra Kei, which is Ravna's home world. The \"Out of Band II\" is pursued by three fleets: anti-human fanatics, survivors from Sjandra Kei, and a shadow fleet controlled by the Blight. During the pursuit, Ravna and Pham learn that every member of the Skroderider species can be subverted by the Blight; this drives a wedge between the crew members. Ships from Sjandra Kei sacrifice themselves to delay the Blight and the anti-human ships, allowing the \"Out of Band II\" to reach Tine's World before the Blight.\nWhen the \"Out of Band II\" arrives at Tine's World, the humans ally with Woodcarver to defeat the Flenserists and rescue Jefri. Blueshell sacrifices himself to rescue Jefri. Pham then initiates an anti-Blight Countermeasure, which was aboard the humans' ship. The Countermeasure extends the Slow Zone outward by thousands of light years. This envelops and destroys the Blight, but results in the destruction of thousands of civilizations and trillions of deaths. The humans are stranded on the Tines' World, now in the depths of the Slow Zone. Activating the Countermeasure proves fatal to Pham, but before he dies, the remnant of Old One reveals to him that, although his body is a reconstruction, his memories are indeed real.\nRelated works.\nVinge first used the concepts of \"Zones of Thought\" in a 1988 novella \"The Blabber\", which occurs after \"Fire\". Vinge's novel \"A Deepness in the Sky\" (1999) is a prequel to \"A Fire Upon the Deep\" set 20,000 years earlier and featuring Pham Nuwen. Vinge's \"The Children of the Sky\", \"a near-term sequel to \"A Fire Upon the Deep\"\", set ten years later, was released in October 2011.\nVinge's former wife, Joan D. Vinge, has also written stories in the Zones of Thought universe, based on his notes. These include \"The Outcasts of Heaven Belt\", \"Legacy\", and (as of 2008) a planned novel featuring Pham Nuwen.\nTitle.\nVinge's original title for the novel was \"Among the Tines\"; its final title was suggested by his editors.\nCritical reactions.\nJo Walton wrote: \"Any one of the ideas in \"A Fire Upon the Deep\" would have kept an ordinary writer going for years. For me it's the book that does everything right, the example of what science fiction does when it works. ... \"A Fire Upon the Deep\" remains a favourite and a delight to re-read, absorbing even when I know exactly what's coming.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2082", "revid": "48557933", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2082", "title": "Aeronautics", "text": "Science involved with the study, design, and manufacturing of airflight-capable machines\nAeronautics is the science or art involved with the study, design, and manufacturing of air flight-capable machines, and the techniques of operating aircraft and rockets within the atmosphere. \nWhile the term originally referred solely to \"operating\" the aircraft, it has since been expanded to include technology, business, and other aspects related to aircraft. The term \"aviation\" is sometimes used interchangeably with aeronautics, although \"aeronautics\" includes lighter-than-air craft such as airships, and includes ballistic vehicles while \"aviation\" technically does not.\nA significant part of aeronautical science is a branch of dynamics called aerodynamics, which deals with the motion of air and the way that it interacts with objects in motion, such as an aircraft.\nHistory.\nEarly ideas.\nAttempts to fly without any real aeronautical understanding have been made from the earliest times, typically by constructing wings and jumping from a tower with crippling or lethal results.\nWiser investigators sought to gain some rational understanding through the study of bird flight. Medieval Islamic Golden Age scientists such as Abbas ibn Firnas also made such studies. The founders of modern aeronautics, Leonardo da Vinci in the Renaissance and Cayley in 1799, both began their investigations with studies of bird flight.\nMan-carrying kites are believed to have been used extensively in ancient China. In 1282 the Italian explorer Marco Polo described the Chinese techniques then current. The Chinese also constructed small hot air balloons, or lanterns, and rotary-wing toys.\nAn early European to provide any scientific discussion of flight was Roger Bacon, who described principles of operation for the lighter-than-air balloon and the flapping-wing ornithopter, which he envisaged would be constructed in the future. The lifting medium for his balloon would be an \"aether\" whose composition he did not know.\nIn the late fifteenth century, Leonardo da Vinci followed up his study of birds with designs for some of the earliest flying machines, including the flapping-wing ornithopter and the rotating-wing helicopter. Although his designs were rational, they were not based on particularly good science. Many of his designs, such as a four-person screw-type helicopter, have severe flaws. He did at least understand that \"An object offers as much resistance to the air as the air does to the object.\" (Newton would not publish the Third law of motion until 1687.) His analysis led to the realisation that manpower alone was not sufficient for sustained flight, and his later designs included a mechanical power source such as a spring. Da Vinci's work was lost after his death and did not reappear until it had been overtaken by the work of George Cayley.\nBalloon flight.\nThe modern era of lighter-than-air flight began early in the 17th century with Galileo's experiments in which he showed that air has weight. Around 1650 Cyrano de Bergerac wrote some fantasy novels in which he described the principle of ascent using a substance (dew) he supposed to be lighter than air, and descending by releasing a controlled amount of the substance. Francesco Lana de Terzi measured the pressure of air at sea level and in 1670 proposed the first scientifically credible lifting medium in the form of hollow metal spheres from which all the air had been pumped out. These would be lighter than the displaced air and able to lift an airship. His proposed methods of controlling height are still in use today; by carrying ballast which may be dropped overboard to gain height, and by venting the lifting containers to lose height. In practice de Terzi's spheres would have collapsed under air pressure, and further developments had to wait for more practicable lifting gases.\nFrom the mid-18th century the Montgolfier brothers in France began experimenting with balloons. Their balloons were made of paper, and early experiments using steam as the lifting gas were short-lived due to its effect on the paper as it condensed. Mistaking smoke for a kind of steam, they began filling their balloons with hot smoky air which they called \"electric smoke\" and, despite not fully understanding the principles at work, made some successful launches and in 1783 were invited to give a demonstration to the French \"Acad\u00e9mie des Sciences\".\nMeanwhile, the discovery of hydrogen led Joseph Black in c.\u20091780 to propose its use as a lifting gas, though practical demonstration awaited a gas-tight balloon material. On hearing of the Montgolfier Brothers' invitation, the French Academy member Jacques Charles offered a similar demonstration of a hydrogen balloon. Charles and two craftsmen, the Robert brothers, developed a gas-tight material of rubberised silk for the envelope. The hydrogen gas was to be generated by chemical reaction during the filling process.\nThe Montgolfier designs had several shortcomings, not least the need for dry weather and a tendency for sparks from the fire to set light to the paper balloon. The manned design had a gallery around the base of the balloon rather than the hanging basket of the first, unmanned design, which brought the paper closer to the fire. On their free flight, De Rozier and d'Arlandes took buckets of water and sponges to douse these fires as they arose. On the other hand, the manned design of Charles was essentially modern. As a result of these exploits, the hot air balloon became known as the \"Montgolfi\u00e8re\" type and the gas balloon the \"Charli\u00e8re\".\nCharles and the Robert brothers' next balloon, \"\", was a Charli\u00e8re that followed Jean Baptiste Meusnier's proposals for an elongated dirigible balloon, and was notable for having an outer envelope with the gas contained in a second, inner ballonet. On 19 September 1784, it completed the first flight of over , between Paris and Beuvry, despite the man-powered propulsive devices proving useless.\nIn an attempt the next year to provide both endurance and controllability, de Rozier developed a balloon having both hot air and hydrogen gas bags, a design which was soon named after him as the \"Rozi\u00e8re.\" The principle was to use the hydrogen section for constant lift and to navigate vertically by heating and allowing to cool the hot air section, in order to catch the most favourable wind at whatever altitude it was blowing. The balloon envelope was made of goldbeater's skin. The first flight ended in disaster and the approach has seldom been used since.\nCayley and the foundation of modern aeronautics.\nSir George Cayley (1773\u20131857) is widely acknowledged as the founder of modern aeronautics. He was first called the \"father of the aeroplane\" in 1846 and Henson called him the \"father of aerial navigation.\" He was the first true scientific aerial investigator to publish his work, which included for the first time the underlying principles and forces of flight.\nIn 1809 he began the publication of a landmark three-part treatise titled \"On Aerial Navigation\" (1809\u20131810). In it he wrote the first scientific statement of the problem, \"The whole problem is confined within these limits, viz. to make a surface support a given weight by the application of power to the resistance of air.\" He identified the four vector forces that influence an aircraft: \"thrust\", \"lift\", \"drag\" and \"weight\" and distinguished stability and control in his designs.\nHe developed the modern conventional form of the fixed-wing aeroplane having a stabilising tail with both horizontal and vertical surfaces, flying gliders both unmanned and manned.\nHe introduced the use of the whirling arm test rig to investigate the aerodynamics of flight, using it to discover the benefits of the curved or cambered aerofoil over the flat wing he had used for his first glider. He also identified and described the importance of dihedral, diagonal bracing and drag reduction, and contributed to the understanding and design of ornithopters and parachutes.\nAnother significant invention was the tension-spoked wheel, which he devised in order to create a light, strong wheel for aircraft undercarriage.\nThe 19th century: Otto Lilienthal and the first human flights.\nDuring the 19th century Cayley's ideas were refined, proved and expanded on, culminating in the works of Otto Lilienthal.\nLilienthal was a German engineer and businessman who became known as the \"flying man\". He was the first person to make well-documented, repeated, successful flights with gliders, therefore making the idea of \"heavier than air\" a reality. Newspapers and magazines published photographs of Lilienthal gliding, favourably influencing public and scientific opinion about the possibility of flying machines becoming practical.\nHis work led to the development of the modern wing. His flight attempts in Berlin in the year 1891 are seen as the beginning of human flight and the \"Lilienthal Normalsegelapparat\" is considered to be the first air plane in series production, making the \"Maschinenfabrik Otto Lilienthal\" in Berlin the first air plane production company in the world.\nOtto Lilienthal is often referred to as either the \"father of aviation\" or \"father of flight\".\nOther important investigators included Horatio Phillips.\nBranches.\nAeronautics may be divided into three main branches, Aviation, Aeronautical science and Aeronautical engineering.\nAviation.\nAviation is the art or practice of aeronautics. Historically aviation meant only heavier-than-air flight, but nowadays it includes flying in balloons and airships.\nAeronautical engineering.\nAeronautical engineering covers the design and construction of aircraft, including how they are powered, how they are used and how they are controlled for safe operation.\nA major part of aeronautical engineering is aerodynamics, the science of passing through the air.\nWith the increasing activity in space flight, nowadays aeronautics and astronautics are often combined as aerospace engineering.\nAerodynamics.\nThe science of aerodynamics deals with the motion of air and the way that it interacts with objects in motion, such as an aircraft.\nThe study of aerodynamics falls broadly into three areas:\n\"Incompressible flow\" occurs where the air simply moves to avoid objects, typically at subsonic speeds below that of sound (Mach 1).\n\"Compressible flow\" occurs where shock waves appear at points where the air becomes compressed, typically at speeds above Mach 1.\n\"Transonic flow\" occurs in the intermediate speed range around Mach 1, where the airflow over an object may be locally subsonic at one point and locally supersonic at another.\nRocketry.\nA rocket or rocket vehicle is a missile, spacecraft, aircraft or other vehicle which obtains thrust from a rocket engine. In all rockets, the exhaust is formed entirely from propellants carried within the rocket before use. Rocket engines work by action and reaction. Rocket engines push rockets forwards simply by throwing their exhaust backwards extremely fast.\nRockets for military and recreational uses date back to at least 13th-century China. Significant scientific, interplanetary and industrial use did not occur until the 20th century, when rocketry was the enabling technology of the Space Age, including setting foot on the Moon.\nRockets are used for fireworks, weaponry, ejection seats, launch vehicles for artificial satellites, human spaceflight and exploration of other planets. While comparatively inefficient for low speed use, they are very lightweight and powerful, capable of generating large accelerations and of attaining extremely high speeds with reasonable efficiency.\nChemical rockets are the most common type of rocket and they typically create their exhaust by the combustion of rocket propellant. Chemical rockets store a large amount of energy in an easily released form, and can be very dangerous. However, careful design, testing, construction and use minimizes risks.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2083", "revid": "1317824883", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2083", "title": "Auguste and Louis Lumi\u00e8re", "text": "French brothers, filmmakers and inventors\nThe Lumi\u00e8re brothers (, ; ), Auguste Marie Louis Nicolas Lumi\u00e8re (19 October 1862 \u2013 10 April 1954) and Louis Jean Lumi\u00e8re (5 October 1864 \u2013 6 June 1948), were French manufacturers of photography equipment, best known for their \"\" motion picture system and the short films they produced between 1895 and 1905, which places them among the earliest filmmakers.\nTheir screening of a single film on 22 March 1895, for around 200 members of the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 d'encouragement pour l'industrie nationale (Society for the Development of the National Industry) in Paris was probably the first presentation of projected film. Their first commercial public screening on 28 December 1895, for around 40 paying visitors and invited relations has traditionally been regarded as the birth of cinema.\nHistory.\nThe Lumi\u00e8re brothers were born in Besan\u00e7on, France, to Charles-Antoine Lumi\u00e8re (1840\u20131911) and Jeanne Jos\u00e9phine Costille Lumi\u00e8re, who were married in 1861 and moved to Besan\u00e7on, setting up a small photographic portrait studio. Here were born Auguste, Louis and their daughter Jeanne. They moved to Lyon in 1870, where their two other daughters were born: M\u00e9lina and Francine. Auguste and Louis both attended La Martiniere, the largest technical school in Lyon.\nThey patented several significant processes leading up to their film camera, most notably film perforations (originally implemented by \u00c9mile Reynaud) as a means of advancing the film through the camera and projector. The original had been patented by L\u00e9on Guillaume Bouly on 12 February 1892. The \u2014 a three-in-one device that could record, develop, and project motion pictures \u2014 was further developed by the Lumi\u00e8res. The brothers patented their own version on 13 February 1895.\nThe date of the recording of their first film is in dispute. In an interview with Georges Sadoul given in 1948, Louis claimed that he shot the film in August 1894 \u2013 before the arrival of the kinetoscope in France. This is questioned by historians, who consider that a functional Lumi\u00e8re camera did not exist before the beginning of 1895.\nThe Lumi\u00e8re brothers saw film as a novelty and had withdrawn from the film business by 1905. They went on to develop the first practical photographic colour process, the Lumi\u00e8re Autochrome.\nLouis died on 6 June 1948, and Auguste on 10 April 1954. They are buried in a family tomb in the New Guilloti\u00e8re Cemetery in Lyon.\nFirst film screenings.\nOn 22 March 1895, in Paris, at the Society for the Development of the National Industry, in front of a small audience, one of whom was said to be L\u00e9on Gaumont, then director of the company , the Lumi\u00e8res privately screened a single film, \"Workers Leaving the Lumi\u00e8re Factory\". The main focus of the conference by Louis concerned the recent developments in the photographic industry, mainly the research on polychromy (colour photography). It was much to Lumi\u00e8re's surprise that the moving black-and-white images retained more attention than the coloured stills.\nThe Lumi\u00e8res gave their first paid public screening on 28 December 1895, at Salon Indien du Grand Caf\u00e9 in Paris. This presentation consisted of the following 10 short films:\nEach film was up to long, which, when hand cranked through a projector, runs approximately 50 seconds.\nThe Lumi\u00e8res went on tour with the in 1896, visiting places like Mexico City, Brussels, Bombay, London, Montreal, New York City, Palestine, and Buenos Aires.\nIn 1896, only a few months after the initial screenings in Europe, films by the Lumiere Brothers were shown in Egypt, first in the Tousson stock exchange in Alexandria on 5 November 1896, and then in the Hamam Schneider (Schneider Bath) in Cairo.\nEarly colour photography.\nThe brothers stated that \"the cinema is an invention without any future\" and declined to sell their camera to other filmmakers such as Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s. This made many film makers upset. Consequently, their role in the history of film was exceedingly brief. In parallel with their cinema work they experimented with colour photography. They worked on colour photographic processes in the 1890s including the Lippmann process (interference heliochromy) and their own 'bichromated glue' process, a subtractive colour process, examples of which were exhibited at the Exposition Universelle in Paris in 1900. This last process was commercialised by the Lumieres but commercial success had to wait for their next colour process. In 1903 they patented a colour photographic process, the \"Autochrome Lumi\u00e8re\", which was launched on the market in 1907. Throughout much of the 20th century, the Lumi\u00e8re company was a major producer of photographic products in Europe, but the brand name, Lumi\u00e8re, disappeared from the marketplace following merger with Ilford.\nFilm systems that preceded the Cin\u00e9matographe Lumi\u00e8re.\nEarlier moving images, for instance those of the phantasmagoria shows, the ph\u00e9nakisticope, the zoetrope and \u00c9mile Reynaud's Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Optique consisted of hand-drawn images. A system that could record photographic reality in motion, in a fashion much like it is seen by the eyes, had a greater impact on people.\nEadweard Muybridge's Zoopraxiscope projected moving painted silhouettes based on his chronophotographic work. The only Zoopraxiscope disc with actual photographs was made as an early form of stop motion.\nLess-known predecessors, such as Jules Duboscq's Bioscope (patented in 1852) were not developed to project the moving images.\nA Polish inventor Kazimierz Pr\u00f3szy\u0144ski built his camera and projecting device, called Pleograph, in 1894, before those made by the Lumi\u00e8re brothers.\nLe Prince went missing in 1890, before he got around to give public demonstrations of the patented cameras and projectors he had been developing during the previous years. His short film known as \"Roundhay Garden Scene\" (1888) has later come to be regarded as the oldest film.\nWilliam Friese-Greene patented a \"machine camera\" in 1889, which embodied many aspects of later film cameras. He displayed the results at photographic societies in 1890 and developed further cameras but did not publicly project the results.\nOttomar Ansch\u00fctz's Electrotachyscope projected very short loops of high photographic quality.\nThomas Edison believed projection of films wasn't as viable a business model as offering the films in the \"peepshow\" kinetoscope device. Watching the images on the screen turned out to be much preferred by audiences. Thomas Edison's Kinetoscope (developed by William Kennedy Dickson), premiered publicly in 1894.\nLauste and Latham's Eidoloscope was demonstrated for members of the press on 21 April 1895, and opened to the paying public on Broadway on 20 May. They shot films up to twenty minutes long at speeds over thirty frames per second and showed them in many US cities. The Eidoloscope Company was dissolved in 1896 after various internal disputes.\nMax and Emil Skladanowsky, inventors of the Bioscop, had offered projected moving images to a paying public in Berlin from 1 November 1895, until the end of the month. Their machinery was relatively cumbersome and their films much shorter than those of the Lumi\u00e8re brothers. The Skladnowskys' booked screenings in Paris were cancelled after the news of the Lumi\u00e8re show. Nonetheless, they toured their films to other countries.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2084", "revid": "49434219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2084", "title": "Acts of the Apostles", "text": "Book of the New Testament\nThe Acts of the Apostles (, \"Pr\u00e1xeis Apost\u00f3l\u014dn\" and ) is the fifth book of the New Testament. It recounts the founding of the Christian Church and the spread of its message across the Roman Empire.\nActs and the Gospel of Luke form a two-volume work known as Luke\u2013Acts by the same author. Tradition identifies the writer as Luke the Evangelist, a doctor who travelled with Paul the Apostle, though the text is anonymous, not naming its author. Critical opinion remains divided about whether Luke the physician wrote it. Many scholars still regard the author of Luke\u2013Acts as a companion of Paul, although they note tensions with the Pauline epistles. Most scholars treat Acts as historiography, though focus is more on the author's aims than on settling questions of strict historicity. Scholars usually date the book to 80\u201390 AD. \nThe Gospel of Luke depicts the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus of Nazareth. Acts continues the story of Christianity in the 1st century, beginning with the ascension of Jesus and the mission from Jerusalem into the wider Mediterranean world. The early chapters describe Pentecost, the shared life of the first believers, and the establishment of the church at Antioch. The later chapters follow Paul as he carries the message throughout the empire and conclude with his imprisonment in Rome as he awaits trial.\nLuke\u2013Acts addresses how the Jewish Messiah came to have an overwhelmingly non-Jewish church by arguing that the message reached the Gentiles after the Jewish rejection. The work also reads as a defense of the Jesus movement for Jewish audiences, since most speeches respond to Jewish concerns while Roman officials arbitrate disputes about Jewish customs and law. Luke presents the followers of Jesus as a Jewish sect entitled to legal protection, but remains ambivalent about the future of Jews and Christians, affirming Jesus' Jewish identity while emphasizing the Jews' rejection of the Messiah.\nComposition and setting.\nTitle, unity of Luke\u2013Acts, authorship and date.\nThe name \"Acts of the Apostles\" was first used by Irenaeus in the late 2nd century. It is not known whether this was an existing name for the book or one invented by Irenaeus; it does seem clear that it was not given by the author, as the word \"pr\u00e1xeis\" (deeds, acts) only appears once in the text (Acts 19:18) and there it refers not to the apostles but to deeds confessed by their followers.\nThe Gospel of Luke and Acts make up a two-volume work which scholars call Luke\u2013Acts. Together they account for 27.5% of the New Testament, the largest contribution attributed to a single author, providing the framework for both the Church's liturgical calendar and the historical outline into which later generations have fitted their idea of the story of Jesus and the early church. The author is not named in either volume. According to Church tradition dating from the 2nd century, the author was Luke, named as a companion of the apostle Paul in three of the letters attributed to Paul himself, but twentieth century scholarship cast this into doubt, with Theissen stating \u201ca critical consensus emphasizes the countless contradictions between the account in Acts and the authentic Pauline letters.\" An example can be seen by comparing Acts' accounts of Paul's conversion (Acts 9:1\u201331, 22:6\u201321, and 26:9\u201323) with Paul's own statement that he remained unknown to Christians in Judea after that event (Galatians 1:17\u201324). The author \"is an admirer of Paul, but does not share Paul's own view of himself as an apostle; his own theology is considerably different from Paul's on key points and does not represent Paul's own views accurately.\" Many modern scholars have therefore expressed doubt that the author of Luke\u2013Acts was the physician Luke, and critical opinion on the subject was assessed to be roughly evenly divided near the end of the 20th century. More recent developments in interpretation find that Paul and the author of Luke\u2013Acts are not as different theologically as previously thought. Most scholars maintain that the author of Luke\u2013Acts, whether named Luke or not, met Paul. He was educated, a man of means, probably urban, and someone who respected manual work, although not a worker himself; this is significant, because more high-brow writers of the time looked down on the artisans and small business people who made up the early church of Paul and were presumably Luke's audience.\nThe interpretation of the \"we\" passages as indicative that the writer was a historical eyewitness (whether Luke the evangelist or not), remains the most influential in current biblical studies. Objections to this viewpoint include the above claim that Luke\u2013Acts contains differences in theology and historical narrative which are irreconcilable with the authentic letters of Paul the Apostle.\nThe earliest possible date for Luke\u2013Acts is around 62 AD, the time of Paul's imprisonment in Rome, but most scholars date the work to 80\u201390 AD on the grounds that it uses Mark as a source, looks back on the destruction of Jerusalem, and does not show any awareness of the letters of Paul (which began circulating late in the first century). If it does show awareness of the Pauline epistles, and also of the work of the Jewish historian Josephus, as some believe, then a date in the early 2nd century is possible. However, many arguments mediate against this dating, such as the Gospel of John's awareness of the gospel, its independence from the Gospel of Matthew in the two-source hypothesis, and 1 Clement.\nManuscripts.\nThere are two major textual variants of Acts, the Western text-type and the Alexandrian. The oldest complete Alexandrian manuscripts date from the 4th century and the oldest Western ones from the 6th, with fragments and citations going back to the 3rd. Western texts of Acts are 6.2\u20138.4% longer than Alexandrian texts, the additions tending to enhance the Jewish rejection of the Messiah and the role of the Holy Spirit, in ways that are stylistically different from the rest of Acts. The majority of scholars prefer the Alexandrian (shorter) text-type over the Western as the more authentic, but this same argument would favour the Western over the Alexandrian for the Gospel of Luke, as in that case the Western version is the shorter.\nGenre, sources and historicity of Acts.\nThe title \"Acts of the Apostles\" (\"Praxeis Apostolon\") would seem to identify it with the genre telling of the deeds and achievements of great men (\"praxeis\"), but it was not the title given by the author. The anonymous author aligned Luke\u2013Acts to the 'narratives' ( ) which many others had written, and described his own work as an \"orderly account\" (). It lacks exact analogies in Hellenistic or Jewish literature. The author may have taken as his model the works of Dionysius of Halicarnassus, who wrote a well-known history of Rome, or the Jewish historian Josephus, author of a history of the Jews. Like them, he anchors his history by dating the birth of the founder (Romulus for Dionysius, Moses for Josephus, Jesus for Luke) and like them he tells how the founder is born from God, taught authoritatively, and appeared to witnesses after death before ascending to heaven. By and large the sources for Acts can only be guessed at, but the author would have had access to the Septuagint (a Greek translation of the Jewish scriptures) and the Gospel of Mark. Advocates of the Two-source hypothesis argue that Luke knew the Q source, while a growing number of scholars defend either the Farrer hypothesis where Luke used Matthew without Q or the Matthean Posteriority Hypothesis where neither were used. He transposed a few incidents from Mark's gospel to the time of the Apostles\u2014for example, the material about \"clean\" and \"unclean\" foods in Mark 7 is used in Acts 10, and Mark's account of the accusation that Jesus has attacked the Temple (Mark 14:58) is used in a story about Stephen (Acts 6:14). There are also points of contact (meaning suggestive parallels but something less than clear evidence) with 1 Peter, the Letter to the Hebrews, and 1 Clement. Other sources can only be inferred from internal evidence\u2014the traditional explanation of the three \"we\" passages, for example, is that they represent eyewitness accounts. The search for such inferred sources was popular in the 19th century, but by the mid-20th it had largely been abandoned.Acts was read as a reliable history of the early church well into the post-Reformation era, but by the 17th century biblical scholars began to notice that it was incomplete and tendentious\u2014its picture of a harmonious church is quite at odds with that given by Paul's letters, and it omits important events such as the deaths of both Peter and Paul. The mid-19th-century scholar Ferdinand Baur suggested that the author had rewritten history to present a united Peter and Paul and advance a single orthodoxy against the Marcionites (Marcion was a 2nd-century theologian who wished to cut Christianity off entirely from Judaism); Baur continues to have enormous influence, but today there is less interest in determining the historical accuracy of Acts (although this has never died out) than in understanding the author's theological program. Most New Testament scholars view Luke-Acts as representing a form of historiography with a number of sub-genres under discussion, with other proposed genres including novel, epic, and ancient biography.\nAudience and authorial intent.\nLuke was written to be read aloud to a group of Jesus-followers gathered in a house to share the Lord's supper. The author assumes an educated Greek-speaking audience, but directs his attention to specifically Christian concerns rather than to the Greco-Roman world at large. He begins his gospel with a preface addressed to Theophilus (; cf. ), informing him of his intention to provide an \"ordered account\" of events which will lead his reader to \"certainty\". He did not write in order to provide Theophilus with historical justification\u2014\"did it happen?\"\u2014but to encourage faith\u2014\"what happened, and what does it all mean?\"\nActs (or Luke\u2013Acts) is intended as a work of \"edification\", meaning \"the empirical demonstration that virtue is superior to vice.\" The work also engages with the question of a Christian's proper relationship with the Roman Empire, the civil power of the day: could a Christian obey God and also Caesar? The answer is ambiguous. The Romans never move against Jesus or his followers unless provoked by the Jews; in the trial scenes the Christian missionaries are always cleared of charges of violating Roman laws; and Acts ends with Paul in Rome proclaiming the Christian message under Roman protection. On the other hand, Luke makes clear that the Romans, like all earthly rulers, receive their authority from Satan, while Christ is ruler of the kingdom of God.\nStructure and content.\nStructure.\nActs is divided into 28 chapters. The work has two key structural principles. The first is the geographic movement from Jerusalem, centre of God's Covenantal people, the Jews, to Rome, centre of the Gentile world. This structure reaches back to the author's preceding work, the Gospel of Luke, and is signaled by parallel scenes such as Paul's utterance in Acts 19:21, which echoes Jesus's words in Luke 9:51: Paul has Rome as his destination, as Jesus had Jerusalem. The second key element is the roles of Peter and Paul, the first representing the Jewish Christian church, the second the mission to the Gentiles.\n 2:1\u20138:1 \u2013 beginnings in Jerusalem\n 8:2\u201340 \u2013 the church expands to Samaria and beyond\n 9:1\u201331 \u2013 conversion of Paul\n 9:32\u201312:25 \u2013 the conversion of Cornelius, and the formation of the Antioch church\n 13:1\u201314:28 \u2013 the Gentile mission is promoted from Antioch\n 15:1\u201335 \u2013 the Gentile mission is confirmed in Jerusalem\n 15:36\u201328:31 \u2013 the Gentile mission, climaxing in Paul's passion story in Rome (21:17\u201328:31)\nContent.\nThe Gospel of Luke began with a prologue addressed to Theophilus; Acts likewise opens with an address to Theophilus and refers to \"my earlier book\", almost certainly the gospel.\nThe apostles and other followers of Jesus meet and elect Matthias to replace Judas Iscariot as a member of The Twelve. On Pentecost, the Holy Spirit descends and confers God's power on them, and Peter and John preach to many in Jerusalem and perform healings, casting out of evil spirits, and raising of the dead. The first believers share all property in common, eat in each other's homes, and worship together. At first many Jews follow Christ and are baptized, but the followers of Jesus begin to be increasingly persecuted by other Jews. Stephen is accused of blasphemy and stoned. Stephen's death marks a major turning point: the Jews have rejected the message, and henceforth it will be taken to the Gentiles.\nThe death of Stephen initiates persecution, and many followers of Jesus leave Jerusalem. The message is taken to the Samaritans, a people held in hostility by the Jews, and to the Gentiles. Saul of Tarsus, one of the Jews who persecuted the followers of Jesus, is converted by a vision to become a follower of Christ (an event which Luke regards as so important that he relates it three times). Peter, directed by a series of visions, preaches to Cornelius the Centurion, a Gentile God-fearer, who becomes a follower of Christ. The Holy Spirit descends on Cornelius and his guests, thus confirming that the message of eternal life in Christ is for all mankind. The Gentile church is established in Antioch (northwestern Syria, the third largest city of the empire), and here Christ's followers are first called Christians.\nThe mission to the Gentiles is promoted from Antioch and confirmed at a meeting in Jerusalem between Paul and the leadership of the Jerusalem church. Paul spends the next few years traveling through western Asia Minor and the Aegean, preaching, converting, and founding new churches. On a visit to Jerusalem he is set on by a Jewish mob. Saved by the Roman commander, he is accused by the Jews of being a revolutionary, the \"ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes\", and imprisoned. Later, Paul asserts his right as a Roman citizen, to be tried in Rome and is sent by sea to Rome, where he spends another two years under house arrest, proclaiming the Kingdom of God and teaching freely about \"the Lord Jesus Christ\". Acts ends abruptly without recording the outcome of Paul's legal troubles.\nTheology.\nPrior to the 1950s, Luke\u2013Acts was seen as a historical work, written to defend Christianity before the Romans or Paul against his detractors; since then the tendency has been to see the work as primarily theological. Luke's theology is expressed primarily through his overarching plot, the way scenes, themes and characters combine to construct his specific worldview. His \"salvation history\" stretches from the Creation to the present time of his readers, in three ages: first, the time of \"the Law and the Prophets\" (Luke 16:16), the period beginning with Genesis and ending with the appearance of John the Baptist (Luke 1:5\u20133:1); second, the epoch of Jesus, in which the Kingdom of God was preached (Luke 3:2\u201324:51); and finally the period of the Church, which began when the risen Christ was taken into Heaven, and would end with his second coming.\nLuke\u2013Acts is an attempt to answer a theological problem, namely how the Messiah, promised to the Jews, came to have an overwhelmingly non-Jewish church; the answer it provides, and its central theme, is that the message of Christ was sent to the Gentiles because the Jews rejected it. This theme is introduced in Chapter 4 of the Gospel of Luke, when Jesus, rejected in Nazareth, recalls the rejection of prophets. At the end of the gospel he commands his disciples to preach his message to all nations, \"beginning from Jerusalem.\" He repeats the command in Acts, telling them to preach \"in Jerusalem, in all Judea and Samaria, and to the end of the Earth.\" They then proceed to do so, in the order outlined: first Jerusalem, then Judea and Samaria, then the entire (Roman) world.\nFor Luke, the Holy Spirit is the driving force behind the spread of the Christian message, and he places more emphasis on it than do any of the other evangelists. The Spirit is \"poured out\" at Pentecost on the first Samaritan and Gentile believers and on disciples who had been baptised only by John the Baptist, each time as a sign of God's approval. The Holy Spirit represents God's power (at his ascension, Jesus tells his followers, \"You shall receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you\"): through it the disciples are given speech to convert thousands in Jerusalem, forming the first church (the term is used for the first time in Acts 5).\nOne issue debated by scholars is Luke's political vision regarding the relationship between the early church and the Roman Empire. On the one hand, Luke generally does not portray this interaction as one of direct conflict. Rather, there are ways in which each may have considered having a relationship with the other rather advantageous to its own cause. For example, early Christians may have appreciated hearing about the protection Paul received from Roman officials against Gentile rioters in Philippi (Acts 16:16\u201340) and Ephesus (Acts 19:23\u201341), and against Jewish rioters on two occasions (Acts 17:1\u201317; Acts 18:12\u201317). Meanwhile, Roman readers may have approved of Paul's censure of the illegal practice of magic (Acts 19:17\u201319) as well as the amicability of his rapport with Roman officials such as Sergius Paulus (Acts 13:6\u201312) and Festus (Acts 26:30\u201332). Furthermore, Acts does not include any account of a struggle between Christians and the Roman government as a result of the latter's imperial cult. Thus Paul is depicted as a moderating presence between the church and the Roman Empire.\nOn the other hand, events such as the imprisonment of Paul at the hands of the empire (Acts 22\u201328) as well as several encounters that reflect negatively on Roman officials (for instance, Felix's desire for a bribe from Paul in Acts 24:26) function as concrete points of conflict between Rome and the early church. Perhaps the most significant point of tension between Roman imperial ideology and Luke's political vision is reflected in Peter's speech to the Roman centurion, Cornelius (Acts 10:36). Peter states that \"this one\" [\u03bf\u1f57\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2], i.e. Jesus, \"is lord [\u03ba\u03cd\u03c1\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2] of all.\" The title, \u03ba\u03cd\u03c1\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2, was often ascribed to the Roman emperor in antiquity, rendering its use by Luke as an appellation for Jesus an unsubtle challenge to the emperor's authority.\nComparison with other writings.\nGospel of Luke.\nAs the second part of the two-part work Luke\u2013Acts, Acts has significant links to the Gospel of Luke. Major turning points in the structure of Acts find parallels in Luke: the presentation of the child Jesus in the Temple parallels the opening of Acts in the Temple, Jesus's forty days of testing in the wilderness prior to his mission parallel the forty days prior to his Ascension in Acts, the mission of Jesus in Samaria and the Decapolis (the lands of the Samaritans and Gentiles) parallels the missions of the Apostles in Samaria and the Gentile lands, and so on (see Gospel of Luke). These parallels continue through both books, contributing to the narrative unity of the work.\nHowever, scholars have noted differences between Luke and Acts, including some apparent contradictions. For example, the gospel seems to place the Ascension on Easter Sunday, shortly after the Resurrection, while Acts 1 puts it forty days later. Such differences have led to debates over the nature of the unity between the two books. While not seriously questioning the single authorship of Luke\u2013Acts, these variations suggest a complex literary structure that balances thematic continuity with narrative development across two volumes. Literary studies have explored how Luke sets the stage in his gospel for key themes that recur and develop throughout Acts, including the offer to and rejection of the Messianic kingdom by Israel, and God's sovereign establishment of the church for both Jews and Gentiles.\nPauline epistles.\nActs agrees with Paul's letters on the major outline of Paul's career: he is converted and becomes a Christian missionary and apostle, establishing new churches in Asia Minor and the Aegean and compelling Gentile Christians to not obey the Jewish Law. There are also agreements on many incidents, such as Paul's escape from Damascus, where he is lowered down the walls in a basket. Recent shifts in interpretation find that the Paul and the author of Luke\u2013Acts are not as different theologically as previously thought. But details of these same incidents are frequently contradictory: for example, according to Paul it was a pagan king who was trying to arrest him in Damascus, but according to Acts it was the Jews (2 Corinthians 11:33 and Acts 9:24). Acts speaks of \"Christians\" and \"disciples\", but Paul never uses either term, and it is striking that Acts never mentions Paul being in conflict with the Jerusalem church and places Paul under the authority of the Jerusalem church and its leaders, especially James and Peter (Acts 15 vs. Galatians 2). Acts omits much from the letters, notably Paul's problems with his congregations (internal difficulties are said to be the fault of the Jews instead), and his apparent final rejection by the church leaders in Jerusalem (Acts has Paul and Barnabas deliver an offering that is accepted, a trip that has no mention in the letters). There are also major differences between Acts and Paul on Christology (the understanding of Christ's nature), eschatology (the understanding of the \"last things\"), and apostleship.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2085", "revid": "41524894", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2085", "title": "Assyria", "text": "Major Mesopotamian civilization\nAssyria was a major ancient Mesopotamian civilization that existed as a city-state from the 21st century BC to the 14th century BC and eventually expanded into an empire from the 14th century BC to the 7th century BC.\nSpanning from the early Bronze Age to the late Iron Age, modern historians typically divide ancient Assyrian history into the Early Assyrian (c. 2600\u20132025 BC), Old Assyrian (c. 2025\u20131364 BC), Middle Assyrian (c. 1363\u2013912 BC), Neo-Assyrian (911\u2013609 BC), and post-imperial (609 BC\u2013c. AD 240) periods, based on political events and gradual changes in language. Assur, the first Assyrian capital, was founded c. 2600 BC, but there is no evidence that the city was independent until the collapse of the Third Dynasty of Ur, in the 21st century BC, when a line of independent kings starting with Puzur-Ashur I began ruling the city. Centered in the Assyrian heartland in northern Mesopotamia, Assyrian power fluctuated over time. The city underwent several periods of foreign rule or domination before Assyria rose under Ashur-uballit I in the early 14th century BC as the Middle Assyrian Empire. In the Middle and Neo-Assyrian periods, Assyria was one of the two major Mesopotamian kingdoms, alongside Babylonia in the south, and at times became the dominant power in the ancient Near East. Assyria was at its strongest in the Neo-Assyrian period, when the Assyrian army was the strongest military power in the world and the Assyrians ruled the largest empire then yet assembled in world history, spanning from parts of modern-day Iran in the east to Egypt in the west.\nThe Neo-Assyrian Empire fell in the late 7th century BC, conquered by a coalition of the Babylonians, who had lived under Assyrian rule for about a century, and the Medes. Though the core urban territory of Assyria was extensively devastated in the Medo-Babylonian conquest of the Assyrian Empire and the succeeding Neo-Babylonian Empire invested few resources in rebuilding it, ancient Assyrian culture and traditions continued to survive for centuries throughout the post-imperial period. Assyria experienced a recovery under the Seleucid and Parthian empires, though it declined again under the Sasanian Empire, which sacked numerous cities and semi-independent Assyrian territories in the region, including Assur itself. The remaining Assyrian people, who have survived in northern Mesopotamia to modern times, were gradually Christianized from the 1st century AD onward. Ancient Mesopotamian religion persisted at Assur until its final sack in the 3rd century AD, and at certain other holdouts for centuries thereafter.\nThe triumph of ancient Assyria can be attributed not only to its vigorous warrior-monarchs but also to its adeptness in efficiently assimilating and governing conquered territories using inventive and advanced administrative mechanisms. The developments in warfare and governance introduced by ancient Assyria continued to be employed by subsequent empires and states for centuries. Ancient Assyria also left a legacy of great cultural significance, particularly through the Neo-Assyrian Empire, making a prominent impression in later Assyrian, Greco-Roman, and Hebrew literary and religious tradition.\nNomenclature.\nIn the Old Assyrian period, when Assyria was merely a city-state centered on the city of Assur, the state was typically referred to as \"\u0101lu A\u0161\u0161ur\" (\"city of Ashur\"). From the time of its rise as a territorial state in the 14th century BC and onward, Assyria was referred to in official documents as \"m\u0101t A\u0161\u0161ur\" (\"land of Ashur\"), marking its shift to being a regional polity. The first attested use of the term \"m\u0101t A\u0161\u0161ur\" is during the reign of Ashur-uballit I (c. 1363\u20131328 BC), who was the first king of the Middle Assyrian Empire. Both \"\u0101lu A\u0161\u0161ur\" and \"m\u0101t A\u0161\u0161ur\" derive from the name of the Assyrian national deity Ashur. Ashur probably originated in the Early Assyrian period as a deified personification of Assur itself. In the Old Assyrian period the deity was considered the formal king of Assur; the actual rulers only used the style \"I\u0161\u0161i'ak\" (\"governor\"). From the time of Assyria's rise as a territorial state, Ashur began to be regarded as an embodiment of the entire land ruled by the Assyrian kings.\nThe modern name \"Assyria\" is of Greek origin, derived from \u0391\u03c3\u03c3\u03c5\u03c1\u03af\u03b1 (\"Assur\u00eda\"). The term's first attested use is during the time of the ancient Greek historian Herodotus (5th century BC). The Greeks called the Levant \"Syria\" and Mesopotamia \"Assyria\", even though the local population, both at that time and well into the later Christian period, used both terms interchangeably to refer to the entire region. It is not known whether the Greeks began referring to Mesopotamia as \"Assyria\" because they equated the region with the Assyrian Empire, long fallen by the time the term is first attested, or because they named the region after the people who lived there, the Assyrians. Because the term is so \"similar to Syria\", scholars have been examining since the 17th century whether the two terms are connected. And because, in sources predating the Greek ones, the shortened form \"Syria\" is attested as a synonym for Assyria, notably in Luwian and Aramaic texts from the time of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, modern scholars overwhelmingly support the conclusion that the names are connected.\nBoth \"Assyria\" and the contraction, \"Syria,\" are ultimately derived from the Akkadian \"A\u0161\u0161ur\". Following the decline of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, the subsequent empires that held dominion over the Assyrian lands adopted distinct appellations for the region, with a significant portion of these names also being rooted in \"A\u0161\u0161ur\". The Achaemenid Empire referred to Assyria as \"A\u03b8\u016br\u0101\" (\"Athura\"). The Sasanian Empire inexplicably referred to Lower Mesopotamia as Asoristan (\"land of the Assyrians\"), though the northern province of N\u014dd\u0161\u012brag\u0101n, which included much of the old Assyrian heartland, was also sometimes called \"At\u016bria\" or \"\u0100th\u014dr\". In Syriac, Assyria was and is referred to as \"\u02be\u0100thor\".\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nAgricultural villages in the region that would later become Assyria are known to have existed by the time of the Hassuna culture, c. 6300\u20135800 BC. Though the sites of some nearby cities that would later be incorporated into the Assyrian heartland, such as Nineveh, are known to have been inhabited since the Neolithic, the earliest archaeological evidence from Assur dates to the Early Dynastic Period, c. 2600 BC. During this time, the surrounding region was already relatively urbanized. There is no evidence that early Assur was an independent settlement, and it might not have been called Assur at all initially, but rather Baltil or Baltila, used in later times to refer to the city's oldest portion.\nThe name \"Assur\" is first attested for the site in documents of the Akkadian period in the 24th century BC. Through most of the Early Assyrian period (c. 2600\u20132025 BC), Assur was dominated by states and polities from southern Mesopotamia. Early on, Assur for a time fell under the loose hegemony of the Sumerian city of Kish and it was later occupied by both the Akkadian Empire and then the Third Dynasty of Ur. In c. 2025 BC, due to the collapse of the Third Dynasty of Ur, Assur became an independent city-state under Puzur-Ashur I.\nUnder the Puzur-Ashur dynasty, Assur was home to less than 10,000 people and likely held very limited military power; no military institutions at all are known from this time and no political influence was exerted on neighboring cities. The city was still influential in other ways; under Erishum I (r.c. 1974\u20131934 BC), Assur experimented with free trade, the earliest known such experiment in world history, which left the initiative for trade and large-scale foreign transactions entirely to the populace rather than the state.\nRoyal encouragement of trade led to Assur quickly establishing itself as a prominent trading city in northern Mesopotamia and soon thereafter establishing an extensive long-distance trade network, the first notable impression Assyria left in the historical record. Among the evidence left from this trade network are large collections of Old Assyrian cuneiform tablets from Assyrian trade colonies, the most notable of which is a set of 22,000 clay tablets found at K\u00fcltepe, near the modern city of Kayseri in Turkey.\nAs trade declined, perhaps due to increased warfare and conflict between the growing states of the Near East, Assur was frequently threatened by larger foreign states and kingdoms. The original Assur city-state, and the Puzur-Ashur dynasty, came to an end c. 1808 BC when the city was conquered by the Amorite ruler of Ekallatum, Shamshi-Adad I. Shamshi-Adad's extensive conquests in northern Mesopotamia eventually made him the ruler of the entire region, founding what some scholars have termed the \"Kingdom of Upper Mesopotamia\". The survival of this realm relied chiefly on Shamshi-Adad's own strength and charisma and thus collapsed shortly after his death c. 1776 BC.\nAfter Shamshi-Adad's death, the political situation in northern Mesopotamia was highly volatile, with Assur at times coming under the brief control of Eshnunna, Elam and the Old Babylonian Empire. At some point, the city returned to being an independent city-state, though the politics of Assur itself were volatile as well, with fighting between members of Shamshi-Adad's dynasty, native Assyrians and Hurrians for control. The infighting came to an end after the rise of Bel-bani as king c. 1700 BC. Bel-bani founded the Adaside dynasty, which after his reign ruled Assyria for about a thousand years.\nAssyria's rise as a territorial state in later times was in large part facilitated by two separate invasions of Mesopotamia by the Hittites. An invasion by the Hittite king Mursili I in c. 1595 BC destroyed the dominant Old Babylonian Empire, allowing the smaller kingdoms of Mitanni and Kassite Babylonia to rise in the north and south, respectively. Around c. 1430 BC, Assur was subjugated by Mitanni, an arrangement that lasted for about 70 years, until c. 1360 BC. Another Hittite invasion by \u0160uppiluliuma I in the 14th century BC effectively crippled the Mitanni kingdom. After his invasion, Assyria succeeded in freeing itself from its suzerain, achieving independence once more under Ashur-uballit I (r.c. 1363\u20131328 BC) whose rise to power, independence, and conquests of neighboring territory traditionally marks the rise of the Middle Assyrian Empire (c. 1363\u2013912 BC).\nAssyrian Empire.\nAshur-uballit I was the first native Assyrian ruler to claim the royal title \"\u0161ar\" (\"king\"). Shortly after achieving independence, he further claimed the dignity of a great king on the level of the Egyptian pharaohs and the Hittite kings. Assyria's rise was intertwined with the decline and fall of the Mitanni kingdom, its former suzerain, which allowed the early Middle Assyrian kings to expand and consolidate territories in northern Mesopotamia. Under the warrior-kings Adad-nirari I (r.c. 1305\u20131274\u00a0BC), Shalmaneser I (r.c. 1273\u20131244\u00a0BC) and Tukulti-Ninurta I (r.c. 1243\u20131207\u00a0BC), Assyria began to realize its aspirations of becoming a significant regional power.\nThese kings campaigned in all directions and incorporated a significant amount of territory into the growing Assyrian Empire. Under Shalmaneser I, the last remnants of the Mitanni kingdom were formally annexed into Assyria. The most successful of the Middle Assyrian kings was Tukulti-Ninurta I, who brought the Middle Assyrian Empire to its greatest extent. His most notable military achievements were his victory at the Battle of Nihriya c. 1237\u00a0BC, which marked the beginning of the end of Hittite influence in northern Mesopotamia, and his temporary conquest of Babylonia, which became an Assyrian vassal c. 1225\u20131216\u00a0BC. Tukulti-Ninurta was also the first Assyrian king to try to move the capital away from Assur, inaugurating the new city Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta as capital c. 1233 BC. The capital was returned to Assur after his death.\nTukulti-Ninurta I's assassination c. 1207 BC was followed by inter-dynastic conflict and a significant drop in Assyrian power. Tukulti-Ninurta I's successors were unable to maintain Assyrian power and Assyria became increasingly restricted to just the Assyrian heartland, a period of decline broadly coinciding with the Late Bronze Age collapse. Though some kings in this period of decline, such as Ashur-dan I (r.c. 1178\u20131133\u00a0BC), Ashur-resh-ishi I (r.1132\u20131115\u00a0BC) and Tiglath-Pileser I (r.1114\u20131076\u00a0BC) worked to reverse the decline and made significant conquests, their conquests were ephemeral and shaky, quickly lost again. From the time of Eriba-Adad II (r.1056\u20131054\u00a0BC) onward, Assyrian decline intensified.\nThe Assyrian heartland remained safe due to its geographical remoteness. Since Assyria was not the only state to undergo decline during these centuries, and the lands surrounding the Assyrian heartland were also significantly fragmented, it would ultimately be relatively easy for the reinvigorated Assyrian army to reconquer large parts of the empire. Under Ashur-dan II (r.934\u2013912\u00a0BC), who campaigned in the northeast and northwest, Assyrian decline was at last reversed, paving the way for grander efforts under his successors. The end of his reign conventionally marks the beginning of the Neo-Assyrian Empire (911\u2013609 BC).\nThrough decades of conquests, the early Neo-Assyrian kings worked to retake the lands of the Middle Assyrian Empire. Since this \"reconquista\" had to begin nearly from scratch, its eventual success was an extraordinary achievement. Under Ashurnasirpal II (r.883\u2013859\u00a0BC), the Neo-Assyrian Empire became the dominant political power in the Near East. In his ninth campaign, Ashurnasirpal II marched to the coast of the Mediterranean Sea, collecting tribute from various kingdoms on the way. A significant development during Ashurnasirpal II's reign was the second attempt to transfer the Assyrian capital away from Assur. Ashurnasirpal restored the ancient and ruined town of Nimrud, also located in the Assyrian heartland, and in 879 BC designated that city as the new capital of the empire. Though no longer the political capital, Assur remained the ceremonial and religious center of Assyria.\nAshurnasirpal II's son Shalmaneser III (r.859\u2013824\u00a0BC) also went on wide-ranging wars of conquest, expanding the empire in all directions. After Shalmaneser III's death, the Neo-Assyrian Empire entered into a period of stagnation dubbed the \"age of the magnates\", when powerful officials and generals were the principal wielders of political power rather than the king. This time of stagnation came to an end with the rise of Tiglath-Pileser III (r.745\u2013727\u00a0BC), who reduced the power of the magnates, consolidated and centralized the holdings of the empire, and through his military campaigns and conquests more than doubled the extent of Assyrian territory. The most significant conquests were the vassalization of the Levant all the way to the Egyptian border and the 729 BC conquest of Babylonia.\nThe Neo-Assyrian Empire reached the height of its extent and power under the Sargonid dynasty, founded by Sargon II (r.722\u2013705\u00a0BC). Under Sargon II and his son Sennacherib (r.705\u2013681\u00a0BC), the empire was further expanded and the gains were consolidated. Both kings founded new capitals. In 706 BC, Sargon II relocated the capital to the newly constructed city of Dur-Sharrukin. The following year, Sennacherib transferred the capital to Nineveh, which he extensively expanded and renovated. He may even have been responsible for the construction of the Hanging Gardens there\u2014one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. The 671 BC conquest of Egypt under Esarhaddon (r.681\u2013669\u00a0BC) brought Assyria to its greatest ever extent.\nAfter the death of Ashurbanipal (r.669\u2013631\u00a0BC), the Neo-Assyrian Empire swiftly collapsed. One of the primary reasons was the inability of the Neo-Assyrian kings to resolve the \"Babylonian problem\"; despite many attempts to appease Babylonia in the south, revolts were frequent all throughout the Sargonid period. The revolt of Babylon under Nabopolassar in 626 BC, in combination with an invasion by the Medes under Cyaxares in 615/614 BC, led to the Medo-Babylonian conquest of the Assyrian Empire. Assur was sacked in 614 BC and Nineveh fell in 612 BC. The last Assyrian ruler, Ashur-uballit II, tried to rally the Assyrian army at Harran in the west but he was defeated in 609 BC, marking the end of the ancient line of Assyrian kings and of Assyria as a state.\nLater history.\nDespite the violent downfall of the Assyrian Empire, Assyrian culture continued to survive through the subsequent post-imperial period (609 BC \u2013 c. AD 240) and beyond. The Assyrian heartland experienced a dramatic decrease in the size and number of inhabited settlements during the rule of the Neo-Babylonian Empire founded by Nabopolassar; the former Assyrian capital cities Assur, Nimrud and Nineveh were nearly completely abandoned. Throughout the time of the Neo-Babylonian and later Achaemenid Empire, Assyria remained a marginal and sparsely populated region. Toward the end of the 6th century BC, the Assyrian dialect of the Akkadian language went extinct, having toward the end of the Neo-Assyrian Empire already largely been replaced by Aramaic as a vernacular language.\nUnder the empires succeeding the Neo-Babylonians, from the late 6th century BC onward, Assyria began to experience a recovery. Under the Achaemenids, most of the territory was organized into the province Athura (\"A\u03b8\u016br\u0101\"). The organization into a single large province, the lack of interference of the Achaemenid rulers in local affairs, and the return of the cult statue of Ashur to Assur soon after the Achaemenids conquered Babylon facilitated the survival of Assyrian culture. Under the Seleucid Empire, which controlled Mesopotamia from the late 4th to mid-2nd century BC, Assyrian sites such as Assur, Nimrud and Nineveh were resettled and a large number of villages were rebuilt and expanded.\nAfter the Parthian Empire conquered the region in the 2nd century BC, the recovery of Assyria continued, culminating in an unprecedented return to prosperity and revival in the 1st to 3rd centuries AD. The region was resettled and restored so intensely that the population and settlement density reached heights not seen since the Neo-Assyrian Empire. The region was under the Parthians primarily ruled by a group of vassal kingdoms, including Osroene, Adiabene and Hatra. Though in some aspects influenced by Assyrian culture, these states were for the most part not ruled by Assyrian rulers.\nAssur itself flourished under Parthian rule. From around or shortly after the end of the 2nd century BC, the city may have become the capital of its own small semi-autonomous Assyrian realm, either under the suzerainty of Hatra, or under direct Parthian suzerainty. On account of the resemblance between the stelae by the local rulers and those of the ancient Assyrian kings, they may have seen themselves as the restorers and continuators of the old royal line. The ancient Ashur temple was restored in the 2nd century AD. This last cultural golden age came to an end with the sack of Assur by the Sasanian Empire c. 240. During the sack, the Ashur temple was destroyed again and the city's population was dispersed.\nStarting from the 1st century AD onward, many of the Assyrians became Christianized, though holdouts of the old ancient Mesopotamian religion continued to survive for centuries. Despite the loss of political power, the Assyrians continued to constitute a significant portion of the population in northern Mesopotamia until religiously motivated suppression and massacres under the Ilkhanate and the Timurid Empire in the 14th century, which relegated them to a local ethnic and religious minority. The Assyrians lived largely in peace under the rule of the Ottoman Empire, which gained control of Assyria in the 16th century.\nIn the late 19th and early 20th century, when the Ottomans grew increasingly nationalistic, further persecutions and massacres were enacted against the Assyrians, most notably the \"Sayfo\" (Assyrian genocide), which resulted in the deaths of as many as 250,000 Assyrians. Throughout the 20th century, many unsuccessful proposals have been made by the Assyrians for autonomy or independence. Further massacres and persecutions, enacted both by governments and by terrorist groups such as the Islamic State, have resulted in most of the Assyrian people living in diaspora.\nGovernment and military.\nKingship.\nIn the Assur city-state of the Old Assyrian period, the government was in many respects an oligarchy, where the king was a permanent, albeit not the only prominent, actor. The Old Assyrian kings were not autocrats, with sole power, but rather acted as stewards on behalf of the god Ashur and presided over the meetings of the city assembly, the main Assyrian administrative body during this time. The composition of the city assembly is not known, but it is generally believed to have been made up of members of the most powerful families of the city, many of whom were merchants.\nThe king acted as the main executive officer and chairman of this group of influential individuals and also contributed with legal knowledge and expertise. The Old Assyrian kings were styled as \"i\u0161\u0161iak A\u0161\u0161ur\" (\"governor [on behalf] of Ashur\"), with Ashur being considered the city's formal king. That the populace of Assur in the Old Assyrian period often referred to the king as \"rub\u0101\u2019um\" (\"great one\") clearly indicates that the kings, despite their limited executive power, were seen as royal figures and as being \"primus inter pares\" (first among equals) among the powerful individuals of the city.\nAssur first experienced a more autocratic form of kingship under the Amorite conqueror Shamshi-Adad I, the earliest ruler of Assur to use the style \"\u0161arrum\" (king) and the title 'king of the Universe'. Shamshi-Adad I appears to have based his more absolute form of kingship on the rulers of the Old Babylonian Empire. Under Shamshi-Adad I, Assyrians also swore their oaths by the king, not just by the god. This practice did not survive beyond his death. The influence of the city assembly had disappeared by the beginning of the Middle Assyrian period. Though the traditional \"i\u0161\u0161iak A\u0161\u0161ur\" continued to be used at times, the Middle Assyrian kings were autocrats, in terms of power having little in common with the rulers of the Old Assyrian period.\nAs the Assyrian Empire grew, the kings began to employ an increasingly sophisticated array of royal titles. Ashur-uballit I was the first to assume the style \"\u0161ar m\u0101t A\u0161\u0161ur\" (\"king of the land of Ashur\") and his grandson Arik-den-ili (r.c. 1317\u20131306\u00a0BC) introduced the style \"\u0161arru dannu\" (\"strong king\"). Adad-nirari I's inscriptions required 32 lines to be devoted just to his titles. This development peaked under Tukulti-Ninurta I, who assumed, among other titles, the styles \"king of Assyria and Karduniash\", \"king of Sumer and Akkad\", \"king of the Upper and the Lower Seas\" and \"king of all peoples\". Royal titles and epithets were often highly reflective of current political developments and the achievements of individual kings; during periods of decline, the royal titles used typically grew more simple again, only to grow grander once more as Assyrian power experienced resurgences.\nThe kings of the Middle and Neo-Assyrian periods continued to present themselves, and be viewed by their subjects, as the intermediaries between Ashur and mankind. This position and role was used to justify imperial expansion: the Assyrians saw their empire as being the part of the world overseen and administered by Ashur through his human agents. In their ideology, the outer realm outside of Assyria was characterized by chaos and the people there were uncivilized, with unfamiliar cultural practices and strange languages. The mere existence of the \"outer realm\" was regarded as a threat to the cosmic order within Assyria and as such, it was the king's duty to expand the realm of Ashur and incorporate these strange lands, converting chaos to civilization.\nTexts describing the coronation of Middle and Neo-Assyrian kings at times include Ashur commanding the king to \"broaden the land of Ashur\" or \"extend the land at his feet\". As such, expansion was cast as a moral and necessary duty. Because the rule and actions of the Assyrian king were seen as divinely sanctioned, resistance to Assyrian sovereignty in times of war was regarded to be resistance against divine will, which deserved punishment. Peoples and polities who revolted against Assyria were seen as criminals against the divine world order. Since Ashur was the king of the gods, all other gods were subjected to him and thus the people who followed those gods should be subjected to the representative of Ashur, the Assyrian king.\nThe kings also had religious and judicial duties. Kings were responsible for performing various rituals in support of the cult of Ashur and the Assyrian priesthood. They were expected, together with the Assyrian people, to provide offerings to not only Ashur but also all the other gods. From the time of Ashur-resh-ishi I onward, the religious and cultic duties of the king were pushed somewhat into the background, though they were still prominently mentioned in accounts of building and restoring temples. Assyrian titles and epithets in inscriptions from then on generally emphasized the kings as powerful warriors. Developing from their role in the Old Assyrian period, the Middle and Neo-Assyrian kings were the supreme judicial authority in the empire, though they generally appear to have been less concerned with their role as judges than their predecessors in the Old Assyrian period were. The kings were expected to ensure the welfare and prosperity of the Assyria and its people, indicated by multiple inscriptions referring to the kings as \"shepherds\" (\"re\u2019\u00fb\").\nCapital cities.\nNo word for the idea of a capital city existed in Akkadian, the nearest being the idea of a \"city of kingship\", i.e. an administrative center used by the king, but there are several examples of kingdoms having multiple \"cities of kingship\". Due to Assyria growing out of the Assur city-state of the Old Assyrian period, and due to the city's religious importance, Assur was the administrative center of Assyria through most of its history. Though the royal administration at times moved elsewhere, the ideological status of Assur was never fully superseded and it remained a ceremonial center in the empire even when it was governed from elsewhere. The transfer of the royal seat of power to other cities was ideologically possible since the king was Ashur's representative on Earth. The king, like the deity embodied Assyria itself, and so the capital of Assyria was in a sense wherever the king happened to have his residence.\nThe first transfer of administrative power away from Assur occurred under Tukulti-Ninurta I, who c. 1233 BC inaugurated Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta as capital. Tukulti-Ninurta I's foundation of a new capital was perhaps inspired by developments in Babylonia in the south, where the Kassite dynasty had transferred the administration from the long-established city of Babylon to the newly constructed city of Dur-Kurigalzu, also named after a king. It seems that Tukulti-Ninurta I intended to go further than the Kassites and also establish Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta as the new Assyrian cult center. The city was however not maintained as capital after Tukulti-Ninurta I's death, with subsequent kings once more ruling from Assur. \nThe Neo-Assyrian Empire underwent several different capitals. There is some evidence that Tukulti-Ninurta II (r.890\u2013884\u00a0BC), perhaps inspired by his predecessor of the same name, made unfulfilled plans to transfer the capital to a city called Nemid Tukulti-Ninurta, either a completely new city or a new name applied to Nineveh, which by this point already rivalled Assur in scale and political importance. The capital was transferred under Tukulti-Ninurta II's son Ashurnasirpal II to Nimrud in 879 BC. An architectural detail separating Nimrud and the other Neo-Assyrian capitals from Assur is that they were designed in a way that emphasized royal power: the royal palaces in Assur were smaller than the temples but the situation was reversed in the new capitals.\nIn 706 BC, Sargon II transferred the capital to the city of Dur-Sharrukin, which he built himself. Since the location of Dur-Sharrukin had no obvious practical or political merit, this move was probably an ideological statement. Immediately after Sargon II's death in 705 BC, his son Sennacherib transferred the capital to Nineveh, a far more natural seat of power. Though it was not meant as a permanent royal residence, Ashur-uballit II chose Harran as his seat of power after the fall of Nineveh in 612 BC. Harran is typically seen as the short-lived final Assyrian capital. No building projects were conducted during this time, but Harran had been long-established as a major religious center, dedicated to the god S\u00een.\nAristocracy and elite.\nBecause of the nature of source preservation, more information about the upper classes of ancient Assyria survives than for the lower ones. At the top of Middle and Neo-Assyrian society were members of long-established and large families called \"houses\". Members of this aristocracy tended to occupy the most important offices within the government and they were likely descendants of the most prominent families of the Old Assyrian period.\nOne of the most influential offices in the Assyrian administration was the position of vizier (\"sukkallu\"). From at least the time of Shalmaneser I onward, there were grand viziers (\"sukkallu rabi\u2019u\"), superior to the ordinary viziers, who at times governed their own lands as appointees of the kings. At least in the Middle Assyrian period, the grand viziers were typically members of the royal family and the position was at this time, as were many other offices, hereditary.\nThe elite of the Neo-Assyrian Empire was expanded and included several different offices. The Neo-Assyrian inner elite is typically divided by modern scholars into the \"magnates\", a set of high-ranking offices, and the \"scholars\" (\"umm\u00e2n\u012b\"), tasked with advising and guiding the kings through interpreting omens. The magnates included the offices \"masennu\" (treasurer), \"n\u0101gir ekalli\" (palace herald), \"rab \u0161\u0101q\u00ea\" (chief cupbearer), \"rab \u0161a-r\u0113\u0161i\" (chief officer/eunuch), \"sartinnu\" (chief judge), \"sukkallu\" (grand vizier) and \"turtanu\" (commander-in-chief), which at times continued to be occupied by royal family members.\nSome of the magnates acted as governors of important provinces and all of them were deeply involved with the Assyrian military, controlling significant forces. They owned large tax-free estates, scattered throughout the empire. In the late Neo-Assyrian Empire, there was a growing disconnect between the traditional Assyrian elite and the kings due to eunuchs growing unprecedently powerful. The highest offices both in the civil administration and the army began to be occupied by eunuchs with deliberately obscure and lowly origins, since this ensured that they would be loyal to the king. Eunuchs were trusted, since they were believed incapable of having any dynastic aspirations of their own.\"\"\nFrom the time of Erishum I in the early Old Assyrian period onward, a yearly office-holder, a \"limmu\" official, was elected from the influential men of Assyria. The \"limmu\" official gave their name to the year, meaning that their name appeared in all administrative documents signed that year. Kings were typically the \"limmu\" officials in their first regnal years. In the Old Assyrian period, the \"limmu\" officials also held substantial executive power, though this aspect of the office had disappeared by the time of the rise of the Middle Assyrian Empire.\nAdministration.\nThe success of Assyria was not only due to energetic kings who expanded its borders but more importantly due to its ability to efficiently incorporate and govern conquered lands. From the rise of Assyria as a territorial state at the beginning of the Middle Assyrian period onward, Assyrian territory was divided into a set of provinces or districts (\"p\u0101\u1e2butu\"). The total number and size of these provinces varied and changed as Assyria expanded and contracted. Every province was headed by a provincial governor (\"bel p\u0101\u1e2bete\",\" b\u0113l p\u012bh\u0101ti\" or \"\u0161aknu\") who was responsible for handling local order, public safety and economy.\nGovernors stored and distributed the goods produced in their province, which were inspected and collected by royal representatives once a year. Through these inspections, the central government could keep track of current stocks and production throughout the country. Governors had to pay both taxes and offer gifts to the god Ashur, though such gifts were usually small and mainly symbolic. The channeling of taxes and gifts were a method of collecting profit and served to connect the elite of the entire empire to the Assyrian heartland.\nIn the Neo-Assyrian period, an extensive hierarchy within the provincial administration is attested. At the bottom of this hierarchy were lower officials, such as village managers (\"rab \u0101l\u0101ni\") who oversaw one or more villages, collecting taxes in the form of labor and goods and keeping the administration informed of the conditions of their settlements, and corv\u00e9e officers (\"\u0161a b\u0113t-k\u016bdini\") who kept tallies on the labor performed by forced laborers and the remaining time owed. Individual cities had their own administrations, headed by mayors (\"\u1e2bazi\u2019\u0101nu\"), responsible for the local economy and production.\nSome regions of the Assyrian Empire were not incorporated into the provincial system but were still subjected to the rule of the Assyrian kings. Such vassal states could be ruled indirectly through allowing established local lines of kings to continue ruling in exchange for tribute or through the Assyrian kings appointing their own vassal rulers. Through the \"ilku\" system, the Assyrian kings could also grant arable lands to individuals in exchange for goods and military service.\nTo overcome the challenges of governing a large empire, the Neo-Assyrian Empire developed a sophisticated state communication system, which included various innovative techniques and relay stations. Per estimates by Karen Radner, an official message sent in the Neo-Assyrian period from the western border province Quw\u00ea to the Assyrian heartland, a distance of 700 kilometers (430 miles) over a stretch of lands featuring many rivers without any bridges, could take less than five days to arrive. Such communication speed was unprecedented before the rise of the Neo-Assyrian Empire and was not surpassed in the Middle East until the telegraph was introduced by the Ottoman Empire in 1865, nearly two and a half thousand years after the Neo-Assyrian Empire's fall.\nMilitary.\nThe Assyrian army was throughout its history mostly composed of levies, mobilized only when they were needed (such as in the time of campaigns). Through regulations, obligations and sophisticated government systems, large amounts of soldiers could be recruited and mobilized already in the early Middle Assyrian period. A small central standing army unit was established in the Neo-Assyrian Empire, dubbed the \"ki\u1e63ir \u0161arri\" (\"king's unit\"). Some professional, though not standing, troops are also attested in the Middle Assyrian period, dubbed \"\u1e2bur\u0101du\" or \"\u1e63\u0101b\u016b \u1e2bur\u0101d\u0101tu\", though what their role was is not clear due to the scarcity of sources. Perhaps this category included archers and charioteers, who needed more extensive training than normal foot soldiers.\nThe Assyrian army developed and evolved over time. In the Middle Assyrian period, foot soldiers were divided into the \"s\u1ea1 b\u016b \u0161a kakk\u0113\" (\"weapon troops\") and the \"s\u1ea1 b\u016b \u0161a ar\u00e2t\u0113\" (\"shield-bearing troops\") but surviving records are not detailed enough to determine what the differences were. It is possible that the \"s\u1ea1 b\u016b \u0161a kakk\u0113\" included ranged troops, such as slingers (\"\u1e63\u0101b\u016b \u0161a u\u0161pe\") and archers (\"\u1e63\u0101b\u016b \u0161a qalte\"). The chariots in the army composed a unit of their own. Based on surviving depictions, chariots were crewed by two soldiers: an archer who commanded the chariot (\"m\u0101ru damqu\") and a driver (\"\u0161a mugerre\"). Chariots first entered extensive military use under Tiglath-Pileser I in the 12th\u201311th centuries BC and were in the later Neo-Assyrian period gradually phased out in favor of cavalry (\"\u0161a pet\u1e2balle\"). In the Middle Assyrian period, cavalry was mainly used for escorting or message deliveries.\nUnder the Neo-Assyrian Empire, important new developments in the military were the large-scale introduction of cavalry, the adoption of iron for armor and weapons, and the development of new and innovative siege warfare techniques. At the height of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, the Assyrian army was the strongest army yet assembled in world history. The number of soldiers in the Neo-Assyrian army was likely several hundred thousand. The Neo-Assyrian army was subdivided into \"ki\u1e63ru\", composed of perhaps 1,000 soldiers, most of whom would have been infantry soldiers (\"z\u016bk\", \"zukk\u00fb\" or \"raks\u016bte\"). The infantry was divided into three types: light, medium and heavy, with varying weapons, level of armor and responsibilities. While on campaign, the Assyrian army made heavy use of both interpreters/translators (\"targumannu\") and guides (\"r\u0101di kibsi\"), both probably being drawn from foreigners resettled in Assyra.\nPopulation and society.\nPopulation and social standing.\nPopulace.\nThe majority of the population of ancient Assyria were farmers who worked land owned by their families. Old Assyrian society was divided into two main groups: slaves (\"subrum\") and free citizens, referred to as \"aw\u012blum\" (\"men\") or \"A\u0161\u0161ur\" (\"sons of Ashur\"). Among the free citizens there was also a division into \"rabi\" (\"big\") and \"\u1e63aher\" (\"small\") members of the city assembly. Assyrian society grew more complex and hierarchical over time. In the Middle Assyrian Empire, there were several groups among the lower classes, the highest of which were the free men (\"a\u2019\u0131l\u016b\"), who like the upper classes could receive land in exchange for performing duties for the government, but who could not live on these lands since they were comparably small.\nBelow the free men were the unfree men (\"\u0161iluhlu\u032e\"). The unfree men had given up their freedom and entered the services of others on their own accord, and were provided with clothes and rations. Many of them probably originated as foreigners. Though similar to slavery, it was possible for an unfree person to regain their freedom by providing a replacement. During their service they were considered the property of the government rather than their employers. Other lower classes of the Middle Assyrian period included the \"\u0101l\u0101y\u00fb\" (\"village residents\"), \"\u0101lik ilke\" (people recruited through the \"ilku\" system) and the \"hup\u0161u\", though what these designations meant in terms of social standing and living standards is not known.\nThe Middle Assyrian structure of society by and large endured through the subsequent Neo-Assyrian period. Below the higher classes of Neo-Assyrian society were free citizens, semi-free laborers and slaves. It was possible through steady service to the Assyrian state bureaucracy for a family to move up the social ladder. In some cases, stellar work conducted by a single individual enhanced the status of their family for generations to come. In many cases, Assyrian family groups, or \"clans\", formed large population groups within the empire, referred to as tribes. Such tribes lived together in villages and other settlements near or adjacent to their agricultural lands.\nSlavery was an intrinsic part of nearly every society in the ancient Near East. There were two main types of slaves in ancient Assyria: chattel slaves, primarily foreigners who were kidnapped or who were spoils of war, and debt slaves, formerly free men and women who had been unable to pay off their debts. In some cases, Assyrian children were seized by authorities due to the debts of their parents and sold off into slavery when their parents were unable to pay. Children born to slave women automatically became slaves themselves, unless some other arrangement had been agreed to. Though Old Babylonian texts frequently mention the geographical and ethnic origin of slaves, there is only a single known such reference in Old Assyrian texts (whereas there are many describing slaves in a general sense), a slave girl explicitly being referred to as Subaraean, indicating that ethnicity was not seen as very important in terms of slavery.\nThe surviving evidence suggests that the number of slaves in Assyria never reached a large share of the population. In the Akkadian language, several terms were used for slaves, commonly \"wardum\", though this term could confusingly also be used for (free) official servants, retainers and followers, soldiers and subjects of the king. Because many individuals designated as \"wardum\" in Assyrian texts are described as handling property and carrying out administrative tasks on behalf of their masters, many may have in actuality been free servants and not slaves in the common meaning of the term. A number of \"wardum\" are also recorded as being bought and sold.\nStatus of women.\nThe main evidence concerning the lives of ordinary women in ancient Assyria is in administrative documents and law codes. There was no legal distinction between men and women in the Old Assyrian period and they had more or less the same rights in society. Since several letters written by women are known from the Old Assyrian period, it is evident that women were free to learn how to read and write. Both men and women paid the same fines, could inherit property, participated in trade, bought, owned, and sold houses and slaves, made their own last wills, and were allowed to divorce their partners.\nRecords of Old Assyrian marriages confirm that the dowry to the bride belonged to her, not the husband, and it was inherited by her children after her death. Although they were equal legally, men and women in the Old Assyrian period were raised and socialized differently and had different social expectations and obligations. Typically, girls were raised by their mothers, taught to spin, weave, and help with daily tasks. Boys were taught trades by masters, later often following their fathers on trade expeditions. Sometimes the eldest daughter of a family was consecrated as a priestess. She was not allowed to marry and became economically independent.\nWives were expected to provide their husbands with garments and food. Although marriages were typically monogamous, husbands were allowed to buy a female slave in order to produce an heir if his wife was infertile. The wife was allowed to choose that slave and the slave never gained the status of a second wife. Husbands who were away on long trading journeys were allowed to take a second wife in one of the trading colonies, although with strict rules that must be followed: the second wife was not allowed to accompany him back to Assur and both wives had to be provided with a home to live in, food, and wood.\nThe status of women decreased in the Middle Assyrian period, as can be gathered from laws concerning them among the Middle Assyrian Laws. Among these laws were punishments for various crimes, often sexual or marital ones. Although they did not deprive women of all their rights and they were not significantly different from other ancient Near Eastern laws of their time, the Middle Assyrian Laws effectively made women second-class citizens. It is not clear how strongly these laws were enforced.\nThese laws gave men the right to punish their wives as they wished. Among the harshest punishments written into these laws, for a crime not even committed by the woman, was that a raped woman would be forcibly married to her rapist. These laws also specified that certain women were obliged to wear veils while out on the street, marital status being the determining factor. Some women, such as slave women and \"\u1e2bar\u0131mt\u016b\" women, were prohibited from wearing veils and others, such as certain priestesses, were only allowed to wear veils if they were married.\nNot all laws were suppressive against women. Women whose husbands died or were taken prisoner in war, and who did not have any sons or relatives to support them, were guaranteed support from the government. The \"\u1e2bar\u0131mt\u016b\" women have historically been believed to have been prostitutes, but today, are interpreted as women with an independent social existence, i.e. not tied to a husband, father, or institution. Although most \"\u1e2bar\u0131mt\u016b\" appear to have been poor, there were noteworthy exceptions. The term appears with negative connotations in several texts. Their mere existence makes it clear that it was possible for women to live independent lives, despite their lesser social standing during that period.\nDuring the Neo-Assyrian period that followed, royal and upper-class women experienced increased influence. Women attached to the Neo-Assyrian royal court sent and received letters, were independently wealthy, and could buy and own lands of their own. The queens of the Neo-Assyrian Empire are better attested historically than queens of preceding periods of the culture. Under the Sargonid dynasty, they were granted their own military units. Sometimes they are known to have partaken in military campaigns alongside other units.\nAmong the most influential women of the Neo-Assyrian period were Shammuramat, queen of Shamshi-Adad V (r.824\u2013811\u00a0BC), who in the reign of her son Adad-nirari III (r.811\u2013783\u00a0BC) might have been regent and participated in military campaigns. Another is Naqi'a, who influenced politics in the reigns of Sennacherib, Esarhaddon, and Ashurbanipal.\nEconomy.\nIn the Old Assyrian period, a major portion of Assur's population was involved in the city's international trade. As can be gathered from hiring contracts and other records, the trade involved people of many different occupations, including porters, guides, donkey drivers, agents, traders, bakers and bankers. Because of the extensive cuneiform records known from the period, details of the trade are relatively well-known. It has been estimated that just in the period c. 1950\u20131836 BC, twenty-five tons of Anatolian silver was transported to Assur, and that approximately one hundred tons of tin and 100,000 textiles were transported to Anatolia in return. The Assyrians also sold livestock, processed goods and reed products. In many cases, the materials sold by Assyrian colonists came from far-away places; the textiles sold by Assyrians in Anatolia were imported from southern Mesopotamia and the tin came from the east in the Zagros Mountains.\nAfter international trade declined in the 19th century BC, the Assyrian economy became increasingly oriented toward the state. In the Neo-Assyrian period, the wealth generated through private investments was dwarfed by the wealth of the state, which was by far the largest employer in the empire and had a monopoly on agriculture, manufacturing and exploitation of minerals. The imperial economy advantaged mainly the elite, since it was structured in a way that ensured that surplus wealth flowed to the government and was then used for the maintenance of the state throughout the empire. Though all means of production were owned by the state, there continued to be a vibrant private economic sector within the empire, with property rights of individuals ensured by the government.\nPersonal identity and continuity.\nEthnicity and culture are largely based in self-perception and self-designation. A distinct Assyrian identity seems to have formed already in the Old Assyrian period, when distinctly Assyrian burial practices, foods and dress codes are attested and Assyrian documents appear to consider the inhabitants of Assur to be a distinct cultural group. A wider Assyrian identity appears to have spread across northern Mesopotamia under the Middle Assyrian Empire, since later writings concerning the reconquests of the early Neo-Assyrian kings refer to some of their wars as liberating the Assyrian people of the cities they reconquered.\nSurviving evidence suggests that the ancient Assyrians had a relatively open definition of what it meant to be Assyrian. Modern ideas such as a person's ethnic background, or the Roman idea of legal citizenship, do not appear to have been reflected in ancient Assyria. Although Assyrian accounts and artwork of warfare frequently describe and depict foreign enemies, they are not depicted with different physical features, but rather with different clothing and equipment. Assyrian accounts describe enemies as barbaric only in terms of their behavior, as lacking correct religious practices, and as doing wrongdoings against Assyria.\nAll things considered, there does not appear to have been any well-developed concepts of ethnicity or race in ancient Assyria. What mattered for a person to be seen by others as Assyrian was mainly fulfillment of obligations, such as military service, being affiliated with the Assyrian Empire politically, and maintaining loyalty to the Assyrian king. One of the inscriptions that attest to this view, as well as royal Assyrian policies enacted to encourage assimilation and cultural mixture, is Sargon II's account of the construction of Dur-Sharrukin. One of the passages of the inscription reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Subjects of (all) four (parts of the world), of foreign tongues, with different languages without similarity, people from mountainous regions and plains, so many (different people) as the light of the gods, lord above all, supervises, I let dwell inside [my new city] on the command of Ashur my lord [...]. Born Assyrians, experienced in all professions, I set above them as supervisors and guides to teach them how to work properly and respect the gods and the king.\nAlthough the text clearly differentiates the new settlers from those that had been \"born Assyrians\", the aim of Sargon's policy was also clearly to transform the new settlers into Assyrians through appointing supervisors and guides to teach them. Though the expansion of the Assyrian Empire, in combination with resettlements and deportations, changed the ethno-cultural make-up of the Assyrian heartland, there is no evidence to suggest that the more ancient Assyrian inhabitants of the land ever disappeared or became restricted to a small elite, nor that the ethnic and cultural identity of the new settlers was anything other than \"Assyrian\" after one or two generations.\nAlthough the use of the term \"Assyrian\" by the modern Assyrian people has historically been the target of misunderstanding and controversy, both politically and academically, Assyrian continuity is generally scholarly accepted based on both historical and genetic evidence in the sense that the modern Assyrians are regarded to be descendants of the population of the ancient Assyrian Empire. Though the ancient Akkadian language and cuneiform script did not survive for long in Assyria after the empire was destroyed in 609 BC, Assyrian culture clearly did. The old Assyrian religion continued to be practised at Assur until the 3rd century AD, and at other sites for centuries thereafter, gradually losing ground to Christianity. At Mardin, believers in the old religion are known from as late as the 18th century.\nIndividuals with names harkening back to ancient Mesopotamia are also attested at Assur until it was sacked for the last time in AD 240 and at other sites as late as the 13th century. Though many foreign states ruled over Assyria in the millennia following the empire's fall, there is no evidence of any large scale influx of immigrants that replaced the original population, which instead continued to make up a significant portion of the region's people until the Mongol and Timurid massacres in the late 14th century.\nIn pre-modern Syriac-language (the type of Aramaic used in Christian Mesopotamian writings) sources, the typical self-designations used are \"\u02be\u0101r\u0101m\u0101y\u0101\" (\"Aramean\") and \"sury\u0101y\u0101\", with the term \"\u02be\u0101thor\u0101y\u0101\" (\"Assyrian\") rarely being used as a self-designation. The terms Assyria (\"\u02be\u0101thor\") and Assyrian (\"\u02be\u0101thor\u0101y\u0101\") were however used in several senses in pre-modern times; most notably being used for the ancient Assyrians and for the land surrounding Nineveh, and for the city of Mosul, built next to Nineveh's ruins. In Syriac translations of the Bible, the term \"\u02be\u0101thor\" is also used to refer to the ancient Assyrian Empire. In the sense of a citizen of Mosul, the designation \"\u02be\u0101thor\u0101y\u0101\" were used for some individuals in the pre-modern period.\nThe reluctance of Christians to use \"\u02be\u0101thor\u0101y\u0101\" as a self-designation could perhaps be explained by the Assyrians described in the Bible being prominent enemies of Israel; the term \"\u02be\u0101thor\u0101y\u0101\" was sometimes employed in Syriac writings as a term for enemies of Christians. In this context, the term was sometimes applied to the Persians of the Sasanian Empire. The 4th-century Syriac writer Ephrem the Syrian for instance referred to the Sasanian Empire as \"filthy \"\u02be\u0101thor\", mother of corruption\". In a similar fashion, the term was sometimes applied to the later Muslim rulers.\nThe self-designation \"sury\u0101y\u0101\", \"sury\u0101y\u0113\" or \"s\u016br\u014dy\u0113\", sometimes translated as \"Syrian\", is believed to be derived from the Akkadian term \"ass\u016br\u0101yu\" (\"Assyrian\"), which was sometimes even in ancient times rendered in the shorter form \"s\u016br\u0101yu\". Some medieval Syriac Christian documents used \"\u0101s\u016br\u0101y\u0113\" and \"s\u016br\u0101y\u0113\", rather than \"\u0101th\u014dr\u0101y\u0113\", also for the ancient Assyrians. Medieval and modern Armenian sources also connected \"ass\u016br\u0101yu\" and \"sury\u0101y\u0101\", consistently referring to the Aramaic-speaking Christians of Mesopotamia and Syria as \"Asori\".\nDespite the complex issue of self-designations, pre-modern Syriac-language sources at times identified positively with the ancient Assyrians and drew connections between the ancient empire and themselves. Most prominently, ancient Assyrian kings and figures long appeared in local folklore and literary tradition and claims of descent from ancient Assyrian royalty were forwarded both for figures in folklore and by actual living high-ranking members of society in northern Mesopotamia. Visits by missionaries from western churches to the Assyrian heartland in the 18th century likely contributed to the Assyrian people more strongly relating their self-designation and identity to ancient Assyria.\nIn the context of interactions with westerners who connected them to the ancient Assyrians, and due to an increasing number of atrocities and massacres directed against them, the Assyrian people experienced a cultural \"awakening\" or \"renaissance\" toward the end of the 19th century, which led to the development of a national ideology more strongly rooted in their descent from ancient Assyria and a re-adoption of self-designations such as \"\u02be\u0101thor\u0101y\u0101\" and \"\u02be\u0101sur\u0101y\u0101\". Today, \"s\u016bry\u014dy\u014d\" or \"s\u016br\u0101y\u0101\" are the predominant self-designations used by Assyrians in their native language, though they are typically translated as \"Assyrian\" rather than \"Syrian\".\nCulture.\nLanguages.\nAkkadian.\nThe ancient Assyrians primarily spoke and wrote the Assyrian language, a Semitic language (i.e. related to modern Hebrew and Arabic) closely related to Babylonian, spoken in southern Mesopotamia. Both Assyrian and Babylonian are generally regarded by modern scholars to be dialects of the Akkadian language. This is a modern convention since contemporary ancient authors considered Assyrian and Babylonian to be two separate languages. Only Babylonian was referred to as \"akkad\u00fbm\", with Assyrian being referred to as \"a\u0161\u0161ur\u00fb\" or \"a\u0161\u0161ur\u0101yu\". Though both were written with cuneiform script, the signs look quite different and can be distinguished relatively easily.\nGiven the vast timespan covered by ancient Assyria, the Assyrian language developed and evolved over time. Modern scholars broadly categorize it into three different periods, roughly (though far from precisely) corresponding to the periods used to divide Assyrian history: the Old Assyrian language (2000\u20131500\u00a0BC), Middle Assyrian language (1500\u20131000\u00a0BC) and Neo-Assyrian language (1000\u2013500\u00a0BC). Because the record of Assyrian tablets and documents is still somewhat spotty, many of the stages of the language remain poorly known and documented.\nThe signs used in Old Assyrian texts are for the most part less complex than those used during the succeeding Middle and Neo-Assyrian periods and they were fewer in number, amounting to no more than 150\u2013200 unique signs, most of which were syllabic signs (representing syllables). Due to the limited number of signs used, Old Assyrian is relatively easier to decipher for modern researchers than later forms of the language, though the limited number of signs also means that there are in cases several possible alternative phonetic values and readings. This means that while it is easy to decipher the signs, many researchers remain uncomfortable with the language itself. Though it was a more archaic variant of the later Assyrian language, Old Assyrian also contains several words that are not attested in later periods, some being peculiar early forms of words and others being names for commercial terms or various textile and food products from Anatolia.\nIn the Middle and Neo-Assyrian empires, the later versions of the Assyrian language were not the only versions of Akkadian used. Though Assyrian was typically used in letters, legal documents, administrative documents, and as a vernacular, Standard Babylonian was also used in an official capacity. Standard Babylonian was a highly codified version of ancient Babylonian, as used around 1500 BC, and was used as a language of high culture, for nearly all scholarly documents, literature, poetry and royal inscriptions. The culture of the Assyrian elite was strongly influenced by Babylonia in the south; in a vein similar to how Greek civilization was respected in, and influenced, ancient Rome, the Assyrians had much respect for Babylon and its ancient culture.\nBecause of the multilingual nature of the vast empire, many loan words are attested as entering the Assyrian language during the Neo-Assyrian period. The number of surviving documents written in cuneiform grow considerably fewer in the late reign of Ashurbanipal, which suggests that the language was declining since it is probably attributable to an increased use of Aramaic, often written on perishable materials such as leather scrolls or papyrus. The ancient Assyrian language did not disappear completely until around the end of the 6th century BC, well into the subsequent post-imperial period.\nAramaic and other languages.\nBecause the Assyrians never imposed their language on foreign peoples whose lands they conquered outside of the Assyrian heartland, there were no mechanisms in place to stop the spread of languages other than Akkadian. Beginning with the migrations of Arameans into Assyrian territory during the Middle Assyrian period, this lack of linguistic policies facilitated the spread of the Aramaic language. As the most widely spoken and mutually understandable of the Semitic languages (the language group containing many of the languages spoken through the empire), Aramaic grew in importance throughout the Neo-Assyrian period and increasingly replaced the Neo-Assyrian language even within the Assyrian heartland itself. From the 9th century BC onward, Aramaic became the \"de facto\" lingua franca of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, with Neo-Assyrian and other forms of Akkadian becoming relegated to a language of the political elite.\nFrom the time of Shalmaneser III, in the 9th century BC, Aramaic was used in state-related contexts alongside Akkadian and by the time of Tiglath-Pileser III, the kings employed both Akkadian and Aramaic-language royal scribes, confirming the rise of Aramaic to a position of an official language used by the imperial administration. During the time after the fall of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, the old Assyrian language was completely abandoned in Mesopotamia in favor of Aramaic. By 500 BC, Akkadian was probably no longer a spoken language.\nModern Assyrian people refer to their language as \"Assyrian\" (\"S\u016brayt\" or \"S\u016breth\"). Though it has little in common with the Assyrian dialect of the Akkadian language, it is a modern version of the ancient Mesopotamian Aramaic. The language retains some influence of ancient Akkadian, particularly in the form of loanwords. Modern Assyrian varieties of Aramaic are often referred to by scholars as Neo-Aramaic or Neo-Syriac. As a liturgical language, many Assyrians also speak Syriac, a codified version of classical Aramaic as spoken at Edessa during the Christianization of Assyria.\nAnother language sometimes used in ancient Assyria as a language of scholarship and culture, though only in written form, was the ancient Sumerian language. At the height of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, various other local languages were also spoken within the imperial borders, though none achieved the same level of official recognition as Aramaic.\nArchitecture.\nThere are three surviving forms of primary evidence for the architecture of ancient Assyria. The most important form is the surviving buildings themselves, found through archaeological excavations, but important evidence can also be gathered from both contemporary documentation, such as letters and administrative documents that describe buildings that might not have been preserved, as well as documentation by later kings concerning the building works of previous kings. Assyrian buildings and construction works were almost always constructed out of mudbrick. Limestone was also used, though primarily only in works such as aqueducts and river walls, exposed to running water, and defensive fortifications.\nIn order to support large buildings, they were often built on top of foundation platforms or on mud brick foundations. Floors were typically made of rammed earth, covered in important rooms with carpets or reed mats. Floors in locations that were exposed to the elements, such as outside on terraces or in courtyards, were paved with stone slabs or backed bricks. Roofs, particularly in larger rooms, were supported through the use of wooden beams.\nThe ancient Assyrians accomplished several technologically complex construction projects, including constructions of whole new capital cities, which indicates sophisticated technical knowledge. Though in large part following previous Mesopotamian architecture, there are several characteristic features of ancient Assyrian architecture. Some examples of features of ancient Assyrian architecture include stepped merlons, vaulted roofs, and palaces to a large degree often being made up of sets of self-contained suites.\nArt.\nA relatively large number of statues and figurines have been recovered from the ruins of temples in Assur dating to the Early Assyrian period. Most of the surviving artwork from this time was clearly influenced by the artwork of foreign powers. For instance, a set of 87 alabaster figures of male and female worshippers from Assur before the rise of the Akkadian Empire greatly resembles Early Dynastic Sumerian figures. Because of variation in artwork elsewhere, the artwork of early Assur was also highly variable depending on the time period, ranging from highly stylized to highly naturalistic.\nAmong the most unique finds from the Early period is the head of a woman of which her eyes, eyebrows, and elaborate hair covering were originally inlaid. This head is typical of the art style of the Akkadian period, with an overall naturalistic style, smooth and soft curves and a full mouth. Another unique art piece from the early period is an ivory figurine of a nude woman, and fragments of at least five additional similar figurines. The ivory used might have come from Indian elephants, which would indicate trade between early Assur and the early tribes and states of Iran. Among other artwork known from the early period are a handful of large stone statues of rulers (governors and foreign kings), figures of animals, and stone statues of naked women.\nThe artwork known from the Old Assyrian period, other than a few objects such as a partial stone statue perhaps depicting Erishum I, is largely limited to seals and impressions of seals on cuneiform documents. Royal seals from the Puzur-Ashur dynasty of kings, prior to the rise of Shamshi-Adad I, are very similar to the seals of the kings of the Third Dynasty of Ur. In the Middle Assyrian period, from Ashur-uballit I onward, seals looked quite different and appear to emphasize royal power, rather than the theological and cosmic sources of the king's right to rule. Among non-royal seals of the Middle Assyrian period a wide assortment of different motifs are known, including both religious scenes and peaceful scenes of animals and trees. From the time of Tukulti-Ninurta I onward, seals also sometimes featured contests and struggles between humans, various animals, and mythological creatures.\nSeveral other new artistic innovations were also made in the Middle Assyrian period. In the temple dedicated to Ishtar in Assur, four cult pedestals (or \"altars\") from the time of Tukulti-Ninurta I have been discovered. These altars were decorated with various motifs, common inclusions being the king (sometimes multiple times) and protective divine figures and standards. One of the pedestals preserves along the lower step of its base a relief image which is the earliest known narrative image in Assyrian art history. This relief, which is not very well-preserved, appears to depict rows of prisoners before the Assyrian king.\nThe earliest known Assyrian wall paintings are also from the time of Tukulti-Ninurta I, from his palace in Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta. Motifs included plant-based patterns (rosettes and palmettes), trees and bird-headed genies. The colors used to paint the walls included black, red, blue, and white. An unusual limestone statue of a nude woman is known from Nineveh from the time of Ashur-bel-kala (r.1074\u20131056\u00a0BC). An entirely new type of monument introduced in the 11th century BC were obelisks; four-sided stone stelae decorated all around with both images and text. Obelisks saw continued use until at least the 9th century BC.\nCompared to other periods, a larger amount of artwork survives from the Neo-Assyrian period, particularly monumental art made under the patronage of the kings. The most well-known form of Neo-Assyrian monumental art are wall reliefs, carved stone artwork that lined the internal and external walls of temples and palaces. Another well-known form of Neo-Assyrian art are colossi, often human-headed lions or bulls (\"lamassu\"), that were placed at the gates of temples, palaces and cities. The earliest known examples of both wall reliefs and colossi are from the reign of Ashurnasirpal II, who might have been inspired by the Hittite monumental art that he saw on his campaigns to the Mediterranean.\nWall paintings such as those made under Tukulti-Ninurta I in the Middle Assyrian period also continued to be used, sometimes to supplement wall reliefs and sometimes instead of them. Interior walls could be decorated by covering the mudbrick used in construction with painted mud plaster and exterior walls were at times decorated with glazed and painted tiles or bricks. The most extensive known surviving sets of wall reliefs are from the reign of Sennacherib. In terms of Neo-Assyrian artwork, modern scholars have paid particular attention to the reliefs produced under Ashurbanipal, which have been described as possessing a distinct \"epic quality\" unlike the art under his predecessors.\nScholarship and literature.\nAncient Assyrian literature drew heavily on Babylonian literary traditions. Both the Old and Middle Assyrian periods are limited in terms of surviving literary texts. The most important surviving Old Assyrian literary work is \"Sargon, Lord of Lies\", a text found in a well-preserved version on a cuneiform tablet from K\u00fcltepe. Once thought to have been a parody, the tale is a first-person narrative of the reign of Sargon of Akkad, the founder of the Akkadian Empire. The text follows Sargon as he gains strength from the god Adad, swears by Ishtar, the \"lady of combat\", and speaks with the gods. Surviving Middle Assyrian literature is only slightly more diverse.\nA distinct Assyrian scholarship tradition, though still drawing on Babylonian tradition, is conventionally placed as beginning around the time of the beginning of the Middle Assyrian period. The rising status of scholarship at this time might be connected to the kings beginning to regard amassing knowledge as a way to strengthen their power. Known Middle Assyrian works include the \"Tukulti-Ninurta Epic\" (a narrative of the reign of Tukulti-Ninurta I and his exploits), fragments of other royal epics, \"The Hunter\" (a short martial poem) and some royal hymns.\nThe clear majority of surviving ancient Assyrian literature is from the Neo-Assyrian period. The kings of the Neo-Assyrian Empire began to see preserving knowledge as one of their responsibilities, and not, as previous kings had, a responsibility of private individuals and temples. This development might have originated with the kings no longer viewing the divination performed by their diviners as enough and wished to have access to the relevant texts themselves. The office of chief scholar is first attested in the reign of the Neo-Assyrian king Tukulti-Ninurta II.\nMost of the surviving ancient Assyrian literature comes from the Neo-Assyrian Library of Ashurbanipal, which included more than 30,000 documents. Libraries were built in the Neo-Assyrian period to preserve knowledge of the past and maintain scribal culture. Neo-Assyrian texts fall into a wide array of genres, including divinatory texts, divination reports, treatments for the sick (either medical or magical), ritual texts, incantations, prayers and hymns, school texts and literary texts. An innovation of the Neo-Assyrian period were the annals, a genre of texts recording the events of the reigns of a king, particularly military exploits. Annals were disseminated throughout the empire and probably served propagandistic purposes, supporting the legitimacy of the king's rule.\nVarious purely literary works, previously aligned by scholars with propaganda, are known from the Neo-Assyrian period. Such works include, among others, the \"Underworld Vision of an Assyrian Crown Prince\", the \"Sin of Sargon\" and the \"Marduk Ordeal\". In addition to their own works, the Assyrians copied and preserved earlier Mesopotamian literature. The inclusion of texts such as the \"Epic of Gilgamesh\", the \"En\u00fbma Eli\u0161\" (the Babylonian creation myth), \"Erra\", the \"Myth of Etana\" and the \"Epic of Anzu\" in the Library of Ashurbanipal is the primary reason for how such texts have survived to the present day.\nReligion.\nAncient Assyrian religion.\nKnowledge of the ancient polytheistic Assyrian religion, referred to as \"Ashurism\" by some modern Assyrians, is mostly limited to state cults given that little can be ascertained of the personal religious beliefs and practices of the common people of ancient Assyria. The Assyrians worshipped the same pantheon of gods as the Babylonians in southern Mesopotamia. The chief Assyrian deity was the national deity Ashur. Though the deity and the ancient capital city are commonly distinguished by modern historians through calling the god Ashur and the city Assur, both were inscribed in the exact same way in ancient times (\"A\u0161\u0161ur\"). In documents from the preceding Old Assyrian period, the city and god are often not clearly differentiated, which suggests that Ashur originated sometime in the Early Assyrian period as a deified personification of the city itself.\nBelow Ashur, the other Mesopotamian deities were organized in a hierarchy, with each having their own assigned roles (the sun-god Shamash was for instance regarded as a god of justice and Ishtar was seen as a goddess of love and war) and their own primary seats of worship (Ninurta was for instance primarily worshipped at Nimrud and Ishtar primarily at Arbela). Quintessentially Babylonian deities such as Enlil, Marduk, and Nabu were worshipped in Assyria just as much as in Babylonia, and several traditionally Babylonian rituals, such as the \"akitu\" festival, were borrowed in the north.\nAshur's role as the chief deity was flexible and changed with the changing culture and politics of the Assyrians themselves. In the Old Assyrian period, Ashur was mainly regarded as a god of death and revival, related to agriculture. Under the Middle and Neo-Assyrian Empire, Ashur's role was expanded and thoroughly altered. Possibly originating as a reaction to the period of suzerainty under the Mittani kingdom, Middle Assyrian theology presented Ashur as a god of war, who bestowed the Assyrian kings not only with divine legitimacy, something retained from the Old Assyrian period, but also commanded the kings to enlarge Assyria (\"the land of Ashur\") with Ashur's \"just scepter\", i.e. expand the Assyrian Empire through military conquest.\nThis militarization of Ashur might also have derived from the Amorite conqueror Shamshi-Adad I equating Ashur with the southern Enlil during his rule over northern Mesopotamia in the 18th and 17th centuries BC. In the Middle Assyrian period, Ashur is attested with the title \"king of the gods\", a role previous civilizations in both northern and southern Mesopotamia ascribed to Enlil. The development of equating Ashur with Enlil, or at least transferring Enlil's role to Ashur, was paralleled in Babylon, where the previously unimportant local god Marduk was elevated in the reign of Hammurabi (18th century BC) to the head of the pantheon, modelled after Enlil.\nAssyrian religion was centered in temples, monumental structures that included a central shrine which housed the cult statue of the temple's god, and several subordinate chapels with space for statues of other deities. Temples were typically self-contained communities; they had their own economic resources, chiefly in the form of land holdings, and their own hierarchically organized personnel. In later times, temples became increasingly dependent on royal benefits, in the shape of specific taxes, offerings and donations of booty and tribute. The head of a temple was titled as the \"chief administrator\" and was responsible to the Assyrian king since the king was regarded to be Ashur's representative in the mortal world. Records from temples showcase that divination in the form of astrology and extispicy (studying the entrails of dead animals) were important parts of the Assyrian religion since they were believed to be means through which deities communicated with the mortal world.\nUnlike many other ancient empires, the Neo-Assyrian Empire did at its height not impose its culture and religion on conquered regions; there were no significant temples built for Ashur outside of northern Mesopotamia. In the post-imperial period, after the fall of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, the Assyrians continued to venerate Ashur and the rest of the pantheon, though without the Assyrian state, religious beliefs in many parts of the Assyrian heartland diverged and developed in different directions. From the time of Seleucid rule over the region (4th to 2nd century BC) onward, there was a strong influence of the ancient Greek religion, with many Greek deities becoming syncretized with Mesopotamian deities. There was also some influence of Judaism, given that the kings of Adiabene, a vassal kingdom covering much of the old Assyrian heartland, converted to Judaism in the 1st century AD.\nIn the 1st century BC onward, as a frontier region between the Roman and the Parthian empires, Assyria was likely highly religiously complex and diverse. Under Parthian rule, both old and new gods were worshipped at Assur. As late as the time of the city's second destruction in the 3rd century AD, the most important deity was still Ashur, known during this time as \"Assor\" or \"Asor\". Worship of Ashur during this time was carried out in the same way as it had been in ancient times, per a cultic calendar effectively identical to that used under the Neo-Assyrian Empire 800 years prior. The ancient Mesopotamian religion persisted in some places for centuries after the end of the post-imperial period, such as at Harran until at least the 10th century (the \"Sabians\" of Harran) and at Mardin until as late as the 18th century (the \"Shams\u012byah\").\nChristianity.\nThe Church of the East developed early in Christian history. Though tradition holds that Christianity was first spread to Mesopotamia by Thomas the Apostle, the exact timespan when the Assyrians were first Christianized is unknown. The city of Arbela was an important early Christian center; according to the later \"Chronicle of Arbela\", Arbela became the seat of a bishop already in AD 100, but the reliability of this document is questioned among scholars. It is however known that both Arbela and Kirkuk later served as important Christian centers in the Sasanian and later Islamic periods.\nAccording to some traditions, Christianity took hold in Assyria when Saint Thaddeus of Edessa converted King Abgar V of Osroene in the mid-1st century AD. From the 3rd century AD onward, it is clear that Christianity was becoming the major religion of the region, with Christ replacing the old Mesopotamian deities. Assyrians had by this time already intellectually contributed to Christian thought; in the 1st century AD, the Christian Assyrian writer Tatian composed the influential \" Diatessaron\", a synoptic rendition of the gospels.\nDuring the early centuries of Christianity, Syriac priests and scholars often identified themselves as Arameans, primarily in a linguistic and cultural sense, due to Aramaic playing a central role in their daily life. However, they remained aware of their Assyrian heritage, which was rooted in biblical and cultural traditions. Syriac Christians in Mesopotamia and Syria identified themselves as Arameans based on their use of Aramaic and shared cultural practices\u2014much like how Arabic speakers today may identify as Arabs, regardless of their specific ethnic background, due to linguistic and cultural ties.\nFor instance, Ephrem the Syrian (c. 306\u2013373 CE), a prominent figure in Syriac Christianity, often criticized the ancient Assyrians for their imperial violence and idolatry, reflecting a common Christian view of pre-Christian empires. His theological and poetic works contrasted the Christian Syriac identity with the pagan legacy of earlier civilizations. While he did not express ethnic identification with the Assyrian past, his writings reflect a broader cultural and historical awareness of the region's heritage, reinterpreted through a Christian lens. This dual identity\u2014of being both Aramean in language and Assyrian in heritage\u2014was part of a broader process in which Syriac Christians, despite their Christian faith, maintained cultural and linguistic ties to their ancient past.\nAramean and Assyrian identities coexisted and overlapped; therefore, it is historically accurate to understand Syriac Christians as Arameans in terms of cultural and linguistic identity, and as Assyrians in terms of ancestral and historical heritage.\nIt is likely that some Syriac Christians identified as \"Assuraye\" (Assyrians) before the term \"Suryoyo\" (Syriac) became widespread. Their identity as Assyrians reflects the enduring legacy of the Assyrian Empire in both biblical and cultural traditions, even as it was reinterpreted through a Christian lens. The term \"Suryoyo\", derived from the Greek word Syrios (possibly a shortened form of Assyrios), was adopted by Syriac Christians to express their linguistic and religious identity. Arameans and Assyrians, who shared many cultural and spiritual practices, both used this term to describe themselves.\n\"Suryoyo\" thus came to represent a religious and linguistic identity for those who spoke Syriac\u2014a dialect of Aramaic\u2014and followed Syriac Christianity. Over time, both Arameans and Assyrians embraced the term and expressed their shared cultural and spiritual heritage within the broader Syriac Christian tradition. While their ancient distinctions were remembered, they became part of a unified religious and cultural identity shaped by shared faith, language, and liturgy.\nThough Christianity is today an intrinsic part of Assyrian identity, Assyrian Christians have over the centuries splintered into a number of different Christian denominations. Though the prominent Assyrian Church of the East, the followers of which have often been termed \"Nestorians\", continues to exist, other prominent eastern churches include the Chaldean Catholic Church, which split off in the 16th century, the Syriac Orthodox Church, the Syriac Catholic Church, and the Ancient Church of the East, which branched off from the Assyrian Church of the East in 1968.\nThough these churches have been distinct for centuries, they still follow much of the same liturgical, spiritual and theological foundation. There are also Assyrian followers of various denominations of Protestantism, chiefly due to missions by American missionaries of the Presbyterian Church.\nBecause the Assyrian Church of the East remains dismissed as \"Nestorian\" and heretical by many other branches of Christianity, it has not been admitted into the Middle East Council of Churches and it does not take part in the Joint International Commission for Theological Dialogue Between the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church. This does not mean that efforts to approach ecumenism have not been undertaken. In 1994, Pope John Paul II and Patriarch Dinkha IV signed the Common Christological Declaration Between the Catholic Church and the Assyrian Church of the East, with some further efforts also having been made in the years since.\nHistorically, the main obstacle in the way of ecumenism has been the ancient text \"Liturgy of Addai and Mari\", used in the Assyrian churches, wherein the anaphora does not contain the Words of Institution, seen as indispensable by the Catholic Church. This obstacle was removed in 2001, when the Catholic Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith determined that the text could be considered valid in Catholicism as well, despite the absence of the words. Some efforts have also been made to approach reunification of the Assyrian and Chaldean churches. In 1996, Dinkha IV and Patriarch Raphael I Bidawid of the Chaldean Church signed a list of common proposals to move toward unity, approved by synods of both churches in 1997.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWeb sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2086", "revid": "855858", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2086", "title": "Abijah", "text": "Abijah ( ') is a Biblical Hebrew unisex name which means \"my Father is Yah\". The Hebrew form ' also occurs in the Bible.\nRussian name.\nThe variant used in the Russian language is \"\" ('), with \"\" or \"\" ('), being older forms. Included into various, often handwritten, church calendars throughout the 17th\u201319th centuries, it was omitted from the official Synodal Menologium at the end of the 19th century. In 1924\u20131930, the name (as \"\", a form of \"'\") was included into various Soviet calendars, which included the new and often artificially created names promoting the new Soviet realities and encouraging the break with the tradition of using the names in the Synodal Menologia. In Russian it is only used as a female name. Diminutives of this name include \" (') and \" (\"\").\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Name listThis page or section lists people that share the same given name. "}
{"id": "2087", "revid": "2902776", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2087", "title": "Ark", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nArk or ARK may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "2088", "revid": "1318927174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2088", "title": "Aphasia", "text": "Inability to comprehend or formulate language\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nAphasia, also known as dysphasia, is an impairment in a person's ability to comprehend or formulate language because of dysfunction in specific brain regions. The major causes are stroke and head trauma; prevalence is hard to determine, but aphasia due to stroke is estimated to be 0.1\u20130.4% in developed countries. Aphasia can also be the result of brain tumors, epilepsy, autoimmune neurological diseases, brain infections, or neurodegenerative diseases (such as dementias).\nTo be diagnosed with aphasia, a person's language must be significantly impaired in one or more of the four aspects of communication. In the case of progressive aphasia, a noticeable decline in language abilities over a short period of time is required. The four aspects of communication include spoken language production, spoken language comprehension, written language production, and written language comprehension. Impairments in any of these aspects can impact functional communication.\nThe difficulties of people with aphasia can range from occasional trouble finding words, to losing the ability to speak, read, or write; intelligence, however, is unaffected. Expressive language and receptive language can both be affected as well. Aphasia also affects visual language such as sign language. In contrast, the use of formulaic expressions in everyday communication is often preserved. For example, while a person with aphasia, particularly expressive aphasia (Broca's aphasia), may not be able to ask a loved one when their birthday is, they may still be able to sing \"Happy Birthday\". One prevalent deficit in all aphasias is anomia, which is a difficulty in finding the correct word.\nWith aphasia, one or more modes of communication in the brain have been damaged and are therefore functioning incorrectly. Aphasia is \"not\" caused by damage to the brain resulting in motor or sensory deficits, thus producing abnormal speech\u00a0\u2014 that is, aphasia is not related to the \"mechanics\" of speech, but rather the individual's language cognition. However, it is possible for a person to have both problems, e.g. in the case of a hemorrhage damaging a large area of the brain. An individual's language abilities incorporate the socially shared set of rules, as well as the thought processes that go behind communication (as it affects both verbal and nonverbal language). Aphasia is not a result of other peripheral motor or sensory difficulty, such as paralysis affecting the speech muscles, or a general hearing impairment.\nNeurodevelopmental forms of auditory processing disorder (APD) are differentiable from aphasia in that aphasia is by definition caused by acquired brain injury, but acquired epileptic aphasia has been viewed as a form of APD.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nPeople with aphasia may experience any of the following behaviors due to an acquired brain injury, although some of these symptoms may be due to related or concomitant problems, such as dysarthria or apraxia, and not primarily due to aphasia. Aphasia symptoms can vary based on the location of damage in the brain. Signs and symptoms may or may not be present in individuals with aphasia and may vary in severity and level of disruption to communication. Often those with aphasia may have a difficulty with naming objects, so they might use words such as \"thing\" or point at the objects. When asked to name a pencil they may say it is a \"thing used to write\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRelated behaviors.\nGiven the previously stated signs and symptoms, the following behaviors are often seen in people with aphasia as a result of attempted compensation for incurred speech and language deficits:\nCognitive deficits.\nWhile aphasia has traditionally been described in terms of language deficits, there is increasing evidence that many people with aphasia commonly experience co-occurring non-linguistic cognitive deficits in areas such as attention, memory, executive functions and learning. By some accounts, cognitive deficits, such as attention and working memory constitute the underlying cause of language impairment in people with aphasia. Others suggest that cognitive deficits often co-occur, but are comparable to cognitive deficits in stroke patients without aphasia and reflect general brain dysfunction following injury. Whilst it has been shown that cognitive neural networks support language reorganisation after stroke,\nThe degree to which deficits in attention and other cognitive domains underlie language deficits in aphasia is still unclear.\nIn particular, people with aphasia often demonstrate short-term and working memory deficits. These deficits can occur in both the verbal domain as well as the visuospatial domain. Furthermore, these deficits are often associated with performance on language specific tasks such as naming, lexical processing, and sentence comprehension, and discourse production. Other studies have found that most, but not all people with aphasia demonstrate performance deficits on tasks of attention, and their performance on these tasks correlate with language performance and cognitive ability in other domains. Even patients with mild aphasia, who score near the ceiling on tests of language often demonstrate slower response times and interference effects in non-verbal attention abilities.\nIn addition to deficits in short-term memory, working memory, and attention, people with aphasia can also demonstrate deficits in executive function. For instance, people with aphasia may demonstrate deficits in initiation, planning, self-monitoring, and cognitive flexibility. Other studies have found that people with aphasia demonstrate reduced speed and efficiency during completion of executive function assessments.\nRegardless of their role in the underlying nature of aphasia, cognitive deficits have a clear role in the study and rehabilitation of aphasia. For instance, the severity of cognitive deficits in people with aphasia has been associated with lower quality of life, even more so than the severity of language deficits. Furthermore, cognitive deficits may influence the learning process of rehabilitation and language treatment outcomes in aphasia. Non-linguistic cognitive deficits have also been the target of interventions directed at improving language ability, though outcomes are not definitive. While some studies have demonstrated language improvement secondary to cognitively-focused treatment, others have found little evidence that the treatment of cognitive deficits in people with aphasia has an influence on language outcomes.\nOne important caveat in the measurement and treatment of cognitive deficits in people with aphasia is the degree to which assessments of cognition rely on language abilities for successful performance. Most studies have attempted to circumvent this challenge by utilizing non-verbal cognitive assessments to evaluate cognitive ability in people with aphasia. However, the degree to which these tasks are truly \"non-verbal\" and not mediated by language is unclear. For instance, Wall et al. found that language and non-linguistic performance was related, except when non-linguistic performance was measured by \"real life\" cognitive tasks.\nCauses.\nAphasia is most often caused by stroke, where about a quarter of patients who experience an acute stroke develop aphasia. However, any disease or damage to the parts of the brain that control language can cause aphasia. Some of these can include brain tumors, traumatic brain injury, epilepsy and progressive neurological disorders. In rare cases, aphasia may also result from herpesviral encephalitis. The herpes simplex virus affects the frontal and temporal lobes, subcortical structures, and the hippocampal tissue, which can trigger aphasia. In acute disorders, such as head injury or stroke, aphasia usually develops quickly. When caused by brain tumor, infection, or dementia, it develops more slowly.\nSubstantial damage to tissue anywhere within the region shown in blue (on the figure in the infobox above) can potentially result in aphasia. Aphasia can also sometimes be caused by damage to subcortical structures deep within the left hemisphere, including the thalamus, the internal and external capsules, and the caudate nucleus of the basal ganglia. The area and extent of brain damage or atrophy will determine the type of aphasia and its symptoms. A very small number of people can experience aphasia after damage to the right hemisphere only. It has been suggested that these individuals may have had an unusual brain organization prior to their illness or injury, with perhaps greater overall reliance on the right hemisphere for language skills than in the general population.\nPrimary progressive aphasia (PPA), while its name can be misleading, is actually a form of dementia that has some symptoms closely related to several forms of aphasia. It is characterized by a gradual loss in language functioning while other cognitive domains are mostly preserved, such as memory and personality. PPA usually initiates with sudden word-finding difficulties in an individual and progresses to a reduced ability to formulate grammatically correct sentences (syntax) and impaired comprehension. The etiology of PPA is not due to a stroke, traumatic brain injury (TBI), or infectious disease; it is still uncertain what initiates the onset of PPA in those affected by it.\nEpilepsy can also include transient aphasia as a prodromal or episodic symptom. However, the repeated seizure activity within language regions may also lead to chronic, and progressive aphasia. Aphasia is also listed as a rare side-effect of the fentanyl patch, an opioid used to control chronic pain.\nDiagnosis.\nNeuroimaging methods.\nMagnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) are the most common neuroimaging tools used in identifying aphasia and studying the extent of damage in the loss of language abilities. This is done by doing MRI scans and locating the extent of lesions or damage within brain tissue, particularly within areas of the left frontal and temporal regions- where a lot of language related areas lie. In fMRI studies a language related task is often completed and then the BOLD image is analyzed. If there are lower than normal BOLD responses that indicate a lessening of blood flow to the affected area and can show quantitatively that the cognitive task is not being completed.\nThere are limitations to the use of fMRI in aphasic patients particularly. Because a high percentage of aphasic patients develop it because of stroke there can be infarct present which is the total loss of blood flow. This can be due to the thinning of blood vessels or the complete blockage of it. This is important in fMRI as it relies on the BOLD response (the oxygen levels of the blood vessels), and this can create a false hyporesponse upon fMRI study. Due to the limitations of fMRI such as a lower spatial resolution, it can show that some areas of the brain are not active during a task when they in reality are. Additionally, with stroke being the cause of many cases of aphasia the extent of damage to brain tissue can be difficult to quantify therefore the effects of stroke brain damage on the functionality of the patient can vary.\nMRI is often used to predict or confirm the subtype of aphasia present. Researchers compared three subtypes of aphasia\u00a0\u2014 nonfluent-variant primary progressive aphasia (nfPPA), logopenic-variant primary progressive aphasia (lvPPA), and semantic-variant primary progressive aphasia (svPPA), with primary progressive aphasia (PPA) and Alzheimer's disease. This was done by analyzing the MRIs of patients with each of the subsets of PPA. Images which compare subtypes of aphasia as well as for finding the extent of lesions are generated by overlapping images of different participant's brains (if applicable) and isolating areas of lesions or damage using third-party software such as MRIcron. MRI has also been used to study the relationship between the type of aphasia developed and the age of the person with aphasia. It was found that patients with fluent aphasia are on average older than people with non-fluent aphasia. It was also found that among patients with lesions confined to the anterior portion of the brain an unexpected portion of them presented with fluent aphasia and were remarkably older than those with non-fluent aphasia. This effect was not found when the posterior portion of the brain was studied.\nIn a study on the features associated with different disease trajectories in Alzheimer's disease (AD)-related primary progressive aphasia (PPA), it was found that metabolic patterns via PET SPM analysis can help predict progression of total loss of speech and functional autonomy in AD and PPA patients. This was done by comparing an MRI or CT image of the brain and presence of a radioactive biomarker with normal levels in patients without Alzheimer's Disease. Apraxia is another disorder often correlated with aphasia. This is due to a subset of apraxia which affects speech. Specifically, this subset affects the movement of muscles associated with speech production, apraxia and aphasia are often correlated due to the proximity of neural substrates associated with each of the disorders. Researchers concluded that there were 2 areas of lesion overlap between patients with apraxia and aphasia, the anterior temporal lobe and the left inferior parietal lobe.\nEvidence for positive treatment outcomes can also be quantified using neuroimaging tools. The use of fMRI and an automatic classifier can help predict language recovery outcomes in stroke patients with 86% accuracy when coupled with age and language test scores. The stimuli tested were sentences both correct and incorrect and the subject had to press a button whenever the sentence was incorrect. The fMRI data collected focused on responses in regions of interest identified by healthy subjects. \u00a0Recovery from aphasia can also be quantified using diffusion tensor imaging. The accurate fasciculus (AF) connects the right and left superior temporal lobe, premotor regions/posterior inferior frontal gyrus. and the primary motor cortex. In a study which enrolled patients in a speech therapy program, an increase in AF fibers and volume was found in patients after 6-weeks in the program which correlated with long-term improvement in those patients. The results of the experiment are pictured in Figure 2. This implies that DTI can be used to quantify the improvement in patients after speech and language treatment programs are applied.\nClassification.\nAphasia is best thought of as a collection of different disorders, rather than a single problem. Each individual with aphasia will present with their own particular combination of language strengths and weaknesses. Consequently, it is a major challenge just to document the various difficulties that can occur in different people, let alone decide how they might best be treated. Most classifications of the aphasias tend to divide the various symptoms into broad classes. A common approach is to distinguish between the fluent aphasias (where speech remains fluent, but content may be lacking, and the person may have difficulties understanding others), and the nonfluent aphasias (where speech is very halting and effortful, and may consist of just one or two words at a time).\nHowever, no such broad-based grouping has proven fully adequate, or reliable. There is wide variation among people even within the same broad grouping, and aphasias can be highly selective. For instance, people with naming deficits (anomic aphasia) might show an inability only for naming buildings, or people, or colors. Unfortunately, assessments that characterize aphasia in these groupings have persisted. This is not helpful to people living with aphasia, and provides inaccurate descriptions of an individual pattern of difficulties.\nThere are typical difficulties with speech and language that come with normal aging as well. As we age, language can become more difficult to process, resulting in a slowing of verbal comprehension, reading abilities and more likely word finding difficulties. With each of these, though, unlike some aphasias, functionality within daily life remains intact.\nClassical-localizationist approaches.\nLocalizationist approaches aim to classify the aphasias according to their major presenting characteristics and the regions of the brain that most probably gave rise to them. Inspired by the early work of nineteenth-century neurologists Paul Broca and Carl Wernicke, these approaches identify two major subtypes of aphasia and several more minor subtypes:\nRecent classification schemes adopting this approach, such as the Boston-Neoclassical Model, also group these classical aphasia subtypes into two larger classes: the nonfluent aphasias (which encompasses Broca's aphasia and transcortical motor aphasia) and the fluent aphasias (which encompasses Wernicke's aphasia, conduction aphasia and transcortical sensory aphasia). These schemes also identify several further aphasia subtypes, including: anomic aphasia, which is characterized by a selective difficulty finding the names for things; and global aphasia, where both expression and comprehension of speech are severely compromised.\nMany localizationist approaches also recognize the existence of additional, more \"pure\" forms of language disorder that may affect only a single language skill. For example, in pure alexia, a person may be able to write, but not read, and in pure word deafness, they may be able to produce speech and to read, but not understand speech when it is spoken to them.\nCognitive neuropsychological approaches.\nAlthough localizationist approaches provide a useful way of classifying the different patterns of language difficulty into broad groups, one problem is that most individuals do not fit neatly into one category or another. Another problem is that the categories, particularly the major ones such as Broca's and Wernicke's aphasia, still remain quite broad and do not meaningfully reflect a person's difficulties. Consequently, even amongst those who meet the criteria for classification into a subtype, there can be enormous variability in the types of difficulties they experience.\nInstead of categorizing every individual into a specific subtype, cognitive neuropsychological approaches aim to identify the key language skills or \"modules\" that are not functioning properly in each individual. A person could potentially have difficulty with just one module, or with a number of modules. This type of approach requires a framework or theory as to what skills/modules are needed to perform different kinds of language tasks. For example, the model of Max Coltheart identifies a module that recognizes phonemes as they are spoken, which is essential for any task involving recognition of words. Similarly, there is a module that stores phonemes that the person is planning to produce in speech, and this module is critical for any task involving the production of long words or long strings of speech. Once a theoretical framework has been established, the functioning of each module can then be assessed using a specific test or set of tests. In the clinical setting, use of this model usually involves conducting a battery of assessments, each of which tests one or a number of these modules. Once a diagnosis is reached as to the skills/modules where the most significant impairment lies, therapy can proceed to treat these skills.\nProgressive aphasias.\nPrimary progressive aphasia (PPA) is a neurodegenerative focal dementia that can be associated with progressive illnesses or dementia, such as frontotemporal dementia / Pick Complex Motor neuron disease, Progressive supranuclear palsy, and Alzheimer's disease, which is the gradual process of progressively losing the ability to think. Gradual loss of language function occurs in the context of relatively well-preserved memory, visual processing, and personality until the advanced stages. Symptoms usually begin with word-finding problems (naming) and progress to impaired grammar (syntax) and comprehension (sentence processing and semantics). The loss of language before the loss of memory differentiates PPA from typical dementias. People with PPA may have difficulties comprehending what others are saying. They can also have difficulty trying to find the right words to make a sentence. There are three classifications of Primary Progressive Aphasia : Progressive nonfluent aphasia (PNFA), Semantic Dementia (SD), and Logopenic progressive aphasia (LPA).\nProgressive Jargon Aphasia is a fluent or receptive aphasia in which the person's speech is incomprehensible, but appears to make sense to them. Speech is fluent and effortless with intact syntax and grammar, but the person has problems with the selection of nouns. Either they will replace the desired word with another that sounds or looks like the original one or has some other connection or they will replace it with sounds. As such, people with jargon aphasia often use neologisms, and may perseverate if they try to replace the words they cannot find with sounds. Substitutions commonly involve picking another (actual) word starting with the same sound (e.g., clocktower \u2013 colander), picking another semantically related to the first (e.g., letter \u2013 scroll), or picking one phonetically similar to the intended one (e.g., lane \u2013 late).\nDeaf aphasia.\nThere have been many instances showing that there is a form of aphasia among deaf individuals. Sign languages are, after all, forms of language that have been shown to use the same areas of the brain as verbal forms of language. Mirror neurons become activated when an animal is acting in a particular way or watching another individual act in the same manner. These mirror neurons are important in giving an individual the ability to mimic movements of hands. Broca's area of speech production has been shown to contain several of these mirror neurons resulting in significant similarities of brain activity between sign language and vocal speech communication. People use facial movements to create, what other people perceive, to be faces of emotions. While combining these facial movements with speech, a more full form of language is created which enables the species to interact with a much more complex and detailed form of communication. Sign language also uses these facial movements and emotions along with the primary hand movement way of communicating. These facial movement forms of communication come from the same areas of the brain. When dealing with damages to certain areas of the brain, vocal forms of communication are in jeopardy of severe forms of aphasia. Since these same areas of the brain are being used for sign language, these same, at least very similar, forms of aphasia can show in the Deaf community. Individuals can show a form of Wernicke's aphasia with sign language and they show deficits in their abilities in being able to produce any form of expressions. Broca's aphasia shows up in some people, as well. These individuals find tremendous difficulty in being able to actually sign the linguistic concepts they are trying to express.\nSeverity.\nThe severity of the type of aphasia varies depending on the size of the stroke. However, there is much variance between how often one type of severity occurs in certain types of aphasia. For instance, any type of aphasia can range from mild to profound. Regardless of the severity of aphasia, people can make improvements due to spontaneous recovery and treatment in the acute stages of recovery. Additionally, while most studies propose that the greatest outcomes occur in people with severe aphasia when treatment is provided in the acute stages of recovery, Robey (1998) also found that those with severe aphasia are capable of making strong language gains in the chronic stage of recovery as well. This finding implies that persons with aphasia have the potential to have functional outcomes regardless of how severe their aphasia may be. While there is no distinct pattern of the outcomes of aphasia based on severity alone, global aphasia typically makes functional language gains, but may be gradual since global aphasia affects many language areas.\nPrevention.\nAphasia is largely caused by unavoidable instances. However, some precautions can be taken to decrease risk for experiencing one of the two major causes of aphasia: stroke and traumatic brain injury (TBI). To decrease the probability of having an ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke, one should take the following precautions:\nTo prevent aphasia due to traumatic injury, one should take precautionary measures when engaging in dangerous activities such as:\nAdditionally, one should always seek medical attention after sustaining head trauma due to a fall or accident. The sooner that one receives medical attention for a traumatic brain injury, the less likely one is to experience long-term or severe effects.\nManagement.\nMost acute cases of aphasia recover some or most skills by participating in speech and language therapy. Recovery and improvement can continue for years after the stroke. After the onset of aphasia, there is approximately a six-month period of spontaneous recovery; during this time, the brain is attempting to recover and repair the damaged neurons. Improvement varies widely, depending on the aphasia's cause, type, and severity. Recovery also depends on the person's age, health, motivation, handedness, and educational level.\nSpeech and language therapy that is higher intensity, higher dose or provided over a long duration of time leads to significantly better functional communication, but people might be more likely to drop out of high intensity treatment (up to 15 hours per week). A total of 20\u201350 hours of speech and language therapy is necessary for the best recovery. The most improvement happens when 2\u20135 hours of therapy is provided each week over 4\u20135 days. Recovery is further improved when besides the therapy people practice tasks at home. Speech and language therapy is also effective if it is delivered online through video or by a family member who has been trained by a professional therapist.\nRecovery with therapy is also dependent on the recency of stroke and the age of the person. Receiving therapy within a month after the stroke leads to the greatest improvements. Three or six months after the stroke more therapy will be needed, but symptoms can still be improved. People with aphasia who are younger than 55 years are the most likely to improve, but people older than 75 years can still get better with therapy.\nThere is no one treatment proven to be effective for all types of aphasias. The reason that there is no universal treatment for aphasia is because of the nature of the disorder and the various ways it is presented. Aphasia is rarely exhibited identically, implying that treatment needs to be catered specifically to the individual. Studies have shown that, although there is no consistency on treatment methodology in literature, there is a strong indication that treatment, in general, has positive outcomes. Therapy for aphasia ranges from increasing functional communication to improving speech accuracy, depending on the person's severity, needs and support of family and friends. Group therapy allows individuals to work on their pragmatic and communication skills with other individuals with aphasia, which are skills that may not often be addressed in individual one-on-one therapy sessions. It can also help increase confidence and social skills in a comfortable setting.\nEvidence does not support the use of transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) for improving aphasia after stroke. Moderate quality evidence does indicate naming performance improvements for nouns, but not verbs using tDCS\nSpecific treatment techniques include the following:\nSemantic feature analysis (SFA)\u00a0\u2014 a type of aphasia treatment that targets word-finding deficits\u00a0\u2014 is based on the theory that neural connections can be strengthened by using related words and phrases that are similar to the target word, to eventually activate the target word in the brain. SFA can be implemented in multiple forms such as verbally, written, using picture cards, etc. The SLP provides prompting questions to the individual with aphasia in order for the person to name the picture provided. Studies show that SFA is an effective intervention for improving confrontational naming.\nMelodic intonation therapy is used to treat non-fluent aphasia and has proved to be effective in some cases. However, there is still no evidence from randomized controlled trials confirming the efficacy of MIT in chronic aphasia. MIT is used to help people with aphasia vocalize themselves through speech song, which is then transferred as a spoken word. Good candidates for this therapy include people who have had left hemisphere strokes, non-fluent aphasias such as Broca's, good auditory comprehension, poor repetition and articulation, and good emotional stability and memory. An alternative explanation is that the efficacy of MIT depends on neural circuits involved in the processing of rhythmicity and formulaic expressions (examples taken from the MIT manual: \"I am fine,\" \"how are you?\" or \"thank you\"); while rhythmic features associated with melodic intonation may engage primarily left-hemisphere subcortical areas of the brain, the use of formulaic expressions is known to be supported by right-hemisphere cortical and bilateral subcortical neural networks.\nSystematic reviews support the effectiveness and importance of partner training. According to the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders (NIDCD), involving family with the treatment of an aphasic loved one is ideal for all involved, because while it will no doubt assist in their recovery, it will also make it easier for members of the family to learn how best to communicate with them.\nWhen a person's speech is insufficient, different kinds of augmentative and alternative communication could be considered such as alphabet boards, pictorial communication books, specialized software for computers or apps for tablets or smartphones.\nWhen addressing Wernicke's aphasia, according to Bakheit et al. (2007), the lack of awareness of the language impairments, a common characteristic of Wernicke's aphasia, may affect the rate and extent of therapy outcomes. Robey (1998) determined that at least 2 hours of treatment per week is recommended for making significant language gains. Spontaneous recovery may cause some language gains, but without speech-language therapy, the outcomes can be half as strong as those with therapy.\nWhen addressing Broca's aphasia, better outcomes occur when the person participates in therapy, and treatment is more effective than no treatment for people in the acute period. Two or more hours of therapy per week in acute and post-acute stages produced the greatest results. High-intensity therapy was most effective, and low-intensity therapy was almost equivalent to no therapy.\nPeople with global aphasia are sometimes referred to as having irreversible aphasic syndrome, often making limited gains in auditory comprehension, and recovering no functional language modality with therapy. With this said, people with global aphasia may retain gestural communication skills that may enable success when communicating with conversational partners within familiar conditions. Process-oriented treatment options are limited, and people may not become competent language users as readers, listeners, writers, or speakers no matter how extensive therapy is. However, people's daily routines and quality of life can be enhanced with reasonable and modest goals. After the first month, there is limited to no healing to language abilities of most people. There is a grim prognosis, leaving 83% who were globally aphasic after the first month that will remain globally aphasic at the first year. Some people are so severely impaired that their existing process-oriented treatment approaches offer no signs of progress, and therefore cannot justify the cost of therapy.\nPerhaps due to the relative rareness of conduction aphasia, few studies have specifically studied the effectiveness of therapy for people with this type of aphasia. From the studies performed, results showed that therapy can help to improve specific language outcomes. One intervention that has had positive results is auditory repetition training. Kohn et al. (1990) reported that drilled auditory repetition training related to improvements in spontaneous speech, Francis et al. (2003) reported improvements in sentence comprehension, and Kalinyak-Fliszar et al. (2011) reported improvements in auditory-visual short-term memory.\nIndividualized service delivery.\nIntensity of treatment should be individualized based on the recency of stroke, therapy goals, and other specific characteristics such as age, size of lesion, overall health status, and motivation. Each individual reacts differently to treatment intensity and is able to tolerate treatment at different times post-stroke. Intensity of treatment after a stroke should be dependent on the person's motivation, stamina, and tolerance for therapy.\nOutcomes.\nIf the symptoms of aphasia last longer than two or three months after a stroke, a complete recovery is unlikely. However, it is important to note that some people continue to improve over a period of years and even decades. Improvement is a slow process that usually involves both helping the individual and family understand the nature of aphasia and learning compensatory strategies for communicating.\nAfter a traumatic brain injury (TBI) or cerebrovascular accident (CVA), the brain undergoes several healing and re-organization processes, which may result in improved language function. This is referred to as spontaneous recovery. Spontaneous recovery is the natural recovery the brain makes without treatment, and the brain begins to reorganize and change in order to recover. There are several factors that contribute to a person's chance of recovery caused by stroke, including stroke size and location. Age, sex, and education have not been found to be very predictive. There is also research pointing to damage in the left hemisphere healing more effectively than the right.\nSpecific to aphasia, spontaneous recovery varies among affected people and may not look the same in everyone, making it difficult to predict recovery.\nThough some cases of Wernicke's aphasia have shown greater improvements than more mild forms of aphasia, people with Wernicke's aphasia may not reach as high a level of speech abilities as those with mild forms of aphasia.\nPrevalence.\nAphasia affects about two million people in the U.S. and 250,000 people in Great Britain. Nearly 180,000 people acquire the disorder every year in the U.S., 170,000 due to stroke. Any person of any age can develop aphasia, given that it is often caused by a traumatic injury. However, people who are middle aged and older are the most likely to acquire aphasia, as the other etiologies are more likely at older ages. For example, approximately 75% of all strokes occur in individuals over the age of 65. Strokes account for most documented cases of aphasia: 25% to 40% of people who survive a stroke develop aphasia as a result of damage to the language-processing regions of the brain.\nHistory.\nThe first recorded case of aphasia is from an Egyptian papyrus, the Edwin Smith Papyrus, which details speech problems in a person with a traumatic brain injury to the temporal lobe.\nDuring the second half of the 19th century, aphasia was a major focus for scientists and philosophers who were working in the beginning stages of the field of psychology.\nIn medical research, speechlessness was described as an incorrect prognosis, and there was no assumption that underlying language complications existed. Broca and his colleagues were some of the first to write about aphasia, but Wernicke was the first credited to have written extensively about aphasia being a disorder that contained comprehension difficulties. Despite claims of who reported on aphasia first, it was F.J. Gall that gave the first full description of aphasia after studying wounds to the brain, as well as his observation of speech difficulties resulting from vascular lesions. A recent book on the entire history of aphasia is available (Reference: Tesak, J. &amp; Code, C. (2008) \"Milestones in the History of Aphasia: Theories and Protagonists\". Hove, East Sussex: Psychology Press).\nEtymology.\n\"Aphasia\" is from Greek \"a-\" (\"without\", negative prefix) + \"ph\u00e1sis\" (\"\u03c6\u03ac\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2\", \"speech\").\nThe word \"aphasia\" comes from the word \u1f00\u03c6\u03b1\u03c3\u03af\u03b1 \"aphasia\", in Ancient Greek, which means \"speechlessness\", derived from \u1f04\u03c6\u03b1\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2 \"aphatos\", \"speechless\" from \u1f00- \"a-\", \"not, un\" and \u03c6\u03b7\u03bc\u03af \"phemi\", \"I speak\".\nFurther research.\nResearch is currently being done using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to witness the difference in how language is processed in normal brains vs aphasic brains. This will help researchers to understand exactly what the brain must go through in order to recover from Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) and how different areas of the brain respond after such an injury.\nAnother intriguing approach being tested is that of drug therapy. Research is in progress that will hopefully uncover whether or not certain drugs might be used in addition to speech-language therapy in order to facilitate recovery of proper language function. It is possible that the best treatment for aphasia might involve combining drug treatment with therapy, instead of relying on one over the other.\nOne other method being researched as a potential therapeutic combination with speech-language therapy is brain stimulation. One particular method, Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS), alters brain activity in whatever area it happens to stimulate, which has recently led scientists to wonder if this shift in brain function caused by TMS might help people re-learn language. Another type of external brain stimulation is transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS), but existing research has not shown it to be useful for improving aphasia after a stroke.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2089", "revid": "1318189890", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2089", "title": "Aorta", "text": "Largest artery in the human body\nThe aorta ( ; pl.: aortas or aortae) is the main and largest artery in the human body, originating from the left ventricle of the heart, branching upwards immediately after, and extending down to the abdomen, where it splits at the aortic bifurcation into two smaller arteries (the common iliac arteries). The aorta distributes oxygenated blood to all parts of the body through the systemic circulation.\nStructure.\nSections.\nIn anatomical sources, the aorta is usually divided into sections for easier understanding.\nOne way of classifying a part of the aorta is by anatomical compartment, where the thoracic aorta (or thoracic portion of the aorta) runs from the heart to the diaphragm. The aorta then continues downward as the abdominal aorta (or abdominal portion of the aorta) from the diaphragm to the aortic bifurcation.\nAnother system divides the aorta with respect to its course and the direction of blood flow. In this system, the aorta starts as the ascending aorta, travels superiorly from the heart, and then makes a hairpin turn known as the aortic arch. Following the aortic arch, the aorta then travels inferiorly as the descending aorta. The descending aorta has two parts. The aorta begins to descend in the thoracic cavity and is consequently known as the thoracic aorta. After the aorta passes through the diaphragm, it is known as the abdominal aorta. The aorta ends by dividing into two major blood vessels, the common iliac arteries and a smaller midline vessel, the median sacral artery.\nAscending aorta.\nThe ascending aorta begins at the opening of the aortic valve in the left ventricle of the heart. It runs through a common pericardial sheath with the pulmonary trunk. These two blood vessels twist around each other, causing the aorta to start out posterior to the pulmonary trunk, but end by twisting to its right and anterior side.\nThe transition from ascending aorta to aortic arch is at the pericardial reflection on the aorta.\nAt the root of the ascending aorta, the lumen has small pockets between the cusps of the aortic valve and the wall of the aorta, which are called the aortic sinuses or the sinuses of Valsalva. The left aortic sinus contains the origin of the left coronary artery and the right aortic sinus likewise gives rise to the right coronary artery. Together, these two arteries supply the heart. The posterior aortic sinus does not give rise to a coronary artery. For this reason the left, right and posterior aortic sinuses are also called left-coronary, right-coronary and non-coronary sinuses.\nAortic arch.\nThe aortic arch loops over the left pulmonary artery and the bifurcation of the pulmonary trunk, to which it remains connected by the ligamentum arteriosum, a remnant of the fetal circulation that is obliterated a few days after birth. In addition to these blood vessels, the aortic arch crosses the left main bronchus. Between the aortic arch and the pulmonary trunk is a network of autonomic nerve fibers, the cardiac plexus or \"aortic plexus\". The left vagus nerve, which passes anterior to the aortic arch, gives off a major branch, the recurrent laryngeal nerve, which loops under the aortic arch just lateral to the ligamentum arteriosum. It then runs back to the neck.\nThe aortic arch has three major branches: from proximal to distal, they are the brachiocephalic trunk, the left common carotid artery, and the left subclavian artery. The brachiocephalic trunk supplies the right side of the head and neck as well as the right arm and chest wall, while the latter two together supply the left side of the same regions.\nThe aortic arch ends, and the descending aorta begins at the level of the intervertebral disc between the fourth and fifth thoracic vertebrae.\nThoracic aorta.\nThe thoracic aorta gives rise to the intercostal and subcostal arteries, as well as to the superior and inferior left bronchial arteries and variable branches to the esophagus, mediastinum, and pericardium. Its lowest pair of branches are the superior phrenic arteries, which supply the diaphragm, and the subcostal arteries for the twelfth rib.\nAbdominal aorta.\nThe abdominal aorta begins at the aortic hiatus of the diaphragm at the level of the twelfth thoracic vertebra. It gives rise to lumbar and musculophrenic arteries, renal and middle suprarenal arteries, and visceral arteries (the celiac trunk, the superior mesenteric artery and the inferior mesenteric artery). It ends in a bifurcation into the left and right common iliac arteries. At the point of the bifurcation, there also springs a smaller branch, the median sacral artery.\nDevelopment.\nThe ascending aorta develops from the outflow tract, which initially starts as a single tube connecting the heart with the aortic arches (which will form the great arteries) in early development but is then separated into the aorta and the pulmonary trunk.\nThe aortic arches start as five pairs of symmetrical arteries connecting the heart with the dorsal aorta, and then undergo a significant remodelling to form the final asymmetrical structure of the great arteries, with the 3rd pair of arteries contributing to the common carotids, the right 4th forming the base and middle part of the right subclavian artery and the left 4th being the central part of the aortic arch. The smooth muscle of the great arteries and the population of cells that form the aorticopulmonary septum that separates the aorta and pulmonary artery is derived from cardiac neural crest. This contribution of the neural crest to the great artery smooth muscle is unusual as most smooth muscle is derived from mesoderm. In fact the smooth muscle within the abdominal aorta is derived from mesoderm, and the coronary arteries, which arise just above the semilunar valves, possess smooth muscle of mesodermal origin. A failure of the aorticopulmonary septum to divide the great vessels results in persistent truncus arteriosus.\nMicroanatomy.\nThe aorta is an elastic artery, and as such is quite distensible. The aorta consists of a heterogeneous mixture of smooth muscle, nerves, intimal cells, endothelial cells, immune cells, fibroblast-like cells, and a complex extracellular matrix. The vascular wall is subdivided into three layers known as the tunica externa, tunica media, and tunica intima. The aorta is covered by an extensive network of tiny blood vessels called vasa vasorum, which feed the tunica externa and tunica media, the outer layers of the aorta. The aortic arch contains baroreceptors and chemoreceptors that relay information concerning blood pressure and blood pH and carbon dioxide levels to the medulla oblongata of the brain. This information along with information from baroreceptors and chemoreceptors located elsewhere is processed by the brain and the autonomic nervous system mediates appropriate homeostatic responses.\nWithin the tunica media, smooth muscle and the extracellular matrix are quantitatively the largest components, these are arranged concentrically as musculoelastic layers (the elastic lamella) in mammals. The elastic lamella, which comprise smooth muscle and elastic matrix, can be considered as the fundamental structural unit of the aorta and consist of elastic fibers, collagens (predominately type III), proteoglycans, and glycoaminoglycans. The elastic matrix dominates the biomechanical properties of the aorta. The smooth muscle component, while contractile, does not substantially alter the diameter of the aorta, but rather serves to increase the stiffness and viscoelasticity of the aortic wall when activated.\nVariation.\nVariations may occur in the location of the aorta, and the way in which arteries branch off the aorta. The aorta, normally on the left side of the body, may be found on the right in dextrocardia, in which the heart is found on the right, or situs inversus, in which the location of all organs are flipped.\nVariations in the branching of individual arteries may also occur. For example, the left vertebral artery may arise from the aorta, instead of the left common carotid artery.\nIn patent ductus arteriosus, a congenital disorder, the fetal ductus arteriosus fails to close, leaving an open vessel connecting the pulmonary artery to the proximal descending aorta.\nFunction.\nThe aorta supplies all of the systemic circulation, which means that the entire body, except for the respiratory zone of the lung, receives its blood from the aorta. Broadly speaking, branches from the ascending aorta supply the heart; branches from the aortic arch supply the head, neck, and arms; branches from the thoracic descending aorta supply the chest (excluding the heart and the respiratory zone of the lung); and branches from the abdominal aorta supply the abdomen. The pelvis and legs get their blood from the common iliac arteries.\nBlood flow and velocity.\nThe contraction of the heart during systole is responsible for ejection and creates a (pulse) wave that is propagated down the aorta, into the arterial tree. The wave is reflected at sites of impedance mismatching, such as bifurcations, where reflected waves rebound to return to semilunar valves and the origin of the aorta. These return waves create the dicrotic notch displayed in the aortic pressure curve during the cardiac cycle as these reflected waves push on the aortic semilunar valve. With age, the aorta stiffens such that the pulse wave is propagated faster and reflected waves return to the heart faster before the semilunar valve closes, which raises the blood pressure. The stiffness of the aorta is associated with a number of diseases and pathologies, and noninvasive measures of the pulse wave velocity are an independent indicator of hypertension. Measuring the pulse wave velocity (invasively and non-invasively) is a means of determining arterial stiffness. Maximum aortic velocity may be noted as Vmax or less commonly as AoVmax.\nMean arterial pressure (MAP) is highest in the aorta, and the MAP decreases across the circulation from aorta to arteries to arterioles to capillaries to veins back to atrium. The difference between aortic and right atrial pressure accounts for blood flow in the circulation. When the left ventricle contracts to force blood into the aorta, the aorta expands. This stretching gives the potential energy that will help maintain blood pressure during diastole, as during this time the aorta contracts passively. This Windkessel effect of the great elastic arteries has important biomechanical implications. The elastic recoil helps conserve the energy from the pumping heart and smooth out the pulsatile nature created by the heart. Aortic pressure is highest at the aorta and becomes less pulsatile and lower pressure as blood vessels divide into arteries, arterioles, and capillaries such that flow is slow and smooth for gases and nutrient exchange.\nSignificance.\nCentral aortic blood pressure has frequently been shown to have greater prognostic value and to show a more accurate response to antihypertensive drugs than has peripheral blood pressure.\nOther animals.\nAll amniotes have a broadly similar arrangement to that of humans, albeit with a number of individual variations. In fish, however, there are two separate vessels referred to as aortas. The ventral aorta carries de-oxygenated blood from the heart to the gills; part of this vessel forms the ascending aorta in tetrapods (the remainder forms the pulmonary artery). A second, dorsal aorta carries oxygenated blood from the gills to the rest of the body and is homologous with the descending aorta of tetrapods. The two aortas are connected by a number of vessels, one passing through each of the gills.\nAmphibians also retain the fifth connecting vessel, so that the aorta has two parallel arches.\nHistory.\nThe word \"aorta\" stems from the Late Latin \"\" from Classical Greek \"aort\u0113\" (), from \"aeir\u014d\", \"I lift, raise\" () This term was first applied by Aristotle when describing the aorta and describes accurately how it seems to be \"suspended\" above the heart.\nThe function of the aorta is documented in the Talmud, where it is noted as one of three major vessels entering or leaving the heart, and where perforation is linked to death.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2090", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2090", "title": "Albert of Brandenburg Prussia", "text": ""}
{"id": "2093", "revid": "47424798", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2093", "title": "Abimelech", "text": "Name given to Philistine kings in the Hebrew Bible\nAbimelech (also spelled Abimelek or Avimelech; Hebrew: / , \u00a0\"\u02bcAv\u012bm\u00e9le\u1e35\" / \"\u02bcAv\u012bm\u00e1le\u1e35\" \u00a0\"\u02bcA\u1e07\u012bmele\u1e35\" / \"\u02bcA\u1e07\u012bm\u0101le\u1e35\", \"my father is a king\"/\"my father reigns\") was the generic name given to all Philistine kings in the Hebrew Bible from the time of Abraham through King David. In the Book of Judges, Abimelech, son of Gideon, of the Tribe of Manasseh, is proclaimed king of Shechem after the death of his father.\nEtymology.\nThe name or title \"Abimelech\" is formed from Canaanite words for \"father\" and \"king,\" and may be interpreted in a variety of ways, including \"Father-King\", \"My father is king,\" or \"Father of a king.\" In the Pentateuch, it is used as a title for kings in the land of Canaan.\nAbimelech can be translated in Arabic as well into \"My father is king\", \"My father is owner\" or \"Father of a king,\" where () means father or my father while () means king or () for owner.\nAt the time of the Amarna tablets (mid-14th century BC), there was an Egyptian governor of Tyre similarly named Abimilki, \nAbimelech of Gerar.\nAbimelech was most prominently the name of a polytheistic king of Gerar who is mentioned in two of the three wife\u2013sister narratives in the Book of Genesis, in connection with both Abraham and Isaac.\nKing Abimelech of Gerar also appears in an extra-biblical tradition recounted in texts such as the \"Arabic Apocalypse of Peter\", the \"Cave of Treasures\" and the \"Conflict of Adam and Eve with Satan\", as one of twelve regional kings in Abraham's time said to have built the city of Jerusalem for Melchizedek.\nAbimelech son of Jerubbaal/Gideon.\nThe Book of Judges mentions Abimelech, son of judge Gideon (also known as Jerubbaal). According to the biblical narrative, Abimelech was an extremely conniving and evil person. He persuaded his mother's brothers to encourage the people of Shechem to back him in a plot to overthrow his family rule and make him sole ruler.\nAfter slaying all but one of his seventy brothers, Abimelech was crowned king. The brother who escaped, Jotham youngest son of Jerrubaal, made a pronouncement against Abimelech and those who had crowned him.\nThe curse was that if they had not dealt righteously with the family of Jerrubaal, then fire would come against Abimelech from the people of Shechem and fire would come out of Abimelech against the people who had backed him in this bloody coup.\nAfter Abimelech ruled for three years, the pronouncement came through. The people of Shechem set robbers to lie in wait of any goods or money headed to Abimelech and steal everything. Then Gaal son of Ebed went to Shechem and drunkenly bragged that he would remove Abimelech from the throne. Zebul, ruler of Shechem, sent word to Abimelech along with a battle strategy. Once Zebul taunted Gaal into fighting Abimelech, he shut Gaal and his brethren out of the city.\nAbimelech then slew the field workers that came out of the city of Shechem the next day. When he heard that the people of Shechem had locked themselves in a strong tower, he and his men set fire to it, killing about a thousand men and women.\nAfter this, Abimelech went to Thebez and camped against it. When he went close to the tower in Thebez to set it on fire, a woman dropped an upper millstone on Abimelech's head. He did not want to be known as having been killed by a woman, so he asked his armour bearer to run him through with a sword. His place of death is cited as being Thebez.\nRussian use.\nAvimelekh () is a Russian male first name derived from Abimelech. It was included into various, often handwritten, church calendars throughout the 17th\u201319th centuries, but was omitted from the official Synodal Menologium at the end of the 19th century.\nOther people with this name.\nApart from the king (or kings) of Gerar, the Bible also records this name for:\nOther literary references include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "2095", "revid": "16084631", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2095", "title": "Anomalous operation", "text": ""}
{"id": "2099", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2099", "title": "Andrew Tridgell", "text": "Australian computer programmer\nAndrew \"Tridge\" Tridgell (born 28 February 1967) is an Australian computer programmer. He is the author of and a contributor to the Samba file server, and co-inventor of the rsync algorithm.\nHe has analysed complex proprietary protocols and algorithms, to allow compatible free and open source software implementations.\nProjects.\nTridgell was a major developer of the Samba software, analyzing the Server Message Block protocol used for workgroup and network file sharing by Microsoft Windows products. He developed the https:// hierarchical memory allocator, originally as part of Samba.\nFor his PhD dissertation, he co-developed rsync, including the rsync algorithm, a highly efficient file transfer and synchronisation tool. He was also the original author of rzip, which uses a similar algorithm to rsync. He developed spamsum, based on locality-sensitive hashing algorithms.\nHe is the author of KnightCap, a reinforcement-learning based chess engine.\nTridgell was also a leader in hacking the TiVo to make it work in Australia, which uses the PAL video format.\nIn April 2005, Tridgell tried to produce free software (now known as SourcePuller) that interoperated with the BitKeeper source code repository. This was cited as the reason that BitMover revoked a license allowing Linux developers free use of their BitKeeper product. Linus Torvalds, the creator of the Linux kernel, and Tridgell were thus involved in a public debate about the events, in which Tridgell stated that, not having bought or owned BitKeeper \u2013 and thus having never agreed to its license \u2013 he could not violate it, and was analyzing the protocol ethically, as he had done with Samba. Tridgell's involvement in the project resulted in Torvalds accusing him of playing dirty tricks with BitKeeper. Tridgell claimed his analysis started with simply telneting to a BitKeeper server and typing codice_1. This incident triggered the creation of Git by Torvalds.\nIn 2011 Tridgell became involved with the software development of ArduPilot Mega, an open source Arduino-based UAV controller board, working on an entry with CanberraUAV for the UAV Challenge Outback Rescue.\nAcademic achievements.\nTridgell completed a PhD at the Computer Sciences Laboratory of the Australian National University. His original doctorate work was in the area of speech recognition but was never completed. His submitted dissertation 'Efficient Algorithms for Sorting and Synchronization' was based on his work on the rsync algorithm.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2100", "revid": "91088", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2100", "title": "Applesoft BASIC", "text": "Dialect of Microsoft BASIC programming language\nApplesoft BASIC is a dialect of Microsoft BASIC, developed by Marc McDonald and Ric Weiland, supplied with Apple II computers. It supersedes Integer BASIC and is the BASIC in ROM in all Apple II series computers after the original Apple II model. It is also referred to as FP BASIC (from floating point) because of the Apple DOS command codice_1 used to invoke it, instead of codice_2 for Integer BASIC.\nApplesoft BASIC was supplied by Microsoft and its name is derived from the names of both Apple Computer and Microsoft. Apple employees, including Randy Wigginton, adapted Microsoft's interpreter for the Apple II and added several features. The first version of Applesoft was released in 1977 on cassette tape and lacked proper support for high-resolution graphics. Applesoft II, which was made available on cassette and disk and in the ROM of the Apple II Plus and subsequent models, was released in 1978. It is this latter version, which has some syntax differences and support for the Apple II high-resolution graphics modes, that is usually synonymous with the term \"Applesoft.\"\nHistory.\nWhen Steve Wozniak wrote Integer BASIC for the Apple II, he did not implement support for floating-point arithmetic because he was primarily interested in writing games, a task for which integers alone were sufficient. In 1976, Microsoft had developed Microsoft BASIC for the MOS Technology 6502, but at the time there was no production computer that used it. Upon learning that Apple had a 6502 machine, Microsoft asked if the company were interested in licensing BASIC, but Steve Jobs replied that Apple already had one.\nThe Apple II was unveiled to the public at the West Coast Computer Faire in April 1977 and became available for sale in June. One of the most common customer complaints about the computer was BASIC's lack of floating-point math. Making things more problematic was that the rival Commodore PET personal computer had a floating point-capable BASIC interpreter from the beginning. As Wozniak\u2014the only person who understood Integer BASIC well enough to add floating point features\u2014was busy with the Disk II drive and controller and with Apple DOS, Apple turned to Microsoft.\nApple reportedly obtained an eight-year license for Applesoft BASIC from Microsoft for a flat fee of $31,000, renewing it in 1985 through an arrangement that gave Microsoft the rights and source code for Apple's Macintosh version of BASIC. Applesoft was designed to be backwards-compatible with Integer BASIC and uses the core of Microsoft's 6502 BASIC implementation, which includes using the GET command for detecting key presses and not requiring any spaces on program lines. While Applesoft BASIC is slower than Integer BASIC, it has many features that the older BASIC lacks:\nConversely, Applesoft lacks the codice_10 (remainder) operator from Integer BASIC.\nAdapting BASIC for the Apple II was a tedious job as Apple received a source listing for Microsoft 6502 BASIC which proved to be buggy and also required the addition of Integer BASIC commands. Since Apple had no 6502 assembler on hand, the development team was forced to send the source code over the phone lines to Call Computer, an outfit that offered compiler services. This was an extremely tedious, slow process and after Call Computer lost the source code due to an equipment malfunction, one of the programmers, Cliff Huston, used his own IMSAI 8080 computer to cross assemble the BASIC source.\nFeatures.\nApplesoft is similar to Commodore's BASIC 2.0 aside from features inherited from Integer BASIC. There are a few minor differences such as Applesoft's lack of bitwise operators; otherwise most BASIC programs that do not use hardware-dependent features will run on both BASICs.\nThe PR# statement redirects output to an expansion card, and IN# redirects input from an expansion card. The slot number of the card is specified after the PR# or IN# within the statement. The computer locks-up if there is no card present in the slot. PR#0 restores output to the 40 column screen and IN#0 to the keyboard.\nThe PR# statement can be used to redirect output to the printer (e.g. ) where x is the slot number containing the printer port card. To send a BASIC program listing to the printer, the user types .\nUsing PR# on a slot with a disk drive (usually in slot 6) causes Applesoft to boot the disk drive. Using PR# on a slot with an 80 column card (usually in slot 3) switches to 80 column text mode.\nAs with Commodore BASIC, numeric variables are stored as 40-bit floating point; each variable requires five bytes of memory. The programmer may designate variables as integer by following them with a percent sign, in which case they use two bytes and are limited to a range of -32768 to 32767; however BASIC internally converts them back to floating point when performing calculations, while each percent sign also takes an additional byte of program code, so in practice this feature is only useful for reducing the memory usage of large array variables, as it offers no performance benefit.\nThe RND function generates a pseudorandom fractional number between 0 and 1. returns the most recently generated random number. RND with a negative number will jump to a point in the sequence determined by the particular negative number used. RND with any positive value generates the next number in the sequence, not dependent on the actual value given.\nLike other implementations of Microsoft BASIC, Applesoft discards spaces (outside of strings and comments) on program lines. codice_11 adds spaces when displaying code for the sake of readability. Since LIST adds a space before and after every tokenized keyword, it often produces two spaces in a row where one would suffice for readability.\nThe default prompt for codice_12 is a question mark. codice_13 does not add a leading space in front of numbers.\nLimitations.\nThrough several early models of the Apple II, Applesoft BASIC did not support the use of lowercase letters in programs, except in strings. codice_13 is a valid command but codice_15 and codice_16 result in a syntax error.\nApplesoft lacks several commands and functions common to most of the non-6502 Microsoft BASIC interpreters, such as:\nApplesoft does not have commands for file or disk handling, other than to save and load programs via cassette tape. The Apple II disk operating system, known simply as DOS, augments the language to provide such abilities.\nOnly the first two letters of variables names are significant. For example, \"LOW\" and \"LOSS\" are treated as the same variable, and attempting to assign a value to \"LOSS\" overwrites any value assigned to \"LOW\". A programmer also has to avoid consecutive letters that are Applesoft commands or operations. The name \"SCORE\" for a variable is interpreted as containing the codice_21 Boolean operator, rendered as codice_22. \"BACKGROUND\" contains codice_23, the command to invoke the low-resolution graphics mode, and results in a syntax error.\nSound and graphics.\nThe only sound support is the option to codice_13 an ASCII bell character to sound the system alert beep, and a codice_25 command to click the speaker. The language is not fast enough to produce more than a baritone buzz from repeated clicks. Programs can, however, store a machine-language routine to be called to generate electronic musical tones spanning several octaves.\nApplesoft supports drawing in the Apple II's low resolution and high resolution modes. There are commands to plot pixels and draw horizontal and vertical lines in low resolution. High resolution allows arbitrary lines and vector-based shape tables for drawing scaled and rotated objects. The only provision for mixing text and graphics is the four lines of text at the bottom of a graphic display.\nBeginning with the Apple IIe, a \"double-high resolution\" mode became available on machines with 128k of memory. This mode essentially duplicates the resolution of the original high resolution mode, but including all 16 colors of the low resolution palette. Applesoft does not provide direct support for this mode. Apple IIGS-specific modes are likewise not supported.\nExtensions.\nApplesoft BASIC can be extended by two means: the ampersand (&amp;) command and the USR() function. These are two features that call low-level machine-language routines stored in memory, which is useful for routines that need to be fast or require direct access to arbitrary functions or data in memory. The USR() function takes one argument, and can be programmed to derive and return a calculated function value to be used in a numerical expression. is effectively a shorthand for CALL, with an address that is predefined. By calling routines in the Applesoft ROM, it is possible for ampersand routines to parse values that follow the ampersand. Numerous third-party commercial packages were available to extend Applesoft using ampersand routines.\nBugs.\nA deficiency with error-trapping via codice_26 means that the system stack is not reset if an error-handling routine does not invoke codice_27, potentially leading to a crash. The built-in pseudorandom number generator function codice_28 is capable of producing a predictable series of outputs due to the manner in which the generator is seeded when first powering on. This behavior is contrary to how Apple's documentation describes the function.\nPerformance.\nWozniak originally referred to his Integer BASIC as \"Game BASIC\" (having written it so he could implement a \"Breakout\" clone for his new computer). Few action games were written in Applesoft BASIC, in large part because the use of floating-point numbers for all math operations degrades performance.\nApplesoft BASIC programs are stored as a linked list of lines; a codice_29 or codice_30 takes linear time. Some programs have the subroutines at the top to reduce the time for calling them.\nUnlike Integer BASIC, Applesoft does not convert literal numbers (like 100) in the source code to binary when a line is entered. Rather, the ASCII string is converted whenever the line is executed. Since variable lookup is often faster than this conversion, it can be faster to store numeric constants used inside loops in variables before the loop is entered.\nSample code.\nHello, World! in Applesoft BASIC can be entered as the following:\n10TEXT:HOME\n20?\"HELLO WORLD\"\nMultiple commands can be included on the same line of code if separated by a colon (codice_31). The codice_32 can be used in Applesoft BASIC (and almost all versions of Microsoft BASIC) as a shortcut for \"PRINT\", though spelling out the word is not only acceptable but canonical\u2014Applesoft converted \"?\" in entered programs to the same token as \"PRINT\" (thus no memory is actually saved by using \"?\"), thus either appears as \"PRINT\" when a program is listed. The program above appears in a codice_11 command as:\n10 TEXT : HOME\n20 PRINT \"HELLO WORLD\"\nWhen Applesoft II BASIC was initially released in mid-1978, it came on cassette tape and could be loaded into memory via the Apple II's machine language monitor. When the enhanced Apple II+ replaced the original II in 1979, Applesoft was now included in ROM and automatically started on power-up if no bootable floppy disk was present. Conversely, Integer BASIC was now removed from ROM and turned into an executable file on the DOS 3.3 disk.\nEarly evolution.\nThe original Applesoft, stored in RAM as documented in its Reference Manual of November 1977, has smaller interpreter code than the later Applesoft II, occupying 8\u00bd\u00a0KB of memory, instead of the 10\u00a0KB used by the later Applesoft II. Consequently, it lacks a number of command features developed for the later, mainstream version:\nas well as several the later version would have, that had already been present in Apple's Integer BASIC:\nIn addition, its low-resolution graphics commands have different names from their Integer BASIC/Applesoft II counterparts. All command names are of the form PLTx such that GR, COLOR=, PLOT, HLIN and VLIN are called PLTG, PLTC, PLTP, PLTH, and PLTV, respectively. The command for returning to text mode, known as TEXT in other versions, is simply TEX, and carries the proviso that it has to be the last statement in a program line.\nApplesoft BASIC 1.x was closer to Microsoft's original 6502 BASIC code than the later Applesoft II; it retained the Memory Size? prompt and displayed a Microsoft copyright notice. To maintain consistency with Integer BASIC, the \"Ok\" prompt from Microsoft's code was replaced by a ] character. Applesoft 1.x also prompted the user upon loading if they wished to disable the REM statement and the LET keyword in assignment statements in exchange for lores graphics commands.\nThe USR() function is also defined differently, serving as a stand-in for the absent CALL command. Its argument is not for passing a numerical value to the machine-language routine, but is instead the call-address of the routine itself; there is no \"hook\" to pre-define the address. All of several examples in the manual use the function only to access \"system monitor ROM\" routines, or short user-routines to manipulate the ROM routines. No mention is made of any code to calculate the value returned by the function itself; the function is always shown being assigned to \"dummy\" variables, which, without action to set a value by user-code, just receive a meaningless value handed back to them. Even accessed ROM routines that return values (in examples, those that provide the service of PDL() and SCRN() functions) merely have their values stored, by user-routines, in locations that are separately PEEKed in a subsequent statement.\nUnlike in Integer BASIC and Applesoft II, the Boolean operators AND, OR and NOT perform bitwise operations on 16-bit integer values. If they are given values outside that range, an error results.\nThe terms OUT and PLT (and the aforementioned IN) appear in the list of reserved words, but are not explained anywhere in the manual.\nRelated BASICs.\nSeveral compilers for Applesoft BASIC exist, including TASC (The Applesoft Compiler) from Microsoft in 1981.\nColeco claimed that its Adam home computer's SmartBASIC was source-code compatible with Applesoft.\nMicrosoft licensed a BASIC compatible with Applesoft to VTech for its Laser 128 clone.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis article includes text from http://, licensed under GFDL."}
{"id": "2101", "revid": "31866656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2101", "title": "Asterix", "text": "Series of French comic albums\nAsterix ( or , \"Asterix the Gaul\"; also known as Asterix and Obelix in some adaptations or The Adventures of Asterix) is a French comic album series about a Gaulish village which, thanks to a magic potion that enhances strength, resists the forces of Julius Caesar's Roman Republic Army in a nonhistorical telling of the time after the Gallic Wars. Many adventures take the titular hero Asterix and his friend Obelix to Rome and beyond.\nThe series first appeared in the Franco-Belgian comic magazine \"Pilote\" on 29 October 1959. It was written by Ren\u00e9 Goscinny and illustrated by Albert Uderzo until Goscinny's death in 1977. Uderzo then took over the writing until 2009, when he sold the rights to publishing company Hachette; he died in 2020. In 2013, a new team consisting of Jean-Yves Ferri (script) and Didier Conrad (artwork) took over. As of 2025[ [update]], 41 volumes have been released; the most recent was penned by new writer Fabcaro and released on 23 October 2025.\nBy that year, the volumes in total had sold 393 million copies, making them the best-selling European comic book series, the fourth best-selling comic book series in the world and the second one after \"One Piece\" in terms of collected volumes-format comics.\nDescription.\nAsterix comics usually start with the following introduction:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The year is 50 BC. Gaul is entirely occupied by the Romans. Well, not entirely... One small village of indomitable Gauls still holds out against the invaders. And life is not easy for the Roman legionaries who garrison the fortified camps of Totorum, Aquarium, Laudanum and Compendium...\nThe series follows the adventures of a village of Gauls as they resist Roman occupation in 50 BC. They do so using a magic potion, brewed by their druid Getafix (Panoramix in the French version), which temporarily gives the recipient superhuman strength. The protagonists, the title character Asterix and his friend Obelix, have various adventures. The \"-ix\" ending of both names (as well as all the other pseudo-Gaulish \"-ix\" names in the series) alludes to the \"-rix\" suffix (meaning \"king\", like \"-rex\" in Latin) present in the names of many real Gaulish chieftains such as Vercingetorix, Orgetorix, and Dumnorix.\nIn some of the stories, they travel to foreign countries, whilst other tales are set in and around their village. For much of the history of the series (volumes 4 through 29), settings in Gaul and abroad alternate, with even-numbered volumes set abroad and odd-numbered volumes set in Gaul, mostly in the village.\nThe \"Asterix\" series is one of the most popular Franco-Belgian comics in the world, with the series being translated into 111 languages and dialects as of 2009[ [update]].\nThe success of the series has led to the adaptation of its books into 15 films: ten animated, and five live action (two of which, \"\" and \"Asterix and Obelix vs. Caesar\", were major box office successes in France). There have also been a number of games based on the characters, and a theme park near Paris, Parc Ast\u00e9rix. The very first French satellite, Ast\u00e9rix, launched in 1965, was named after the character, whose name is close to Greek \u1f00\u03c3\u03c4\u03ae\u03c1 and Latin \"astrum\", meaning a \"star\". As of 20 April 2022, 385million copies of \"Asterix\" books had been sold worldwide and translated in 111 languages making it the world's most widely translated comic book series, with co-creators Ren\u00e9 Goscinny and Albert Uderzo being France's best-selling authors abroad.\nIn April 2022, Albert and Ren\u00e9's general director, C\u00e9leste Surugue, hosted a 45-minute talk entitled 'The Next Incarnation of a Heritage Franchise: Asterix' and spoke about the success of the Asterix franchise, of which he noted \"The idea was to find a subject with a strong connection with French culture and, while looking at the country's history, they ended up choosing its first defeat, namely the Gaul's Roman colonisation\". He also went on to say how, since 1989, Parc Asterix has attracted an average of 2.3 million visitors per year. Other notable mentions were how the franchise includes 10 animated movies, which recorded over 53 million viewers worldwide. The inception of Studios Id\u00e9fix in 1974 and the opening of Studio 58 in 2016 were among the necessary steps to make Asterix a \"100% Gaulish production\", considered the best solution to keep the creative process under control from start to finish and to employ French manpower. He also noted how a new album is now published every two years, with print figures of 5 million and an estimated readership of 20 million.\nPublication history.\nPrior to creating the \"Asterix\" series, Goscinny and Uderzo had had success with their series \"Oumpah-pah\", which was published in \"Tintin\" magazine.\n\"Ast\u00e9rix\" was originally serialised in \"Pilote\" magazine, debuting in the first issue on 29 October 1959. In 1961, the first book was put together, titled \"Asterix the Gaul\". From then on, books were released generally on a yearly basis. Their success was exponential; the first book sold 6,000 copies in its year of publication; a year later, the second sold 20,000. In 1963, the third sold 40,000; the fourth, released in 1964, sold 150,000. A year later, the fifth sold 300,000; 1966's \"Asterix and the Big Fight\" sold 400,000 upon initial publication. The ninth \"Asterix\" volume, when first released in 1967, sold 1.2 million copies in two days.\nUderzo's first preliminary sketches portrayed Asterix as a huge and strong traditional Gaulish warrior. But Goscinny had a different picture in his mind, visualizing Asterix as a shrewd, compact warrior who would possess intelligence and wit more than raw strength. However, Uderzo felt that the downsized hero needed a strong but dim companion, to which Goscinny agreed. Hence, Obelix was born. Despite the growing popularity of \"Asterix\" with the readers, the financial backing for the publication \"Pilote\" ceased. \"Pilote\" was taken over by Georges Dargaud.\nWhen Goscinny died in 1977, Uderzo continued the series by popular demand of the readers, who implored him to continue. He continued to issue new volumes of the series, but on a less frequent basis. Many critics and fans of the series prefer the earlier collaborations with Goscinny. Uderzo created his own publishing company, \u00c9ditions Albert Ren\u00e9, which published every album drawn and written by Uderzo alone since then. However, Dargaud, the initial publisher of the series, kept the publishing rights on the 24 first albums made by both Uderzo and Goscinny. In 1990, the Uderzo and Goscinny families decided to sue Dargaud to take over the rights. In 1998, after a long trial, Dargaud lost the rights to publish and sell the albums. Uderzo decided to sell these rights to Hachette instead of Albert-Ren\u00e9, but the publishing rights on new albums were still owned by Albert Uderzo (40%), Sylvie Uderzo (20%) and Anne Goscinny (40%).\nIn December 2008, Uderzo sold his stake to Hachette, which took over the company. In a letter published in the French newspaper in 2009, Uderzo's daughter, Sylvie, attacked her father's decision to sell the family publishing firm and the rights to produce new \"Ast\u00e9rix\" adventures after his death. She said:\n... the co-creator of \"Ast\u00e9rix\", France's comic strip hero, has betrayed the Gaulish warrior to the modern-day Romans \u2013 the men of industry and finance.\nHowever, Ren\u00e9 Goscinny's daughter, Anne, also gave her agreement to the continuation of the series and sold her rights at the same time. She is reported to have said that \"\"Asterix\" has already had two lives: one during my father's lifetime and one after it. Why not a third?\". A few months later, Uderzo appointed three illustrators, who had been his assistants for many years, to continue the series. In 2011, Uderzo announced that a new \"Asterix\" album was due out in 2013, with Jean-Yves Ferri writing the story and Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric M\u00e9barki drawing it. A year later, in 2012, the publisher Albert-Ren\u00e9 announced that Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric M\u00e9barki had withdrawn from drawing the new album, due to the pressure he felt in following in the steps of Uderzo. Comic artist Didier Conrad was officially announced to take over drawing duties from M\u00e9barki, with the due date of the new album in 2013 unchanged.\nIn January 2015, after the murders of seven cartoonists at the satirical Paris weekly \"Charlie Hebdo\", \"Ast\u00e9rix\" creator Albert Uderzo came out of retirement to draw two \"Ast\u00e9rix\" pictures honouring the memories of the victims.\nList of titles.\nNumbers 1\u201324, 32 and 34 are by Goscinny and Uderzo. Numbers 25\u201331 and 33 are by Uderzo alone. Numbers 35\u201339 are by Jean-Yves Ferri and Didier Conrad. Years stated are for their initial album release.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Asterix Conquers Rome\" is a comics adaptation of the animated film \"The Twelve Tasks of Asterix\". It was released in 1976 and was the 23rd volume to be published, but it has been rarely reprinted and is not considered to be canonical to the series. The only English translations ever to be published were in the \"Asterix Annual 1980\" and never an English standalone volume. A picture-book version of the same story was published in English translation as \"The Twelve Tasks of Asterix\" by Hodder &amp; Stoughton in 1978.\nIn 1996, a tribute album in honour of Albert Uderzo was released titled \"Uderzo Croqu\u00e9 par ses Amis\", a volume containing 21 short stories with Uderzo in Ancient Gaul. This volume was published by Soleil Productions and has not been translated into English.\nIn 2007, \u00c9ditions Albert Ren\u00e9 released a tribute volume titled \"Ast\u00e9rix et ses Amis\", a 60-page volume of one-to-four-page short stories. It was a tribute to Albert Uderzo on his 80th birthday by 34 European cartoonists. The volume was translated into nine languages. As of 2016[ [update]], it has not been translated into English.\nIn 2016, the French publisher Hachette, along with Anne Goscinny and Albert Uderzo decided to make the special issue album \"The XII Tasks of Asterix\" for the 40th anniversary of the film \"The Twelve Tasks of Asterix\". There was no English edition.\nSynopsis and characters.\nThe main setting for the series is an unnamed coastal village, rumoured to be inspired by Erquy in Armorica (present-day Brittany/Normandy), a province of Gaul (modern France), in the year 50 BC. Julius Caesar has conquered nearly all of Gaul for the Roman Republic during the Gallic Wars. The little Armorican village, however, has held out because the villagers can gain temporary superhuman strength by drinking a magic potion brewed by the local village druid, Getafix. His chief is Vitalstatistix.\nThe main protagonist and hero of the village is Asterix, who, because of his shrewdness, is usually entrusted with the most important affairs of the village. He is aided in his adventures by his rather corpulent and slower thinking friend, Obelix, who, because he fell into the druid's cauldron of the potion as a baby, has permanent superhuman strength (because of this, Getafix steadfastly refuses to allow Obelix to drink the potion, as doing so would have a dangerous and unpredictable result, as shown in \"Asterix and Obelix All at Sea\"). Obelix is usually accompanied by Dogmatix, his little dog. (Except for Asterix and Obelix, the names of the characters change with the language. For example, Obelix's dog's name is \"Id\u00e9fix\" in the original French edition.)\nAsterix and Obelix (and sometimes other members of the village) go on various adventures both within the village and in far away lands. Places visited in the series include parts of Gaul (Lutetia, Corsica etc.), neighbouring nations (Belgium, Spain, Britain, Germany etc.), and far away lands (North America, Middle East, India etc.).\nThe series employs science-fiction and fantasy elements in the more recent books; for instance, the use of extraterrestrials in \"Asterix and the Falling Sky\" and the city of Atlantis in \"Asterix and Obelix All at Sea\".\nWith rare exceptions, the ending of the albums usually shows a big banquet with the village's inhabitants gathering \u2013 the sole exception is the bard Cacofonix restrained and gagged to prevent him from singing (but in \"Asterix and the Normans\" the blacksmith Fulliautomatix was tied up). Mostly the banquets are held under the starry nights in the village, where roast boar is devoured and all (but one) are set about in merrymaking. However, there are a few exceptions, such as in \"Asterix and Cleopatra\".\nHumour.\nThe humour encountered in the \"Asterix\" comics often centers around puns, caricatures, and tongue-in-cheek stereotypes of contemporary European nations and French regions. Much of the multi-layered humour in the initial Asterix books was French-specific, which delayed the translation of the books into other languages for fear of losing the jokes and the spirit of the story. Some translations have actually added local humour: In the Italian translation, the Roman legionaries are made to speak in 20th-century Roman dialect, and Obelix's famous \"\" (\"These Romans are crazy\") is translated as \"Sono pazzi questi romani\", a long-established humorous expansion of the Roman abbreviation \"SPQR\". In another example: Hiccups are written onomatopoeically in French as \"hips\", but in English as \"hic\", allowing Roman legionaries in more than one of the English translations to decline their hiccups absurdly in Latin (\"hic, haec, hoc\"). The newer albums share a more universal humour, both written and visual.\nCharacter names.\nAll the fictional characters in \"Asterix\" have names which are puns on their roles or personalities, and which follow certain patterns specific to nationality. Certain rules are followed (most of the time) such as Gauls (and their neighbours) having an \"-ix\" suffix for the men and ending in \"-a\" for the women; for example, Chief Vitalstatistix (so called due to his portly stature) and his wife Impedimenta (often at odds with the chief). The male Roman names end in \"-us\", echoing Latin nominative male singular form, as in Gluteus Maximus, a muscle-bound athlete whose name is literally the butt of the joke. Gothic names (present-day Germany) end in \"-ic\", after Gothic chiefs such as Alaric and Theoderic; for example Rhetoric the interpreter. Greek names end in \"-os\" or \"-es\"; for example, Thermos the restaurateur. British names usually end in \"-ax\" or \"-os\" and are often puns on the taxation associated with the later United Kingdom; examples include Mykingdomforanos, a British tribal chieftain, Valuaddedtax the druid, and Selectivemploymentax the mercenary. Names of Normans end with \"-af\", for example Nescaf or Cenotaf. Egyptian characters often end in \"-is\", such as the architects Edifis and Artifis, and the scribe Exlibris. Indic names, apart from the only Indic female characters Orinjade and Lemuhnade, exhibit considerable variation; examples include Watziznehm, Watzit, Owzat, and Howdoo. Other nationalities are treated to pidgin translations from their language, like Huevos y Bacon, a Spanish chieftain (whose name, meaning eggs and bacon, is often guidebook Spanish for tourists), or literary and other popular media references, like Dubbelosix (a sly reference to James Bond's codename \"007\").\nMost of these jokes, and hence the names of the characters, are specific to the translation; for example, the druid named Getafix in English translation \u2013 \"get a fix\", referring to the character's role in dispensing the magic potion \u2013 is \"Panoramix\" in the original French and \"Miraculix\" in German. Even so, occasionally the wordplay has been preserved: Obelix's dog, known in the original French as \"Id\u00e9fix\" (from \"id\u00e9e fixe\", a \"fixed idea\" or obsession), is called \"Dogmatix\" in English, which not only renders the original meaning strikingly closely (\"dogmatic\") but in fact adds another layer of wordplay with the syllable \"Dog-\" at the beginning of the name.\nThe name \"Asterix\", French \"Ast\u00e9rix\", comes from ', meaning \"asterisk\", which is the typographical symbol *\"' indicating a footnote, from the Greek word \u1f00\u03c3\u03c4\u03ae\u03c1 (\"aster\"), meaning a \"star\". His name is usually left unchanged in translations, aside from accents and the use of local alphabets. For example, in Esperanto, Polish, Slovene, Latvian, and Turkish it is \"Asteriks\" (in Turkish he was first named \"B\u00fcc\u00fcr\" meaning \"shorty\", but the name was then standardised). Two exceptions include Icelandic, in which he is known as \"\u00c1str\u00edkur\" (\"Rich of love\"), and Sinhala, where he is known as (\"Soora Pappa\"), which can be interpreted as \"Hero\". The name \"Obelix\" (\"Ob\u00e9lix\") may refer to \"obelisk\", a stone column from ancient Egypt (and hence his large size and strength and his task of carrying around menhirs), but also to another typographical symbol, the obelisk or obelus (\u2020).\nFor explanations of some of the other names, see List of \"Asterix\" characters.\nEthnic stereotypes.\nMany of the \"Asterix\" adventures take place in other countries away from their homeland in Gaul. In every album that takes place abroad, the characters meet (usually modern-day) stereotypes for each country, as seen by the French.\nWhen the Gauls see foreigners speaking their foreign languages, these have different representations in the cartoon speech bubbles:\nTranslations.\nThe various volumes have been translated into more than 120 languages and dialects. Besides the original French language, most albums are available in Arabic, Basque, Bulgarian, Catalan, Chinese, Croatian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Estonian, Finnish, Galician, German, Greek, Hebrew, Hindi, Icelandic, Irish, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Latin, Latvian, Norwegian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Serbian, Slovene, Spanish, Swedish, Turkish, and Ukrainian.\nSome books have also been translated into languages including Esperanto, Scottish Gaelic, Irish, Scots, Indonesian, Hindi, Persian, Bengali, Afrikaans, Arabic, Frisian, Romansch, Thai, Vietnamese, Welsh, Sinhala, Ancient Greek, and Luxembourgish.\nIn Europe, several volumes were translated into a variety of regional languages and dialects, such as Alsatian, Breton, Chtimi (Picard), and Corsican in France; Bavarian, Swabian, and Low German in Germany; and Savo, Karelia, Rauma, and Helsinki slang dialects in Finland. In Portugal a special edition of the first volume, \"Asterix the Gaul\", was translated into local language Mirandese. In Greece, a number of volumes have appeared in the Cretan Greek, Cypriot Greek, and Pontic Greek dialects. In the Italian version, while the Gauls speak standard Italian, the legionaries speak in the Romanesque dialect. In the former Yugoslavia, the \"Forum\" publishing house translated Corsican text in \"Asterix in Corsica\" into the Montenegrin dialect of Serbo-Croatian (today called Montenegrin).\nIn the Netherlands, several volumes were translated into West Frisian, a Germanic language spoken in the province of Friesland; into Limburgish, a regional language spoken not only in Dutch Limburg but also in Belgian Limburg and North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany; and into Tweants, a dialect in the region of Twente in the eastern province of Overijssel. Hungarian-language books were published in the former Yugoslavia for the Hungarian minority living in Serbia. Although not translated into a fully autonomous dialect, the books differ slightly from the language of the books issued in Hungary. In Sri Lanka, the cartoon series was adapted into Sinhala as \"Sura Pappa\".\nMost volumes have been translated into Latin and Ancient Greek, with accompanying teachers' guides, as a way of teaching these ancient languages.\nEnglish translation.\nIn the early 1960s, translations of some strips were published in British comics including \"Valiant\", \"Ranger\", and \"Look &amp; Learn\", under names \"Little Fred and Big Ed\", and \"Beric the Bold\", set in Roman-occupied Britain. These were included in an exhibition on Goscinny's life and career, and Asterix, in London's Jewish Museum in 2018.\nIn 1970, William Morrow and Company published English translations in hardback of three Asterix albums for the American market. These were \"Asterix the Gaul\", \"Asterix and Cleopatra\" and \"Asterix the Legionary\". Lawrence Hughes in a letter to \"The New York Times\" stated, \"Sales were modest, with the third title selling half the number of the first. I was publisher at the time, and Bill Cosby tried to buy film and television rights. When that fell through, we gave up the series.\"\nThe first 33 Asterix albums were translated into English by Anthea Bell and Derek Hockridge (including the three volumes reprinted by William Morrow), who were widely praised for maintaining the spirit and humour of the original French versions. Hockridge died in 2013, so Bell translated books 34 to 36 by herself, before retiring in 2016 for health reasons. She died in 2018. Adriana Hunter became translator.\nUS publisher Papercutz in December 2019 announced it would begin publishing \"all-new more American translations\" of the Asterix books, starting on 19 May 2020. The launch was postponed to 15 July 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The new translator is Joe Johnson, a professor of French and Spanish at Clayton State University. The comics' popularity has been relatively low in US markets, where Franco-Belgian comics have less mainstream exposure.\nAdaptations.\nThe series has been adapted into various media. There are 18 films, 15 board games, 40 video games, and 1 theme park.\nTelevision series.\n\"Dogmatix and the Indomitables\", an animated series of eleven-minute episodes, was produced by Studio 58 and Futurikon, and premiered on the Okoo streaming service on 2 July 2021 before beginning its linear broadcast on France 4 on 28 August 2021. The animation is produced by o2o Studio. \nThe show is distributed globally by LS Distribution. \n\"\", a CG-animated miniseries based on the 1966 album, and directed by Alain Chabat, debuted on Netflix in 2025.\nGames.\nMany gamebooks, board games and video games are based upon the \"Asterix\" series. In particular, many video games were released by various computer game publishers.\nTheme park.\nParc Ast\u00e9rix, a theme park 22 miles north of Paris, based upon the series, was opened in 1989. It is one of the most visited sites in France, with around 2.3\u00a0million visitors per year.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2102", "revid": "19992876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2102", "title": "Arizona Cardinals", "text": "National Football League franchise in Glendale, Arizona\nThe Arizona Cardinals are a professional American football team based in the Phoenix metropolitan area. The Cardinals compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the National Football Conference (NFC) West division. The team plays its home games at State Farm Stadium in Glendale, a suburb northwest of the state capital of Phoenix.\nThe team was established in Chicago in 1898 as the Morgan Athletic Club, and joined the NFL as a charter member on September 17, 1920. The Cardinals are the oldest continuously run professional football franchise in the United States, and, along with the Chicago Bears, are the only NFL charter member franchises still in operation. \nIn 1960, the team moved to St. Louis, where it was commonly referred to as the \"Football Cardinals\", the \"Gridbirds\", or the \"Big Red\" to avoid confusion with Major League Baseball's (MLB) St. Louis Cardinals. \nBefore the 1988 season, the team moved to Tempe, Arizona, a suburb of Phoenix, where it played home games for the next 18 seasons at Sun Devil Stadium on the campus of Arizona State University. In 2006, the team moved to their current home field in suburban Glendale. Their executive offices and training facility remain in Tempe, although they are moving them to north Phoenix in 2028. From 1988 to 2012 (except 2005, when they trained in Prescott), the Cardinals conducted their annual summer training camp at Northern Arizona University in Flagstaff. In 2013, the Cardinals moved their training camp to their home field, then called University of Phoenix Stadium, now State Farm Stadium.\nThe Cardinals have won two NFL championships, both while the team was in Chicago. The first, in 1925, was disputed by supporters of the runner-up Pottsville Maroons. Their second, and the first to be won in a championship game, came in 1947, nearly two decades before the first Super Bowl. They returned to the title game to defend in 1948, but lost the rematch 7\u20130 in a snowstorm in Philadelphia.\nThe team has since suffered many losing seasons and, as of 2024, has the longest active championship drought in North American sports at 77 seasons (one more than MLB's Cleveland Guardians, who last won the World Series in 1948). The Cardinals have recorded the most losses by a franchise in NFL history with 812 regular season losses as of 2024. \nThe team's all-time win\u2013loss record (including regular season and playoff games) at the conclusion of the 2024 season was 600\u2013822\u201341 (593\u2013812\u201341 in the regular season, 7\u201310 in the playoffs). They have been to the playoffs 11 times and have won seven playoff games, including three in the 2008\u201309 NFL playoffs. During that season, they won their only NFC Championship Game since the 1970 AFL\u2013NFL merger, and reached Super Bowl XLIII, losing 27\u201323 to the Pittsburgh Steelers. \nThe team has won five division titles (1974, 1975, 2008, 2009, and 2015) since their 1947\u201348 NFL championship game appearances. The Cardinals are the only NFL team that has never lost a playoff game at home: their 5\u20130 record encompasses the 1947 NFL Championship Game, two games during the 2008\u201309 NFL playoffs, one during the 2009\u201310 playoffs, and one during the 2015\u201316 playoffs. \nIn their 36 seasons since moving to Arizona in 1988, the Cardinals have a total of six playoff appearances, three division titles, and one NFC championship.\nHistory.\nChicago Cardinals (1920\u20131959).\nThe franchise dates to 1898, when a neighborhood group gathered to play on the South Side of Chicago, calling themselves the Morgan Athletic Club. Chicago painting and building contractor Chris O'Brien acquired the team, which he moved to Normal Field on Racine Avenue. The team was known as the Racine Normals until 1901, when O'Brien bought used jerseys from the University of Chicago. After he described the faded maroon clothing as \"Cardinal red\", the team became the Racine Street Cardinals. Eventually in 1920, the team became a charter member of the American Professional Football Association (APFA), which was rechristened the National Football League (NFL) two years later. The team entered the league as the Racine Cardinals, but changed their name to the Chicago Cardinals in 1922 to avoid confusion with the Horlick-Racine Legion, who entered the league the same year.\nNFL champions (1925).\nIn 1925, the Cardinals were awarded the NFL Championship after the Pottsville Maroons were suspended for playing a game in what was deemed \"another team's territory\". Having beat the Cardinals in a head-to-head game earlier in the season, the Pottsville Maroons won their extra game against the University of Notre Dame, helping them finish the year with the same record as the Cardinals. The Cardinals were also guilty of breaking NFL rules by scheduling two additional games against the Hammond Pros and the Milwaukee Badgers, both of whom had already disbanded for the season. The game against the Badgers spurred a scandal when the Badgers filled out their roster with four high school players, in violation of NFL rules.\nNFL Champions (1947).\nDuring the post-World War II years, the team reached two straight NFL finals against the Philadelphia Eagles, winning in 1947 (eight months after Charles Bidwill's death) but losing the following year. In the late 1950s, after years of bad seasons and losing fans to their crosstown rivals, the Chicago Bears, the Cardinals were almost bankrupt, and owner Violet Bidwill Wolfner became interested in moving the team to a new city.\nSt. Louis Cardinals (1960\u20131987).\nDue to the formation of the rival American Football League, the NFL allowed Bidwill to move the team to St. Louis, Missouri, where they became the St. Louis Cardinals. They were locally called the \"Big Red\", the \"Gridbirds\" or the \"Football Cardinals\" to avoid confusion with the local baseball team of the same name. During the Cardinals' 28-year stay in St. Louis, they advanced to the playoffs just three times (1974, 1975 and 1982), never hosting or winning. They did, however, win the Playoff Bowl, a now-defunct post-season game for third place, in 1964 against the Green Bay Packers by a score of 24\u201317. The overall mediocrity of the Cardinals, combined with a then-21-year-old stadium, caused game attendance to dwindle, and owner Bill Bidwill decided to move the team to Arizona.\nPhoenix/Arizona Cardinals (1988\u2013present).\nNot long after the end of the 1987 NFL season, Bidwill agreed to move to Phoenix on a handshake deal with state and local officials, and the team became the Phoenix Cardinals. The team changed their name to the Arizona Cardinals on March 17, 1994. \nThe Cardinals hired Vince Tobin as head coach before the 1996 season. In his first season, he led the team to a 7\u20139 mark in the 1996 season. The team regressed in the 1997 season with a 4\u201312 record. The 1998 NFL season saw the Cardinals break two long droughts, qualifying for the playoffs for the first time in 16 years. The team got their first postseason win since 1947 by defeating the Dallas Cowboys 20\u20137 in the . The Cardinals saw their run end in the Divisional Round with a 41\u201321 loss to the Minnesota Vikings. The Cardinals regressed to a 6\u201310 record in the 1999 season. In the 2000 season, Tobin was fired after a 2\u20135 start. Dave McGinnis finished the season out with a 1\u20138 record.\nBefore the 2001 season, the Cardinals named McGinnis as their full-time head coach. He coached for three seasons, regressing each year record-wise. He was fired by the team after the 2003 season.\nBefore the 2004 season, the Cardinals hired Dennis Green as head coach. He coached the team to three consecutive losing seasons and was fired after the 2006 season.\nThe Cardinals hired Ken Whisenhunt as head coach before the 2007 season. In his first season with the team, Whisenhunt led the Cardinals to an 8\u20138 record in the 2007 season. In the 2008 postseason, the Cardinals, led by quarterback Kurt Warner, won the Wild Card Round over the Atlanta Falcons, the Divisional Round against the Carolina Panthers, and the against the Philadelphia Eagles to advance to the Super Bowl for the first time in their history. They lost Super Bowl XLIII 27\u201323 to the Pittsburgh Steelers in the final seconds of the game.\nAfter their historic 2008 season, the Cardinals posted a 10\u20136 record in 2009, their first season with 10 wins in Arizona. The Cardinals clinched their second consecutive NFC West title but were defeated by eventual Super Bowl champion New Orleans Saints, 45\u201314 in the divisional playoffs. After the 2012 season, the Cardinals fired Whisenhunt as head coach. Before the 2013 season, the team hired Bruce Arians as head coach. Arians' first season with the team saw the Cardinals go 10\u20136 but miss the postseason in 2013. The next time they would make the playoffs would be in 2014, as a wild card. They set the best regular-season record in their history in Arizona at 11\u20135 but were defeated by the 7\u20138\u20131 NFC South champions, the Carolina Panthers.\nThe next year, the Cardinals set a franchise-best 13\u20133 record and clinched their first-ever first-round playoff bye as the NFC's second seed. They defeated the Green Bay Packers , giving quarterback Carson Palmer his first playoff victory. The Cardinals then advanced to their second in their history but were blown out by the top-seeded 15\u20131 Panthers 49\u201315, committing seven turnovers.\nThe Cardinals then fell to 7\u20138\u20131 in 2016 and 8\u20138 in 2017. After the 2017 season, Arians retired as head coach. The Cardinals hired Steve Wilks to be the head coach before the 2018 season. The team dropped to a 3\u201313 record in 2018, tying the franchise record set in 2000 for the worst record in a 16-game season. Wilks was fired after the season. The Cardinals hired Kliff Kingsbury as head coach before the 2019 season. In the 2019 NFL draft, the Cardinals used the top overall pick in the draft on Oklahoma quarterback Kyler Murray. The team improved to 5\u201310\u20131 in 2019 and 8\u20138 in 2020. In 2021, the Cardinals went 11\u20136, posting a winning record and returning to the postseason for the first time since 2015, but lost to the Los Angeles Rams in the Wild Card round. They failed to improve their record in 2022, dropping to the bottom of NFC West at 4\u201313, and missing the playoffs. Kingsbury was fired as head coach after the 2022 season. Under first year head coach Jonathan Gannon, the Cardinals once again finished in fourth in the NFC West with a 4\u201313 record in 2023. In 2024 they finished with an 8\u20139 record. In 2025 the Arizona Cardinals set NFL history as the first team to lose three consecutive games by a last second game winning field goal\nLogos and uniforms.\nThe team has worn cardinal red jerseys since Chris O'Brien bought them for the club in 1898. For most of their history, the Cardinals have used the same basic uniform design of white helmets, white pants with red stripes on the sides, and either red or white jerseys.\nStarting in 1947, the team had a logo of a Northern cardinal (\"Cardinalis cardinalis\") perched on the laces of a football.\nThe Cardinals moved to Arizona in 1988, and the flag of Arizona was added to the sleeves the following year. In 1990, the team began wearing red pants with their white jerseys, as new coach Joe Bugel wanted to emulate his former employer, the Washington Redskins, who at the time wore burgundy pants with their white jerseys (the Redskins later returned to their 1970s gold pants with all their jerseys).\nIn 1994, the Cardinals participated in the NFL's 75th-anniversary throwback uniform program. The jerseys were similar to those of the 1920s Chicago Cardinals, with an interlocking \"CC\" logo and three stripes on each sleeve. The uniform numbers were moved to the right chest. The pants were khaki to simulate the color and material used in that era. The Cardinals also stripped the logos from their helmets for two games: at Cleveland and home vs. Pittsburgh.\nThe Cardinal head on the helmet also appeared on the sleeve of the white jersey from 1982 to 1995. In 1996, the state flag of Arizona was moved higher on the sleeve after the Cardinal head was eliminated as sleeves on football jerseys became shorter, and black was removed as an accent color, instead replaced with blue to match the predominant color of the state flag. In 2002, the Cardinals began to wear all-red and all-white combinations, and continued to do so through 2004, before the team's makeover.\nIn 2005, the team unveiled its first major changes in a century. The cardinal-head logo was updated to look sleeker and meaner than its predecessor. Numerous fans had derisively called the previous version a \"parakeet\". Black again became an accent color after an eight-year absence, while trim lines were added to the outside shoulders, sleeves, and sides of the jerseys and pants. Both the red and white jerseys have the option of red or white pants.\nHoping to break a six-game losing streak, the Cardinals wore the red pants for the first time on October 29, 2006, in a game at Lambeau Field against the Green Bay Packers. The Packers won 31\u201314, and the Cards headed into their bye week with a 1\u20137 mark. After the bye week, the Cardinals came out in an all-red combination at home against the Dallas Cowboys and lost, 27\u201310. Arizona did not wear the red pants for the remainder of the season and won four of their last seven games. However, the following season, in 2007, the Cardinals again wore their red pants for their final 3 home games. They wore red pants with white jerseys in games on the road at the Cincinnati Bengals and Seattle Seahawks. They paired red pants with red jerseys, the all-red combination, for home games against the Detroit Lions, San Francisco 49ers, Cleveland Browns, and St. Louis Rams. The red pants were not worn at all in 2008, but they were used in home games against Seattle, Minnesota, and St. Louis in 2009. The red pants were paired with the white road jersey for the first time in three years during a 2010 game at Carolina, but the white jersey/red pants combination was not used again until 2018, when they broke out the combination against the Kansas City Chiefs.\nThe Cardinals' first home game in Arizona, in 1988, saw them play in red jerseys. Thereafter, for the next 18 years in Arizona, the Cardinals, like a few other NFL teams in warm climates, wore their white jerseys at home during the first half of the season\u2014forcing opponents to suffer in their darker jerseys during Arizona autumns that frequently see temperatures over 100\u00a0\u00b0F (38\u00a0\u00b0C). However, this tradition did not continue when the Cardinals moved from Sun Devil Stadium to State Farm Stadium in 2006, as early-season games (and some home games late in the season) were played with the roof closed. With the temperature inside at a comfortable 70\u00a0\u00b0F (21\u00a0\u00b0C), the team opted to wear red jerseys at home full-time. The Cardinals wore white jerseys at home for the first time at State Farm Stadium on August 29, 2008, in a preseason game against the Denver Broncos.\nThe Cardinals wore white at home for the first time in a regular-season game at State Farm Stadium against the Houston Texans on October 11, 2009. In October 2009, the NFL recognized Breast Cancer Awareness Month, and players wore pink-accented items, including gloves, wristbands, and shoes. The team thought the pink accents looked better with white uniforms than with red.\nFrom 1970 through 1983, and again in many seasons between 1989 and 2002, the Cardinals would wear white when hosting the Dallas Cowboys in order to force the Cowboys to don their \"jinxed\" blue jerseys. They have not done this since moving into State Farm Stadium, however.\nThe 2010 season saw the Cardinals debut a new, alternate black jersey. In 2017, the Cardinals debuted an all-black set for the NFL Color Rush program. While the regular black alternates featured white lettering and are paired with white pants, the Cardinals' Color Rush alternates used red lettering and black pants for the occasion. Starting in 2022, both black uniforms would be paired with an alternate black helmet with black facemasks.\nBefore the 2023 season, the Cardinals unveiled new uniforms. Most notably, the team opted to wear all-red uniforms at home and all-white uniforms on the road, with all-black uniforms as the alternate. The red uniform featured the state name in front in addition to white numbers with silver trim. The white uniform featured red numbers with black trim, and red and silver stripes along the pants and sleeves. The black alternate uniform design mirrored that of the white uniform, featuring red numbers with silver trim, and red and silver stripes along the pants and sleeves. On both uniforms, the silver sleeve stripe contained the team name. Both the red and white uniforms are worn with white helmets and silver facemasks, while the black uniform is worn with the black helmets from 2022. The new helmets featured silver flakes while the black helmet had red flakes in them.\nAhead of the 2025 season, the team unveiled a \"Rivalries\" uniform, which they would wear once per season at home against each of their NFC West opponents for three seasons. The primarily tan design featured sand speckles throughout the uniform, along with red numbers and stripes trimmed in copper. The modified cardinal head decal also featured red and white with copper trim.\nFans.\nThe Cardinals' playoff drought has exhibited resilience for some fans who have shown longtime devotion to the team. Some fans view the championship drought and loss record as the result of a convoluted \"curse\" that stems from the team's refusal to cede or share the disputed 1925 NFL title. Fans of the Cardinals are often referred to as the Red Sea or the Bird Gang; notable fans include Blake Shelton and Jordin Sparks. In honor of the tragic death of former safety Pat Tillman, the Cardinals strengthened their relationship with members of the armed forces community. The team regularly markets to military personnel and frequently visits nearby Luke Air Force Base in support of Arizona's servicemen.\nRivalries.\nDivisional.\nLos Angeles Rams.\nBoth the oldest and most intense divisional rivalry for the Cardinals, the matchup saw both teams first meet during the 1937 NFL season, while the Rams played in Cleveland, and the Cardinals were still originally located in Chicago. Both teams had played in St. Louis for a brief period in their histories, the Cardinals from 1960 to 1987 and the Rams from 1995 to 2015. Their Rivalry with the Los Angeles Rams has resurged in recent years as both teams found playoff success, despite the Cardinals' best efforts; the Rams have been 9\u20131 since hiring head coach Sean McVay in 2017. The Week 17 matchup of the 2020 season saw both teams playing for a playoff berth; despite the injury to Rams quarterback Jared Goff, the Cardinals lost 18\u20137 and were eliminated from the postseason. The Cardinals' streak ended against the Rams the following season. They took the lead in the NFC over the Rams and started the season 7\u20130. In the following matchup, the Rams won on Monday Night Football; the Cardinals lost 6 of 10 games after their 7\u20130 start. The Cardinals would clinch a wild card berth after a week 17 win over the Dallas Cowboys. They played the Rams in Los Angeles and lost 34\u201311 as Kyler Murray threw 2 interceptions with one returned for a touchdown. The Rams lead the series 50\u201340\u20132 while leading the postseason series 2\u20130.\nSeattle Seahawks.\nOne of the newer rivalries in the NFL, the Cardinals and Seattle Seahawks became divisional rivals after both were moved to the NFC West as a result of the league's realignment in 2002. This rivalry has become one of the NFL's more bitter in recent years, as the mid-to-late 2010s often saw the Seahawks and Cardinals squaring off for NFC West supremacy. The rivalry featured such clashes between the likes of Carson Palmer or Kyler Murray for the Cardinals against Pete Carroll and Russell Wilson for the Seahawks during the era. Seattle leads the series 25\u201322\u20131, and the two teams have yet to meet in the playoffs.\nSan Francisco 49ers.\nThough they first met in 1951 and would meet occasionally until 2000, this would not become a full-fledged rivalry until both teams were placed in the NFC West division in 2002. While a close rivalry, it is often lopsided on both ends. After the 49ers won nine of ten meetings between 2009 and 2013, the Cardinals won eight straight meetings between 2014 and 2018. The 49ers lead the series 34\u201329.\nThe two teams have yet to meet in the playoffs.\nHistoric.\nChicago Bears.\nThe historic rivalry between the Cardinals and the Chicago Bears features the only two teams that remain from the league's inception in 1920. At that time, the Bears were known as the Decatur Staleys, and the Cardinals were the Racine Cardinals. In 1922, the matchup between the teams became known as \"The Battle of Chicago\" for 38 years, making it the first true rivalry in the league's history. The Bears lead the all-time series 59\u201329\u20136.\nKansas City Chiefs.\nWhilst the Cardinals were located in St. Louis from 1960 to 1987; the team took part in an instate rivalry with the Kansas City Chiefs, with a trophy being awarded to the winner of the matchup. The series ended after the Cardinals' move to Arizona in 1988. The Chiefs posted a 16\u20137\u20132 mark in its Governor's Cup series against the Cardinals from 1968 to 1987, going 3\u20131\u20131 in the regular season record and 13\u20136\u20131 in preseason play.\nSeasons and overall records.\nSingle-season records.\nPoints scored: 489 (2015)\nPassing\nRushing\nReceiving\nReturns\nKicking\nPlayers of note.\nRetired numbers.\nNotes:\nPro Football Hall of Famers.\n\"Italics\" = played a portion of career with the Cardinals and enshrined representing another team\nDierdorf, Smith, Wehrli and Wilson were members of the St. Louis Football Ring of Fame in The Dome at America's Center when the Rams played there from 1995 to 2015.\nRing of Honor.\nThe Cardinals' Ring of Honor was started in 2006 to mark the opening of State Farm Stadium. It honors former Cardinal greats from all eras of the franchise's history. Following is a list of inductees and the dates that they were inducted.\nStaff.\nThe Cardinals have had 42 head coaches throughout their history. Their first head coach was Paddy Driscoll, who compiled a 17\u20138\u20134 record with the team from 1920 to 1922. Jimmy Conzelman, Jim Hanifan and Ken Whisenhunt are tied as the longest-serving head coaches in Cardinals history. On April 14, 2022, Mark Ahlemeier, the Cardinals equipment manager, retired after working with the organization for 41 seasons.\nRadio and television.\nThe Cardinals' flagship radio station is KMVP-FM; Dave Pasch, Ron Wolfley, and Paul Calvisi handle the radio broadcast. Spanish-language radio broadcasts are heard on the combo of KQMR/KHOV-FM \"Latino Mix\" under a contract with Univisi\u00f3n, signed in 2015. Before 2015, they were heard on KDVA/KVVA-FM \"Jos\u00e9 FM\", as well as co-owned KBMB AM 710. The Cardinals were the first NFL team to offer all 20 preseason and regular season games on Spanish-language radio, doing so in 2000. Luis Hernandez and Rolando Cant\u00fa are the Spanish broadcast team. The Cardinals have the most extensive Mexican affiliate network in the NFL, with contracts with Grupo Larsa (in the state of Sonora) and Grupo Radiorama (outside Sonora) and stations in 20 cities, including Hermosillo, Guadalajara and Mexico City.\nFrom 2017 to 2023, NBC affiliate KPNX broadcasts the team's preseason games on television (which, that year, included the Hall of Fame Game broadcast by NBC), called by Pasch and Wolfley, with station anchor Paul Gerke as sideline reporter. The broadcasts were syndicated regionally to KTTU and KMSB-TV in Tucson, and, until the Raiders' move to Las Vegas, KVVU-TV in Las Vegas.\nIn 2024, KTVK and KPHO purchased preseason broadcast rights to the Cardinals. This will be in addition to any Cardinals games already scheduled for KPHO.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "2103", "revid": "48535054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2103", "title": "Atlanta Falcons", "text": "National Football League franchise in Atlanta, Georgia\nThe Atlanta Falcons are a professional American football team based in Atlanta. The Falcons compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the National Football Conference (NFC) South division. The Falcons were founded on June 30, 1965, and joined the NFL in 1966 as an expansion team, after the NFL offered then-owner Rankin Smith a franchise to keep him from joining the rival American Football League (AFL).\nIn their 59 years of existence, the Falcons have compiled a record of 398\u2013512\u20136 (398\u2013512\u20136 in the regular season and 10\u201314 in the playoffs), winning division championships in 1980, 1998, 2004, 2010, 2012, and 2016. The Falcons have appeared in two Super Bowls, the first during the 1998 season in Super Bowl XXXIII, where they lost to the Denver Broncos and the second 18 years later, a 34\u201328 overtime loss to the New England Patriots in Super Bowl LI. They are the oldest major professional sports team in America with no championships.\nThe Falcons' current home field is Mercedes-Benz Stadium, which opened for the 2017 season; the team's headquarters and practice facilities are located at a site in Flowery Branch, northeast of Atlanta in Hall County.\nHistory.\nProfessional football comes to Atlanta (1962).\nProfessional football first came to Atlanta in 1962, when the American Football League (AFL) staged two preseason contests, with one featuring the Denver Broncos vs. the Houston Oilers and the second pitting the Dallas Texans against the Oakland Raiders. Two years later, the AFL held another exhibition, this time with the New York Jets taking on the San Diego Chargers.\nIn 1965, after the Atlanta\u2013Fulton County Stadium (then known simply as Atlanta Stadium) was built, the city of Atlanta felt the time was right to start pursuing professional football. One independent group which had been active in NFL exhibition promotions in Atlanta applied for franchises in both the AFL and NFL, acting entirely on its own with no guarantee of stadium rights. Another group reported it had deposited earnest money for a team in the AFL.\nWith everyone running in different directions, some local businessmen (Cox Broadcasting) worked out a deal and were awarded an AFL franchise on June 8, contingent upon acquiring exclusive stadium rights from city NFL Commissioner Pete Rozelle, who had been moving slowly in Atlanta matters, was spurred by the AFL interest and headed on the next plane down to Atlanta to block the rival league's claim on the city of Atlanta. He forced the city to make a choice between the two leagues; by June 30, the city picked Rankin Smith and the NFL.\nThe AFL's original expansion plans in June 1965 were for two new teams in Atlanta and It later evolved into the Miami Dolphins in 1966 and the Cincinnati Bengals in 1968. The NFL had planned to add two teams in 1967; the competition with the AFL for Atlanta forced the first to be added a year early in 1966. The odd number of teams (15) resulted in one idle team (bye) each week, with each team playing 14 games over 15 weeks (similar to 1960: 12 games over 13 weeks). The second expansion team, the New Orleans Saints, joined the NFL as planned in 1967 as its sixteenth franchise.\nThe Atlanta Falcons franchise began when it was approved to begin play in 1966 by a unanimous vote of the NFL club owners on June 21, 1965. Rozelle granted ownership nine days later on June 30 to 40-year-old Rankin Smith Sr., an executive vice president of Life Insurance Company of Georgia. He paid $8.5 million, the highest price in NFL history at the time for a franchise. Rozelle and Smith made the deal in about five minutes and the Atlanta Falcons brought the largest and most popular sport to the city of Atlanta.\nThe Atlanta expansion team became the 15th NFL franchise, and they were awarded the first overall pick in the 1966 NFL draft as well as the final pick in each of the first five rounds. They selected consensus All-American linebacker Tommy Nobis from the University of Texas, making him the first-ever Falcon. The league also held the expansion draft six weeks later in which Atlanta selected unprotected players from the 14 existing franchises. Although the Falcons selected many good players in those drafts, they still were not able to win right away.\nThe Atlanta team received its nickname on August 29, 1965. Miss Julia Elliott, a school teacher from Griffin, was singled out from many people who suggested \"Falcons\" as the nickname for the new franchise. She wrote: \"the Falcon is proud and dignified, with great courage and fight. It never drops its prey. It is deadly and has a great sporting tradition.\"\nSmith family era (1966\u20132001).\nThe Falcons' inaugural season was in 1966, and their first preseason game was on August 1, a loss to the Philadelphia Eagles. Under head coach Norb Hecker, Atlanta lost their first nine regular-season games in 1966; their first victory came on the road against the struggling New York Giants on November 20 in Yankee Stadium. Two weeks later, Atlanta won at Minnesota, and beat St. Louis in Atlanta the next week for their first home win. The team finished with a 1\u201312\u20131 record the next year, with the only win coming in Week 7 in a 21\u201320 win over the Minnesota Vikings in 1967. After a 0\u20133 start to the 1968 season, Hecker was dismissed. Norm Van Brocklin finished out the season as head coach with a 2\u20139 record. Van Brocklin continued to coach the team the next season. The team improved to a 6\u20138 record in 1969.\nThe Falcons had their first Monday Night Football game in Atlanta during the 1970 season, a 20\u20137 loss to the Miami Dolphins. The team went 4\u20138\u20132 in 1970. The only two winning seasons in their first 12 years were 1971 (7\u20136\u20131) and 1973 (9\u20135).\nIn the 1978 season, the 9\u20137 Falcons qualified for the playoffs for the first time and won the Wild Card game against the Eagles 14\u201313. The following week, they lost to the Dallas Cowboys 27\u201320 in the Divisional Playoffs. The 1979 team regressed to a 6\u201310 record.\nIn the 1980 season, after a nine-game winning streak, the Falcons posted a franchise then-best record of 12\u20134 and captured their first NFC West division title. The next week, their dream season ended at home with a loss to the Cowboys 30\u201327 in the divisional playoffs. In the strike-shortened 1982 season, the 5\u20134 Falcons made the playoffs but lost to the Minnesota Vikings, 30\u201324. Falcons coach Leeman Bennett was fired after the loss. The team then had losing seasons for the next eight years. Dan Henning was hired prior to the 1983 season.\nIn the 1989 NFL draft, the Falcons selected cornerback Deion Sanders in the first round, who helped them for the next four years, setting many records for the franchise. \"Neon Deion\" (a.k.a. \"Prime Time\") had a flashy appeal and helped bring media attention to one of the league's most anonymous franchises. Sanders was also famous for playing on major league baseball teams (New York Yankees and the Atlanta Braves) while simultaneously playing in the NFL.\nAfter defeating the New Orleans Saints in the NFC Wild Card game, the Falcons' 1991 season ended in a divisional playoff loss to the Washington Redskins. In the 1991 NFL draft, the Falcons selected quarterback Brett Favre as the 33rd overall pick. During his rookie season, he played in two games where he amassed a record of four passing attempts with no receptions and two interceptions. The following February, Favre was traded to the Green Bay Packers.\nIn 1992, the Atlanta Falcons opened a new chapter in their history moving into the newly constructed Georgia Dome, where the team has defeated all 31 other NFL teams at least once during its time there.\nDan Reeves years (1997\u20132003).\nIn 1998, under recently acquired head coach Dan Reeves, quarterback Chris Chandler and running back Jamal Anderson the \"Dirty Bird\" Falcons had their greatest season to date. On November 8, they beat the New England Patriots 41\u201310, ending a streak of 22 losses at cold-weather sites. The team finished with a franchise-best 14\u20132 regular-season record and the NFC West division championship. On January 17, 1999, the Falcons upset the top-seeded Vikings at the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome in the NFC Championship Game 30\u201327, in an exciting overtime victory. However, in their first-ever Super Bowl appearance, they lost 34\u201319 to the defending champion Denver Broncos in Super Bowl XXXIII.\nIn the second game of the Falcons 1999 season, running back Jamal Anderson, who had been a key player in the Falcons' 1998 success, suffered a season-ending knee injury. The Falcons finished the season with a very disappointing 5\u201311 regular-season record. In 2000, the Falcons suffered through another horrendous season finishing 4\u201312 and once again missing the playoffs.\nIn the 2001 NFL draft, the Falcons orchestrated a trade with the San Diego Chargers, acquiring the first overall pick (which was used on quarterback Michael Vick) in exchange for wide receiver-return specialist Tim Dwight and the fifth overall pick (used on running back LaDainian Tomlinson).\nThe Falcons finished the 2001 season with a record of 7\u20139 and missed the playoffs. Jessie Tuggle retired following 14 seasons in Atlanta.\nArthur Blank era (2002\u2013present).\nOn December 6, 2001, billionaire Home Depot co-founder Arthur M. Blank reached a preliminary agreement with the Falcons' Taylor Smith to purchase the team for a reported $545 million. In a special meeting prior to Super Bowl XXXVI in New Orleans on February 2, 2002, NFL owners voted unanimously to approve the deal.\nThe 2002 season saw the Falcons return to the playoffs with a regular-season record of 9\u20136\u20131, tying the Pittsburgh Steelers. It was Vick's first year as the starter, and the team, with newly acquired running back Warrick Dunn, delivered the Green Bay Packers their first home playoff loss ever with a 27\u20137 result in the Wild Card Round. A 20\u20136 loss to the Donovan McNabb-led Philadelphia Eagles the following week, however, ended the Falcons' season.\nOn March 19, 2003, the Falcons presented their new logo. During the 2003 preseason Vick broke his leg and missed the first 12 games of the season. After losing 7 straight games, the decision was made to fire head coach Dan Reeves. Wade Phillips acted as interim coach for the final three games. Although the Falcons won 3 of their last 4 games after the return of Vick, they ended up with a 5\u201311 record that year.\nJim Mora years (2004\u20132006).\nIn 2004, a new head coach, Jim L. Mora, was hired and Vick returned for the full season. The Falcons went 11\u20135, winning their third division title and earning a first-round bye into the playoffs. In the divisional playoffs, the Falcons defeated the St. Louis Rams, 47\u201317, in the Georgia Dome, advancing to the NFC Championship Game, which they lost to the Eagles, 27\u201310.\nThe Falcons again fell short of achieving back-to-back winning seasons in 2005, going 8\u20138. In 2006, Michael Vick became the first quarterback in league history to rush for more than 1,000 yards in a season, with 1,039. After finishing the season 7\u20139, however, coach Jim Mora was dismissed.\nBobby Petrino.\nBobby Petrino, the University of Louisville's football coach, replaced Mora. Before the 2007 season began, Vick was suspended indefinitely by the NFL after pleading guilty to charges involving dog fighting in the state of Virginia. On December 10, 2007, Vick received a 23-month prison sentence and was officially cut from the Atlanta roster.\nFor the 2007 season, the Falcons were forced to start Joey Harrington at quarterback. On December 11, 13 games into his first NFL season as head coach, Bobby Petrino resigned without notice to coach at the University of Arkansas, leaving the beleaguered players only a note in the locker room. Secondary Coach Emmitt Thomas was named interim coach for the final three games of the season on December 12. The Falcons ended the year with a dismal 4\u201312 record.\nAfter the tumultuous and disappointing 2007 season, the Falcons made a number of moves, hiring a new general manager and head coach, drafting a new starting quarterback, and signing a starting running back.\nMike Smith years (2008\u20132014).\nOn January 13, 2008, the Falcons named former Patriots director of college football scouting Thomas Dimitroff General Manager. On January 23, Jacksonville Jaguars defensive coach and former linebackers coach for the 2000 Super Bowl champion Baltimore Ravens Mike Smith was named the Falcons' new head coach. Chargers back-up running back Michael Turner agreed to a 6-year, $30 million deal on March 2. On April 26, Matt Ryan (quarterback from Boston College) was drafted third overall in the 2008 NFL draft by the Falcons.\nThe Falcons finished the 2008 regular season with a record of 11\u20135, and the #5 seed in the playoffs. On December 21, 2008, Atlanta beat the Minnesota Vikings 24\u201317 to clinch a wild card spot, earning a trip to the playoffs for the first time since 2004. The Falcons would go on to lose in the wild-card round of the 2008 NFL playoffs to the eventual NFC champion Arizona Cardinals, 30\u201324.\nMatt Ryan started all 16 games in his rookie season and was named the Associated Press Offensive Rookie of the Year. First-year head coach Mike Smith was named 2008 NFL Coach of the Year.\nAlthough they failed to make the playoffs in 2009 the team rallied to win their final three regular-season games to record back-to-back winning seasons for the first time in franchise history. The Falcons defeated the Tampa Bay Buccaneers 20\u201310 in the final game of the season to improve their record to 9\u20137.\nIn 2010, with a regular-season record of 13\u20133, the Falcons secured a third straight winning season, their fourth overall divisional title, and the top overall seed in the NFC playoffs; however, the Falcons were overpowered by the eventual Super Bowl XLV champion Green Bay Packers in the NFC Divisional Playoffs 48\u201321. The Falcons scored 414 points \u2013 the fifth-most in franchise history. The team sent an NFL-high and franchise-best nine players to the 2011 Pro Bowl.\nThe Falcons made a surprise trade up with the Cleveland Browns in the 2011 NFL draft to select Alabama wide receiver Julio Jones sixth overall. In exchange, the Falcons gave up their first-, second- and fourth-round draft picks in 2011, and their first and fourth draft picks in 2012. Jones, along with teammates Tony Gonzalez and Roddy White, have since been dubbed Atlanta's \"Big Three\" (based on their total number of reception yards). On August 30, 2011, Sports Illustrated senior writer Peter King, who correctly predicted the 2011 Super Bowl, made his predictions for the 2011 season and picked the Falcons to defeat the San Diego Chargers in the 2012 Super Bowl. The Falcons finished the season at 10\u20136, securing the fifth seed after a Week 17 beatdown of Tampa Bay in which the Falcons pulled their starters after leading 42\u20130 just 23 minutes into the game.\nThe Falcons then went on to play the New York Giants in a 2011 NFC Wild Card Game at MetLife Stadium in East Rutherford, New Jersey. The first half was a defensive struggle, with the first points coming off of a safety by the Falcons, giving Atlanta a 2\u20130 lead. In the second quarter, though, Eli Manning connected with Hakeem Nicks for a short touchdown pass to make it 7\u20132 Giants heading into the second half. Then the Giants took control, as Manning threw for two more touchdown passes to Mario Manningham and Nicks and the defense completed its shutout of the Falcons to give the New York Giants the win, 24\u20132, and the Falcons their third straight playoff loss with Matt Ryan and Mike Smith. After the season, defensive coordinator Brian VanGorder accepted a coaching job at Auburn University, and the offensive coordinator Mike Mularkey took the head coaching job in Jacksonville.\nAtlanta exploded out of the gate, going a franchise-best 8\u20130 and remaining the last unbeaten team in the NFL that year. Their hopes to get an undefeated season came to an end with a 27\u201331 loss to the division rival Saints. Julio Jones had a remarkable second year, grabbing 10 touchdowns and 1,198 yards. The Falcons finished the season 13\u20133, and clinched the number one seed in the NFC playoffs.\nThe Falcons played the Seattle Seahawks in their first playoff game. Although they went down 28\u201327 with only 31 seconds left on the clock, Matt Ryan led the team to their first playoff victory, 30\u201328. It was the only playoff victory in the Mike Smith era.\nThe Atlanta Falcons then advanced to face the San Francisco 49ers. The Falcons seized control of the game early with a Matt Bryant field goal, a trio of Matt Ryan touchdown passes caught by Julio Jones and Tony Gonzalez coupled with outstanding defensive play. By the end of the half, the score was 24\u201314. The tides of the game began to shift in the second half as the 49ers rallied back with a pair of Frank Gore touchdown runs. Atlanta's offense attempted to reply but were ultimately shut down by the 49er defense. A few series later, late in the 4th quarter with little time remaining, Atlanta found themselves in a 4th and 4 situation at the 10-yard line. The Falcons needed just 10 more yards to secure victory and advance to their first Super Bowl berth in 14 years. Matt Ryan fired a pass to Roddy White which was ultimately broken up by inside linebacker NaVorro Bowman, resulting in a 28\u201324 defeat.\nFollowing the success of the previous season, the Falcons were an expected Super Bowl contender. However, injuries hampered the team's performance and the team finished the season 4\u201312. With that, the streak of consecutive winning seasons came to an end and Mike Smith had his first losing season as a head coach. Tony Gonzalez, in his final season in the NFL, was selected to the 2014 Pro Bowl as a starter representing Team Rice. Following the conclusion of the 2012 season, director of player personnel Les Snead departed the team to join the St. Louis Rams and Dave Caldwell, assistant to general manager Thomas Dimitroff, left the team to join the Jacksonville Jaguars. Scott Pioli, former GM of the Kansas City Chiefs, was announced as the Falcons' new assistant GM. Mike Smith was given a one-year extension on his contract as head coach. The Falcons had the 6th overall pick in the 2014 NFL draft with which they selected Jake Matthews, who played as offensive tackle for Texas A&amp;M.\nDespite having another rough season, the Falcons still had an opportunity to qualify for the playoffs at the end of the regular season. The Falcons hosted the Carolina Panthers in their regular season finale, with the winners clinching the NFC South division. Unfortunately, the Falcons lost in a 34\u20133 blowout as Matt Ryan threw two interceptions that were returned for touchdowns and got sacked six times. The Falcons finished the season 6\u201310, marking the second consecutive losing season for the team. The following day, Mike Smith was fired after seven seasons as head coach. The Falcons would soon hire Seattle Seahawks defensive coordinator Dan Quinn as the team's 16th head coach. The Falcons had the 8th overall pick in the 2015 NFL draft with which they selected Vic Beasley, a defensive end from Clemson University.\nDan Quinn years (2015\u20132020).\nIn February 2015, the team was investigated by the NFL for alleged use of artificial crowd noise in the Georgia Dome. The Falcons lost a 2016 NFL draft selection as a result of the league's investigation.\nDan Quinn's first season saw a 5\u20130 start, the team's best start in four years. They would then struggle throughout the rest of the season by losing 8 of their last 11 games, resulting in an 8\u20138 record in the 2015 season. They did, however, give the Panthers their only regular-season loss. The Falcons used their first-round pick in the 2016 NFL draft on safety Keanu Neal from the University of Florida.\nIn the Falcons' 25th and final season in the Georgia Dome, Atlanta lost their week 1 game to the Buccaneers 24\u201331. The Falcons would then win their next four including one over the Panthers, when the franchise set new records: Matt Ryan threw for 503 yards, and Julio Jones caught 12 passes for 300 yards. Beating the San Francisco 49ers 41\u201313 in Week 15, the Falcons improved to 9\u20135 and secured their first winning season since 2012. One week later, the Falcons defeated the Panthers in Charlotte, North Carolina, and clinched their first NFC South division title since 2012. In their last regular-season game at the Georgia Dome, the Falcons defeated the New Orleans Saints, and secured an 11\u20135 record and a first-round bye.\nIn the divisional round of the playoffs, Atlanta defeated the Seahawks 36\u201320 in the Georgia Dome, and hosted their last game at the Georgia Dome against the Green Bay Packers in the NFC Championship Game on January 22, 2017. The Falcons defeated the Packers 44\u201321 to advance to Super Bowl LI as the NFC champions. Atlanta was up 28\u20133 late in the third quarter, and the New England Patriots scored 31 unanswered points, with the last 6 in the first-ever overtime in the Super Bowl. The Patriots' 25-point comeback was the largest in Super Bowl history.\nIn 2016, the Falcons scored 540 points in the regular season, the seventh-most in NFL history, tied with the Greatest Show on Turf (the 2000 St. Louis Rams). However, the Falcons defense gave up 406 points, 27th in the league.\nThe Falcons moved into their new home, the Mercedes-Benz Stadium, this season. Their first game ever played at the new stadium was a preseason loss to the Arizona Cardinals. The first regular-season game at the new stadium was a rematch of the 2016\u201317 NFC Championship, with Atlanta defeating Green Bay 34\u201323. Their first loss of the season was a 23\u201317 home defeat to the Buffalo Bills in week 4. The team returned to the playoffs with a 10\u20136 record (albeit with a third-place finish in the NFC South). The Falcons defeated the Los Angeles Rams 26\u201313 in the Wild Card round, but their 2017 season came to an end a week later in the Divisional Playoff round at the hands of the eventual Super Bowl champion Philadelphia Eagles 15\u201310. The 2018 and 2019 seasons saw the Falcons go 7\u20139 and miss the postseason both years.\nIn their first game with new uniforms, the Falcons lost to the Seattle Seahawks at home 38\u201325. The Falcons then suffered comebacks made by both the Cowboys on the road (39\u201340) and then back in Atlanta against the Bears (26\u201330). On October 11, after the team suffered a 23\u201316 loss at home against the Carolina Panthers and fell to 0\u20135, the Falcons announced the firings of Quinn and Dimitroff. Defensive coordinator Raheem Morris took over for the rest of the season, leading the team to a 4\u201312 record. Morris was not retained after the season, and soon joined the Los Angeles Rams as their defensive coordinator.\nArthur Smith years (2021\u20132024).\nOn January 15, 2021, the Falcons announced that Tennessee Titans offensive coordinator Arthur Smith had been named the 18th head coach in franchise history. Four days later, New Orleans Saints executive Terry Fontenot was named the Falcons' new general manager. Tight end Kyle Pitts was selected with the 4th pick of the 2021 draft, and longtime star receiver Julio Jones was traded to the Titans, after publicly requesting a trade from Atlanta. The Falcons improved on their record from the prior year, finishing the season with a 7\u201310 record.\nOn March 21, 2022, the Falcons traded longtime star quarterback Matt Ryan to the Indianapolis Colts. During the 2022 season, the team finished last place in the NFC South with a 7\u201310 record.\nThe Falcons entered the 2023 seasons with heightened expectations after drafting Texas running back Bijan Robinson with the eighth overall pick of the 2023 draft and making significant improvements in free agency, including signing Jessie Bates and Calais Campbell to improve their defense. However, the team finished with a 7\u201310 record for the third consecutive season, although they had been in contention for a playoff spot until the final day of the season before a 48\u201317 loss to the New Orleans Saints on January 7, 2024. The following day, Smith was fired after three years as head coach.\nRaheem Morris years (2024\u2013present).\nOn January 25, 2024, the Falcons announced Raheem Morris's return to the organization, this time as the 19th head coach in Falcons history. During the early months of his tenure, Morris faced scrutiny and criticism for his questionable player selection decisions.\nStadiums.\nThe Falcons have called three stadiums home in their 59 years of existence, and its third home in their history opened in the late summer of 2017. The first was the Atlanta\u2013Fulton County Stadium, sharing with the Atlanta Braves Major League Baseball team until 1991. In 1992, the Georgia Dome was built, and the Falcons played there from its opening to the 2016 season. The Dome has been frequently used for college football, including Georgia State football and college bowl games such as the Peach Bowl.\nIn an effort to replace the aging Georgia Dome and potentially host a future Super Bowl, team owner Arthur Blank proposed a deal with the city of Atlanta to build a new state-of-the-art stadium not far from where the Georgia Dome is located. Blank will contribute $800 million and the city of Atlanta will contribute an additional $200 million via bonds backed by the city's hotel/motel tax towards the construction of a retractable roof stadium. Blank will contribute additional money for cost overruns if it is needed. The team will provide up to $50 million towards infrastructure costs that weren't included in the construction budget and to retire the remaining debt on the Georgia Dome. In addition, Blank's foundation and the city will each provide $15 million for development in surrounding neighborhoods. Though the total cost of the stadium was initially estimated to be around $1 billion, the total cost was revised to $1.5 billion according to Blank. In March 2013, the Atlanta City Council voted 11\u20134 in favor of building the stadium. The retractable roof Mercedes-Benz Stadium broke ground in May 2014, and became the third home stadium for the Falcons and the first for the new Atlanta United FC Major League Soccer club upon opening in 2017.\nLogo and uniforms.\nThe Atlanta Falcons' colors are black, red, silver and white. When the team began play in 1966, the Falcons wore red helmets with a black falcon crest logo. In the center of the helmet was a center black stripe surrounded by two gold stripes and two white stripes. These colors represented the two college rival schools in the state of Georgia; rival schools Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets (white and gold) and the Georgia Bulldogs (red and black). Although the gold was removed after several seasons, the white remains to this day. They wore white pants and either black or white jerseys. At first, the falcon crest logo was also put on the jersey sleeves, but it was replaced by a red and white stripe pattern four years later. They switched from black to red jerseys in 1971, and the club began to wear silver pants in 1978. The facemasks on the helmets were initially gray, becoming white in 1978, and then black in 1984; the team wore black face masks until its 2020 redesign.\nA prototype white helmet was developed for the team prior to the 1974 season, but was never worn.\nIn 1990, the uniform design changed to black helmets, silver pants, and either black or white jerseys. The numbers on the white jerseys were black, but were changed to red in 1997. (The red numerals could be seen on the away jerseys briefly in 1990.)\nBoth the logo and uniforms changed in 2003. The logo was redesigned with red and silver accents to depict a more powerful, aggressive falcon, which now more closely resembles the capital letter \"F\".\nAlthough the Falcons still wore black helmets, the new uniforms featured jerseys and pants with red trim down the sides. The uniform design consisted of either black or white jerseys, and either black or white pants. During that same year, a red alternate jersey with black trim was also introduced. The Falcons also started wearing black cleats with these uniforms.\nIn 2004, the red jerseys became the primary jerseys, and the black ones became the alternate, both worn with white pants. In select road games, the Falcons wear black pants with white jerseys. The Falcons wore an all-black combination for home games against their archrivals, the New Orleans Saints, winning the first two contests (24\u201321 in 2004 and 36\u201317 in 2005), but losing 31\u201313 in 2006. The Falcons wore the all-black combination against the New Orleans Saints for four straight seasons starting in 2004, With the last time being in 2007, losing 34\u201314. They wore the combination again in 2006, against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in Week 2. The Falcons won that game, 14\u20133. The Falcons also wore their all-black uniform in 2007 against the New York Giants, and in 2008 against the Carolina Panthers and against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers (for the second time). After that, the black pants and uniforms were retired and the white pants were now used full-time with the regular uniforms.\nIn the 1980s, the Falcons wore their white uniforms at home most of the time because of the heat. When the Falcons started playing in a dome, the team switched to their dark uniforms for home games but have worn their white uniforms at home a few times since switching to the dome. It was announced at the 2009 state of the franchise meeting that the Falcons would wear 1966 throwback uniforms for a couple games during the 2009 season. The Atlanta Falcons wore 1966 throwback jerseys for two home games in 2009 \u2013 against the Carolina Panthers on September 20 and against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers on November 29. The Falcons won both of those games. They donned the throwbacks again for 2 games in 2010, against Baltimore and San Francisco, winning both of those games as well. The throwbacks were used twice in 2011 and 2012; both times were against the Panthers and Saints. However, the throwbacks were retired following a 2013 NFL rule requiring only one helmet shell per team.\nThe Falcons unveiled an all-red Color Rush uniform on September 13, 2016; however, due to the fact that the Falcons and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers had similar all-red Color Rush uniforms, the Falcons were unable to wear their Color Rush uniform until the 2017 season.\nAlso in 2016, the Falcons unveiled a mixed throwback uniform set. The uniform tops, pants and socks closely resembled their 1960s kits. From 2016 to 2021, due to the NFL's one-shell rule, the Falcons wore the black helmets with the original logo decal similar to the design they wore in the 1990s. However, starting in 2022, with the NFL now reinstating the use of alternate helmets, the Falcons brought back the original red helmets to pair with their throwback uniforms.\nIt was revealed in January 2020 that the Falcons will change uniforms for the 2020 NFL season. The ensuing design featured the return to black as the primary home uniform color for the first time since 2003. Both the primary home and road uniforms featured the \"ATL\" abbreviation in red above either white or black numbers with red drop shadows. The white and black tops are usually paired with either white or black pants. The alternate uniform featured a red/black gradient design and also featured the \"ATL\" abbreviation in white above white numbers with black drop shadows. Black pants are only used with this uniform. All three uniforms feature red side stripes. The current throwback uniform was also retained. In addition, the Falcons switched to matte helmets with the enlarged falcon logo and gray facemasks. The red/black gradient alternates only lasted three seasons before it was removed from the uniform rotation in 2023.\nRivalries.\nDivisional.\nNew Orleans Saints.\nThe Falcons have shared a heated divisional rivalry with the New Orleans Saints (first the NFC West, and now the NFC South). The two teams were often basement-dwellers in the division; but the rivalry grew as a means of pride between the two cities, as they were the only two NFL teams in the Deep South for multiple decades. The series is the oldest and most iconic rivalry in the NFC South as the two teams have long harbored bad blood against one another. The series is currently tied at 55\u201355, including the most recent loss to the Saints on January 7, 2024, when the Falcons lost 48\u201317.\nCarolina Panthers.\nIn addition, the Falcons share a similar, rivalry with the Carolina Panthers, with both teams having been in the NFC West from the Panthers' founding in 1995 to the NFL realignment in 2002. Similar to their rivalry with the Saints, the Falcons have often endured several competitive divisional battles with the Panthers for lead of the NFC South, though the two have yet to meet in the postseason. The series is also known as the \"I-85 Rivalry\" due to Atlanta and Charlotte being only four hours apart on Interstate 85. The Falcons lead the series 36\u201322.\nTampa Bay Buccaneers.\nThe Falcons share a less-intense divisional rivalry with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers since the NFL realignment in 2002. The two had been regional opponents but very little had linked any further animosity towards the two as the Buccaneers played in the former NFC Central before the realignment. The two teams would find themselves competing over staff and players alike, particularly during the 2000s after the Falcons had lured general manager Rich McKay after winning Super Bowl XXXVII the season prior. McKay's ties with Tampa extend into his family as his father John McKay was head coach of the Buccaneers for nine seasons.\nConference.\nPhiladelphia Eagles.\nThe Eagles lead the Falcons 21\u201315\u20131, with a 3\u20131 lead in playoff games. The rivalry first emerged after the Falcons upset the Eagles 14\u201313 in the , and only intensified further in the 2000s thanks to the rivalry between prominent dual-threat quarterbacks Donovan McNabb, and Michael Vick. Recently, the Falcons lost to the Eagles in the . The Falcons managed a win against Philly in week 2 en route to Philly's eventual Super Bowl LIX victory.\nGreen Bay Packers.\nThe Falcons have also shared a playoff rivalry with the Green Bay Packers as much of the connections between the two teams stems from Atlanta trading future hall-of-fame quarterback Brett Favre to the Green Bay on February 11, 1992, in exchange for a first-round pick. The two teams have met four times in the postseason, most recently during the 2016\u201317 NFC Championship as it would also be the final game played at the Georgia Dome. The Packers lead the all-time series 19\u201316, while both teams are tied in the postseason 2\u20132.\nStatistics.\nRecord vs. opponents.\nIncludes postseason records\nSource:\n\"Note: W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties\"\nPlayers.\nPro Football Hall of Famers.\nHumphrey is the only person in the Hall of Fame who spent the majority of his career with the Falcons.\nRing of Honor.\nFourteen members are included in the Atlanta Falcons Ring of Honor.\nDraft history.\nIn the team's history, the Falcons have had the number one overall pick four times.\nCoaching staff.\nHead coaches.\nIn their history, the Atlanta Falcons have had 18 head coaches. Five coaches have served in interim roles\nRadio and television.\nThe Falcons' flagship radio station is WZGC 92.9 The Game. Wes Durham, son of longtime North Carolina Tar Heels voice Woody Durham, is the Falcons' play-by-play announcer, with former Atlanta Falcons quarterback and pro football veteran, Dave Archer serving as color commentator.\nIn 2014, The CW affiliate WUPA became the official television station of the Falcons, gaining rights to its preseason games, which are produced by CBS Sports.\nIn the regular season, the team's games are seen on Fox's O&amp;O affiliate WAGA. When the Falcons challenge an AFC team, CBS affiliate WANF will air those games while Sunday night games are televised on WXIA, the local NBC affiliate.\nRadio affiliates.\nSource:\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2104", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2104", "title": "Heathenry in the United States", "text": "Religious movement in the United States\nHeathenry is a modern Pagan new religious movement that has been active in the United States since at least the early 1970s. Although the term \"Heathenry\" is often employed to cover the entire religious movement, different Heathen groups within the United States often prefer the term \"\u00c1satr\u00fa\" or \"Odinism\" as self-designations.\nHeathenry appeared in the United States during the 1960s, at the same time as the wider emergence of modern Paganism in the United States. Among the earliest American group was the Odinist Fellowship, founded by Danish migrant Else Christensen in 1969.\nHistory.\n\u00c1satr\u00fa grew steadily in the United States during the 1960s. In 1969, the Danish Odinist Else Christensen established the Odinist Fellowship from her home in Florida. Heavily influenced by Alexander Rud Mills' writings, she began publication of a magazine, \"The Odinist\", although this focused to a greater extent on right-wing and racialist ideas than theological ones. Stephen McNallen first founded the Viking Brotherhood in the early 1970s, before creating the \u00c1satr\u00fa Free Assembly (AFA) in 1976, which broke up in 1986 amid widespread political disagreements after McNallen's repudiation of neo-Nazis within the group. In the 1990s, McNallen founded the \u00c1satr\u00fa Folk Assembly (AFA), an ethnically oriented Heathen group headquartered in California.\nMeanwhile, Valgard Murray and his kindred in Arizona founded the \u00c1satr\u00fa Alliance (AA) in the late 1980s, which shared the AFA's perspectives on race and which published the \"Vor Tru\" newsletter. In 1987, Edred Thorsson and James Chisholm founded The Troth, which was incorporated in Texas. Taking an inclusive, non-racialist view, it soon grew into an international organisation.\nTerminology.\nIn English usage, the genitive \"\" \"of \u00c6sir faith\" is often used on its own to denote adherents (both singular and plural). This term is favored by practitioners who focus on the deities of Scandinavia, although it is problematic as many Asatruar worship deities and entities other than the \u00c6sir, such as the Vanir, Valkyries, Elves, and Dwarves. Other practitioners term their religion \"Vanatr\u00fa\", meaning \"those who honour the Vanir\" or \"D\u00edsitr\u00fa\", meaning \"those who honour the Goddesses\", depending on their particular theological emphasis.\nWithin the community it is sometimes stated that the term \"\u00c1satr\u00fa\" pertains to groups which are not racially focused, while \"Odinism\" is the term preferred by racially oriented groups. However, in practice, there is no such neat division in terminology.\nThere are notable differences of emphasis between \"\u00c1satr\u00fa\" as practiced in the US and in Scandinavia. According to , American Asatruar tend to prefer a more devotional form of worship and a more emotional conception of the Nordic gods than Scandinavian practitioners, reflecting the parallel tendency of highly emotional forms of Christianity prevalent in the United States.\nDemographics.\nAlthough deeming it impossible to calculate the exact size of the Heathen community in the US, sociologist Jeffrey Kaplan estimated that, in the mid-1990s, there were around 500 active practitioners in the country, with a further thousand individuals on the periphery of the movement. He noted that the overwhelming majority of individuals in the movement were white, male, and young. Most had at least an undergraduate degree, and worked in a mix of white collar and blue collar jobs. From her experience within the community, Snook concurred that the majority of American Heathens were male, adding also that most were also white and middle-aged, but believed that there had been a growth in the proportion of Heathen women in the US since the mid-1990s.\nIn 2003, the Pagan Census Project led by Helen A. Berger, Evan A. Leach, and Leigh S. Shaffer gained 60 responses from Heathens in the US, noting that 65% were male and 35% female, which they saw as the \"opposite\" of the rest of the country's Pagan community. The majority had a college education, but were generally less well educated than the wider Pagan community, with a lower median income than the wider Pagan community too.\nPolitics and controversies.\n\u00c1satr\u00fa organizations have memberships which span the entire political and spiritual spectrum. There is a history of political controversy within organized US \u00c1satr\u00fa, mostly surrounding the question of how to deal with such adherents as place themselves in a context of the far right and white supremacy, notably resulting in the fragmentation of the \"Asatru Free Assembly\" in 1986.\nExternally, political activity on the part of \u00c1satr\u00fa organizations has surrounded campaigns against alleged religious discrimination, such as the call for the introduction of an \u00c1satr\u00fa \"emblem of belief\" by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs to parallel the Wiccan pentacle granted to the widow of SGT Patrick Dana Stewart in 2006. In May 2013, the \"Hammer of Thor\" was added to the list of United States Department of Veterans Affairs emblems for headstones and markers. It was reported in early 2019 that a Heathenry service was held on the U.S. Navy's USS John C. Stennis\nFolkish \u00c1satr\u00fa, Universalism and racialism.\nHistorically, the main dispute between the national organizations has generally centered on the interpretation of \"Nordic heritage\" as either something cultural, or as something genetic or racial. In the internal discourse within American \u00c1satr\u00fa, this cultural/racial divide has long been known as \"universalist\" vs. \"folkish\" \u00c1satr\u00fa.\nThe Troth takes the \"universalist\" position, claiming \"\u00c1satr\u00fa\" as a synonym for \"Northern European Heathenry\" taken to comprise \"many variations, names, and practices, including Theodism, Irminism, Odinism, and Anglo-Saxon Heathenry\". The Asatru Folk Assembly takes the folkish position, claiming that \u00c1satr\u00fa and the Germanic beliefs are ancestral in nature, and as an indigenous religion of the European Folk should only be accessed by the descendants of Europe. In the UK, Germanic Neopaganism is more commonly known as Odinism or as \"Heathenry\". This is mostly a matter of terminology, and US \u00c1satr\u00fa may be equated with UK Odinism for practical purposes, as is evident in the short-lived International Asatru-Odinic Alliance of folkish \u00c1satr\u00fa/Odinist groups.\nSome groups identifying as \u00c1satr\u00fa have been associated with national socialist and white nationalist movements. Wotansvolk, for example, is an explicitly racial form.\nMore recently, however, many \u00c1satr\u00fa groups have been taking a harder stance against these elements of their community. http://, so named for the corresponding stanza of the H\u00e1vam\u00e1l: \"When you see misdeeds, speak out against them, and give your enemies no fri\u00f0\u201d is a collective statement denouncing and testifying disassociation with the Asatru Folk Assembly for alleged racial and sexually-discriminatory practices and beliefs signed by over 150 \u00c1satr\u00fa religious organizations from over 15 different nations mainly represented on Facebook.\nDiscrimination charges.\nInmates of the \"Intensive Management Unit\" at Washington State Penitentiary who are adherents of \u00c1satr\u00fa in 2001 were deprived of their Thor's Hammer medallions.\nIn 2007, a federal judge confirmed that \u00c1satr\u00fa adherents in US prisons have the right to possess a Thor's Hammer pendant. An inmate sued the Virginia Department of Corrections after he was denied it while members of other religions were allowed their medallions.\nIn the \"Georgacarakos v. Watts\" case Peter N. Georgacarakos filed a pro se civil-rights complaint in the United States District Court for the District of Colorado against 19 prison officials for \"interference with the free exercise of his \u00c1satr\u00fa religion\" and \"discrimination on the basis of his being \u00c1satr\u00fa\".\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2106", "revid": "50815268", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2106", "title": "Ansible", "text": "Fictional machine capable of faster-than-light communication\nThe term ansible refers to a category of fictional technological devices capable of superluminal or faster-than-light (FTL) communication. These devices can instantaneously transmit and receive communicative and informational data streams across vast distances and obstacles, including between star systems and even across galaxies. As a name for such a device, the term \"ansible\" first appeared in a 1966 novel by Ursula K. Le Guin. Since that time, the broad use of the term has continued in the works of numerous science-fiction authors, across a variety of settings and continuities. Related terms are ultraphone and ultrawave.\nCoinage by Ursula Le Guin.\nUrsula K. Le Guin first used the word \"ansible\" in her 1966 novel \"Rocannon's World\". Etymologically, the word was a contraction of \"answerable\", reflecting the device's ability to deliver responses to their messages in a reasonable amount of time, even over interstellar distances.\nThe ansible was the basis for creating a specific kind of interstellar civilization, where communication between far-flung stars is instantaneous, but humans can only travel at relativistic speeds. Under these conditions, a full-fledged galactic empire is not possible, but there is a looser interstellar organization, in which several of Le Guin's protagonists are involved.\nAlthough Le Guin invented the name \"ansible\" for this type of device (further developing its details in her fictional works), the broader concept of instantaneous superluminal or FTL communication had already existed in science fiction. Similar communication functions were included in a device called an \"interocitor\" in the 1952 novel \"This Island Earth\" by Raymond F.\u00a0Jones, and the 1955 film based on the novel. Similarly in 1954, another of these devices called the \"Dirac Communicator\" appeared in James Blish's short story \"Beep\", which was expanded into the 1974 novel \"The Quincunx of Time\". Additionally, Robert A. Heinlein, in his 1958 novel \"Time for the Stars,\" employed instantaneous telepathic communication between identical twin pairs over interstellar distances, and like Le Guin, provided a technical explanation based on a non-Einsteinian principle of simultaneity.\nIn Le Guin's works.\nIn her subsequent works, Le Guin continued to develop the concept of the ansible:\nAny ansible may be used to communicate through any other, by setting its coordinates to those of the receiving ansible. They have a limited bandwidth, allowing at most a few hundred characters of text to be communicated in any transaction of a dialog session, and are attached to a keyboard and small display to perform text messaging.\nUse by later authors.\nSince Le Guin's conception of the ansible, the name of the device has been borrowed by numerous authors. While Le Guin's ansible was said to communicate \"instantaneously\", the name has also been adopted for devices capable of communication at finite speeds that are faster than light.\nOrson Scott Card's works.\nAmerican author Orson Scott Card in his \"Ender's Game\" novels used the term \"ansible\" as an unofficial name for the \"Philotic Parallax Instantaneous Communicator\" device, which transmits information across infinite distances with no time delay. In the first \"Ender's Game\" novel (1985), Colonel Graff states that \"somebody dredged the name \"ansible\" out of an old book somewhere\". In an answer on the question-and-answer website Quora, Card explained why he chose to appropriate LeGuin's term \"ansible\" instead of developing a new in-universe name for one:\nIn a FTL universe, you have several levels. [If you] can travel hyperfast, but no radio signal can outstrip [outrun] your ship, [then] you have to carry the mail with you. It's like the way things were between Europe and America before the laying of the successful transatlantic cable. But once it was laid, messages could be sent long before a ship could make the passage. That is like the ansible universe in Ursula K. LeGuin's early Hainish novels. Since I needed to use exactly that rule set, why not use the word \u2013 an excellent word \u2013 which I apply in the same way we all say 'robot,' an invented word that has entered the language, [and thereby] pay tribute to the writer from whose works I learned the word.\nCard's ansible in the \"Ender's Game\" universe works via fictional subatomic particles called \"philotes\". The two quarks inside a pi meson can be separated by an arbitrary distance, while remaining connected by \"philotic rays\". Card's version of the ansible also features in the video game \"Advent Rising\", which he helped write the story for.\nUsage by Other Authors.\nUsage of \"Ansible\" or Derived Terms.\nNumerous other writers have included ansibles. Notable examples include:\nOther Depictions of FTL Communication.\nMany authors have depicted FTL communication devices in their fictional works without necessarily using the term \"ansible.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2108", "revid": "36494975", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2108", "title": "Adalbert of Prague", "text": "Bohemian missionary and saint (c.956\u2013997)\nAdalbert of Prague (, , , , ; c. 956\u00a0\u2013 23 April 997), known in the Czech Republic, Poland and Slovakia by his birth name Vojt\u011bch (), was a Czech missionary and Christian saint. He was the Bishop of Prague and a missionary to the Hungarians, Poles, and Prussians, who was martyred in his efforts to convert the Baltic Prussians to Christianity. He is said to be the composer of the oldest Czech hymn \"Hospodine, pomiluj ny\" and \"Bogurodzica\", the oldest known Polish anthem but his authorship of them has not been confirmed.\nAdalbert was later declared the patron saint of the Czech Republic, Poland, and the Duchy of Prussia. He is also the patron saint of the Archdiocese of Esztergom in Hungary.\nHis life.\nEarly years.\nBorn as Vojt\u011bch in 952 or c.\u2009956 in gord Libice, he belonged to the Slavnik clan, one of the two most powerful families in Bohemia. Events from his life were later recorded by a Bohemian priest Cosmas of Prague (1045\u20131125). Vojt\u011bch's father was Slavn\u00edk (d. 978\u2013981), a duke ruling a province centred at Libice. His mother was St\u0159ezislava (d. 985\u2013987), and according to David Kalhous belonged to the P\u0159emyslid dynasty.\nHe had five brothers: Sob\u011bslav, Spytim\u00edr, Dobroslav, Po\u0159ej, and \u010c\u00e1slav. Cosmas also refers to Radim (later Gaudentius) as a brother; who is believed to have been a half-brother by his father's liaison with another woman. After he survived a grave illness in childhood, his parents decided to dedicate him to the service of God. Adalbert was well educated, having studied for approximately ten years (970\u201380) in Magdeburg under Adalbert of Magdeburg. The young Vojt\u011bch took his tutor's name \"Adalbert\" at his Confirmation.\nEpiscopacy.\nIn 981 Adalbert of Magdeburg died, and his young protege Adalbert returned to Bohemia. Later Bishop Dietmar of Prague ordained him a Catholic priest. In 982, Bishop Dietmar died, and Adalbert, despite being under canonical age, was chosen to succeed him as Bishop of Prague. Amiable and somewhat worldly, he was not expected to trouble the secular powers by making excessive claims for the Church. Although Adalbert was from a wealthy family, he avoided comfort and luxury, and was noted for his charity and austerity. After six years of preaching and prayer, he had made little headway in evangelising the Bohemians, who maintained deeply embedded pagan beliefs.\nAdalbert opposed the participation of Christians in the slave trade and complained of polygamy and idolatry, which were common among the people. Once he started to propose reforms he was met with opposition from the secular powers as well as the clergy. His family refused to support Duke Boleslaus in an unsuccessful war against Poland. Adalbert was no longer welcome and eventually forced into exile. In 988 he went to Rome. He intended to go to Jerusalem, but instead he went to the monastery of Monte Cassino, and from there to the Benedictine monastery of Saint Boniface and Alexis on Aventine Hill, where he lived for two years.\nIn 992, the archbishop of Mainz, Willigis, who was the superior of the Prague diocese, demanded that Adalbert return to his episcopal see \u2014 which he did. Together with a group of Italian Benedictine monks which he brought with him, he founded in 14 January 993 a monastery in B\u0159evnov (then situated westward from Prague, now part of the city), the second oldest monastery on Czech territory. However, after another unsuccessful attempt at Christianization, he returned to the Aventine in 995. Shortly after Adalbert's departure from Bohemia, Duke Boleslaus II the Pious murdered Adalbert's five brothers and destroyed their family seat in Lidice. After this, Adalbert could not safely stay in Bohemia and escaped from Prague. Strachkvas was eventually appointed to be his successor. However, Strachkvas suddenly died during the liturgy at which he was to accede to his episcopal office in Prague. The cause of his death is still ambiguous. The Pope directed Adalbert to resume his see, but believing that he would not be allowed back, Adalbert requested a brief as an itinerant missionary.\nAfter spending a year on the Aventine, Adalbert set out on a pilgrimage through France and Germany in June 996. Between September and November, he stayed at the court of Emperor Otto III. During this time, he was released from his duties as bishop of Prague and was free to devote himself to the Christianization of pagan lands as a missionary bishop. From the imperial court, he traveled to a place referred to in the sources as \"Mestris\", which Gerard Labuda identifies as P\u00e9csv\u00e1rad (\"Mons Ferreus\") in Hungary. He probably baptized there G\u00e9za of Hungary and his son Stephen in Esztergom. From there, in March 997, he went to the court of the Polish duke Boles\u0142aw Chrobry in Gniezno.\nMission in Prussia.\nBoles\u0142aw initially planned to send Adalbert on a mission to the Veleti, but this direction was deemed too dangerous. The Bishop and his companions, entered Prussian territory and traveled along the coast of the Baltic Sea to Gda\u0144sk. At the borders of the Polish realm, at the mouth of the Vistula River, his half-brother Radim (Gaudentius), Benedict-Bogusza (who was probably a Pole), and at least one interpreter, ventured out into Prussia alone, as Boles\u0142aw had sent his soldiers only to escort them to the border. Around April 8\u20139, Adalbert arrived in Gda\u0144sk. There, he performed a baptismal ceremony on Sunday, April 11. He arrived in Prussia on April 17, most likely in the region of Pomesania.\nUpon arriving in Prussia, Adalbert dismissed his escort and remained only with his brother Gaudentius and the priest Benedict on a small island surrounded by a river called \"Ilfing\" near its mouth into the sea. The 9th-century account by Wulfstan uses the name \"Ilfing\" to refer to the channel connecting the Vistula Lagoon with the lake on which the Prussian settlement of Truso was located. Gerard Labuda identifies this location with Lake Dru\u017cno, which flows into the Vistula Lagoon near present-day Elbl\u0105g. There, they encountered the Prussians, who did not welcome them warmly. They were taken to a market village, most likely Truso, located on the opposite bank. They spent the day there, and after a tribal assembly was held, they were deemed dangerous and ordered to leave, which they did on April 18.\nMartyrdom.\nThe missionaries spent the following five days in a safe location, most likely on the Pomeranian side. From there, on April 22, they crossed the river once again and set out toward another settlement called \"Cholinun\". Along the way, they passed through a forest and rested in a clearing, where they took a meal. According to Gerard Labuda, the settlement was the village of Pacho\u0142y (recorded in old sources as \"Bacculen, Bacolln, Bkollen, Pachollen\"), located on the Dzierzgo\u0144 River, which flows into Lake Dru\u017cno. Upon arriving at the settlement, Adalbert struck the gate, but since he was standing in a ditch, likely a dry moat, the guard told them to climb up to the hill. When the missionaries did so, one of the guards recognized them as the men previously expelled from the market settlement for bringing bad luck. According to the \"Passio\" from Tegernsee, the guard let out a \"wild and strange cry,\" summoning the townspeople to the gate, where an interrogation of the newcomers began.\nThe inhabitants reacted with hostility, and their anger only grew due to Adalbert's demeanor, he \"stood motionless, continuing to preach\". The crowd began to stone him, and Adalbert collapsed to the ground. After that, the Prussians left them alone, and the missionaries withdrew from the site. The earliest hagiographies differ in the details of Adalbert's martyrdom. However, they agree that his death occurred after the group had left the settlement, that the wounds were inflicted solely on Adalbert and not on his companions, and that after his death, the bishop's head was cut off and impaled on a stake.\nThe \"Vita\" attributed to Canaparius names the instigator of the killing as Sicco, a priest and leader of the group, who was the first to strike with a spear. Bruno of Querfurt's account adds that this Prussian leader had a brother who had been \u201ckilled by the Polans,\u201d suggesting a motive rooted in vengeance. According to the \"Passio\" from Tegernsee, the bishop died while praying, struck down by the first blow of an axe, which severed his head.\nThe reasons for Adalbert's death remain unclear to this day. None of the three oldest hagiographies provide them, as none of Adalbert's companions knew the motives behind the actions of the Prussians. The most probable interpretation is that Adalbert ignored the decision of the tribal assembly and returned to Prussian territory. Another potential interpretation is the imperious manner with which he preached, but potentially because he preached utilizing a book. The Prussians had an oral society where communication was face to face. To the locals Adalbert reading from a book may have come off as a manifestation of an evil action. According to other interpretations, on their way to \"Cholinun\", the missionaries may have unknowingly passed through a sacred grove of the Prussians, thereby violating a taboo. This is suggested by the ritual nature of the murder and the leading role played by the pagan priest. Such an interpretation is supported by a later account from Adam of Bremen, who, in describing Adalbert's mission and martyrdom, notes that the Prussians did not allow Christians to enter their sacred forests.\nThis encounter may also have taken place in Tenkitten and Fischhausen (now Primorsk, Kaliningrad Oblast, Russia). It is recorded that his body was bought back for its weight in gold by Boleslaus of Poland.\nVeneration and relics.\nCanonization and initial veneration.\nImmediately after the death of Adalbert, his close friends and promoters of his cult, Emperor Otto III, Bishop Notker of Li\u00e8ge, and Duke Boles\u0142aw the Brave, began building churches and chapels dedicated to him. Notker did this in the capital of his bishopric, founding a church near the older Church of St. John the Evangelist. Boles\u0142aw the Brave founded the Church of St. Adalbert on the Warta River, opposite the cathedral located on the island. All the early sites connected with the cult of St. Adalbert shared a link to water, being located on islands or near bodies of water.\nThe main effort of Boles\u0142aw the Brave, however, was the pursuit of the canonization of St. Adalbert, undertaken immediately after the ransom of his body and its transfer to Poland. A key role in this was played by Radim Gaudentius, the martyr's brother and a witness to his death, who was sent to Rome, where, together with John Canaparius, he wrote the \"Vita sancti Adalberti\" (known as the \"Vita prior\"). Adalbert was most likely declared a saint on June 29, 999, in Rome. Another famous biographer of Adalbert was Bruno of Querfurt who wrote a hagiography of him in two versions, the first written in 1004, the second in 1008 (known as the \"Vita altera\"). Around 1025, the third hagiography of the saint was created, known as the \"Passion from Tegernsee\", from the Bavarian Benedictine abbey where the memory of Saint Adalbert was venerated.\nSoon after the basilica in Gniezno, where the body of Adalbert was placed (according to legend it was held initially for some time in the monastery of Trzemeszno), was given the title of St. Adalbert's Church. The saint's brother, Radim Gaudentius, was ordained bishop in 999 and soon received the title of \u201cArchbishop of St. Adalbert\u201d with assignment to the church in Gniezno. This was a prelude to the elevation of Gniezno to the rank of archbishopric and the creation of a sovereign Polish ecclesiastical province, which took place in the year 1000. The establishment of the Polish metropolis, consisting of an archbishopric and four bishoprics, was supported by both the pope and the emperor. Otto III himself traveled to Gniezno to pay homage to the saint's relics and to preside over the synod that established the new metropolis.\nOtto III received one of the arms of St. Adalbert, from Boles\u0142aw the Brave. Right after the death of St. Adalbert the emperor founded a large church in Aachen in Adalbert's honor, as well as others in Reichenau and Rome, along with chapels in Benedictine abbeys, including Monte Cassino in Affile. Now returning from Poland, possibly accompanied by Duke Boles\u0142aw, he left some of the relics in Aachen. Later he went to Italy and was spreading the cult of the new saint along the way. In the year 1001, Otto III established a church dedicated to St. Adalbert north of Ravenna, at the hermitage of St. Romuald in Pereum, today near the town of Sant'Alberto. A monastery developed around it, intended for Christian missionary work in Slavic lands. A finger of the saint was placed by the emperor there. Otto III traveled then to Rome and deposited an arm relic of St. Adalbert in the church he founded in his name on Tiber Island.\nMost of the relics that remained in Poland were placed in Gniezno. According to later legend the second arm of the saint was transferred to Trzemeszno, but this is unlikely since the monastery there was founded only in the 12th century. Other smaller fragments may have been relocated to churches that were being established in Poland at that time. Between 1001 and 1010 some relics were transffered to Esztergom and possibly to Bamberg.\nTheft of relics.\nAfter the death of King Mieszko II, the Polish state fell into a state of decline, which his son and successor, Duke Casimir, was unable to quickly halt. This situation was exploited by the Czech Duke Bretislav I, who invaded and plundered Krak\u00f3w, Giecz, and Gniezno. In the latter city, his main target was the relics of St. Adalbert, as indicated by the participation of the Prague bishop Severus in the expedition. Czech soldiers broke the altar in the cathedral, behind which the relics had been walled in. According to Cosmas' account, they also took from Gniezno the remains of Radim Gaudentius, buried next to Adalbert, as well as the relics of the Five Martyred Brothers, which were buried in another church in Gniezno. The fate of the latter remains uncertain, as according to the account of Peter Damian, they were not in Gniezno, but in Kazimierz. The relics of St. Adalbert were then solemnly brought into Prague on August 24, 1038. A set of legal regulations were promulgated over the grave of St. Adalbert in Hn\u011bzden by Czech Duke Bretislav I which is known as B\u0159etislav's Decree (also known as the Hn\u011bzden Decree).\nFor their actions, the Czech duke and the bishop of Prague brought upon themselves the wrath of Pope Benedict IX, who threatened them with excommunication. Ultimately, as a form of penance, he ordered them to establish a monastery. German King Henry III demanded the return of the looted treasures to Poland and then invaded and subjugated Bohemia. The relics, however, were not returned to Poland. They were deposited, likely together with the remains of Radim Gaudentius, in the collegiate church next to St. Vitus Cathedral at Prague Castle. The relics of the Five Martyred Brothers were placed in the newly founded monastery in Star\u00e1 Boleslav. After the construction of a new, large cathedral on the site of the old one, the relics of St. Adalbert were transferred to it. The cathedral was dedicated to St. Vitus, St. Wenceslaus, and St. Adalbert. It was then that the cult of St. Adalbert as the patron saint of Bohemia began, strongly promoted by the chronicler and canon of the Prague chapter, Cosmas.\nVeneration in Poland.\nThe cathedral in Gniezno was rebuilt in 1064. The church organization was restored, and St. Adalbert continued to be regarded as the patron of the cathedral, the archbishopric, and the entire country. The chronicler Gallus Anonymus, describing the Polish forces fighting the Czechs in the year 1100, mentioned \u201cthe Gniezno troop dedicated to the patron of Poland.\nMoreover, a growing belief emerged that some part of the relics had remained in Gniezno. In 1090, the feast of the \u201cTranslation of St. Adalbert\u201d appeared in the liturgical calendar of the Gniezno Cathedral, likely related to the discovery of a hiding place containing either genuine or alleged relics, which were then moved behind the altar. In 1111, Duke Boles\u0142aw the Wrymouth captured and blinded his brother Zbigniew, who soon died. To atone for his guilt, the duke undertook a penitential pilgrimage to the tomb of St. Stephen in Hungary and the abbey of Somogyv\u00e1r, concluding it at the tomb of St. Adalbert in Gniezno. He donated a pure gold reliquary to the cathedral.\nThe significance of the cult of St. Adalbert began to grow as the archbishops of Magdeburg increasingly asserted their claims to authority over the Polish ecclesiastical province. Boles\u0142aw the Wrymouth minted bracteates bearing the image of the saint. Bishop Otto of Bamberg, who led a Christianization mission in Pomerania with the duke's support, dedicated churches to St. Adalbert in Szczecin and Wolin. In 1127, the head of St. Adalbert was discovered in the Gniezno Cathedral. Several years later, in 1143, the bishop of Prague, Otto, likewise declared the discovery of the saint's head in the Prague Cathedral.\nThe massive bronze doors of Gniezno Cathedral, dating from around 1175, are decorated with eighteen reliefs of scenes from Adalbert's life. They are the only Romanesque ecclesiastical doors in Europe depicting a cycle illustrating the life of a saint, and therefore are a precious relic documenting Adalbert's martyrdom. We can read that door literally and theologically. Associated with the founding of the Gniezno Doors was the creation of a new Polish version of the saint's life, loosely based on earlier accounts but adding many new elements, some of them entirely fantastical. From its opening words, it is known as \"Tempore illo\".\nIn the mid-13th century, the cult of Poland's second patron, Saint Stanislaus, the Bishop of Krak\u00f3w who was killed on the orders of King Boles\u0142aw II, began to develop. The center of this cult was Krak\u00f3w, which competed with Gniezno, the center of the cult of Saint Adalbert, for the title of the main spiritual center of a unifying Polish state. The cult of Saint Stanislaus was more dynamic and richer in content. By the end of the 13th century, only the \"Legend of Saint Adalbert\" and \"The Miracles of Saint Adalbert\" had been created. In 1285, Archbishop Jakub \u015awinka called for every parish church and monastery in Poland to possess a written hagiography of Saint Adalbert, and for it to be read aloud and sung. After the unification of the state, Krak\u00f3w gradually consolidated its dominance. The first Polish cardinal, Zbigniew Ole\u015bnicki, promoted the vision of four patrons of Poland alongside St. Adalbert: St. Stanislaus, St. Wenceslaus, and St. Florian. The relics of the latter three were kept in Krak\u00f3w Cathedral.\nThe cult of Saint Adalbert was revived in the 16th century, particularly during the Counter-Reformation, largely thanks to the immense popularity of Piotr Skarga's \"Lives of the Saints\".\nIn 1928, one of the arms of Adalbert, which Boles\u0142aw I had given to Holy Roman Emperor Otto III in 1000, was added to the bones preserved in Gniezno. Therefore, today Adalbert has two elaborate shrines in the Prague Cathedral and Royal Cathedral of Gniezno, each of which claims to possess his relics, but which of these bones are his authentic relics is unknown. For example, pursuant to both claims two skulls are attributed to Adalbert. The one in Gniezno was stolen in 1923.\nThe one thousandth anniversary of Adalbert's martyrdom was on 23 April 1997. It was commemorated in Poland, the Czech Republic, Germany, Russia, and other nations. Representatives of Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, and Evangelical churches traveled on a pilgrimage to Adalbert's tomb located in Gniezno. Pope John Paul II visited the cathedral and celebrated a liturgy there in which heads of seven European nations and approximately one million faithful participated.\nA ten-meter cross was erected near the village of Beregovoe (formerly Tenkitten), Kaliningrad Oblast, where Adalbert is thought to have been martyred by the Prussians.\nFeast days.\nHe is also commemorated on 23 April by Evangelical Church in Germany and Eastern Orthodox Church.\nIn popular culture.\nThe Dagmar and V\u00e1clav Havel VIZE 97 Foundation Prize, given annually to a distinguished thinker \"whose work exceeds the traditional framework of scientific knowledge, contributes to the understanding of science as an integral part of general culture and is concerned with unconventional ways of asking fundamental questions about cognition, being and human existence\"\nincludes a massive replica of Adalbert's crozier by Czech artist Ji\u0159\u00ed Plie\u0161t\u00edk.\nSt. Vojtech Fellowship was established in 1870 by Slovak Catholic priest Andrej Radlinsk\u00fd. It had facilitated Slovak Catholic thinkers and authors, continuing to publish religious original works and translations to this day. It is the official publishing body of Episcopal Conference of Slovakia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2110", "revid": "2340490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2110", "title": "\u00c6lfheah of Canterbury", "text": "Archbishop of Canterbury from 1006 to 1012\n\u00c6lfheah (c.\u2009953\u00a0\u2013 19 April 1012), more commonly known today as Alphege, was an Anglo-Saxon Bishop of Winchester, later Archbishop of Canterbury from 1006 to 1012. He became an anchorite before being elected abbot of Bath Abbey. His reputation for piety and sanctity led to his promotion to the episcopate and, eventually, to his becoming archbishop. \u00c6lfheah furthered the cult of Dunstan and also encouraged learning. He was captured by Viking raiders in 1011 during the siege of Canterbury and killed by them the following year after refusing to allow himself to be ransomed. \u00c6lfheah was canonised as a saint in 1078. Thomas Becket, a later Archbishop of Canterbury, prayed to \u00c6lfheah just before his murder in Canterbury Cathedral in 1170.\nLife.\n\u00c6lfheah was born around 953, and became a monk early in life. He first entered the monastery of Deerhurst, but then moved to Bath, where he became an anchorite. He was noted for his piety and austerity and rose to become abbot of Bath Abbey. The 12th-century chronicler, William of Malmesbury recorded that \u00c6lfheah was a monk and prior at Glastonbury Abbey, but this is not accepted by all historians. Indications are that \u00c6lfheah became abbot at Bath by 982, perhaps as early as around 977. He perhaps shared authority with his predecessor \u00c6scwig after 968.\nProbably due to the influence of Dunstan, the Archbishop of Canterbury (959\u2013988), \u00c6lfheah was elected Bishop of Winchester in 984, and was consecrated on 19 October that year. While bishop, he was largely responsible for the construction of a large organ in the cathedral, audible from over a mile (1600\u00a0m) away and said to require more than 24\u00a0men to operate. He also built and enlarged the city's churches, and promoted the cult of Swithun and his predecessor, \u00c6thelwold of Winchester. One act promoting \u00c6thelwold's cult was the translation of \u00c6thelwold's body to a new tomb in the cathedral at Winchester, which \u00c6lfheah presided over on 10 September 996.\nFollowing a Viking raid in 994, a peace treaty was agreed with one of the raiders, Olaf Tryggvason. Besides receiving danegeld, Olaf converted to Christianity and undertook never to raid or fight the English again. \u00c6lfheah may have played a part in the treaty negotiations, and it is certain that he confirmed Olaf in his new faith.\nIn 1006, \u00c6lfheah succeeded \u00c6lfric as Archbishop of Canterbury, probably consecrated on 16 November. taking Swithun's head with him as a relic for the new location. He went to Rome in 1007 to receive his pallium\u2014symbol of his status as an archbishop\u2014from Pope John XVIII, but was robbed during his journey. While at Canterbury, he promoted the cult of Dunstan, ordering the writing of the second \"Life of Dunstan\", which Adelard of Ghent composed between 1006 and 1011. He also introduced new practices into the liturgy, and was instrumental in the Witenagemot's recognition of Wulfsige of Sherborne as a saint in about 1012.\n\u00c6lfheah sent \u00c6lfric of Eynsham to Cerne Abbey to take charge of its monastic school. He was present at the council of May 1008 at which Wulfstan II, Archbishop of York, preached his \"Sermo Lupi ad Anglos\" (\"The Sermon of the Wolf to the English\"), castigating the English for their moral failings and blaming the latter for the tribulations afflicting the country.\nIn 1011, the Danes again raided England, and from 8\u201329 September they laid siege to Canterbury. Aided by the treachery of \u00c6lfmaer, whose life \u00c6lfheah had once saved, the raiders succeeded in sacking the city. \u00c6lfheah was taken prisoner and held captive for seven months. Godwine (Bishop of Rochester), Leofrun (abbess of St Mildrith's), and the king's reeve, \u00c6lfweard were captured also, but the abbot of St Augustine's Abbey, \u00c6lfm\u00e6r, managed to escape. Canterbury Cathedral was plundered and burned by the Danes following \u00c6lfheah's capture.\nDeath.\n\u00c6lfheah refused to allow a ransom to be paid for his freedom, and as a result was killed on 19 April 1012 at Greenwich, reputedly on the site of St Alfege's Church. The account of \u00c6lfheah's death appears in the E version of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\": &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... the raiding-army became much stirred up against the bishop, because he did not want to offer them any money, and forbade that anything might be granted in return for him. Also they were very drunk, because there was wine brought from the south. Then they seized the bishop, led him to their \"hustings\" on the Saturday in the octave of Easter, and then pelted him there with bones and the heads of cattle; and one of them struck him on the head with the butt of an axe, so that with the blow he sank down and his holy blood fell on the earth, and sent forth his holy soul to God's kingdom.\n\u00c6lfheah was the first Archbishop of Canterbury to die a violent death. A contemporary report tells that Thorkell the Tall attempted to save \u00c6lfheah from the mob about to kill him by offering everything he owned except for his ship, in exchange for \u00c6lfheah's life; Thorkell's presence is not mentioned in the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", however. Some sources record that the final blow, with the back of an axe, was delivered as an act of kindness by a Christian convert known as \"Thrum\". \u00c6lfheah was buried in Old St Paul's Cathedral. In 1023, his body was moved by King Cnut to Canterbury, with great ceremony. Thorkell the Tall was appalled at the brutality of his fellow raiders, and switched sides to the English king \u00c6thelred the Unready following \u00c6lfheah's death.\nVeneration.\nPope Gregory VII canonised \u00c6lfheah in 1078, with a feast day of 19 April. Lanfranc, the first post-Conquest archbishop, was dubious about some of the saints venerated at Canterbury. He was persuaded of \u00c6lfheah's sanctity, but \u00c6lfheah and Augustine of Canterbury were the only pre-conquest Anglo-Saxon archbishops kept on Canterbury's calendar of saints. \u00c6lfheah's shrine, which had become neglected, was rebuilt and expanded in the early 12th century under Anselm of Canterbury, who was instrumental in retaining \u00c6lfheah's name in the church calendar. After the 1174 fire in Canterbury Cathedral, \u00c6lfheah's remains, together with those of Dunstan were placed around the high altar, at which Thomas Becket is said to have commended his life into \u00c6lfheah's care shortly before his martyrdom during the Becket controversy. The new shrine was sealed in lead, and was north of the high altar, sharing the honour with Dunstan's shrine, which was located south of the high altar. A \"Life of Saint \u00c6lfheah\" in prose and verse was written by a Canterbury monk named Osbern, at Lanfranc's request. The prose version has survived, but the \"Life\" is very much a hagiography; many of the stories it contains have obvious Biblical parallels, making them suspect as a historical record.\nIn the late medieval period, \u00c6lfheah's feast day was celebrated in Scandinavia, perhaps because of the saint's connection with Cnut. Few church dedications to him are known, with most of them occurring in Kent and one each in London and Winchester; as well as St Alfege's Church in Greenwich, a nearby hospital (1931\u20131968) was named after him. In the town of Solihull in the West Midlands, St Alphege Church is dedicated to \u00c6lfheah dating back to approximately 1277. In 1929, a new Roman Catholic church in Bath, the Church of Our Lady &amp; St Alphege, was designed by Giles Gilbert Scott in homage to the ancient Roman church of Santa Maria in Cosmedin, and dedicated to \u00c6lfheah under the name of Alphege. \nArtistic representations of \u00c6lfheah often depict him holding a pile of stones in his chasuble, a reference to his martyrdom.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2112", "revid": "19089174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2112", "title": "Associative algebra", "text": "Ring that is also a vector space or a module\nIn mathematics, an associative algebra \"A\" over a commutative ring (often a field) \"K\" is a ring \"A\" together with a ring homomorphism from \"K\" into the center of \"A\". This is thus an algebraic structure with an addition, a multiplication, and a scalar multiplication (the multiplication by the image of the ring homomorphism of an element of \"K\"). The addition and multiplication operations together give \"A\" the structure of a ring; the addition and scalar multiplication operations together give \"A\" the structure of a module or vector space over \"K\". In this article we will also use the term \"K\"-algebra to mean an associative algebra over \"K\". A standard first example of a \"K\"-algebra is a ring of square matrices over a commutative ring \"K\", with the usual matrix multiplication.\nA commutative algebra is an associative algebra for which the multiplication is commutative, or, equivalently, an associative algebra that is also a commutative ring.\nIn this article associative algebras are assumed to have a multiplicative identity, denoted 1; they are sometimes called unital associative algebras for clarification. In some areas of mathematics this assumption is not made, and we will call such structures non-unital associative algebras. We will also assume that all rings are unital, and all ring homomorphisms are unital.\nEvery ring is an associative algebra over its center and over the integers.\nDefinition.\nLet \"R\" be a commutative ring (so \"R\" could be a field). An associative \"R\"-algebra \"A (or more simply, an R\"-algebra \"A\") is a ring \"A\" \nthat is also an \"R\"-module in such a way that the two additions (the ring addition and the module addition) are the same operation, and scalar multiplication satisfies\n formula_1\nfor all \"r\" in \"R\" and \"x\", \"y\" in the algebra. (This definition implies that the algebra, being a ring, is unital, since rings are supposed to have a multiplicative identity.)\nEquivalently, an associative algebra \"A\" is a ring together with a ring homomorphism from \"R\" to the center of \"A\". If \"f\" is such a homomorphism, the scalar multiplication is (\"r\", \"x\") \u21a6 \"f\"(\"r\")\"x\" (here the multiplication is the ring multiplication); if the scalar multiplication is given, the ring homomorphism is given by \"r\" \u21a6 \"r\" \u22c5 1\"A\". (See also \"\" below).\nEvery ring is an associative Z-algebra, where Z denotes the ring of the integers.\nA &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;commutative algebra is an associative algebra that is also a commutative ring.\nAs a monoid object in the category of modules.\nThe definition is equivalent to saying that a unital associative \"R\"-algebra is a monoid object in \"R\"-Mod (the monoidal category of \"R\"-modules). By definition, a ring is a monoid object in the category of abelian groups; thus, the notion of an associative algebra is obtained by replacing the category of abelian groups with the category of modules.\nPushing this idea further, some authors have introduced a \"generalized ring\" as a monoid object in some other category that behaves like the category of modules. Indeed, this reinterpretation allows one to avoid making an explicit reference to elements of an algebra \"A\". For example, the associativity can be expressed as follows. By the universal property of a tensor product of modules, the multiplication (the \"R\"-bilinear map) corresponds to a unique \"R\"-linear map\n formula_2.\nThe associativity then refers to the identity:\n formula_3\nFrom ring homomorphisms.\nAn associative algebra amounts to a ring homomorphism whose image lies in the center. Indeed, starting with a ring \"A\" and a ring homomorphism \"\u03b7\" : \"R\" \u2192 \"A\" whose image lies in the center of \"A\", we can make \"A\" an \"R\"-algebra by defining\n formula_4\nfor all \"r\" \u2208 \"R\" and \"x\" \u2208 \"A\". If \"A\" is an \"R\"-algebra, taking \"x\" = 1, the same formula in turn defines a ring homomorphism \"\u03b7\" : \"R\" \u2192 \"A\" whose image lies in the center.\nIf a ring is commutative then it equals its center, so that a commutative \"R\"-algebra can be defined simply as a commutative ring \"A\" together with a commutative ring homomorphism \"\u03b7\" : \"R\" \u2192 \"A\".\nThe ring homomorphism \"\u03b7\" appearing in the above is often called a structure map. In the commutative case, one can consider the category whose objects are ring homomorphisms \"R\" \u2192 \"A\" for a fixed \"R\", i.e., commutative \"R\"-algebras, and whose morphisms are ring homomorphisms \"A\" \u2192 \"A\"\u2032 that are under \"R\"; i.e., \"R\" \u2192 \"A\" \u2192 \"A\"\u2032 is \"R\" \u2192 \"A\"\u2032 (i.e., the coslice category of the category of commutative rings under \"R\".) The prime spectrum functor Spec then determines an anti-equivalence of this category to the category of affine schemes over Spec \"R\".\nHow to weaken the commutativity assumption is a subject matter of noncommutative algebraic geometry and, more recently, of derived algebraic geometry. See also: \"Generic matrix ring\".\nAlgebra homomorphisms.\nA homomorphism between two \"R\"-algebras is an \"R\"-linear ring homomorphism. Explicitly, \"\u03c6\" : \"A\"1 \u2192 \"A\"2 is an associative algebra homomorphism if\n formula_5\nThe class of all \"R\"-algebras together with algebra homomorphisms between them form a category, sometimes denoted \"R\"-Alg.\nThe subcategory of commutative \"R\"-algebras can be characterized as the coslice category \"R\"/CRing where CRing is the category of commutative rings.\nExamples.\nThe most basic example is a ring itself; it is an algebra over its center or any subring lying in the center. In particular, any commutative ring is an algebra over any of its subrings. Other examples abound both from algebra and other fields of mathematics.\n then formula_9 is called a deformation quantization of formula_8.\nDual of an associative algebra.\nLet \"A\" be an associative algebra over a commutative ring \"R\". Since \"A\" is in particular a module, we can take the dual module \"A\"* of \"A\". A priori, the dual \"A\"* need not have a structure of an associative algebra. However, \"A\" may come with an extra structure (namely, that of a Hopf algebra) so that the dual is also an associative algebra.\nFor example, take \"A\" to be the ring of continuous functions on a compact group \"G\". Then, not only \"A\" is an associative algebra, but it also comes with the co-multiplication \u0394(\"f\")(\"g\", \"h\") = \"f\"(\"gh\") and co-unit \"\u03b5\"(\"f\") = \"f\"(1). The \"co-\" refers to the fact that they satisfy the dual of the usual multiplication and unit in the algebra axiom. Hence, the dual \"A\"* is an associative algebra. The co-multiplication and co-unit are also important in order to form a tensor product of representations of associative algebras (see \"\" below).\nEnveloping algebra.\nGiven an associative algebra \"A\" over a commutative ring \"R\", the enveloping algebra \"A\"e of \"A\" is the algebra \"A\" \u2297\"R\" \"A\"op or \"A\"op \u2297\"R\" \"A\", depending on authors.\nNote that a bimodule over \"A\" is exactly a left module over \"A\"e.\nSeparable algebra.\nLet \"A\" be an algebra over a commutative ring \"R\". Then the algebra \"A\" is a right module over \"A\"e := \"A\"op \u2297\"R\" \"A\" with the action \"x\" \u22c5 (\"a\" \u2297 \"b\") = \"axb\". Then, by definition, \"A\" is said to separable if the multiplication map \"A\" \u2297\"R\" \"A\" \u2192 \"A\" : \"x\" \u2297 \"y\" \u21a6 \"xy\" splits as an \"A\"e-linear map, where \"A\" \u2297 \"A\" is an \"A\"e-module by (\"x\" \u2297 \"y\") \u22c5 (\"a\" \u2297 \"b\") = \"ax\" \u2297 \"yb\". Equivalently,\n\"A\" is separable if it is a projective module over \"A\"e; thus, the \"A\"e-projective dimension of \"A\", sometimes called the bidimension of \"A\", measures the failure of separability.\nFinite-dimensional algebra.\nLet \"A\" be a finite-dimensional algebra over a field \"k\". Then \"A\" is an Artinian ring.\nCommutative case.\nAs \"A\" is Artinian, if it is commutative, then it is a finite product of Artinian local rings whose residue fields are algebras over the base field \"k\". Now, a reduced Artinian local ring is a field and thus the following are equivalent\nLet formula_24, the profinite group of finite Galois extensions of \"k\". Then formula_25 is an anti-equivalence of the category of finite-dimensional separable \"k\"-algebras to the category of finite sets with continuous formula_26-actions.\nNoncommutative case.\nSince a simple Artinian ring is a (full) matrix ring over a division ring, if \"A\" is a simple algebra, then \"A\" is a (full) matrix algebra over a division algebra \"D\" over \"k\"; i.e., \"A\" = M\"n\"(\"D\"). More generally, if \"A\" is a semisimple algebra, then it is a finite product of matrix algebras (over various division \"k\"-algebras), the fact known as the Artin\u2013Wedderburn theorem.\nThe fact that \"A\" is Artinian simplifies the notion of a Jacobson radical; for an Artinian ring, the Jacobson radical of \"A\" is the intersection of all (two-sided) maximal ideals (in contrast, in general, a Jacobson radical is the intersection of all left maximal ideals or the intersection of all right maximal ideals.)\nThe Wedderburn principal theorem states: for a finite-dimensional algebra \"A\" with a nilpotent ideal \"I\", if the projective dimension of \"A\" / \"I\" as a module over the enveloping algebra (\"A\" / \"I\")e is at most one, then the natural surjection \"p\" : \"A\" \u2192 \"A\" / \"I\" splits; i.e., \"A\" contains a subalgebra \"B\" such that \"p\"|\"B\" : \"B\" ~\u2192 \"A\" / \"I\" is an isomorphism. Taking \"I\" to be the Jacobson radical, the theorem says in particular that the Jacobson radical is complemented by a semisimple algebra. The theorem is an analog of Levi's theorem for Lie algebras.\nLattices and orders.\nLet \"R\" be a Noetherian integral domain with field of fractions \"K\" (for example, they can be Z, Q). A \"lattice\" \"L\" in a finite-dimensional \"K\"-vector space \"V\" is a finitely generated \"R\"-submodule of \"V\" that spans \"V\"; in other words, \"L\" \u2297\"R\" \"K\" = \"V\".\nLet \"A\"\"K\" be a finite-dimensional \"K\"-algebra. An \"order\" in \"A\"\"K\" is an \"R\"-subalgebra that is a lattice. In general, there are a lot fewer orders than lattices; e.g., Z is a lattice in Q but not an order (since it is not an algebra).\nA \"maximal order\" is an order that is maximal among all the orders.\nRelated concepts.\nCoalgebras.\nAn associative algebra over \"K\" is given by a \"K\"-vector space \"A\" endowed with a bilinear map \"A\" \u00d7 \"A\" \u2192 \"A\" having two inputs (multiplicator and multiplicand) and one output (product), as well as a morphism \"K\" \u2192 \"A\" identifying the scalar multiples of the multiplicative identity. If the bilinear map \"A\" \u00d7 \"A\" \u2192 \"A\" is reinterpreted as a linear map (i.e., morphism in the category of \"K\"-vector spaces) \"A\" \u2297 \"A\" \u2192 \"A\" (by the universal property of the tensor product), then we can view an associative algebra over \"K\" as a \"K\"-vector space \"A\" endowed with two morphisms (one of the form \"A\" \u2297 \"A\" \u2192 \"A\" and one of the form \"K\" \u2192 \"A\") satisfying certain conditions that boil down to the algebra axioms. These two morphisms can be dualized using categorial duality by reversing all arrows in the commutative diagrams that describe the algebra axioms; this defines the structure of a coalgebra.\nThere is also an abstract notion of \"F\"-coalgebra, where \"F\" is a functor. This is vaguely related to the notion of coalgebra discussed above.\nRepresentations.\nA representation of an algebra \"A\" is an algebra homomorphism \"\u03c1\" : \"A\" \u2192 End(\"V\") from \"A\" to the endomorphism algebra of some vector space (or module) \"V\". The property of \"\u03c1\" being an algebra homomorphism means that \"\u03c1\" preserves the multiplicative operation (that is, \"\u03c1\"(\"xy\") = \"\u03c1\"(\"x\")\"\u03c1\"(\"y\") for all \"x\" and \"y\" in \"A\"), and that \"\u03c1\" sends the unit of \"A\" to the unit of End(\"V\") (that is, to the identity endomorphism of \"V\").\nIf \"A\" and \"B\" are two algebras, and \"\u03c1\" : \"A\" \u2192 End(\"V\") and \"\u03c4\" : \"B\" \u2192 End(\"W\") are two representations, then there is a (canonical) representation \"A\" \u2297 \"B\" \u2192 End(\"V\" \u2297 \"W\") of the tensor product algebra \"A\" \u2297 \"B\" on the vector space \"V\" \u2297 \"W\". However, there is no natural way of defining a tensor product of two representations of a single associative algebra in such a way that the result is still a representation of that same algebra (not of its tensor product with itself), without somehow imposing additional conditions. Here, by \"tensor product of representations\", the usual meaning is intended: the result should be a linear representation of the same algebra on the product vector space. Imposing such additional structure typically leads to the idea of a Hopf algebra or a Lie algebra, as demonstrated below.\nMotivation for a Hopf algebra.\nConsider, for example, two representations \"\u03c3\" : \"A\" \u2192 End(\"V\") and \"\u03c4\" : \"A\" \u2192 End(\"W\"). One might try to form a tensor product representation \"\u03c1\" : \"x\" \u21a6 \"\u03c3\"(\"x\") \u2297 \"\u03c4\"(\"x\") according to how it acts on the product vector space, so that\n formula_27\nHowever, such a map would not be linear, since one would have\n formula_28\nfor \"k\" \u2208 \"K\". One can rescue this attempt and restore linearity by imposing additional structure, by defining an algebra homomorphism \u0394 : \"A\" \u2192 \"A\" \u2297 \"A\", and defining the tensor product representation as\n formula_29\nSuch a homomorphism \u0394 is called a comultiplication if it satisfies certain axioms. The resulting structure is called a bialgebra. To be consistent with the definitions of the associative algebra, the coalgebra must be co-associative, and, if the algebra is unital, then the co-algebra must be co-unital as well. A Hopf algebra is a bialgebra with an additional piece of structure (the so-called antipode), which allows not only to define the tensor product of two representations, but also the Hom module of two representations (again, similarly to how it is done in the representation theory of groups).\nMotivation for a Lie algebra.\nOne can try to be more clever in defining a tensor product. Consider, for example,\n formula_30\nso that the action on the tensor product space is given by\n formula_31.\nThis map is clearly linear in \"x\", and so it does not have the problem of the earlier definition. However, it fails to preserve multiplication:\n formula_32.\nBut, in general, this does not equal\n formula_33.\nThis shows that this definition of a tensor product is too naive; the obvious fix is to define it such that it is antisymmetric, so that the middle two terms cancel. This leads to the concept of a Lie algebra.\nNon-unital algebras.\nSome authors use the term \"associative algebra\" to refer to structures which do not necessarily have a multiplicative identity, and hence consider homomorphisms which are not necessarily unital.\nOne example of a non-unital associative algebra is given by the set of all functions \"f\" : R \u2192 R whose limit as \"x\" nears infinity is zero.\nAnother example is the vector space of continuous periodic functions, together with the convolution product.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2113", "revid": "24465790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2113", "title": "Axiom of regularity", "text": "Axiom of set theory\nIn mathematics, the axiom of regularity (also known as the axiom of foundation) is an axiom of Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory that states that every non-empty set \"A\" contains an element that is disjoint from \"A\". In first-order logic, the axiom reads:\nformula_1\nThe axiom of regularity together with the axiom of pairing implies that no set is an element of itself, and that there is no infinite sequence formula_2 such that formula_3 is an element of formula_4 for all formula_5. With the axiom of dependent choice (which is a weakened form of the axiom of choice), this result can be reversed: if there are no such infinite sequences, then the axiom of regularity is true. Hence, in this context the axiom of regularity is equivalent to the sentence that there are no downward infinite membership chains.\nThe axiom was originally formulated by von Neumann; it was adopted in a formulation closer to the one found in contemporary textbooks by Zermelo. Virtually all results in the branches of mathematics based on set theory hold even in the absence of regularity. However, regularity makes some properties of ordinals easier to prove; and it not only allows induction to be done on well-ordered sets but also on proper classes that are well-founded relational structures such as the lexicographical ordering on formula_6\nGiven the other axioms of Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory, the axiom of regularity is equivalent to the axiom of induction. The axiom of induction tends to be used in place of the axiom of regularity in intuitionistic theories (ones that do not accept the law of the excluded middle), where the two axioms are not equivalent.\nIn addition to omitting the axiom of regularity, non-standard set theories have indeed postulated the existence of sets that are elements of themselves.\nElementary implications of regularity.\nNo set is an element of itself.\nLet formula_7 be a set, and apply the axiom of regularity to formula_8, which is a set by the axiom of pairing. By this axiom, there must be an element of formula_8 which is disjoint from formula_8. Since the only element of formula_8 is formula_7, it must be that formula_7 is disjoint from formula_8. So, since formula_15, we cannot have formula_7 an element of formula_7 (by the definition of disjointness).\nNo infinite descending sequence of sets exists.\nSuppose, to the contrary, that there is a function, \"f\", on the natural numbers with \"f\"(\"n\"+1) an element of \"f\"(\"n\") for each \"n\". Define \"S\" = {\"f\"(\"n\"): \"n\" a natural number}, the range of \"f\", which can be seen to be a set from the axiom schema of replacement. Applying the axiom of regularity to \"S\", let \"B\" be an element of \"S\" which is disjoint from \"S\". By the definition of \"S\", \"B\" must be \"f\"(\"k\") for some natural number \"k\". However, we are given that \"f\"(\"k\") contains \"f\"(\"k\"+1) which is also an element of \"S\". So \"f\"(\"k\"+1) is in the intersection of \"f\"(\"k\") and \"S\". This contradicts the fact that they are disjoint sets. Since our supposition led to a contradiction, there must not be any such function, \"f\".\nThe nonexistence of a set containing itself can be seen as a special case where the sequence is infinite and constant.\nNotice that this argument only applies to functions \"f\" that can be represented as sets as opposed to undefinable classes. The hereditarily finite sets, \"V\"\u03c9, satisfy the axiom of regularity (and all other axioms of ZFC except the axiom of infinity). So if one forms a non-trivial ultrapower of V\u03c9, then it will also satisfy the axiom of regularity. The resulting model will contain elements, called non-standard natural numbers, that satisfy the definition of natural numbers in that model but are not really natural numbers. They are \"fake\" natural numbers which are \"larger\" than any actual natural number. This model will contain infinite descending sequences of elements. For example, suppose \"n\" is a non-standard natural number, then formula_18 and formula_19, and so on. For any actual natural number \"k\", formula_20. This is an unending descending sequence of elements. But this sequence is not definable in the model and thus not a set. So no contradiction to regularity can be proved.\nSimpler set-theoretic definition of the ordered pair.\nThe axiom of regularity enables defining the ordered pair (\"a\",\"b\") as {\"a\",{\"a\",\"b\"}}; see ordered pair for specifics. This definition eliminates one pair of braces from the canonical Kuratowski definition (\"a\",\"b\") = .\nEvery set has an ordinal rank.\nThis was actually the original form of the axiom in von Neumann's axiomatization.\nSuppose \"x\" is any set. Let \"t\" be the transitive closure of {\"x\"}. Let \"u\" be the subset of \"t\" consisting of unranked sets. If \"u\" is empty, then \"x\" is ranked and we are done. Otherwise, apply the axiom of regularity to \"u\" to get an element \"w\" of \"u\" which is disjoint from \"u\". Since \"w\" is in \"u\", \"w\" is unranked. \"w\" is a subset of \"t\" by the definition of transitive closure. Since \"w\" is disjoint from \"u\", every element of \"w\" is ranked. Applying the axioms of replacement and union to combine the ranks of the elements of \"w\", we get an ordinal rank for \"w\", to wit formula_21. This contradicts the conclusion that \"w\" is unranked. So the assumption that \"u\" was non-empty must be false and \"x\" must have rank.\nFor every two sets, only one can be an element of the other.\nLet \"X\" and \"Y\" be sets. Then apply the axiom of regularity to the set {\"X\",\"Y\"} (which exists by the axiom of pairing). We see there must be an element of {\"X\",\"Y\"} which is also disjoint from it. It must be either \"X\" or \"Y\". By the definition of disjoint then, we must have either \"Y\" is not an element of \"X\" or vice versa.\nThe axiom of dependent choice and no infinite descending sequence of sets implies regularity.\nLet the non-empty set \"S\" be a counter-example to the axiom of regularity; that is, every element of \"S\" has a non-empty intersection with \"S\". We define a binary relation \"R\" on \"S\" by formula_22, which is entire by assumption. Thus, by the axiom of dependent choice, there is some sequence (\"an\") in \"S\" satisfying \"anRan+1\" for all \"n\" in N. As this is an infinite descending chain, we arrive at a contradiction and so, no such \"S\" exists.\nRegularity and the rest of ZF(C) axioms.\nRegularity was shown to be relatively consistent with the rest of ZF by Skolem and von Neumann, meaning that if ZF without regularity is consistent, then ZF (with regularity) is also consistent.\nThe axiom of regularity was also shown to be independent from the other axioms of ZFC, assuming they are consistent. The result was announced by Paul Bernays in 1941, although he did not publish a proof until 1954. The proof involves (and led to the study of) Rieger-Bernays permutation models (or method), which were used for other proofs of independence for non-well-founded systems.\nRegularity in ordinary mathematics.\nThe axiom of regularity is rarely useful outside of set theory; A. A. Fraenkel, Y. Bar-Hillel and A. Levy noted that \u201cits omission will not incapacitate any field of mathematics\u201d. Its inclusion, therefore, can be considered as chiefly a clarification of what one means by \u201cset\u201d, as elaborated on by the Mostowski collapse lemma (which provides the converse: that not only is membership on every set a well-founded and extensional relation, but that any such relation admits a corresponding set). If one performs mathematics in a more structural setting, for example by using a type theory or structural set theory like ETCS, the axiom is not used at all, since it is not needed to prove that Set, the category of sets, forms an elementary topos.\nHowever, it does have practical uses, especially in the absence of the axiom of choice. One application is Scott's trick for constructing equivalence classes of a relation defined on proper classes, as an alternative to postulating a Grothendieck universe; it may also be used as an alternative to choice in the proof of Frucht's theorem for infinite groups.\nRegularity and Russell's paradox.\nNaive set theory (the axiom schema of unrestricted comprehension and the axiom of extensionality) is inconsistent due to Russell's paradox. In early formalizations of sets, mathematicians and logicians have avoided that contradiction by replacing the axiom schema of comprehension with the much weaker axiom schema of separation. However, this step alone takes one to theories of sets which are considered too weak. So some of the power of comprehension was added back via the other existence axioms of ZF set theory (pairing, union, powerset, replacement, and infinity) which may be regarded as special cases of comprehension. So far, these axioms do not seem to lead to any contradiction. Subsequently, the axiom of choice and the axiom of regularity were added to exclude models with some undesirable properties. These two axioms are known to be relatively consistent.\nIn the presence of the axiom schema of separation, Russell's paradox becomes a proof that there is no set of all sets. The axiom of regularity together with the axiom of pairing also prohibit such a universal set. However, Russell's paradox yields a proof that there is no \"set of all sets\" using the axiom schema of separation alone, without any additional axioms. In particular, ZF without the axiom of regularity already prohibits such a universal set.\nIf a theory is extended by adding an axiom or axioms, then any (possibly undesirable) consequences of the original theory remain consequences of the extended theory. In particular, if ZF without regularity is extended by adding regularity to get ZF, then any contradiction (such as Russell's paradox) which followed from the original theory would still follow in the extended theory.\nThe existence of Quine atoms (sets that satisfy the formula equation \"x\"\u00a0=\u00a0{\"x\"}, i.e. have themselves as their only elements) is consistent with the theory obtained by removing the axiom of regularity from ZFC. Various non-wellfounded set theories allow \"safe\" circular sets, such as Quine atoms, without becoming inconsistent by means of Russell's paradox.\nRegularity, the cumulative hierarchy, and types.\nIn ZF it can be proven that the class formula_23, called the von Neumann universe, is equal to the class of all sets. This statement is even equivalent to the axiom of regularity (if we work in ZF with this axiom omitted). From any model which does not satisfy the axiom of regularity, a model which satisfies it can be constructed by taking only sets in formula_23.\nHerbert Enderton wrote that \"The idea of rank is a descendant of Russell's concept of \"type\"\". Comparing ZF with type theory, Alasdair Urquhart wrote that \"Zermelo's system has the notational advantage of not containing any explicitly typed variables, although in fact it can be seen as having an implicit type structure built into it, at least if the axiom of regularity is included.\nDana Scott went further and claimed that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The truth is that there is only one satisfactory way of avoiding the paradoxes: namely, the use of some form of the \"theory of types\". That was at the basis of both Russell's and Zermelo's intuitions. Indeed the best way to regard Zermelo's theory is as a simplification and extension of Russell's. (We mean Russell's \"simple\" theory of types, of course.) The simplification was to make the types \"cumulative\". Thus mixing of types is easier and annoying repetitions are avoided. Once the later types are allowed to accumulate the earlier ones, we can then easily imagine \"extending\" the types into the transfinite\u2014just how far we want to go must necessarily be left open. Now Russell made his types \"explicit\" in his notation and Zermelo left them \"implicit\". [emphasis in original]\nIn the same paper, Scott shows that an axiomatic system based on the inherent properties of the cumulative hierarchy turns out to be equivalent to ZF, including regularity.\nHistory.\nThe concept of well-foundedness and rank of a set were both introduced by Dmitry Mirimanoff. Mirimanoff called a set \"x\" \"regular\" () if every descending chain \"x\" \u220b \"x\"1 \u220b \"x\"2 \u220b ... is finite. Mirimanoff however did not consider his notion of regularity (and well-foundedness) as an axiom to be observed by all sets; in later papers Mirimanoff also explored what are now called non-well-founded sets ( in Mirimanoff's terminology).\nSkolem and von Neumann pointed out that non-well-founded sets are superfluous and in the same publication von Neumann gives an axiom which excludes some, but not all, non-well-founded sets. In a subsequent publication, von Neumann gave an equivalent but more complex version of the axiom of class foundation:\nformula_25\nThe contemporary and final form of the axiom is due to Zermelo.\nRegularity in the presence of urelements.\nUrelements are objects that are not sets, but which can be elements of sets. In ZF set theory, there are no urelements, but in some other set theories such as ZFA, there are. In these theories, the axiom of regularity must be modified. The statement \"formula_26\" needs to be replaced with a statement that formula_27 is not empty and is not an urelement. One suitable replacement is formula_28, which states that \"x\" is inhabited."}
{"id": "2114", "revid": "1126265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2114", "title": "IBM AIX", "text": "Series of Unix operating systems from IBM\nAIX (pronounced ) is a series of proprietary Unix operating systems developed and sold by IBM since 1986. The name stands for \"Advanced Interactive eXecutive\". Current versions are designed to work with Power ISA based server and workstation computers such as IBM's Power line.\nBackground.\nOriginally released for the IBM RT PC RISC workstation in 1986, AIX has supported a wide range of hardware platforms, including the IBM RS/6000 series and later Power and PowerPC-based systems, IBM System i, System/370 mainframes, PS/2 personal computers, and the Apple Network Server. Currently, it is supported on IBM Power Systems alongside IBM i and Linux.\nAIX is based on UNIX System V with 4.3BSD-compatible extensions. It is certified to the UNIX 03 and UNIX V7 specifications of the Single UNIX Specification, beginning with AIX versions 5.3 and 7.2 TL5, respectively. Older versions were certified to the UNIX 95 and UNIX 98 specifications.\nAIX was the first operating system to implement a journaling file system. IBM has continuously enhanced the software with features such as processor, disk, and network virtualization, dynamic hardware resource allocation (including fractional processor units), and reliability engineering concepts derived from its mainframe designs.\nHistory.\nUnix began in the early 1970s at AT&amp;T's Bell Labs research center, running on DEC minicomputers. By 1976, the operating system was used in various academic institutions, including Princeton University, where Tom Lyon and others ported it to the S/370 to run as a guest OS under VM/370. This port became Amdahl UTS from IBM's mainframe rival, which that company increasingly prioritized from the late 1980s.\nIBM's involvement with Unix began in 1979 when it assisted Bell Labs in porting Unix to the S/370 platform to be used as a build host for the 5ESS switch's software. During this process, IBM made modifications to the TSS/370 Resident Supervisor to better support Unix.\nIn 1984, IBM introduced its own Unix variant for the S/370 platform called VM/IX, developed by Interactive Systems Corporation (ISC) using Unix System III. However, VM/IX was only available as a PRPQ (Programming Request for Price Quotation) and was not a General Availability product.\nBy 1985 most computer companies offered Unix alongside their proprietary operating systems. Although an industry analyst that year described IBM as not enthusiastic about Unix, the company replaced VM/IX in 1985 with IBM IX/370, a fully supported product based on AT&amp;T's Unix System V, intended to compete against UTS and also developed by ISC.\nISC also developed AIX for the IBM RT PC workstation, introduced in January 1986, based on UNIX System V Releases 1 and 2, and incorporating source code from 4.2 and 4.3 BSD UNIX. AIX Version 2 followed in 1987 for the RT PC. AIX was also available for the IBM PC AT and IBM PC XT/286.\nIn 1990, AIX Version 3 was released for the new POWER-based RS/6000 platform. Observers said that year that IBM had officially approved Unix, with the company willing to let its proprietary AS/400 and Unix-based RS/6000 compete against each other in the midrange system market. AIX was the primary operating system for the RS/6000 series, which was later renamed \"IBM eServer pSeries\", \"IBM System p\", and finally \"IBM Power Systems\".\nAIX Version 4, introduced in 1994, added symmetric multiprocessing and evolved through the 1990s, culminating with AIX 4.3.3 in 1999. A modified version of Version 4.1 was also used as the standard OS for the Apple Network Server line by Apple Computer.\nIn the late 1990s, under Project Monterey, IBM and the Santa Cruz Operation attempted to integrate AIX and UnixWare into a multiplatform Unix for Intel IA-64 architecture. The project was discontinued in 2002 after limited commercial success.\nIn 2003, the SCO Group filed a lawsuit against IBM, alleging misappropriation of UNIX System V source code in AIX. The case was resolved in 2010 when a jury ruled that Novell owned the rights to Unix, not SCO.\nAIX 6 was announced in May 2007 and became generally available on November 9, 2007. Key features included role-based access control, workload partitions, and Live Partition Mobility.\nAIX 7.1 was released in September 2010 with enhancements such as Cluster Aware AIX and support for large-scale memory and real-time application requirements.\nSupported hardware platforms.\nIBM RT PC.\nThe original AIX (sometimes called AIX/RT) was developed for the IBM RT PC workstation by IBM in conjunction with ISC, which had previously ported UNIX System III to the IBM PC for IBM as PC/IX. According to its developers, the original AIX source consists of one million lines of code. Installation media consists of eight 1.2M floppy disks. The RT was based on the IBM ROMP microprocessor, the first commercial RISC chip, based on IBM Research's IBM 801).\nOne of the novel aspects of the RT design is the use of a microkernel, called Virtual Resource Manager (VRM). The keyboard, mouse, display, disk drives and network are all controlled by a microkernel. One can \"hotkey\" from one operating system to the next using the Alt-Tab key combination. Each OS in turn gets possession of the keyboard, mouse and display. Besides AIX v2, the PICK OS also includes this microkernel.\nMuch of the AIX v2 kernel was written in the PL.8 programming language, which proved troublesome during the migration to AIX v3. AIX v2 includes full TCP/IP networking, as well as SNA and two networking file systems: NFS, licensed from Sun Microsystems, and Distributed Services (DS). DS has the distinction of being built on top of SNA, and thereby being fully compatible with DS on and on midrange systems running OS/400 through IBM i. For the graphical user interfaces, AIX v2 comes with the X10R3 and later the X10R4 and X11 versions of the X Window System from MIT, with the Athena widget set. Compilers for Fortran and C were available.\nIBM PS/2 series.\nAIX PS/2 (also known as AIX/386) was developed by Locus Computing Corporation under contract to IBM. AIX PS/2, first released in October 1988, runs on IBM PS/2 personal computers with Intel 386 and compatible processors.\nThe product was announced in September 1988 with a baseline tag price of $595, although some utilities, such as UUCP, were included in a separate Extension package priced at $250. nroff and troff for AIX were also sold separately in a Text Formatting System package priced at $200. The TCP/IP stack for AIX PS/2 retailed for another $300. The X Window System package was priced at $195, and has a graphical environment called the AIXwindows Desktop, based on IXI's X.desktop. The C and FORTRAN compilers each had a price tag of $275. Locus also made available their DOS Merge virtual machine environment for AIX, which can run MS DOS 3.3 applications inside AIX; DOS Merge was sold separately for another $250. IBM also offered a $150 AIX PS/2 DOS Server Program, which provided file server and print server services for client computers running PC DOS 3.3.\nThe last version of PS/2 AIX is 1.3. It was released in 1992 and announced to add support for non-IBM (non-microchannel) computers as well. Support for PS/2 AIX ended in March 1995.\nIBM mainframes.\nIn 1988, IBM announced AIX/370, also developed by Locus. AIX/370 was IBM's fourth attempt to offer Unix-like functionality for their mainframe line, specifically the System/370 (the prior versions were a TSS/370-based Unix system developed jointly with AT&amp;T c.1980, a VM/370-based system named VM/IX developed jointly with ISC c.1984, and a VM/370-based version of TSS/370 named IX/370 which was upgraded to be compatible with UNIX System V). AIX/370 was released in 1990 with functional equivalence to System V Release 2 and 4.3BSD as well as IBM enhancements. With the introduction of the ESA/390 architecture, AIX/370 was replaced by AIX/ESA in 1991 based on OSF/1, and also runs on the System/390 platform. Unlike AIX/370, AIX/ESA runs both natively as the host operating system, and as a guest under VM. AIX/ESA, while technically advanced, had little commercial success, partially because UNIX functionality was added as an option to the existing mainframe operating system, MVS, as MVS/ESA SP Version 4 Release 3 OpenEdition in 1994, and continued as an integral part of MVS/ESA SP Version 5, OS/390 and z/OS, with the name eventually changing from \"OpenEdition\" to \"Unix System Services\". IBM also provided OpenEdition in VM/ESA Version 2 through z/VM.\nIA-64 systems.\nAs part of Project Monterey, IBM released a beta test version of AIX 5L for the IA-64 (Itanium) architecture in 2001, but this never became an official product due to lack of interest.\nApple Network Servers.\nThe Apple Network Server (ANS) systems are PowerPC-based systems designed by Apple Computer to have numerous high-end features that contemporary standard Apple hardware does not have, including swappable hard drives, redundant power supplies, and external monitoring capability. These systems are more or less based on the Power Macintosh hardware available at the time but designed to use AIX (versions 4.1.4 or 4.1.5) as their native operating system in a specialized version specific to the ANS called AIX for Apple Network Servers.\nAIX is only compatible with the Network Servers and was not ported to standard Power Macintosh hardware. It should not be confused with A/UX, Apple's earlier version of Unix for 68k-based Macintoshes.\nPOWER ISA/PowerPC/Power ISA-based systems.\nThe release of AIX version 3 (sometimes called AIX/6000) coincided with the announcement of the first POWER1-based IBM RS/6000 models in 1990.\nAIX v3 innovated in several ways on the software side. It is the first operating system to introduce the idea of a journaling file system, JFS, which allows for fast boot times by avoiding the need to ensure the consistency of the file systems on disks (see fsck) on every reboot. Another innovation is shared libraries which avoid the need for static linking from an application to the libraries it used. The resulting smaller binaries use less of the hardware RAM to run, and used less disk space to install. Besides improving performance, executable binaries can be in the tens of kilobytes instead of a megabyte for an executable statically linked to the C library. AIX v3 also scrapped the microkernel of AIX v2, a contentious move that resulted in v3 containing no PL.8 code and being somewhat more \"pure\" than v2.\nOther notable subsystems include:\nIn addition, AIX applications can run in the PASE subsystem under IBM i.\nSource code.\nIBM made the AIX for RS/6000 source code available to customers for a fee; in 1991, IBM customers could order the AIX 3.0 source code for a one-time charge of US$60,000; subsequently, IBM released the AIX 3.1 source code in 1992, and AIX 3.2 in 1993. These source code distributions exclude certain files (authored by third-parties) which IBM did not have rights to redistribute, and also exclude layered products such as the MS-DOS emulator and the C compiler. To license the AIX source code the customer first had to procure source code license agreements with AT&amp;T and the University of California, Berkeley.\nUser interfaces.\nThe default shell was Bourne shell up to AIX version 3, and KornShell (ksh88) in version 4 for XPG4 and POSIX compliance.\nGraphical.\nThe Common Desktop Environment (CDE) is AIX's default graphical user interface. As part of Linux Affinity and the free AIX Toolbox for Linux Applications (ATLA), open-source KDE and GNOME desktops are also available.\nSystem Management Interface Tool.\nSMIT is the System Management Interface Tool for AIX. It allows a user to navigate a menu hierarchy of commands, rather than using the command line. Invocation is typically achieved with the command codice_1. Experienced system administrators make use of the codice_2 function key which generates the command line that SMIT will invoke to complete it.\nSMIT also generates a log of commands that are performed in the codice_3 file. The codice_3 file automatically records the commands with the command flags and parameters used. The codice_3 file can be used as an executable shell script to rerun system configuration tasks. SMIT also creates the codice_6 file, which contains additional detailed information that can be used by programmers in extending the SMIT system.\ncodice_1 and codice_8 refer to the same program, though codice_8 invokes the text-based version, while codice_1 will invoke an X Window System based interface if possible; however, if codice_1 determines that X Window System capabilities are not present, it will present the text-based version instead of failing. Determination of X Window System capabilities is typically performed by checking for the existence of the codice_12 variable.\nDatabase.\nObject Data Manager (ODM) is a database of system information integrated into AIX, analogous to the registry in Microsoft Windows. A good understanding of the ODM is essential for managing AIX systems.\nData managed in ODM is stored and maintained as objects with associated attributes. Interaction with ODM is possible via application programming interface (API) library for programs, and command-line utilities such as \"odmshow\", \"odmget\", \"odmadd\", \"odmchange\" and \"odmdelete\" for shell scripts and users. SMIT and its associated AIX commands can also be used to query and modify information in the ODM. ODM is stored on disk using Berkeley DB files.\nExample of information stored in the ODM database are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2115", "revid": "3542054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2115", "title": "AppleTalk", "text": "Computer networking protocol suite\nAppleTalk is a discontinued proprietary suite of networking protocols developed by Apple Computer for their Macintosh computers. AppleTalk includes a number of features that allow local area networks to be connected with no prior setup or the need for a centralized router or server of any sort. Connected AppleTalk-equipped systems automatically assign addresses, update the distributed namespace, and configure any required inter-networking routing.\nAppleTalk was released in 1985 and was the primary protocol used by Apple devices through the 1980s and 1990s. Versions were also released for the IBM PC and compatibles and the Apple IIGS. AppleTalk support was also available in most networked printers (especially laser printers), some file servers, and a number of routers.\nThe rise of TCP/IP during the 1990s led to a reimplementation of most of these types of support on that protocol, and AppleTalk became unsupported as of the release of Mac OS X v10.6 in 2009. Many of AppleTalk's more advanced autoconfiguration features have since been introduced in Bonjour, while Universal Plug and Play serves similar needs.\nHistory.\nAppleNet.\nAfter the release of the Apple Lisa computer in January 1983, Apple invested considerable effort in the development of a local area networking (LAN) system for the machines. Known as AppleNet, it was based on the seminal Xerox XNS protocol stack but running on a custom 1\u00a0Mbit/s coaxial cable system rather than Xerox's 2.94\u00a0Mbit/s Ethernet. AppleNet was announced early in 1983 with a full introduction at the target price of $500 for plug-in AppleNet cards for the Lisa and the Apple II.\nAt that time, early LAN systems were just coming to market, including Ethernet, Token Ring, Econet, and ARCNET. This was a topic of major commercial effort at the time, dominating shows like the National Computer Conference (NCC) in Anaheim in May 1983. All of the systems were jockeying for position in the market, but even at this time, Ethernet's widespread acceptance suggested it was to become a \"de facto\" standard. It was at this show that Steve Jobs asked Gursharan Sidhu a seemingly innocuous question: \"Why has networking not caught on?\"\nFour months later, in October, AppleNet was cancelled. At the time, they announced that \"Apple realized that it's not in the business to create a networking system. We built and used AppleNet in-house, but we realized that if we had shipped it, we would have seen new standards coming up.\" In January, Jobs announced that they would instead be supporting IBM's Token Ring, which he expected to come out in a \"few months\".\nAppleBus.\nThrough this period, Apple was deep in development of the Macintosh computer. During development, engineers had made the decision to use the Zilog 8530 serial controller chip (SCC) instead of the lower-cost and more common UART to provide serial port connections. The SCC cost about $5 more than a UART, but offered much higher speeds of up to 250\u00a0kilobits per second (or higher with additional hardware) and internally supported a number of basic networking-like protocols like IBM's Bisync.\nThe SCC was chosen because it would allow multiple devices to be attached to the port. Peripherals equipped with similar SCCs could communicate using the built-in protocols, interleaving their data with other peripherals on the same bus. This would eliminate the need for more ports on the back of the machine, and allowed for the elimination of expansion slots for supporting more complex devices. The initial concept was known as AppleBus, envisioning a system controlled by the host Macintosh polling \"dumb\" devices in a fashion similar to the modern Universal Serial Bus.\nAppleBus networking.\nThe Macintosh team had already begun work on what would become the LaserWriter and had considered a number of other options to answer the question of how to share these expensive machines and other resources. A series of memos from Bob Belleville clarified these concepts, outlining the Mac, LaserWriter, and a file server system which would become the Macintosh Office. By late 1983 it was clear that IBM's Token Ring would not be ready in time for the launch of the Mac, and might miss the launch of these other products as well. In the end, Token Ring would not ship until October 1985.\nJobs' earlier question to Sidhu had already sparked a number of ideas. When AppleNet was cancelled in October, Sidhu led an effort to develop a new networking system based on the AppleBus hardware. This new system would not have to conform to any existing preconceptions, and was designed to be worthy of the Mac \u2013 a system that was user-installable and required no configuration or fixed network addresses \u2013 in short, a true plug-and-play network. Considerable effort was needed, but by the time the Mac was released, the basic concepts had been outlined, and some of the low-level protocols were on their way to completion. Sidhu mentioned the work to Belleville only two hours after the Mac was announced.\nThe \"new\" AppleBus was announced in early 1984, allowing direct connection from the Mac or Lisa through a small box that is plugged into the serial port and connected via cables to the next computer upstream and downstream. Adaptors for Apple II and Apple III were also announced. Apple also announced that an AppleBus network could be attached to, and would appear to be a single node within, a Token Ring system. Details of how this would work were sketchy.\nAppleTalk Personal Network.\nJust prior to its release in early 1985, AppleBus was renamed AppleTalk. Initially marketed as AppleTalk Personal Network, it comprised a family of network protocols and a physical layer.\nThe physical layer had a number of limitations, including a speed of only 230.4\u00a0kbit/s, a maximum distance of from end to end, and only 32 nodes per LAN. But as the basic hardware was built into the Mac, adding nodes only cost about $50 for the adaptor box. In comparison, Ethernet or Token Ring cards cost hundreds or thousands of dollars. Additionally, the entire networking stack required only about 6\u00a0kB of RAM, allowing it to run on any Mac.\nThe relatively slow speed of AppleTalk allowed further reductions in cost. Instead of using RS-422's balanced transmit and receive circuits, the AppleTalk cabling used a single common electrical ground, which limited speeds to about 500\u00a0kbit/s, but allowed one conductor to be removed. This meant that common three-conductor cables could be used for wiring. Additionally, the adaptors were designed to be \"self-terminating\", meaning that nodes at the end of the network could simply leave their last connector unconnected. There was no need for the wires to be connected back together into a loop, nor the need for hubs or other devices.\nThe system was designed for future expansion; the addressing system allowed for expansion to 255 nodes in a LAN (although only 32 could be used at that time), and by using \"bridges\" (which came to be known as \"routers\", although technically not the same) one could interconnect LANs into larger collections. \"Zones\" allowed devices to be addressed within a bridge-connected internet. Additionally, AppleTalk was designed from the start to allow use with any potential underlying physical link, and within a few years, the physical layer would be renamed LocalTalk, so as to differentiate it from the AppleTalk protocols.\nOne advantage of AppleTalk was that it was auto-configuring. To join a device to a network, a user simply plugged the adaptor into the machine, then connected a cable from it to any free port on any other adaptor. The AppleTalk network stack negotiated a network address, and compiled a list of names and types of other machines on the network so the user could browse the devices through the Chooser. AppleTalk was so easy to use that ad hoc networks tended to appear whenever multiple Macs were in the same room. Apple would later use this in an advertisement showing a network being created between two seats in an airplane. A disadvantage of AppleTalk Personal Network is that cable connectors easily separate, causing network failures.\nPhoneNet and other adaptors.\nSlow but inexpensive, AppleTalk became widely popular. A thriving third-party market for AppleTalk devices developed over the next few years. One particularly notable example was an alternate adaptor designed by BMUG and commercialised by Farallon as PhoneNET in 1987. This was essentially a replacement for Apple's connector using conventional phone jacks instead of Apple's round connectors. PhoneNet allows AppleTalk networks to be connected together using normal telephone wires, and with very little extra work, can run analog phones and AppleTalk on a single four-conductor phone cable.\nOther companies took advantage of the SCC's ability to read external clocks in order to support higher transmission speeds, up to 1 Mbit/s. In these systems, the external adaptor also included its own clock, and used that to signal the SCC's clock input pins. The best-known such system was Centram's FlashTalk, which ran at 768\u00a0kbit/s, and was intended to be used with their TOPS networking system. A similar solution was the 850\u00a0kbit/s DaynaTalk, which used a separate box that plugged in between the computer and a normal LocalTalk/PhoneNet box. Dayna also offered a PC expansion card that ran up to 1.7\u00a0Mbit/s when talking to other Dayna PC cards. Several other systems also existed with even higher performance, but these often required special cabling that was incompatible with LocalTalk/PhoneNet, and also required patches to the networking stack that often caused problems.\nAppleTalk over Ethernet.\nAs Apple expanded into more commercial and education markets, they needed to integrate AppleTalk into existing network installations. Many of these organisations had already invested in a very expensive Ethernet infrastructure and there was no direct way to connect a Macintosh to Ethernet. AppleTalk included a protocol structure for interconnecting AppleTalk subnets and so as a solution, EtherTalk was initially created to use the Ethernet as a backbone between LocalTalk subnets. To accomplish this, organizations would need to purchase a LocalTalk-to-Ethernet bridge and Apple left it to third parties to produce these products. A number of companies responded, including Hayes and a few newly formed companies like Kinetics.\nLocalTalk, EtherTalk, TokenTalk, and AppleShare.\nBy 1987, Ethernet was clearly winning the standards battle over Token Ring, and in the middle of that year, Apple introduced EtherTalk 1.0, an implementation of the AppleTalk protocol over the Ethernet physical layer. Introduced for the newly released Macintosh II computer, one of Apple's first two Macintoshes with expansion slots (the Macintosh SE had one slot of a different type), the operating system included a new Network control panel that allowed the user to select which physical connection to use for networking (from \"Built-in\" or \"EtherTalk\"). At introduction, Ethernet interface cards were available from 3Com and Kinetics that plugged into a NuBus slot in the machine. The new networking stack also expanded the system to allow a full 255 nodes per LAN. With EtherTalk's release, AppleTalk Personal Network was renamed LocalTalk, the name it would be known under for the bulk of its life. Token Ring would later be supported with a similar TokenTalk product, which used the same Network control panel and underlying software. Over time, many third-party companies would introduce compatible Ethernet and Token Ring cards that used these same drivers.\nThe appearance of a Macintosh with a direct Ethernet connection also magnified the Ethernet and LocalTalk compatibility problem: Networks with new and old Macs needed some way to communicate with each other. This could be as simple as a network of Ethernet Mac II's trying to talk to a LaserWriter that only connected to LocalTalk. Apple initially relied on the aforementioned LocalTalk-to-Ethernet bridge products, but contrary to Apple's belief that these would be low-volume products, by the end of 1987, 130,000 such networks were in use. AppleTalk was at that time the most used networking system in the world, with over three times the installations of any other vendor.\n1987 also marked the introduction of the AppleShare product, a dedicated file server that ran on any Mac with 512\u00a0kB of RAM or more. A common AppleShare machine was the Mac Plus with an external SCSI hard drive. AppleShare was the #3 network operating system (NOS) in the late 1980s, behind Novell NetWare and Microsoft's MS-Net. While NetWare had more than 50% of the NOS market, AppleTalk users were the happiest. AppleShare was effectively the replacement for the failed Macintosh Office efforts, which had been based on a dedicated file server device.\nAppleTalk Phase II and other developments.\nA significant re-design was released in 1989 as AppleTalk Phase II. In many ways, Phase II can be considered an effort to make the earlier version (never called Phase I) more generic. LANs could now support more than 255 nodes, and zones were no longer associated with physical networks but were entirely virtual constructs used simply to organize nodes. For instance, one could now make a \"Printers\" zone that would list all the printers in an organization, or one might want to place that same device in the \"2nd Floor\" zone to indicate its physical location. Phase II also included changes to the underlying inter-networking protocols to make them less \"chatty\", which had previously been a serious problem on networks that bridged over wide-area networks.\nBy this point, Apple had a wide variety of communications products under development, and many of these were announced along with AppleTalk Phase II. These included updates to EtherTalk and TokenTalk, AppleTalk software and LocalTalk hardware for the IBM PC, EtherTalk for Apple's A/UX operating system allowing it to use LaserWriters and other network resources, and the Mac X.25 and MacX products.\nEthernet had become almost universal by 1990, and it was time to build Ethernet into Macs direct from the factory. However, the physical wiring used by these networks was not yet completely standardized. Apple solved this problem using a single port on the back of the computer into which the user could plug an adaptor for any given cabling system. This FriendlyNet system was based on the industry-standard Attachment Unit Interface or AUI, but deliberately chose a non-standard connector that was smaller and easier to use, which they called \"Apple AUI\", or AAUI. FriendlyNet was first introduced on the Quadra 700 and Quadra 900 computers, and used across much of the Mac line for some time. As with LocalTalk, a number of third-party FriendlyNet adaptors quickly appeared.\nAs 10BASE-T became the de facto cabling system for Ethernet, second-generation Power Macintosh machines added a 10BASE-T port in addition to AAUI. The PowerBook 3400c and lower-end Power Macs also added 10BASE-T. The Power Macintosh 7300/8600/9600 were the final Macs to include AAUI, and 10BASE-T became universal starting with the Power Macintosh G3 and PowerBook G3.\nThe capital-I Internet.\nFrom the beginning of AppleTalk, users wanted to connect the Macintosh to TCP/IP network environments. In 1984, Bill Croft at Stanford University pioneered the development of IP packets encapsulated in DDP as part of the SEAGATE (Stanford Ethernet\u2013AppleTalk Gateway) project. SEAGATE was commercialized by Kinetics in their LocalTalk-to-Ethernet bridge as an additional routing option. A few years later, MacIP was separated from the SEAGATE code and became the de facto method for IP packets to be routed over LocalTalk networks. By 1986, Columbia University released the first version of the Columbia AppleTalk Package (CAP) that allowed higher integration of Unix, TCP/IP, and AppleTalk environments. In 1988, Apple released MacTCP, a system that allowed the Mac to support TCP/IP on machines with suitable Ethernet hardware. However, this left many universities with the problem of supporting IP on their many LocalTalk-equipped Macs. It was soon common to include MacIP support in LocalTalk-to-Ethernet bridges. MacTCP would not become a standard part of the Classic Mac OS until 1994, by which time it also supported SNMP and PPP.\nFor some time in the early 1990s, the Mac was a primary client on the rapidly expanding Internet.Among the better-known programs in wide use were Fetch, Eudora, eXodus, NewsWatcher, and the NCSA packages, especially NCSA Mosaic and its offspring, Netscape Navigator. Additionally, a number of server products appeared that allowed the Mac to host Internet content. Through this period, Macs had about 2 to 3 times as many clients connected to the Internet as any other platform, despite the relatively small overall microcomputer market share.\nAs the world quickly moved to IP for both LAN and WAN uses, Apple was faced with maintaining two increasingly outdated code bases on an ever-wider group of machines as well as the introduction of the PowerPC-based machines. This led to the Open Transport efforts, which re-implemented both MacTCP and AppleTalk on an entirely new code base adapted from the Unix standard STREAMS. Early versions had problems and did not become stable for some time. By that point, Apple was deep in their ultimately doomed Copland efforts.\nLegacy and abandonment.\nWith the purchase of NeXT and subsequent development of Mac OS X, AppleTalk was strictly a legacy system. Support was added to Mac\u00a0OS\u00a0X in order to provide support for a large number of existing AppleTalk devices, notably laser printers and file shares, but alternate connection solutions common in this era, notably USB for printers, limited their demand. As Apple abandoned many of these product categories, and all new systems were based on IP, AppleTalk became less and less common. AppleTalk support was finally removed from the macOS line in Mac OS X v10.6 in 2009.\nHowever, the loss of AppleTalk did not reduce the desire for networking solutions that combined its ease of use with IP routing. Apple has led the development of many such efforts, from the introduction of the AirPort router to the development of the zero-configuration networking system and their implementation of it, Rendezvous, later renamed \"Bonjour\".\nAs of 2020, AppleTalk support has been completely removed from legacy support with macOS 11 Big Sur.\nDesign.\nThe AppleTalk design followed the OSI model of protocol layering. Unlike most of the early LAN systems, AppleTalk was not built using the archetypal Xerox XNS system. The intended target was not Ethernet, and it did not have 48-bit addresses to route. Nevertheless, many portions of the AppleTalk system have direct analogs in XNS.\nOne key differentiation for AppleTalk was it contained two protocols aimed at making the system completely self-configuring. The \"AppleTalk address resolution protocol\" (\"AARP\") allowed AppleTalk hosts to automatically generate their own network addresses, and the \"Name Binding Protocol\" (\"NBP\") was a dynamic system for mapping network addresses to user-readable names. Although systems similar to AARP existed in other systems, Banyan VINES for instance. Beginning about 2002 Rendezvous (the combination of DNS-based service discovery, Multicast DNS, and link-local addressing) provided capabilities and usability using IP that were similar to those of AppleTalk.\nBoth AARP and NBP had defined ways to allow \"controller\" devices to override the default mechanisms. The concept was to allow routers to provide the information or \"hardwire\" the system to known addresses and names. On larger networks where AARP could cause problems as new nodes searched for free addresses, the addition of a router could reduce \"chattiness.\" Together AARP and NBP made AppleTalk an easy-to-use networking system. New machines were added to the network by plugging them in and optionally giving them a name. The NBP lists were examined and displayed by a program known as the \"Chooser\" which would display a list of machines on the local network, divided into classes such as file-servers and printers.\nAddressing.\nAn AppleTalk address was a four-byte quantity. This consisted of a two-byte network number, a one-byte node number, and a one-byte socket number. Of these, only the network number required any configuration, being obtained from a router. Each node dynamically chose its own node number, according to a protocol (originally the LocalTalk Link Access Protocol LLAP and later, for Ethernet/EtherTalk, the AppleTalk Address Resolution Protocol, AARP) which handled contention between different nodes accidentally choosing the same number. For socket numbers, a few well-known numbers were reserved for special purposes specific to the AppleTalk protocol itself. Apart from these, all application-level protocols were expected to use dynamically assigned socket numbers at both the client and server end.\nBecause of this dynamism, users could not be expected to access services by specifying their address. Instead, all services had \"names\" which, being chosen by humans, could be expected to be meaningful to users, and also could be sufficiently long to minimize the chance of conflicts.\nAs NBP names translated to an address, which included a socket number as well as a node number, a name in AppleTalk mapped directly to a \"service\" being provided by a machine, which was entirely separate from the name of the machine itself. Thus, services could be moved to a different machine and, so long as they kept the same service name, there was no need for users to do anything different in order to continue accessing the service. And the same machine could host any number of instances of services of the same type, without any network connection conflicts.\nContrast this with \"A records\" in the DNS, in which a name translates to a machine's address, not including the port number that might be providing a service. Thus, if people are accustomed to using a particular machine name to access a particular service, their access will break when the service is moved to a different machine. This can be mitigated somewhat by insistence on using \"CNAME records\" indicating service rather than actual machine names to refer to the service, but there is no way of guaranteeing that users will follow such a convention. Some newer protocols, such as Kerberos and Active Directory use DNS SRV records to identify services by name, which is much closer to the AppleTalk model.\nProtocols.\nAppleTalk Address Resolution Protocol.\nThe AppleTalk Address Resolution Protocol (AARP) resolves AppleTalk addresses to link layer addresses. It is functionally equivalent to ARP and obtains address resolution by a method very similar to ARP.\nAARP is a fairly simple system. When powered on, an AppleTalk machine broadcasts an \"AARP probe packet\" asking for a network address, intending to hear back from controllers such as routers. If no address is provided, one is picked at random from the \"base subnet\", 0. It then broadcasts another packet saying \"I am selecting this address\", and then waits to see if anyone else on the network complains. If another machine has that address, the newly connecting machine will pick another address, and keep trying until it finds a free one. On a network with many machines it may take several tries before a free address is found, so for performance purposes the successful address is recorded in NVRAM and used as the default address in the future. This means that in most real-world setups where machines are added a few at a time, only one or two tries are needed before the address effectively becomes constant.\nAppleTalk Data Stream Protocol.\nThe AppleTalk Data Stream Protocol (ADSP) was a comparatively late addition to the AppleTalk protocol suite, done when it became clear that a TCP-style reliable connection-oriented transport was needed. Significant differences from TCP were that:\nApple Filing Protocol.\nThe Apple Filing Protocol (AFP), formerly AppleTalk Filing Protocol, is the protocol for communicating with AppleShare file servers. Built on top of AppleTalk Session Protocol (for legacy AFP over DDP) or the Data Stream Interface (for AFP over TCP), it provides services for authenticating users (extensible to different authentication methods including two-way random-number exchange) and for performing operations specific to the Macintosh HFS filesystem. AFP is still in use in macOS, even though most other AppleTalk protocols have been deprecated.\nAppleTalk Session Protocol.\nThe AppleTalk Session Protocol (ASP) was an intermediate protocol, built on top of AppleTalk Transaction Protocol (ATP), which in turn was the foundation of AFP. It provided basic services for requesting responses to arbitrary \"commands\" and performing out-of-band status queries. It also allowed the server to send asynchronous \"attention\" messages to the client.\nAppleTalk Transaction Protocol.\nThe AppleTalk Transaction Protocol (ATP) was the original reliable transport-level protocol for AppleTalk, built on top of DDP. At the time it was being developed, a full, reliable connection-oriented protocol like TCP was considered to be too expensive to implement for most of the intended uses of AppleTalk. Thus, ATP was a simple request/response exchange, with no need to set up or tear down connections.\nAn ATP \"request\" packet could be answered by up to eight \"response\" packets. The requestor then sent an \"acknowledgement\" packet containing a bit mask indicating which of the response packets it received, so the responder could retransmit the remainder.\nATP could operate in either \"at-least-once\" mode or \"exactly-once\" mode. Exactly-once mode was essential for operations which were not idempotent; in this mode, the responder kept a copy of the response buffers in memory until successful receipt of a \"release\" packet from the requestor, or until a timeout elapsed. This way, it could respond to duplicate requests with the same transaction ID by resending the same response data, without performing the actual operation again.\nDatagram Delivery Protocol.\nThe Datagram Delivery Protocol (DDP) was the lowest-level data-link-independent transport protocol. It provided a datagram service with no guarantees of delivery. All application-level protocols, including the infrastructure protocols NBP, RTMP and ZIP, were built on top of DDP. AppleTalk's DDP corresponds closely to the Network layer of the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) communication model.\nName Binding Protocol.\nThe Name Binding Protocol (NBP) was a dynamic, distributed system for managing AppleTalk names. When a service started up on a machine, it registered a name for itself as chosen by a human administrator. At this point, NBP provided a system for checking that no other machine had already registered the same name. Later, when a client wanted to access that service, it used NBP to query machines to find that service. NBP provided browsability (\"what are the names of all the services available?\") as well as the ability to find a service with a particular name. Names were human-readable, containing spaces and upper- and lower-case letters, and including support for searching.\nAppleTalk Echo Protocol.\nThe AppleTalk Echo Protocol (AEP) was a transport layer protocol designed to test the reachability of network nodes. AEP generates packets to be sent to the network node and is identified in the Type field of a packet as an AEP packet. The packet is first passed to the source DDP. After it is identified as an AEP packet, it is forwarded to the node where the packet is examined by the DDP at the destination. After the packet is identified as an AEP packet, the packet is then copied and a field in the packet is altered to create an AEP reply packet, and is then returned to the source node.\nPrinter Access Protocol.\nThe Printer Access Protocol (PAP) was the standard way of communicating with PostScript printers. It was built on top of ATP. When a PAP connection was opened, each end sent the other an ATP request which basically meant \"send me more data\". The client's response to the server was to send a block of PostScript code, while the server could respond with any diagnostic messages that might be generated as a result, after which another \"send-more-data\" request was sent. This use of ATP provided automatic flow control; each end could only send data to the other end if there was an outstanding ATP request to respond to.\nPAP also provided for out-of-band status queries, handled by separate ATP transactions. Even while it was busy servicing a print job from one client, a PAP server could continue to respond to status requests from any number of other clients. This allowed other Macintoshes on the LAN that were waiting to print to display status messages indicating that the printer was busy, and what the job was that it was busy with.\nRouting Table Maintenance Protocol.\nThe Routing Table Maintenance Protocol (RTMP) was the protocol by which routers kept each other informed about the topology of the network. This was the only part of AppleTalk that required periodic unsolicited broadcasts: every 10 seconds, each router had to send out a list of all the network numbers it knew about and how far away it thought they were.\nZone Information Protocol.\nThe Zone Information Protocol (ZIP) was the protocol by which AppleTalk network numbers were associated with zone names. A \"zone\" was a subdivision of the network that made sense to humans (for example, \"Accounting Department\"); but while a network number had to be assigned to a topologically contiguous section of the network, a zone could include several different discontiguous portions of the network.\nPhysical implementation.\nThe initial default hardware implementation for AppleTalk was a high-speed serial protocol known as \"LocalTalk\" that used the Macintosh's built-in RS-422 ports at 230.4\u00a0kbit/s. LocalTalk used a splitter box in the RS-422 port to provide an upstream and downstream cable from a single port. The topology was a bus: cables were daisy-chained from each connected machine to the next, up to the maximum of 32 permitted on any LocalTalk segment. The system was slow by today's standards, but at the time the additional cost and complexity of networking on PC machines was such that it was common that Macs were the only networked personal computers in an office. Other larger computers, such as UNIX or VAX workstations, would commonly be networked via Ethernet.\nOther physical implementations were also available. A very popular replacement for LocalTalk was \"PhoneNET\", a third-party solution from Farallon Computing, Inc. (renamed Netopia, acquired by Motorola in 2007) that also used the RS-422 port and was indistinguishable from LocalTalk as far as Apple's LocalTalk port drivers were concerned, but ran over very inexpensive standard phone cabling with four-wire, six-position modular connectors, the same cables used to connect landline telephones. Since it used the second pair of wires, network devices could even be connected through existing telephone jacks if a second line was not present. Foreshadowing today's network hubs and switches, Farallon provided solutions for PhoneNet to be used in \"star\" as well as \"bus\" configurations, with both \"passive\" star connections (with the phone wires simply bridged to each other at a central point), and \"active\" star with \"PhoneNet Star Controller\" hub hardware. In a star configuration, any wiring issue only affected one device, and problems were easy to pinpoint. PhoneNet's low cost, flexibility, and easy troubleshooting resulted in it being the dominant choice for Mac networks into the early 1990s.\nAppleTalk protocols also came to run over Ethernet (first coaxial and then twisted pair) and Token Ring physical layers, labeled by Apple as \"EtherTalk\" and \"TokenTalk\", respectively. EtherTalk gradually became the dominant implementation method for AppleTalk as Ethernet became generally popular in the PC industry throughout the 1990s. Besides AppleTalk and TCP/IP, any Ethernet network could also simultaneously carry other protocols such as DECnet and IPX.\nCross-platform solutions.\nBy contrast to Macs, in the late 1980s no dominant LAN hardware standard existed for the most popular office computing platform, the PC compatible running MS-DOS. Apple introduced the AppleTalk PC Card in early 1987, allowing PCs to join AppleTalk networks and print to LaserWriter printers. A year later AppleShare PC was released, allowing PCs to access AppleShare file servers.\nThe \"TOPS Teleconnector\" MS-DOS networking system over AppleTalk system enabled MS-DOS PCs to communicate over AppleTalk network hardware; it comprised an AppleTalk interface card for the PC and a suite of networking software allowing such functions as file, drive and printer sharing. As well as allowing the construction of a PC-only AppleTalk network, it allowed communication between PCs and Macs with TOPS software installed. (Macs without TOPS installed could use the same network but only to communicate with other Apple machines.) The Mac TOPS software did not match the quality of Apple's own either in ease of use or in robustness and freedom from crashes, but the DOS software was relatively simple to use in DOS terms, and was robust.\nThe BSD and Linux operating systems support AppleTalk through an open source project called Netatalk, which implements the complete protocol suite and allows them to both act as native file or print servers for Macintosh computers, and print to LocalTalk printers over the network.\nThe Windows Server operating systems supported AppleTalk starting with Windows NT and ending after Windows Server 2003. Miramar included AppleTalk in its PC MacLAN product which was discontinued by CA in 2007. GroupLogic continues to bundle its AppleTalk protocol with its ExtremeZ-IP server software for Macintosh-Windows integration which supports Windows Server 2008 and Windows Vista as well prior versions. HELIOS Software GmbH offers a proprietary implementation of the AppleTalk protocol stack, as part of their HELIOS UB2 server. This is essentially a File and Print Server suite that runs on a whole range of different platforms.\nIn addition, Columbia University released the Columbia AppleTalk Package (CAP) which implemented the protocol suite for various Unix flavours including Ultrix, SunOS, BSD and IRIX. This package is no longer actively maintained.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2116", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2116", "title": "Apple II", "text": "1977\u20131993 series of microcomputers\nApple II (\"apple two\", stylized as Apple ][) is a series of microcomputers manufactured by Apple Computer, Inc. from 1977 to 1993. The original Apple II model, which gave the series its name, was designed by Steve Wozniak and was first sold on June 10, 1977. Its success led to it being followed by the Apple II Plus, Apple IIe, Apple IIc, and Apple IIc Plus, with the 1983 IIe being the most popular. The name is trademarked with square brackets as Apple\u00a0][, then, beginning with the IIe, as Apple\u00a0//.\nThe Apple II was a major advancement over its predecessor, the Apple I, in terms of ease of use, features, and expandability. It became one of several recognizable and successful computers throughout the 1980s, although this was mainly limited to the US. It was aggressively marketed through volume discounts and manufacturing arrangements to educational institutions, which made it the first computer in widespread use in American secondary schools, displacing the early leader Commodore PET. The effort to develop educational and business software for the Apple II, including the 1979 release of the popular VisiCalc spreadsheet, made the computer especially popular with business users and families.\nThe Apple II computers are based on the 6502 8-bit processor and can display text and two resolutions of color graphics. A software-controlled speaker provides one channel of low-fidelity audio. A model with more advanced graphics and sound and a 16-bit processor, the Apple II, was added in 1986. It remained compatible with earlier Apple II models, but the II has more in common with mid-1980s systems like the Atari ST, Amiga, and Acorn Archimedes.\nDespite the introduction of the Motorola 68000-based Macintosh in 1984, the Apple II series still reportedly accounted for 85% of the company's hardware sales in the first quarter of fiscal 1985. Apple continued to sell Apple II systems alongside the Macintosh until terminating the II in December 1992 and the IIe in November 1993. The last II-series Apple in production, the IIe card for Macintoshes, was discontinued on October 15, 1993; having been one of the longest running mass-produced home computer series, the total Apple II sales of all of its models during its 16-year production run were about 6 million units (including about 1.25\u00a0million Apple II models) with the peak occurring in 1983 when 1 million were sold.\nHardware.\nUnlike preceding home microcomputers, the Apple II was sold as a finished consumer appliance rather than as a kit (unassembled or preassembled). Apple marketed the Apple II as a durable product, including a 1981 ad in which an Apple II survived a fire started when a cat belonging to one early user knocked over a lamp.\nAll the machines in the series, except the IIc, share similar overall design elements. The plastic case was designed to look more like a home appliance than a piece of electronic equipment, and the case can be opened without the use of tools. All models in the Apple II series have a built-in keyboard, with the exception of the II which has a separate keyboard.\nApple IIs have color and high-resolution graphics modes, sound capabilities and a built-in BASIC programming language. The motherboard holds eight expansion slots and an array of random access memory (RAM) sockets that can hold up to 48\u00a0kilobytes. Over the course of the Apple II series' life, an enormous amount of first- and third-party hardware was made available to extend the capabilities of the machine. The IIc was designed as a compact, portable unit, not intended to be disassembled, and cannot use most of the expansion hardware sold for the other machines in the series.\nSoftware.\nThe original Apple II has the operating system in ROM along with a BASIC variant called Integer BASIC. Apple eventually released Applesoft BASIC, a more advanced variant of the language which users can run instead of Integer BASIC. The Apple II series eventually supported over 1,500 software programs.\nWhen the Disk II floppy disk drive was released in 1978, a new operating system, Apple DOS, was commissioned from Shepardson Microsystems and developed by Paul Laughton, adding support for the disk drive. The final and most popular version of this software was Apple DOS 3.3.\nApple DOS was superseded by ProDOS, which supported a hierarchical file system and larger storage devices. With an optional third-party Z80-based expansion card, the Apple II could boot into the CP/M operating system and run WordStar, dBase II, and other CP/M software. With the release of MousePaint in 1984 and the Apple II in 1986, the platform took on the look of the Macintosh user interface, including a mouse.\nMuch commercial Apple II software shipped on self-booting disks and does not use standard DOS disk formats. This discouraged the copying or modifying of the software on the disks, and improved loading speed.\nModels.\nApple II.\nThe first Apple II computers went on sale on June 10, 1977 with a MOS Technology 6502 (later Synertek) microprocessor running at 1.023\u00a0MHz, 4\u00a0KB of RAM, an audio cassette interface for loading programs and storing data, and the Integer BASIC programming language built into the ROMs. The video controller displayed 40 columns by 24 lines of monochrome, upper-case-only (the original character set matches ASCII characters 0x20 to 0x5F) text on the screen, with NTSC composite video output suitable for display on a TV monitor, or on a regular TV set by way of a separate RF modulator. The original retail price of the computer was US$ with 4\u00a0KB of RAM and US$ with the maximum 48\u00a0KB of RAM. To reflect the computer's color graphics capability, the Apple logo on the casing was represented using rainbow stripes, which remained a part of Apple's corporate logo until early 1998. The earliest Apple IIs were assembled in Silicon Valley, and later in Texas; printed circuit boards were manufactured in Ireland and Singapore.\nAn external &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5+1\u20444-inch floppy disk drive, the Disk II, attached via a controller card that plugged into one of the computer's expansion slots (usually slot 6), was used for data storage and retrieval to replace cassettes. The Disk II interface, created by Steve Wozniak, was regarded as an engineering masterpiece for its economy of electronic components.\nRather than having a dedicated sound-synthesis chip, the Apple II had a toggle circuit that could only emit a click through a built-in speaker; all other sounds (including two, three and, eventually, four-voice music and playback of audio samples and speech synthesis) were generated entirely by software that clicked the speaker at just the right times.\nThe Apple II's multiple expansion slots permitted a wide variety of third-party devices, including Apple II peripheral cards such as serial controllers, display controllers, memory boards, hard disks, networking components, and real-time clocks. There were plug-in expansion cards \u2013 such as the Z-80 SoftCard \u2013 that permitted the Apple to use the Z80 processor and run a multitude of programs developed under the CP/M operating system, including the dBase II database and the WordStar word processor. There was also a third-party 6809 card that would allow OS-9 Level One to be run. Third-party sound cards greatly improved audio capabilities, allowing simple music synthesis and text-to-speech functions. Eventually, Apple II accelerator cards were created to double or quadruple the computer's speed.\nRod Holt designed the Apple II's power supply. He employed a switched-mode power supply design, which was far smaller and generated less unwanted heat than the linear power supply some other home computers used.\nThe original Apple II was discontinued at the start of 1981; it was superseded by the Apple II+.\nApple II Plus.\nThe Apple II Plus, introduced in June 1979, included the Applesoft BASIC programming language in ROM. This Microsoft-authored dialect of BASIC, which was previously available as an upgrade, supported floating-point arithmetic, and became the standard BASIC dialect on the Apple II series (though it ran at a noticeably slower speed than Steve Wozniak's Integer BASIC).\nExcept for improved graphics and disk-booting support in the ROM, and the removal of the 2k 6502 assembler to make room for the floating point BASIC, the II+ was otherwise identical to the original II in terms of electronic functionality. There were small differences in the physical appearance and keyboard. RAM prices fell during 1980\u201381 and all II+ machines came from the factory with a full 48 KB of memory already installed.\nApple II Europlus and J-Plus.\nAfter the success of the first Apple II in the United States, Apple expanded its market to include Europe, the Middle East, Australia and the Far East in 1979, with the Apple II Europlus (Europe, Australia) and the Apple II J-Plus (Japan). In these models, Apple made the necessary hardware, software and firmware changes in order to comply to standards outside of the US.\nApple IIe.\nThe Apple II Plus was followed in 1983 by the Apple IIe, a cost-reduced yet more powerful machine that used newer chips to reduce the component count and add new features, such as the display of upper and lowercase letters and a standard 64\u00a0KB of RAM.\nThe IIe RAM was configured as if it were a 48\u00a0KB Apple II Plus with a language card. The machine had no slot 0, but instead had an auxiliary slot that could accept a 1\u00a0KB memory card to enable the 80-column display. This card contained only RAM; the hardware and firmware for the 80-column display was built into the Apple IIe. An \"extended 80-column card\" with more memory increased the machine's RAM to 128\u00a0KB.\nThe Apple IIe was the most popular machine in the Apple II series. It has the distinction of being the longest-lived Apple computer of all time\u2014it was manufactured and sold with only minor changes for nearly 11 years. The IIe was the last Apple II model to be sold, and was discontinued in November 1993.\nDuring its lifespan two variations were introduced: the Apple IIe Enhanced (four replacement chips to give it some of the features of the later model Apple IIc) and the Apple IIe Platinum (a modernized case color to match other Apple products of the era, along with the addition of a numeric keypad).\nSome of the features of the IIe were carried over from the less successful \"Apple III\", among them the ProDOS operating system.\nApple IIc.\nThe Apple IIc was released in April 1984, billed as a portable Apple II because it could be easily carried due to its size and carrying handle, which could be flipped down to prop the machine up into a typing position. Unlike modern portables, it lacked a built-in display and battery. It was the first of three Apple II models to be made in the Snow White design language, and the only one that used its unique creamy off-white color.\nThe Apple IIc was the first Apple II to use the 65C02 low-power variant of the 6502 processor, and featured a built-in 5.25-inch floppy drive and 128\u00a0KB RAM, with a built-in disk controller that could control external drives, composite video (NTSC or PAL), serial interfaces for modem and printer, and a port usable by either a joystick or mouse. Unlike previous Apple II models, the IIc had no internal expansion slots at all.\nTwo different monochrome LC displays were sold for use with the IIc's video expansion port, although both were short-lived due to high cost and poor legibility. The IIc had an external power supply that converted AC power to 15\u00a0V DC, though the IIc itself will accept between 12\u00a0V and 17\u00a0V DC, allowing third parties to offer battery packs and automobile power adapters that connected in place of the supplied AC adapter.\nApple II.\nThe Apple II, released on September 15, 1986, is the penultimate and most advanced model in the Apple II series, and a radical departure from prior models. It uses a 16-bit microprocessor, the 65C816 operating at 2.8\u00a0MHz with 24-bit addressing, allowing expansion up to 8\u00a0MB of RAM. The graphics are significantly improved, with 4096 colors and new modes with resolutions of 320\u00d7200 and 640\u00d7400. The audio capabilities are vastly improved, with a built-in music synthesizer that far exceeded any other home computer.\nThe Apple II evolved the platform while still maintaining near-complete backward compatibility. Its Mega II chip contains the functional equivalent of an entire Apple IIe computer (sans processor). This, combined with the 65816's ability to execute 65C02 code directly, provides full support for legacy software, while also supporting 16-bit software running under a new OS.\nThe OS eventually included a Macintosh-like graphical Finder for managing disks and files and opening documents and applications, along with desk accessories. Later, the II gained the ability to read and write Macintosh disks and, through third-party software, a multitasking Unix-like shell and TrueType font support.\nThe GS includes a 32-voice Ensoniq 5503 DOC sample-based sound synthesizer chip with 64\u00a0KB dedicated RAM, 256\u00a0KB (or later 1.125\u00a0MB) of standard RAM, built-in peripheral ports (switchable between IIe-style card slots and IIc-style onboard controllers for disk drives, mouse, RGB video, and serial devices), and built-in AppleTalk networking.\nApple IIc Plus.\nThe final Apple II model was the Apple IIc Plus introduced in 1988. It was the same size and shape as the IIc that came before it, but the 5.25-inch floppy drive had been replaced with a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+1\u20442-inch drive, the power supply was moved inside the case, and the processor was a fast 4\u00a0MHz 65C02 processor that actually ran 8-bit Apple II software faster than the II.\nThe IIc Plus also featured a new keyboard layout that matched the Platinum IIe and II. Unlike the IIe IIc and II, the IIc Plus came only in one version (American) and was not officially sold anywhere outside the US. The Apple IIc Plus ceased production in 1990, with its two-year production run being the shortest of all the Apple II computers.\nApple IIe Card.\nAlthough not an extension of the Apple II line, in 1990 the Apple IIe Card, an expansion card for the Macintosh LC, was released. Essentially a miniaturized Apple IIe computer on a card (using the Mega II chip from the Apple II), it allowed the Macintosh to run 8-bit Apple IIe software through hardware emulation, with an option to run at roughly double the speed of the original IIe (about 1.8\u00a0MHz). However, the video output was emulated in software, and, depending on how much of the screen the currently running program was trying to update in a single frame, performance could be much slower compared to a real IIe. This is due to the fact that writes from the 65C02 on the IIe Card to video memory were caught by the additional hardware on the card, so the video emulation software running on the Macintosh side could process that write and update the video display. But, while the Macintosh was processing video updates, execution of Apple II code would be temporarily halted.\nWith a breakout cable which connected to the back of the card, the user could attach up to two UniDisk or Apple 5.25 Drives, up to one UniDisk 3.5 drive, and a DE-9 Apple II joystick. Many of the LC's built-in Macintosh peripherals could also be \"borrowed\" by the card when in Apple II mode, including extra RAM, the Mac's internal 3.5-inch floppy drives, AppleTalk networking, any ProDOS-formatted hard disk partitions, the serial ports, mouse, and real-time clock. The IIe card could not, however, run software intended for the 16-bit Apple II.\nAdvertising, marketing, and packaging.\nMike Markkula, a retired Intel marketing manager, provided the early critical funding for Apple Computer. From 1977 to 1981, Apple used the Regis McKenna agency for its advertisements and marketing. In 1981, Chiat-Day acquired Regis McKenna's advertising operations and Apple used Chiat-Day. At Regis McKenna Advertising, the team assigned to launch the Apple II consisted of Rob Janoff, art director, Chip Schafer, copywriter and Bill Kelley, account executive. Janoff came up with the Apple logo with a bite out of it. The design was originally an olive green with matching company logotype all in lowercase. Steve Jobs insisted on promoting the color capability of the Apple II by putting rainbow stripes on the Apple logo. In its letterhead and business card implementation, the rounded \"a\" of the logotype echoed the \"bite\" in the logo. This logo was developed simultaneously with an advertisement and a brochure; the latter being produced for distribution initially at the first West Coast Computer Faire.\nSince the original Apple II, Apple has paid high attention to its quality of packaging, partly because of Steve Jobs' personal preferences and opinions on packaging and final product appearance. All of Apple's packaging for the Apple II series looked similar, featuring much clean white space and showing the Apple rainbow logo prominently. For several years up until the late 1980s, Apple used the Motter Tektura font for packaging, until changing to the Apple Garamond font.\nApple ran the first advertisement for the Apple II, a two-page spread ad titled \"Introducing Apple II\", in \"BYTE\" in July 1977. The first brochure, was entitled \"Simplicity\" and the copy in both the ad and brochure pioneered \"demystifying\" language intended to make the new idea of a home computer more \"personal.\" The Apple II introduction ad was later run in the September 1977 issue of \"Scientific American\".\nApple later aired eight television commercials for the Apple II, emphasizing its benefits to education and students, along with some print ads.\nClones.\nThe Apple II was frequently cloned, both in the United States and abroad, in a similar way to the IBM PC. According to some sources (see below), more than 190 different models of Apple II clones were manufactured. Most could not be legally imported into the United States. Apple sued and sought criminal charges against clone makers in more than a dozen countries.\nData storage.\nCassette.\nOriginally the Apple II used Compact Cassette tapes for program and data storage. A dedicated tape recorder along the lines of the Commodore Datasette was never produced; Apple recommended using the Panasonic RQ309 in some of its early printed documentation. The uses of common consumer cassette recorders and a standard video monitor or television set (with a third-party RF modulator) made the total cost of owning an Apple II less expensive and helped contribute to the Apple II's success.\nCassette storage may have been inexpensive, but it was also slow and unreliable. The Apple II's lack of a disk drive was \"a glaring weakness\" in what was otherwise intended to be a polished, professional product. Recognizing that the II needed a disk drive to be taken seriously, Apple set out to develop a disk drive and a DOS to run it. Wozniak spent the 1977 Christmas holidays designing a disk controller that reduced the number of chips used by a factor of 10 compared to existing controllers. Still lacking a DOS, and with Wozniak inexperienced in operating system design, Jobs approached Shepardson Microsystems with the project. On April 10, 1978, Apple signed a contract for $13,000 with Shepardson to develop the DOS.\nEven after disk drives made the cassette tape interfaces obsolete they were still used by enthusiasts as simple one-bit audio input-output ports. Ham radio operators used the cassette input to receive slow scan TV (single frame images). A commercial speech recognition Blackjack program was available, after some user-specific voice training it would recognize simple commands (Hit, stand). Bob Bishop's \"Music Kaleidoscope\" was a simple program that monitored the cassette input port and based on zero-crossings created color patterns on the screen, a predecessor to current audio visualization plug-ins for media players. Music Kaleidoscope was especially popular on projection TV sets in dance halls.\nThe OS Disk.\nApple and many third-party developers made software available on tape at first, but after the Disk II became available in 1978, tape-based Apple II software essentially disappeared from the market. The initial price of the Disk II drive and controller was US$595, although a $100 off coupon was available through the Apple newsletter \"Contact\". The controller could handle two drives and a second drive (without controller) retailed for $495.\nThe Disk II single-sided floppy drive used 5.25-inch floppy disks; double-sided disks could be used, one side at a time, by turning them over and notching a hole for the write protect sensor. The first disk operating systems for the Apple II were DOS 3.1 and DOS\u00a03.2, which stored 113.75\u00a0KB on each disk, organized into 35 tracks of 13 256-byte sectors each. After about two years, DOS\u00a03.3 was introduced, storing 140\u00a0KB thanks to a minor firmware change on the disk controller that allowed it to store 16 sectors per track. (This upgrade was user-installable as two PROMs on older controllers.) After the release of DOS\u00a03.3, the user community discontinued use of DOS 3.2 except for running legacy software. Programs that required DOS\u00a03.2 were fairly rare; however, as DOS\u00a03.3 was not a major architectural change aside from the number of sectors per track, a program called MUFFIN was provided with DOS\u00a03.3 to allow users to copy files from DOS\u00a03.2 disks to DOS\u00a03.3 disks. It was possible for software developers to create a DOS\u00a03.2 disk which would also boot on a system with DOS 3.3 firmware.\nLater, double-sided drives, with heads to read both sides of the disk, became available from third-party companies. (Apple only produced double-sided 5.25-inch disks for the Lisa 1 computer).\nOn a DOS 3.x disk, tracks 0, 1, and most of track 2 were reserved to store the operating system. (It was possible, with a special utility, to reclaim most of this space for data if a disk did not need to be bootable.) A short ROM program on the disk controller had the ability to seek to track zero\u00a0\u2013 which it did without regard for the read/write head's current position, resulting in the characteristic \"chattering\" sound of a Disk II boot, which was the read/write head hitting the rubber stop block at the end of the rail \u2013 and read and execute code from sector 0. The code contained in there would then pull in the rest of the operating system. DOS stored the disk's directory on track 17, smack in the middle of the 35-track disks, in order to reduce the average seek time to the frequently used directory track. The directory was fixed in size and could hold a maximum of 105 files. Subdirectories were not supported.\nMost game publishers did not include DOS on their floppy disks, since they needed the memory it occupied more than its capabilities; instead, they often wrote their own boot loaders and read-only file systems. This also served to discourage \"crackers\" from snooping around in the game's copy-protection code, since the data on the disk was not in files that could be accessed easily.\nSome third-party manufacturers produced floppy drives that could write 40 tracks to most 5.25-inch disks, yielding 160\u00a0KB of storage per disk, but the format did not catch on widely, and no known commercial software was published on 40-track media. Most drives, even Disk IIs, could write 36 tracks; a two byte modification to DOS to format the extra track was common.\nThe Apple Disk II stored 140\u00a0KB on single-sided, \"single-density\" floppy disks, but it was very common for Apple II users to extend the capacity of a single-sided floppy disk to 280\u00a0KB by cutting out a second write-protect notch on the side of the disk using a \"disk notcher\" or hole puncher and inserting the disk flipped over. Double-sided disks, with notches on both sides, were available at a higher price, but in practice the magnetic coating on the reverse of nominally single-sided disks was usually of good enough quality to be used (both sides were coated in the same way to prevent warping, although only one side was certified for use). Early on, diskette manufacturers routinely warned that this technique would damage the read/write head of the drives or wear out the disk faster, and these warnings were frequently repeated in magazines of the day. In practice, however, this method was an inexpensive way to store twice as much data for no extra cost, and was widely used for commercially released floppies as well.\nLater, Apple IIs were able to use 3.5-inch disks with a total capacity of 800\u00a0KB and hard disks. DOS 3.3 did not support these drives natively; third-party software was required, and disks larger than about 400\u00a0KB had to be split up into multiple \"virtual disk volumes.\"\nDOS 3.3 was succeeded by ProDOS, a 1983 descendant of the Apple ///'s SOS. It added support for subdirectories and volumes up to 32\u00a0MB in size. ProDOS became the Apple II DOS of choice; AppleWorks and other newer programs required it.\nLegacy.\nThe Apple II series of computers had an enormous impact on the technology industry and expanded the role of microcomputers in society. The Apple II was the first personal computer many people ever saw. Its price was within the reach of many middle-class families, and a partnership with MECC helped make the Apple II popular in schools. By the end of 1980 Apple had already sold over 100,000 Apple IIs, and at the introduction of the II, 3 million models in the range had been sold. However, in other markets, the range saw rather more limited adoption, with only 120,000 units selling in the UK over this nine-year period.\nThe Apple II's popularity bootstrapped the computer game and educational software markets and began the boom in the word processor and computer printer markets. The first spreadsheet application, VisiCalc, was initially released for the Apple II, and many businesses bought them just to run VisiCalc. Its success drove IBM in part to create the IBM PC, which many businesses purchased to run spreadsheet and word processing software, at first ported from Apple II versions.\nThe Apple II's slots, allowing any peripheral card to take control of the bus and directly access memory, enabled an independent industry of card manufacturers who together created a flood of hardware products that let users build systems that were far more powerful and useful (at a lower cost) than any competing system, most of which were not nearly as expandable and were universally proprietary. The first peripheral card was a blank prototyping card intended for electronics enthusiasts who wanted to design their own peripherals for the Apple II.\nSpecialty peripherals kept the Apple II in use in industry and education environments for many years after Apple Computer stopped supporting the Apple II. Well into the 1990s every clean-room (the super-clean facility where spacecraft are prepared for flight) at the Kennedy Space Center used an Apple II to monitor the environment and air quality. Most planetariums used Apple IIs to control their projectors and other equipment.\nEven the game port was unusually powerful and could be used for digital and analog input and output. The early manuals included instructions for how to build a circuit with only four commonly available components (one transistor and three resistors) and a software routine to drive a common Teletype Model 33 machine. Don Lancaster used the game port I/O to drive a LaserWriter printer.\nModern use.\nToday, emulators for various Apple II models are available to run Apple II software on macOS, Linux, Microsoft Windows, homebrew enabled Nintendo DS and other operating systems. Numerous disk images of Apple II software are available free over the Internet for use with these emulators. AppleWin and MESS are among the best emulators compatible with most Apple II images. The MESS emulator supports recording and playing back of Apple II emulation sessions, as does Home Action Replay Page (a.k.a. HARP).\nThere is still a small annual convention, KansasFest, dedicated to the platform.\nIn 2017, the band 8 Bit Weapon released the world's first 100% Apple II-based music album entitled, \"Class Apples\". The album featured dance-oriented cover versions of classical music by Bach, Beethoven, and Mozart recorded directly off the Apple II motherboard.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2117", "revid": "41347959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2117", "title": "Apple III", "text": "1980 business-oriented personal computer\nThe Apple III (styled as apple ///) is a business-oriented personal computer that was produced by Apple Computer and released in 1980. It was intended as the successor to the Apple II with features business users wanted\u2014a full typewriter-style keyboard with upper and lowercase letters, multi-directional cursor keys and an 80-column display\u2014but it failed in the market. It uses Apple's proprietary Sophisticated Operating System (SOS). \nDesigned by Wendell Sander, the Apple III was announced on May 19, 1980, and released in late November that year. Serious stability issues required a design overhaul and a recall of the first 14,000 machines produced. It was formally reintroduced on November 9, 1981, but damage to the computer's reputation had already been done. An updated version was released in December 1983 as the Apple III Plus.\nAn estimated 65,000 to 75,000 Apple III computers were sold. The Apple III Plus brought this up to approximately 120,000. The original model was discontinued on April 24, 1984 and the Plus in September 1985. The III's failure led Apple to reevaluate its plan to phase out the Apple II, and later Apple II models incorporate some technologies of the Apple III. Steve Wozniak stated that the primary reason for the Apple III's failure was that the system was designed by Apple's marketing department, unlike Apple's previous engineering-driven projects.\nOverview.\nDesign.\nSteve Wozniak and Steve Jobs expected hobbyists to purchase the Apple II; however, because of VisiCalc and Disk II, small businesses purchased 90% of the computers. The Apple III was designed to be a business computer and successor. Though the Apple II contributed to the inspirations of several important business products, such as VisiCalc, Multiplan, and Apple Writer, the computer's hardware architecture, operating system, and developer environment are limited. Apple management intended to clearly establish market segmentation by designing the Apple III to appeal to the 90% business market, leaving the Apple II to home and education users. Management believed that \"once the Apple III was out, the Apple II would stop selling in six months\", Wozniak said.\nThe Apple III is powered by a 2 megahertz Synertek 6502A or 6502B 8-bit CPU (operating effectively between 1.4 and 1.8\u00a0MHz due to video or memory refresh cycles) and, like some of the later machines in the Apple II family, uses bank switching techniques to address memory beyond the 6502's traditional 64\u00a0KB limit, up to 256\u00a0KB in the III's case. Third-party vendors produced memory upgrade kits that allow the Apple III to reach up to 512\u00a0KB of random-access memory (RAM). Other Apple III built-in features include an 80-column, 24-line display with upper and lowercase characters, a numeric keypad, dual-speed (pressure-sensitive) cursor control keys, 6-bit (DAC) audio, and a built-in 140-kilobyte 5.25-inch floppy disk drive. Graphics modes include 560x192 in black and white, and 280x192 with 16 colors or shades of gray. Unlike the Apple II, the Disk III controller is part of the logic board.\nThe Apple III is the first Apple product to allow the user to choose both a screen font and a keyboard layout: either QWERTY or Dvorak. These choices cannot be changed while programs were running. This was unlike the Apple IIc, which has a keyboard switch directly above the keyboard, allowing the user to switch on the fly.\nSoftware.\nThe Apple III introduced an advanced operating system called Apple SOS, pronounced \"apple sauce\". Its ability to address resources by name allows the Apple III to be more scalable than the Apple II's addressing by physical location such as codice_1 and codice_2. Apple SOS allows the full capacity of a storage device to be used as a single volume, such as the Apple ProFile hard disk drive, and it supports a hierarchical file system. Some of the features and code base of Apple SOS were later adopted into the Apple II's ProDOS and GS/OS operating systems, as well as Lisa 7/7 and Mac OS.\nWith a starting price of $4,340 (equivalent to $17,356 as of 2024) and a maximum price of $7,800 (equivalent to $31,194 as of 2024), the Apple III was more expensive than many of the CP/M-based business computers that were available at the time. Few software applications other than VisiCalc are available for the computer; according to a presentation at KansasFest 2012, fewer than 50 Apple III-specific software packages were ever published, most shipping when the III Plus was released. However this number is proven to be wildly incorrect, given the manual 'RESOURCE GUIDE: Of Apple /// and Apple /// Plus Software and Hardware' published and released by Apple Computer, Inc. in May 1984 lists in excess of 500+ software packages produced by many and varied publishers. Given software publishers and specialised hardware manufacturers such as On-Three, Inc. produced products for the Apple III well in to the late 90s, in excess of 500 products can also be seen as way too conservative.\nBecause Apple did not view the Apple III as suitable for hobbyists, it did not provide much of the technical software information that accompanies the Apple II. Originally intended as a direct replacement to the Apple II, it was designed to be backward compatible with Apple II software. However, since Apple did not want to encourage continued development of the II platform, Apple II compatibility exists only in a special Apple II Mode which is limited in its capabilities to the emulation of a basic Apple II Plus configuration with of RAM.\nSpecial chips were intentionally added to prevent access from Apple II Mode to the III's advanced features such as its larger amount of memory.\nPeripherals.\nThe Apple III has four expansion slots, a number that \"inCider\" in 1986 called \"miserly\", also saying Apple II cards are compatible but risk violating government RFI regulations, and require Apple III-specific device drivers; \"BYTE\" stated that \"Apple provides virtually no information on how to write them\". As with software, Apple provided little hardware technical information with the computer but Apple III-specific products became available, such as one that made the computer compatible with the Apple IIe. Several new Apple-produced peripherals were developed for the Apple III. The original Apple III has a built-in real-time clock, which is recognized by Apple SOS. The clock was later removed from the \"revised\" model, and was instead made available as an add-on.\nAlong with the built-in floppy drive, the Apple III can also handle up to three additional external Disk III floppy disk drives. The Disk III is only officially compatible with the Apple III. The Apple III Plus requires an adaptor from Apple to use the Disk III with its DB-25 disk port.\nWith the introduction of the revised Apple III a year after launch, Apple began offering the ProFile external hard disk system. Priced at $3,499 for 5\u00a0MB of storage, it also required a peripheral slot for its controller card.\nBackward compatibility.\nThe Apple III has the built-in hardware capability to run Apple II software. In order to do so, an emulation boot disk is required that functionally turns the machine into a standard 48-kilobyte Apple II Plus, until it is powered off. The keyboard, internal floppy drive (and one external Disk III), display (color is provided through the 'B/W video' port) and speaker all act as Apple II peripherals. The paddle and serial ports can also function in Apple II mode, however with some limitations and compatibility issues.\nApple engineers added specialized circuitry with the sole purpose of blocking access to its advanced features when running in Apple II emulation mode. This was done primarily to discourage further development and interest in the Apple II line, and to push the Apple III as its successor. For example, no more than 48 KB of RAM can be accessed, even if the machine has 128 KB of RAM or higher present. Many Apple II programs require a minimum of 64 KB of RAM, making them impossible to run on the Apple III. Similarly, access to lowercase support, 80 columns text, or its more advanced graphics and sound are blocked by this hardware circuitry, making it impossible for even skilled software programmers to bypass Apple's lockout. A third-party company, Titan Technologies, sold an expansion board called the III Plus II that allows Apple II mode to access more memory, a standard game port, and with a later released companion card, even emulate the Apple IIe.\nCertain Apple II slot cards can be installed in the Apple III and used in native III-mode with custom written SOS device drivers, including Grappler Plus and Liron 3.5 Controller.\nRevisions.\nAfter overheating issues were attributed to serious design flaws, a redesigned logic board was introduced in mid-December 1981 \u2013 which included a lower power supply requirement, wider circuit traces and better-designed chip sockets. The $3,495 revised model also includes 256\u00a0KB of RAM as the standard configuration. The 14,000 units of the original Apple III sold were returned and replaced with the entirely new revised model.\nApple III Plus.\nApple discontinued the III in October 1983 because it violated FCC regulations, and the FCC required the company to change the redesigned computer's name. It introduced the Apple III Plus in December 1983 at a price of US$2,995. This newer version includes a built-in clock, video interlacing, standardized rear port connectors, 55-watt power supply, 256\u00a0KB of RAM as standard, and a redesigned, Apple IIe-like keyboard.\nOwners of the Apple III could purchase individual III Plus upgrades, like the clock and interlacing feature, and obtain the newer logic board as a service replacement. A keyboard upgrade kit, dubbed \"Apple III Plus upgrade kit\" was also made available \u2013 which included the keyboard, cover, keyboard encoder ROM, and logo replacements. This upgrade had to be installed by an authorized service technician.\nDesign flaws.\nAccording to Wozniak, the Apple III \"had 100 percent hardware failures\". Former Apple executive Taylor Pohlman stated that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There was way too short a time frame in manufacturing and development. When the decision was made to announce, there were only three Apple IIIs in existence, and they were all wire-wrapped boards.\nThe case of the Apple III had long since been set in concrete, so they had a certain size logic board to fit the circuits on ... They went to three different outside houses and nobody could get a layout that would fit on the board.\nThey used the smallest line circuit boards that could be used. They ran about 1,000 of these boards as preproduction units to give to the dealers as demonstration units. They really didn't work ... Apple swapped out the boards. The problem was, at this point there were other problems, things like chips that didn't fit. There were a million problems that you would normally take care of when you do your preproduction and pilot run. Basically, customers were shipped the pilot run.\nJobs insisted on the idea of having no fan or air vents, in order to make the computer run quietly. He would later push this same ideology onto almost all Apple models he had control of, from the Apple Lisa and Macintosh 128K to the iMac. To allow the computer to dissipate heat, the base of the Apple III was made of heavy cast aluminum, which supposedly acts as a heat sink. One advantage to the aluminum case was a reduction in RFI (Radio Frequency Interference), a problem which had plagued the Apple II series throughout its history. Unlike the Apple II, the power supply was mounted \u2013 without its own shell \u2013 in a compartment separate from the logic board. The decision to use an aluminum shell ultimately led to engineering issues which resulted in the Apple III's reliability problems. The lead time for manufacturing the shells was high, and this had to be done before the motherboard was finalized. Later, it was realized that there was not enough room on the motherboard for all of the components unless narrow traces were used.\nMany Apple IIIs were thought to have failed due to their inability to properly dissipate heat. \"inCider\" stated in 1986 that \"Heat has always been a formidable enemy of the Apple ///\", and some users reported that their Apple IIIs became so hot that the chips started dislodging from the board, causing the screen to display garbled data or their disk to come out of the slot \"melted\". \"BYTE\" wrote, \"the integrated circuits tended to wander out of their sockets\". It has been rumored Apple advised customers to tilt the front of the Apple III six inches above the desk and then drop it to reseat the chips as a temporary solution. Other analyses blame a faulty automatic chip insertion process, not heat.\nCase designer Jerry Manock denied the design flaw charges, insisting that tests proved that the unit adequately dissipated the internal heat. The primary cause, he claimed, was a major logic board design problem. The logic board used \"fineline\" technology that was not fully mature at the time, with narrow, closely spaced traces. When chips were \"stuffed\" into the board and wave-soldered, solder bridges would form between traces that were not supposed to be connected. This caused numerous short circuits, which required hours of costly diagnosis and hand rework to fix. Apple designed a new circuit board with more layers and normal-width traces. The new logic board was laid out by one designer on a huge drafting board, rather than using the costly CAD-CAM system used for the previous board, and the new design worked.\nEarlier Apple III units came with a built-in real time clock. The hardware, however, would fail after prolonged use. Assuming that National Semiconductor would test all parts before shipping them, Apple did not perform this level of testing. Apple was soldering chips directly to boards and could not easily replace a bad chip if one was found. Eventually, Apple solved this problem by removing the real-time clock from the Apple III's specification rather than shipping the Apple III with the clock pre-installed, and then sold the peripheral as a level 1 technician add-on.\nBASIC.\nMicrosoft and Apple each developed their own versions of BASIC for the Apple III. Apple III Microsoft BASIC was designed to run on the CP/M platform available for the Apple III. Apple Business BASIC shipped with the Apple III. Donn Denman ported Applesoft BASIC to SOS and reworked it to take advantage of the extended memory of the Apple III.\nBoth languages introduced a number of new or improved features over Applesoft BASIC. Both languages replaced Applesoft's single-precision floating-point variables using 5-byte storage with the somewhat-reduced-precision 4-byte variables, while also adding a larger numerical format. Apple III Microsoft BASIC provides double-precision floating-point variables, taking 8 bytes of storage, while Apple Business BASIC offers an extra-long integer type, also taking 8 bytes for storage. Both languages also retain 2-byte integers, and maximum 255-character strings.\nOther new features common to both languages include:\nSome features work differently in each language:\nMicrosoft BASIC additional features.\nThere is no support for graphics provided within the language, nor for reading analog controls or buttons; nor is there a means of defining the active window of the text screen.\nBusiness BASIC additional features.\nApple Business BASIC eliminates all references to absolute memory addresses. Thus, the POKE command and PEEK() function were not included in the language, and new features replaced the CALL statement and USR() function. The functionality of certain features in Applesoft that had been achieved with various PEEK and POKE locations is now provided by:\nExternal binary subroutines and functions are loaded into memory by a single INVOKE disk-command that loads separately-assembled code modules. A PERFORM statement is then used to call an INVOKEd procedure by name, with an argument-list. INVOKEd functions would be referenced in expressions by EXFN. (floating-point) or EXFN%. (integer), with the function name appended, plus the argument-list for the function.\nGraphics are supported with an INVOKEd module, with features including displaying text within graphics in various fonts, within four different graphics modes available on the Apple III.\nReception.\n\"The Apple III is unlikely to approach the success of the Apple II\", \"InfoWorld\" said in January 1981. Citing the III's high price, manufacturing delays, limited disk storage, and small software library, the magazine asked \"why buy a $5000 computer with an emulator when most of the programs you need run directly on a $2500 computer\".\nDespite devoting the majority of its R&amp;D to the Apple III and so ignoring the II that for a while dealers had difficulty in obtaining the latter, the III's technical problems made marketing the computer difficult. Ed Smith, who after designing the APF Imagination Machine worked as a distributor's representative, described the III as \"a complete disaster\". He recalled that he \"was responsible for going to every dealership, setting up the Apple III in their showroom, and then explaining to them the functions of the Apple III, which in many cases didn't really work\".\nSales.\n\"BYTE\" reported in 1982 that Apple had sold only 10,000 of the original Apple III, compared to 350,000 Apple IIs sold by the end of 1981. Pohlman reported that Apple was only selling 500 units a month by late 1981, mostly as replacements. The company was able to eventually raise monthly sales to 5,000, but the IBM PC's successful launch had encouraged software companies to develop for it instead, prompting Apple to shift focus to the Lisa and Macintosh. The PC almost ended sales of the Apple III, the most closely comparable Apple computer model. IIe sales rose in late 1983 and early 1984 despite its circa-1977 technology; by contrast, III sales were primarily to existing III owners, Apple itself\u2014its 4,500 employees were equipped with some 3,000-4,500 units\u2014and some small businesses. After selling about 75,000 units, and replacing 14,000 defective units, Apple discontinued the III series on April 24, 1984, four months after introducing the III Plus.\nJobs said the company lost \"incalculable amounts\" of money on the Apple III. Wozniak estimated that Apple had spent $100 million on the III instead of improving the II and better competing against IBM. Pohlman claimed that there was a \"stigma\" at Apple associated with having contributed to the computer. Most employees who worked on the III reportedly left Apple.\nLegacy.\nSome design ideas, including the file system from the Apple III's operating system, Apple SOS, were influential. Apple SOS's file system was incorporated into Apple ProDOS and Apple GS/OS (the main operating systems for the Apple II following the demise of the Apple III) as well as the Apple Lisa (the de facto business-oriented successor to the Apple III). The Apple III introduced the hierarchical file system which influenced the evolution of the Macintosh: the original Macintosh File System (MFS) was a flat file system without subdirectories, designed for a floppy disk; all subsequent file systems were hierarchical. By comparison, the IBM PC's first file system (again designed for floppy disks) was also flat and later versions (designed for hard disks) were hierarchical.\nIn popular culture.\nAt the start of the Walt Disney Pictures film \"Tron\", lead character Kevin Flynn (played by Jeff Bridges) is seen hacking into the ENCOM mainframe using an Apple III.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2118", "revid": "49412255", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2118", "title": "AVL tree", "text": "Self-balancing binary search tree\nIn computer science, an AVL tree (named after inventors Adelson-Velsky and Landis) is a self-balancing binary search tree. In an AVL tree, the heights of the two child subtrees of any node differ by at most one; if at any time they differ by more than one, rebalancing is done to restore this property. Lookup, insertion, and deletion all take O(log \"n\") time in both the average and worst cases, where formula_1 is the number of nodes in the tree prior to the operation. Insertions and deletions may require the tree to be rebalanced by one or more tree rotations.\nThe AVL tree is named after its two Soviet inventors, Georgy Adelson-Velsky and Evgenii Landis, who published it in their 1962 paper \"An algorithm for the organization of information\". It is the first self-balancing binary search tree data structure to be invented.\nAVL trees are often compared with red\u2013black trees because both support the same set of operations and take formula_2 time for the basic operations. For lookup-intensive applications, AVL trees are faster than red\u2013black trees because they are more strictly balanced. Similar to red\u2013black trees, AVL trees are height-balanced. Both are, in general, neither weight-balanced nor formula_3-balanced for any formula_4;\nAVL trees are more rigidly balanced than RB trees with an asymptotic relation AVL/RB \u22480.720 of the maximal heights. For insertions and deletions, Ben Pfaff shows in 79 measurements a relation of AVL/RB between 0.677 and 1.077 with median \u22480.947 and geometric mean \u22480.910."}
{"id": "2120", "revid": "712163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2120", "title": "Aliphatic compound", "text": "Hydrocarbon compounds without aromatic rings\nIn organic chemistry, hydrocarbons (compounds composed solely of carbon and hydrogen) are divided into two classes: aromatic compounds and aliphatic compounds (; G. \"aleiphar\", fat, oil). Aliphatic compounds can be saturated (in which all the C-C bonds are single, requiring the structure to be completed, or 'saturated', by hydrogen) like hexane, or unsaturated, like hexene and hexyne. Open-chain compounds, whether straight or branched, and which contain no rings of any type, are always aliphatic. Cyclic compounds can be aliphatic if they are not aromatic.\nStructure.\nAliphatic compounds can be saturated, joined by single bonds (alkanes), or unsaturated, with double bonds (alkenes) or triple bonds (alkynes). If other elements (heteroatoms) are bound to the carbon chain, the most common being oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur, and chlorine, it is no longer a hydrocarbon, and therefore no longer an aliphatic compound. However, such compounds may still be referred to as aliphatic if the hydrocarbon portion of the molecule is aliphatic, e.g. aliphatic amines, to differentiate them from aromatic amines.\nThe least complex aliphatic compound is methane (CH4).\nProperties.\nMost aliphatic compounds are flammable, allowing the use of hydrocarbons as fuel, such as methane in natural gas for stoves or heating; butane in torches and lighters; various aliphatic (as well as aromatic) hydrocarbons in liquid transportation fuels like petrol/gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel; and other uses such as ethyne (acetylene) in welding.\nExamples of aliphatic compounds.\nThe most important aliphatic compounds are:\nImportant examples of low-molecular aliphatic compounds can be found in the list below (sorted by the number of carbon-atoms):"}
{"id": "2122", "revid": "382591", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2122", "title": "Astrology", "text": "Pseudoscientific divination based on the movements of the stars\nAstrology is a range of divinatory practices, recognized as pseudoscientific since the 18th century, that propose that information about human affairs and terrestrial events may be discerned by studying the apparent positions of celestial objects. Different cultures have employed forms of astrology since at least the 2nd millennium BCE, these practices having originated in calendrical systems used to predict seasonal shifts and to interpret celestial cycles as signs of divine communications.\nMost, if not all, cultures have attached importance to what they observed in the sky, and some\u2014such as the Hindus, Chinese, and the Maya\u2014developed elaborate systems for predicting terrestrial events from celestial observations. Western astrology, one of the oldest astrological systems still in use, can trace its roots to 19th\u201317th century BCE Mesopotamia, from where it spread to Ancient Greece, Rome, the Islamic world, and eventually Central and Western Europe. Contemporary Western astrology is often associated with systems of horoscopes that purport to explain aspects of a person's personality and predict significant events in their lives based on the positions of celestial objects; the majority of professional astrologers rely on such systems.\nThroughout its history, astrology has had its detractors, competitors and skeptics who opposed it for moral, religious, political, and empirical reasons. Nonetheless, prior to the Enlightenment, astrology was generally considered a scholarly tradition and was common in learned circles, often in close relation with astronomy, meteorology, medicine, and alchemy. It was present in political circles and is mentioned in various works of literature, from Dante Alighieri and Geoffrey Chaucer to William Shakespeare, Lope de Vega, and Pedro Calder\u00f3n de la Barca. During the Enlightenment, however, astrology lost its status as an area of legitimate scholarly pursuit.\nFollowing the end of the 19th century and the wide-scale adoption of the scientific method, researchers have successfully challenged astrology on both theoretical and experimental grounds, and have shown it to have no scientific validity or explanatory power. Astrology thus lost its academic and theoretical standing in the western world, and common belief in it largely declined, until a continuing resurgence starting in the 1960s.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"astrology\" comes from the early Latin word \"astrologia\", which derives from the Greek \u2014from \u1f04\u03c3\u03c4\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd \"astron\" (\"star\") and -\u03bb\u03bf\u03b3\u03af\u03b1 \"-logia\", (\"study of\"\u2014\"account of the stars\"). The word entered the English language via Latin and medieval French, and its use overlapped considerably with that of \"astronomy\" (derived from the Latin \"astronomia\"). By the 17th century, \"astronomy\" became established as the scientific term, with \"astrology\" referring to divinations and schemes for predicting human affairs.\nHistory.\nMany cultures have attached importance to astronomical events, and the Indians, Chinese, and Maya developed elaborate systems for predicting terrestrial events from celestial observations. A form of astrology was practised in the Old Babylonian period of Mesopotamia, c.\u20091800 BCE. \"Ved\u0101\u1e45ga Jyoti\u1e63a\" is one of earliest known Hindu texts on astronomy and astrology (\"Jyotisha\"). The text is dated between 1400 BCE to final centuries BCE by various scholars according to astronomical and linguistic evidences. Chinese astrology was elaborated in the Zhou dynasty (1046\u2013256 BCE). Hellenistic astrology after 332 BCE mixed Babylonian astrology with Egyptian Decanic astrology in Alexandria, creating horoscopic astrology. Alexander the Great's conquest of Asia allowed astrology to spread to Ancient Greece and Rome. In Rome, astrology was associated with \"Chaldean wisdom\". After the conquest of Alexandria in the 7th century, astrology was taken up by Islamic scholars, and Hellenistic texts were translated into Arabic and Persian. In the 12th century, Arabic texts were imported to Europe and translated into Latin. Major astronomers including Tycho Brahe, Johannes Kepler and Galileo practised as court astrologers. Astrological references appear in literature in the works of poets such as Dante Alighieri and Geoffrey Chaucer, and of playwrights such as Christopher Marlowe and William Shakespeare.\nThroughout most of its history, astrology was considered a scholarly tradition. It was accepted in political and academic contexts, and was connected with other studies, such as astronomy, alchemy, meteorology, and medicine. At the end of the 17th century, new scientific concepts in astronomy and physics (such as heliocentrism and Newtonian mechanics) called astrology into question. Astrology thus lost its academic and theoretical standing, and common belief in astrology has largely declined.\nAncient world.\nAncient applications.\nAstrology, in its broadest sense, is the search for meaning in the sky. Early evidence for humans making conscious attempts to measure, record, and predict seasonal changes by reference to astronomical cycles, appears as markings on bones and cave walls, which show that lunar cycles were being noted as early as 25,000 years ago. This was a first step towards recording the Moon's influence upon tides and rivers, and towards organising a communal calendar. Farmers addressed agricultural needs with increasing knowledge of the constellations that appear in the different seasons\u2014and used the rising of particular star-groups to herald annual floods or seasonal activities. By the 3rd millennium BCE, civilisations had sophisticated awareness of celestial cycles, and may have oriented temples in alignment with heliacal risings of the stars.\nScattered evidence suggests that the oldest known astrological references are copies of texts made in the ancient world. The Venus tablet of Ammisaduqa is thought to have been compiled in Babylon around 1700 BCE. A scroll documenting an early use of electional astrology is doubtfully ascribed to the reign of the Sumerian ruler Gudea of Lagash (c.\u20092144 \u2013 2124 BCE). This describes how the gods revealed to him in a dream the constellations that would be most favourable for the planned construction of a temple. However, there is controversy about whether these were genuinely recorded at the time or merely ascribed to ancient rulers by posterity. The oldest undisputed evidence of the use of astrology as an integrated system of knowledge is therefore attributed to the records of the first dynasty of Babylon (1950\u20131651 BCE). This astrology had some parallels with Hellenistic Greek (western) astrology, including the zodiac, a norming point near 9 degrees in Aries, the trine aspect, planetary exaltations, and the dodekatemoria (the twelve divisions of 30 degrees each). The Babylonians viewed celestial events as possible signs rather than as causes of physical events.\nThe system of Chinese astrology was elaborated during the Zhou dynasty (1046\u2013256 BCE) and flourished during the Han dynasty (2nd century BCE to 2nd century CE), during which all the familiar elements of traditional Chinese culture \u2013 the Yin-Yang philosophy, theory of the five elements, Heaven and Earth, Confucian morality \u2013 were brought together to formalise the philosophical principles of Chinese medicine and divination, astrology, and alchemy.\nThe ancient Arabs that inhabited the Arabian Peninsula before the advent of Islam used to profess a widespread belief in fatalism (\"\u1e33adar\") alongside a fearful consideration for the sky and the stars, which they held to be ultimately responsible for every phenomena that occurs on Earth and for the destiny of humankind. Accordingly, they shaped their entire lives in accordance with their interpretations of astral configurations and phenomena.\nAncient objections.\nThe Hellenistic schools of philosophical skepticism criticized astrology, alongside all other beliefs. Criticism of astrology by academic skeptics such as Carneades, Cicero, and Favorinus; Pyrrhonists such as Sextus Empiricus; and neoplatonists such as Plotinus, has been preserved.\nCarneades argued that belief in fate denies free will and morality; that people born at different times can all die in the same accident or battle; and that contrary to uniform influences from the stars, tribes and cultures are all different.\nCicero, in \"De Divinatione\", leveled a critique of astrology that some modern philosophers consider to be the first working definition of pseudoscience and the answer to the demarcation problem. The philosopher of science Massimo Pigliucci, building on the work of the historian of science, Damian Fernandez-Beanato, argues that Cicero outlined a \"convincing distinction between astrology and astronomy that remains valid in the twenty-first century.\" Cicero stated the twins objection (that with close birth times, personal outcomes can be very different), later developed by Augustine. He argued that since the other planets are much more distant from the Earth than the Moon, they could have only very tiny influence compared to the Moon's. He also argued that if astrology explains everything about a person's fate, then it wrongly ignores the visible effect of inherited ability and parenting, changes in health worked by medicine, or the effects of the weather on people. The historian Stefano Rapisarda notes that the text is formally \"equally balanced between \"pro\" and \"contra\", and no final or definite answer is given.\"\nFavorinus argued that it was absurd to imagine that stars and planets would affect human bodies in the same way as they affect the tides, and equally absurd that small motions in the heavens cause large changes in people's fates.\nSextus Empiricus argued that it was absurd to link human attributes with myths about the signs of the zodiac, and wrote an entire book, \"Against the Astrologers\" (\u03a0\u03c1\u1f78\u03c2 \u1f00\u03c3\u03c4\u03c1\u03bf\u03bb\u03cc\u03b3\u03bf\u03c5\u03c2, \"Pros astrologous\"), compiling arguments against astrology. \"Against the Astrologers\" was the fifth section of a larger work arguing against philosophical and scientific inquiry in general, \"Against the Professors\" (\u03a0\u03c1\u1f78\u03c2 \u03bc\u03b1\u03b8\u03b7\u03bc\u03b1\u03c4\u03b9\u03ba\u03bf\u03cd\u03c2, \"Pros mathematikous\").\nPlotinus, a neoplatonist, had a lasting interest in astrology, including the question of how the world of humans could be affected by the stars, and (if so) whether astrology could predict events on Earth. He argued that since the fixed stars are much more distant than the planets, it is laughable to imagine the planets' effect on human affairs should depend on their position with respect to the zodiac. He also argues that the interpretation of the Moon's conjunction with a planet as good when the moon is full, but bad when the moon is waning, is clearly wrong, as from the Moon's point of view, half of its surface is always in sunlight; and from the planet's point of view, waning should be better, as then the planet sees some light from the Moon, but when the Moon is full to us, it is dark, and therefore bad, on the side facing the planet in question.\nHellenistic Egypt.\nIn 525 BCE, Egypt was conquered by the Persians. The 1st century BCE Egyptian Dendera Zodiac shares two signs \u2013 the Balance and the Scorpion \u2013 with Mesopotamian astrology.\nWith the occupation by Alexander the Great in 332 BCE, Egypt became Hellenistic. The city of Alexandria was founded by Alexander after the conquest, becoming the place where Babylonian astrology was mixed with Egyptian Decanic astrology to create Horoscopic astrology. This contained the Babylonian zodiac with its system of planetary exaltations, the triplicities of the signs and the importance of eclipses. It used the Egyptian concept of dividing the zodiac into thirty-six decans of ten degrees each, with an emphasis on the rising decan, and the Greek system of planetary Gods, sign rulership and four elements. 2nd century BCE texts predict positions of planets in zodiac signs at the time of the rising of certain decans, particularly Sothis. The astrologer and astronomer Ptolemy lived in Alexandria. Ptolemy's work the \"Tetrabiblos\" formed the basis of Western astrology, and, \"...enjoyed almost the authority of a Bible among the astrological writers of a thousand years or more.\"\nGreece and Rome.\nThe conquest of Asia by Alexander the Great exposed the Greeks to ideas from Syria, Babylon, Persia and central Asia. Around 280 BCE, Berossus, a priest of Bel from Babylon, moved to the Greek island of Kos, teaching astrology and Babylonian culture. By the 1st century BCE, there were two varieties of astrology, one using horoscopes to describe the past, present and future; the other, theurgic, emphasising the soul's ascent to the stars. Greek influence played a crucial role in the transmission of astrological theory to Rome.\nThe first definite reference to astrology in Rome comes from the orator Cato, who in 160 BCE warned farm overseers against consulting with Chaldeans, who were described as Babylonian 'star-gazers'. Among both Greeks and Romans, Babylonia (also known as Chaldea) became so identified with astrology that 'Chaldean wisdom' became synonymous with divination using planets and stars. The 2nd-century Roman poet and satirist Juvenal complains about the pervasive influence of Chaldeans, saying, \"Still more trusted are the Chaldaeans; every word uttered by the astrologer they will believe has come from Hammon's fountain.\"\nOne of the first astrologers to bring Hermetic astrology to Rome was Thrasyllus, astrologer to the emperor Tiberius, the first emperor to have had a court astrologer, though his predecessor Augustus had used astrology to help legitimise his Imperial rights.\nMedieval world.\nHindu.\nThe main texts upon which classical Indian astrology is based are early medieval compilations, notably the \"\", and \"S\u0101r\u0101val\u012b\" by .\nThe \"Hor\u0101shastra\" is a composite work of 71 chapters, of which the first part (chapters 1\u201351) dates to the 7th to early 8th centuries and the second part (chapters 52\u201371) to the later 8th century. The \"S\u0101r\u0101val\u012b\" likewise dates to around 800 CE. English translations of these texts were published by N.N. Krishna Rau and V.B. Choudhari in 1963 and 1961, respectively.\nIslamic.\nAstrology was taken up by Islamic scholars following the collapse of Alexandria to the Arabs in the 7th century, and the founding of the Abbasid empire in the 8th. The second Abbasid caliph, Al Mansur (754\u2013775) founded the city of Baghdad to act as a centre of learning, and included in its design a library-translation centre known as \"Bayt al-Hikma\" 'House of Wisdom', which continued to receive development from his heirs and was to provide a major impetus for Arabic-Persian translations of Hellenistic astrological texts. The early translators included Mashallah, who helped to elect the time for the foundation of Baghdad, and Sahl ibn Bishr, (\"a.k.a.\" \"Zael\"), whose texts were directly influential upon later European astrologers such as Guido Bonatti in the 13th century, and William Lilly in the 17th century. Knowledge of Arabic texts started to become imported into Europe during the Latin translations of the 12th century.\nJewish.\nMedieval Jewish astrology developed significantly in the Islamic World, where Jewish scholars studied, adapted, and debated astrological knowledge inherited from Greek and Arabic sources. While some, like Maimonides, famously rejected astrology as unscientific and theologically problematic, others, including Saadia Gaon, Sherira Gaon, and Hai Gaon, addressed astrological ideas in their commentaries and responsa. Dunash ibn Tamim, active in Kairouan, incorporated astrology into biblical exegesis and authored a critical treatise on its principles. Astrological texts circulated widely among Jewish communities, as evidenced by hundreds of Hebrew and Judeo-Arabic fragments preserved in the Cairo Geniza, including horoscopes, almanacs, and medical or meteorological prognostications.\nThe most influential figure was Abraham Ibn Ezra (1089\u20131164), who was born in Tudela, in Al-Andalus, and later traveled extensively throughout the Mediterranean and Western Europe. His astrological corpus includes treatises on horoscopy (\"Sefer ha-She\u2019elot\"), electional astrology (\"Sefer ha-Miv\u1e25arim\"), medical astrology (\"Sefer ha-Me'orot\"), and introductions to theory (\"Reshit \u1e24okhmah\", \"Mishpe\u1e6dei ha-Mazalot\"). His writings served as a bridge between Arabic and Latin astrological traditions and shaped Jewish and Christian astrology in medieval Europe.\nEurope.\nIn the seventh century, Isidore of Seville argued in his \"Etymologiae\" that astronomy described the movements of the heavens, while astrology had two parts: one was scientific, describing the movements of the Sun, the Moon and the stars, while the other, making predictions, was theologically erroneous.\nThe first astrological book published in Europe was the \"Liber Planetis et Mundi Climatibus\" (\"Book of the Planets and Regions of the World\"), which appeared between 1010 and 1027 AD, and may have been authored by Gerbert of Aurillac. Ptolemy's second century AD \"Tetrabiblos\" was translated into Latin by Plato of Tivoli in 1138. The Dominican theologian Thomas Aquinas followed Aristotle in proposing that the stars ruled the imperfect 'sublunary' body, while attempting to reconcile astrology with Christianity by stating that God ruled the soul. The thirteenth century mathematician Campanus of Novara is said to have devised a system of astrological houses that divides the prime vertical into 'houses' of equal 30\u00b0 arcs, though the system was used earlier in the East. The thirteenth century astronomer Guido Bonatti wrote a textbook, the \"Liber Astronomicus\", a copy of which King Henry VII of England owned at the end of the fifteenth century.\nIn \"Paradiso\", the final part of the \"Divine Comedy\", the Italian poet Dante Alighieri referred \"in countless details\" to the astrological planets, though he adapted traditional astrology to suit his Christian viewpoint, for example using astrological thinking in his prophecies of the reform of Christendom.\nJohn Gower in the fourteenth century defined astrology as essentially limited to the making of predictions. The influence of the stars was in turn divided into natural astrology, with for example effects on tides and the growth of plants, and judicial astrology, with supposedly predictable effects on people. The fourteenth-century sceptic Nicole Oresme however included astronomy as a part of astrology in his \"Livre de divinacions\". Oresme argued that current approaches to prediction of events such as plagues, wars, and weather were inappropriate, but that such prediction was a valid field of inquiry. However, he attacked the use of astrology to choose the timing of actions (so-called interrogation and election) as wholly false, and rejected the determination of human action by the stars on grounds of free will. The friar Laurens Pignon (c. 1368\u20131449) similarly rejected all forms of divination and determinism, including by the stars, in his 1411 \"Contre les Devineurs\". This was in opposition to the tradition carried by the Arab astronomer Albumasar (787\u2013886) whose \"Introductorium in Astronomiam\" and \"De Magnis Coniunctionibus\" argued the view that both individual actions and larger scale history are determined by the stars.\nIn the late 15th century, Giovanni Pico della Mirandola forcefully attacked astrology in \"Disputationes contra Astrologos\", arguing that the heavens neither caused, nor heralded earthly events. His contemporary, Pietro Pomponazzi, a \"rationalistic and critical thinker\", was much more sanguine about astrology and critical of Pico's attack.\nRenaissance and Early Modern.\nRenaissance scholars commonly practised astrology. Gerolamo Cardano cast the horoscope of king Edward VI of England, while John Dee was the personal astrologer to queen Elizabeth I of England. Catherine de Medici paid Michael Nostradamus in 1566 to verify the prediction of the death of her husband, king Henry II of France, made by her astrologer Lucus Gauricus. Major astronomers who practised as court astrologers included Tycho Brahe in the royal court of Denmark, Johannes Kepler to the Habsburgs, Galileo Galilei to the Medici, and Giordano Bruno who was burnt at the stake for heresy in Rome in 1600. The distinction between astrology and astronomy was not entirely clear. Advances in astronomy were often motivated by the desire to improve the accuracy of astrology. Kepler, for example, was driven by a belief in harmonies between Earthly and celestial affairs, yet he disparaged the activities of most astrologers as \"evil-smelling dung\".\nEphemerides with complex astrological calculations, and almanacs interpreting celestial events for use in medicine and for choosing times to plant crops, were popular in Elizabethan England. In 1597, the English mathematician and physician Thomas Hood made a set of paper instruments that used revolving overlays to help students work out relationships between fixed stars or constellations, the midheaven, and the twelve astrological houses. Hood's instruments also illustrated, for pedagogical purposes, the supposed relationships between the signs of the zodiac, the planets, and the parts of the human body adherents believed were governed by the planets and signs. While Hood's presentation was innovative, his astrological information was largely standard and was taken from Gerard Mercator's astrological disc made in 1551, or a source used by Mercator. Despite its popularity, Renaissance astrology had what historian Gabor Almasi calls \"elite debate\", exemplified by the polemical letters of Swiss physician Thomas Erastus who fought against astrology, calling it \"vanity\" and \"superstition.\" Then around the time of the new star of 1572 and the comet of 1577 there began what Almasi calls an \"extended epistemological reform\" which began the process of excluding religion, astrology and anthropocentrism from scientific debate. By 1679, the yearly publication La Connoissance des temps eschewed astrology as a legitimate topic.\nEnlightenment period and onwards.\nDuring the Enlightenment, intellectual sympathy for astrology fell away, leaving only a popular following supported by cheap almanacs. One English almanac compiler, Richard Saunders, followed the spirit of the age by printing a derisive \"Discourse on the Invalidity of Astrology\", while in France Pierre Bayle's \"Dictionnaire\" of 1697 stated that the subject was puerile. The Anglo-Irish satirist Jonathan Swift ridiculed the Whig political astrologer John Partridge.\nIn the second half of the 17th century, the Society of Astrologers (1647\u20131684), a trade, educational, and social organization, sought to unite London's often fractious astrologers in the task of revitalizing astrology. Following the template of the popular \"Feasts of Mathematicians\" they endeavored to defend their art in the face of growing religious criticism. The Society hosted banquets, exchanged \"instruments and manuscripts\", proposed research projects, and funded the publication of sermons that depicted astrology as a legitimate biblical pursuit for Christians. They commissioned sermons that argued Astrology was divine, Hebraic, and scripturally supported by Bible passages about the Magi and the sons of Seth. According to historian Michelle Pfeffer, \"The society's public relations campaign ultimately failed.\" Modern historians have mostly neglected the Society of Astrologers in favor of the still extant Royal Society (1660), even though both organizations initially had some of the same members.\nAstrology saw a popular revival starting in the 19th century, as part of a general revival of spiritualism and\u2014later, New Age philosophy, and through the influence of mass media such as newspaper horoscopes. Early in the 20th century the psychiatrist Carl Jung developed some concepts concerning astrology, which led to the development of psychological astrology.\nPrinciples and practice.\nAdvocates have defined astrology as a symbolic language, an art form, a science, and a method of divination. Though most cultural astrology systems share common roots in ancient philosophies that influenced each other, many use methods that differ from those in the West. These include Hindu astrology (also known as \"Indian astrology\" and in modern times referred to as \"Vedic astrology\") and Chinese astrology, both of which have influenced the world's cultural history.\nWestern.\nWestern astrology is a form of divination based on the construction of a horoscope for an exact moment, such as a person's birth. It uses the tropical zodiac, which is aligned to the equinoctial points.\nWestern astrology is founded on the movements and relative positions of celestial bodies such as the Sun, Moon and planets, which are analysed by their movement through signs of the zodiac (twelve spatial divisions of the ecliptic) and by their aspects (based on geometric angles) relative to one another. They are also considered by their placement in houses (twelve spatial divisions of the sky). Astrology's modern representation in western popular media is usually reduced to sun sign astrology, which considers only the zodiac sign of the Sun at an individual's date of birth, and represents only 1/12 of the total chart.\nThe horoscope visually expresses the set of relationships for the time and place of the chosen event. These relationships are between the seven 'planets', signifying tendencies such as war and love; the twelve signs of the zodiac; and the twelve houses. Each planet is in a particular sign and a particular house at the chosen time, when observed from the chosen place, creating two kinds of relationship. A third kind is the aspect of each planet to every other planet, where for example two planets 120\u00b0 apart (in 'trine') are in a harmonious relationship, but two planets 90\u00b0 apart ('square') are in a conflicted relationship. Together these relationships and their interpretations are said to form \"...the language of the heavens speaking to learned men.\"\nAlong with tarot divination, astrology is one of the core studies of Western esotericism, and as such has influenced systems of magical belief not only among Western esotericists and Hermeticists, but also belief systems such as Wicca, which have borrowed from or been influenced by the Western esoteric tradition. Tanya Luhrmann has said that \"all magicians know something about astrology,\" and refers to a table of correspondences in Starhawk's \"The Spiral Dance\", organised by planet, as an example of the astrological lore studied by magicians.\nHindu.\nThe earliest Vedic text on astronomy is the \"Vedanga Jyotisha\"; Vedic thought later came to include astrology as well.\nHindu natal astrology originated with Hellenistic astrology by the 3rd century BCE, though incorporating the Hindu lunar mansions. The names of the signs (e.g. Greek 'Krios' for Aries, Hindi 'Kriya'), the planets (e.g. Greek 'Helios' for Sun, astrological Hindi 'Heli'), and astrological terms (e.g. Greek 'apoklima' and 'sunaphe' for declination and planetary conjunction, Hindi 'apoklima' and 'sunapha' respectively) in Varaha Mihira's texts are considered conclusive evidence of a Greek origin for Hindu astrology. The Indian techniques may also have been augmented with some of the Babylonian techniques.\nChinese and East Asian.\nChinese astrology has a close relation with Chinese philosophy (theory of the three harmonies: heaven, earth and man) and uses concepts such as yin and yang, the Five phases, the 10 Celestial stems, the 12 Earthly Branches, and shichen (\u6642\u8fb0 a form of timekeeping used for religious purposes). The early use of Chinese astrology was mainly confined to political astrology, the observation of unusual phenomena, identification of portents and the selection of auspicious days for events and decisions.\nThe constellations of the Zodiac of western Asia and Europe were not used; instead the sky is divided into Three Enclosures (\u4e09\u57a3 s\u0101n yu\u00e1n), and Twenty-Eight Mansions (\u4e8c\u5341\u516b\u5bbf \u00e8rsh\u00edb\u0101 xi\u00f9) in twelve Ci (). The Chinese zodiac of twelve animal signs is said to represent twelve different types of personality. It is based on cycles of years, lunar months, and two-hour periods of the day (the shichen). The zodiac traditionally begins with the sign of the Rat, and the cycle proceeds through 11 other animal signs: the Ox, Tiger, Rabbit, Dragon, Snake, Horse, Goat, Monkey, Rooster, Dog, and Pig. Complex systems of predicting fate and destiny based on one's birthday, birth season, and birth hours, such as \"ziping\" and Zi Wei Dou Shu () are still used regularly in modern-day Chinese astrology. They do not rely on direct observations of the stars.\nThe Korean zodiac is identical to the Chinese one. The Vietnamese zodiac is almost identical to the Chinese, except for second animal being the \"Water Buffalo\" instead of the \"Ox\", and the fourth animal the \"Cat\" instead of the \"Rabbit\". The Japanese have since 1873 celebrated the beginning of the new year on 1 January as per the Gregorian calendar. The Thai zodiac begins, not at Chinese New Year, but either on the first day of the fifth month in the Thai lunar calendar, or during the Songkran festival (now celebrated every 13\u201315 April), depending on the purpose of the use.\nTheological viewpoints.\nAncient.\nAugustine (354\u2013430) believed that the determinism of astrology conflicted with the Christian doctrines of man's free will and responsibility, and God not being the cause of evil, but he also grounded his opposition philosophically, citing the failure of astrology to explain twins who behave differently although conceived at the same moment and born at approximately the same time.\nMedieval.\nSome of the practices of astrology were contested on theological grounds by medieval Muslim astronomers such as Al-Farabi (Alpharabius), Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen) and Avicenna. They said that the methods of astrologers conflicted with orthodox religious views of Islamic scholars, by suggesting that the Will of God can be known and predicted. For example, Avicenna's 'Refutation against astrology', \"Ris\u0101la f\u012b ib\u1e6d\u0101l a\u1e25k\u0101m al-noj\u016bm\", argues against the practice of astrology while supporting the principle that planets may act as agents of divine causation. Avicenna considered that the movement of the planets influenced life on earth in a deterministic way, but argued against the possibility of determining the exact influence of the stars. Essentially, Avicenna did not deny the core dogma of astrology, but denied our ability to understand it to the extent that precise and fatalistic predictions could be made from it. Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya (1292\u20131350), in his \"Miftah Dar al-SaCadah\", also used physical arguments in astronomy to question the practice of judicial astrology. He recognised that the stars are much larger than the planets, and argued: And if you astrologers answer that it is precisely because of this distance and smallness that their influences are negligible, then why is it that you claim a great influence for the smallest heavenly body, Mercury? Why is it that you have given an influence to [the head] and [the tail], which are two imaginary points [ascending and descending nodes]?\nModern.\nMartin Luther denounced astrology in his \"Table Talk\". He asked why twins like Esau and Jacob had two different natures yet were born at the same time. Luther also compared astrologers to those who say their dice will always land on a certain number. Although the dice may roll on the number a couple of times, the predictor is silent for all the times the dice fails to land on that number.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Martin Luther, \"Table Talk\"\nThe Catechism of the Catholic Church maintains that divination, including predictive astrology, is incompatible with modern Catholic beliefs such as free will:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All forms of divination are to be rejected: recourse to Satan or demons, conjuring up the dead or other practices falsely supposed to \"unveil\" the future. Consulting horoscopes, astrology, palm reading, interpretation of omens and lots, the phenomena of clairvoyance, and recourse to mediums all conceal a desire for power over time, history, and, in the last analysis, other human beings, as well as a wish to conciliate hidden powers. They contradict the honor, respect, and loving fear that we owe to God alone.\u2014\u200a\nScientific analysis and criticism.\nThe scientific community rejects astrology as having no explanatory power for describing the universe, and considers it a pseudoscience. Scientific testing of astrology has been conducted, and no evidence has been found to support any of the premises or purported effects outlined in astrological traditions. There is no proposed mechanism of action by which the positions and motions of stars and planets could affect people and events on Earth that does not contradict basic and well understood aspects of biology and physics. Those who have faith in astrology have been characterised by scientists including Bart J. Bok as doing so \"...in spite of the fact that there is no verified scientific basis for their beliefs, and indeed that there is strong evidence to the contrary\".\nConfirmation bias is a form of cognitive bias, a psychological factor that contributes to belief in astrology. Astrology believers tend to selectively remember predictions that turn out to be true, and do not remember those that turn out false. Another, separate, form of confirmation bias also plays a role, where believers often fail to distinguish between messages that demonstrate special ability and those that do not. Thus there are two distinct forms of confirmation bias that are under study with respect to astrological belief.\nDemarcation.\nUnder the criterion of falsifiability, first proposed by the philosopher of science Karl Popper, astrology is a pseudoscience. Popper regarded astrology as \"pseudo-empirical\" in that \"it appeals to observation and experiment,\" but \"nevertheless does not come up to scientific standards.\" In contrast to scientific disciplines, astrology has not responded to falsification through experiment.\nIn contrast to Popper, the philosopher Thomas Kuhn argued that it was not lack of falsifiability that makes astrology unscientific, but rather that the process and concepts of astrology are non-empirical. Kuhn thought that, though astrologers had, historically, made predictions that categorically failed, this in itself does not make astrology unscientific, nor do attempts by astrologers to explain away failures by saying that creating a horoscope is very difficult. Rather, in Kuhn's eyes, astrology is not science because it was always more akin to medieval medicine; astrologers followed a sequence of rules and guidelines for a seemingly necessary field with known shortcomings, but they did no research because the fields are not amenable to research, and so \"they had no puzzles to solve and therefore no science to practise.\" While an astronomer could correct for failure, an astrologer could not. An astrologer could only explain away failure but could not revise the astrological hypothesis in a meaningful way. As such, to Kuhn, even if the stars could influence the path of humans through life, astrology is not scientific.\nThe philosopher Paul Thagard asserts that astrology cannot be regarded as falsified in this sense until it has been replaced with a successor. In the case of predicting behaviour, psychology is the alternative. To Thagard a further criterion of demarcation of science from pseudoscience is that the state-of-the-art must progress and that the community of researchers should be attempting to compare the current theory to alternatives, and not be \"selective in considering confirmations and disconfirmations.\" Progress is defined here as explaining new phenomena and solving existing problems, yet astrology has failed to progress having only changed little in nearly 2000 years. To Thagard, astrologers are acting as though engaged in normal science believing that the foundations of astrology were well established despite the \"many unsolved problems\", and in the face of better alternative theories (psychology). For these reasons Thagard views astrology as pseudoscience.\nFor the philosopher Edward W. James, astrology is irrational not because of the numerous problems with mechanisms and falsification due to experiments, but because an analysis of the astrological literature shows that it is infused with fallacious logic and poor reasoning.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What if throughout astrological writings we meet little appreciation of coherence, blatant insensitivity to evidence, no sense of a hierarchy of reasons, slight command over the contextual force of critieria, stubborn unwillingness to pursue an argument where it leads, stark naivete concerning the efficacy of explanation and so on? In that case, I think, we are perfectly justified in rejecting astrology as irrational.\u00a0... Astrology simply fails to meet the multifarious demands of legitimate reasoning.\nEffectiveness.\nAstrology has not demonstrated its effectiveness in controlled studies and has no scientific validity. Where it has made falsifiable predictions under controlled conditions, they have been falsified. One famous experiment included 28 astrologers who were asked to match over a hundred natal charts to psychological profiles generated by the California Psychological Inventory (CPI) questionnaire. The double-blind experimental protocol used in this study was agreed upon by a group of physicists and a group of astrologers nominated by the National Council for Geocosmic Research, who advised the experimenters, helped ensure that the test was fair and helped draw the central proposition of natal astrology to be tested. They also chose 26 out of the 28 astrologers for the tests (two more volunteered afterwards). The study, published in \"Nature\" in 1985, found that predictions based on natal astrology were no better than chance, and that the testing \"...clearly refutes the astrological hypothesis.\"\nIn 1955, the astrologer and psychologist Michel Gauquelin stated that though he had failed to find evidence that supported indicators like zodiacal signs and planetary aspects in astrology, he did find positive correlations between the diurnal positions of some planets and success in professions that astrology traditionally associates with those planets. The best-known of Gauquelin's findings is based on the positions of Mars in the natal charts of successful athletes and became known as the \"Mars effect\". A study conducted by seven French scientists attempted to replicate the claim, but found no statistical evidence. They attributed the effect to selective bias on Gauquelin's part, accusing him of attempting to persuade them to add or delete names from their study.\nGeoffrey Dean has suggested that the effect may be caused by self-reporting of birth dates by parents rather than any issue with the study by Gauquelin. The suggestion is that a small subset of the parents may have had changed birth times to be consistent with better astrological charts for a related profession. The number of births under astrologically undesirable conditions was also lower, indicating that parents choose dates and times to suit their beliefs. The sample group was taken from a time when belief in astrology was more common. Gauquelin had failed to find the Mars effect in more recent populations, where a nurse or doctor recorded the birth information.\nDean, a scientist and former astrologer, and psychologist Ivan Kelly conducted a large scale scientific test that involved more than one hundred cognitive, behavioural, physical, and other variables\u2014but found no support for astrology. Furthermore, a meta-analysis pooled 40 studies that involved 700 astrologers and over 1,000 birth charts. Ten of the tests\u2014which involved 300 participants\u2014had the astrologers pick the correct chart interpretation out of a number of others that were not the astrologically correct chart interpretation (usually three to five others). When date and other obvious clues were removed, no significant results suggested there was any preferred chart.\nLack of mechanisms and consistency.\nTesting the validity of astrology can be difficult, because there is no consensus amongst astrologers as to what astrology is or what it can predict. Most professional astrologers are paid to predict the future or describe a person's personality and life, but most horoscopes only make vague untestable statements that can apply to almost anyone.\nMany astrologers believe that astrology is scientific, while some have proposed conventional causal agents such as electromagnetism and gravity. Scientists reject these mechanisms as implausible since, for example, the magnetic field, when measured from Earth, of a large but distant planet such as Jupiter is far smaller than that produced by ordinary household appliances.\nWestern astrology has taken the earth's axial precession (also called precession of the equinoxes) into account since Ptolemy's \"Almagest\", so the \"first point of Aries\", the start of the astrological year, continually moves against the background of the stars. The tropical zodiac has no connection to the stars; tropical astrologers distinguish the constellations from their historically associated sign, thereby avoiding complications involving precession. Charpak and Broch, noting this, referred to astrology based on the tropical zodiac as being \"...empty boxes that have nothing to do with anything and are devoid of any consistency or correspondence with the stars.\" Sole use of the tropical zodiac is inconsistent with references made, by the same astrologers, to the Age of Aquarius, which depends on when the vernal point enters the constellation of Aquarius.\nAstrologers usually have only a small knowledge of astronomy, and often do not take into account basic principles\u2014such as the precession of the equinoxes, which changes the position of the sun with time. They commented on the example of \u00c9lizabeth Teissier, who wrote that, \"The sun ends up in the same place in the sky on the same date each year\", as the basis for the idea that two people with the same birthday, but a number of years apart, should be under the same planetary influence. Charpak and Broch noted that, \"There is a difference of about twenty-two thousand miles between Earth's location on any specific date in two successive years\", and that thus they should not be under the same influence according to astrology. Over a 40-year period there would be a difference greater than 780,000 miles.\nReception in the social sciences.\nThe general consensus of astronomers and other natural scientists is that astrology is a pseudoscience which carries no predictive capability, with many philosophers of science considering it a \"paradigm or prime example of pseudoscience.\" Some scholars in the social sciences have cautioned against categorizing astrology, especially ancient astrology, as \"just\" a pseudoscience or projecting the distinction backwards into the past. Thagard, while demarcating it as a pseudoscience, notes that astrology \"should be judged as not pseudoscientific in classical or Renaissance times...Only when the historical and social aspects of science are neglected does it become plausible that pseudoscience is an unchanging category.\" Historians of science such as Tamsyn Barton, Roger Beck, Francesca Rochberg, and Wouter J. Hanegraaff argue that such a wholesale description is anachronistic when applied to historical contexts, stressing that astrology was not pseudoscience before the 18th century and the importance of the discipline to the development of medieval science. R. J. Hakinson writes in the context of Hellenistic astrology that \"the belief in the possibility of [astrology] was, at least some of the time, the result of careful reflection on the nature and structure of the universe.\"\nNicholas Campion, both an astrologer and academic historian of astrology, argues that Indigenous astronomy is largely used as a synonym for astrology in academia, and that modern Indian and Western astrology are better understood as modes of cultural astronomy or ethnoastronomy. Roy Willis and Patrick Curry draw a distinction between propositional ' and metaphoric ' in the ancient world, identifying astrology with the latter and noting that the central concern of astrology \"is not knowledge (factual, let alone scientific) but wisdom (ethical, spiritual and pragmatic)\". Similarly, historian of science Justin Niermeier-Dohoney writes that astrology was \"more than simply a science of prediction using the stars and comprised a vast body of beliefs, knowledge, and practices with the overarching theme of understanding the relationship between humanity and the rest of the cosmos through an interpretation of stellar, solar, lunar, and planetary movement.\" Scholars such as Assyriologist Matthew Rutz have begun using the term \"astral knowledge\" rather than astrology \"to better describe a category of beliefs and practices much broader than the term 'astrology' can capture.\"\nCultural impact.\nWestern politics and society.\nIn the West, political leaders have sometimes consulted astrologers. For example, the British intelligence agency MI5 employed Louis de Wohl as an astrologer after it was reported that Adolf Hitler used astrology to time his actions. The War Office was \"...interested to know what Hitler's own astrologers would be telling him from week to week.\" In fact, de Wohl's predictions were so inaccurate that he was soon labelled a \"complete charlatan\", and later evidence showed that Hitler considered astrology \"complete nonsense\". After John Hinckley's attempted assassination of US President Ronald Reagan, first lady Nancy Reagan commissioned astrologer Joan Quigley to act as the secret White House astrologer. However, Quigley's role ended in 1988 when it became public through the memoirs of former chief of staff, Donald Regan.\nThere was a boom in interest in astrology in the late 1960s. The sociologist Marcello Truzzi described three levels of involvement of \"Astrology-believers\" to account for its revived popularity in the face of scientific discrediting. He found that most astrology-believers did not think that it was a scientific explanation with predictive power. Instead, those superficially involved, knowing \"next to nothing\" about astrology's 'mechanics', read newspaper astrology columns, and could benefit from \"tension-management of anxieties\" and \"a cognitive belief-system that transcends science.\" Those at the second level usually had their horoscopes cast and sought advice and predictions. They were much younger than those at the first level, and could benefit from knowledge of the language of astrology and the resulting ability to belong to a coherent and exclusive group. Those at the third level were highly involved and usually cast horoscopes for themselves. Astrology provided this small minority of astrology-believers with a \"\"meaningful\" view of their universe and [gave] them an \"understanding\" of their place in it.\" This third group took astrology seriously, possibly as an overarching religious worldview (a \"sacred canopy\", in Peter L. Berger's phrase), whereas the other two groups took it playfully and irreverently.\nIn 1953, the sociologist Theodor W. Adorno conducted a study of the astrology column of a Los Angeles newspaper as part of a project examining mass culture in capitalist society. Adorno believed that popular astrology, as a device, invariably leads to statements that encouraged conformity\u2014and that astrologers who go against conformity, by discouraging performance at work etc., risk losing their jobs. Adorno concluded that astrology is a large-scale manifestation of systematic irrationalism, where individuals are subtly led\u2014through flattery and vague generalisations\u2014to believe that the author of the column is addressing them directly. Adorno drew a parallel with the phrase opium of the people, by Karl Marx, by commenting, \"occultism is the metaphysic of the dopes.\"\nA 2005 Gallup poll and a 2009 survey by the Pew Research Center reported that 25% of US adults believe in astrology, while a 2024 Pew survey found a figure of 27%. According to data released in the National Science Foundation's 2014 \"Science and Engineering Indicators\" study, \"Fewer Americans rejected astrology in 2012 than in recent years.\" The NSF study noted that in 2012, \"slightly more than half of Americans said that astrology was 'not at all scientific,' whereas nearly two-thirds gave this response in 2010. The comparable percentage has not been this low since 1983.\" Astrology apps became popular in the late 2010s, some receiving millions of dollars in Silicon Valley venture capital.\nIndia and Japan.\nIn India, there is a long-established and widespread belief in astrology. It is commonly used for daily life, particularly in matters concerning marriage and career, and makes extensive use of electional, horary and karmic astrology. Indian politics have also been influenced by astrology. It is still considered a branch of the Vedanga. In 2001, Indian scientists and politicians debated and critiqued a proposal to use state money to fund research into astrology, resulting in permission for Indian universities to offer courses in Vedic astrology.\nIn February 2011, the Bombay High Court reaffirmed astrology's standing in India when it dismissed a case that challenged its status as a science.\nIn Japan, strong belief in astrology has led to dramatic changes in the fertility rate and the number of abortions in the years of Fire Horse. Adherents believe that women born in \"hinoeuma\" years are unmarriageable and bring bad luck to their father or husband. In 1966, the number of babies born in Japan dropped by over 25% as parents tried to avoid the stigma of having a daughter born in the hinoeuma year.\nLiterature and music.\nThe fourteenth-century English poets John Gower and Geoffrey Chaucer both referred to astrology in their works, including Gower's \"Confessio Amantis\" and Chaucer's \"The Canterbury Tales\". Chaucer commented explicitly on astrology in his \"Treatise on the Astrolabe\", demonstrating personal knowledge of one area, judicial astrology, with an account of how to find the ascendant or rising sign.\nIn the fifteenth century, references to astrology, such as with similes, became \"a matter of course\" in English literature.\nIn the sixteenth century, John Lyly's 1597 play, \"The Woman in the Moon\", is wholly motivated by astrology, while Christopher Marlowe makes astrological references in his plays \"Doctor Faustus\" and \"Tamburlaine\" (both c. 1590), and Sir Philip Sidney refers to astrology at least four times in his romance \"The Countess of Pembroke's Arcadia\" (c. 1580). Edmund Spenser uses astrology both decoratively and causally in his poetry, revealing \"...unmistakably an abiding interest in the art, an interest shared by a large number of his contemporaries.\" George Chapman's play, \"Byron's Conspiracy\" (1608), similarly uses astrology as a causal mechanism in the drama. William Shakespeare's attitude towards astrology is unclear, with contradictory references in plays including \"King Lear\", \"Antony and Cleopatra\", and \"Richard II\". Shakespeare was familiar with astrology and made use of his knowledge of astrology in nearly every play he wrote, assuming a basic familiarity with the subject in his commercial audience. Outside theatre, the physician and mystic Robert Fludd practised astrology, as did the quack doctor Simon Forman. In Elizabethan England, \"The usual feeling about astrology\u00a0... [was] that it is the most useful of the sciences.\"\nIn seventeenth century Spain, Lope de Vega, with a detailed knowledge of astronomy, wrote plays that ridicule astrology. In his pastoral romance \"La Arcadia\" (1598), it leads to absurdity; in his novela \"Guzman el Bravo\" (1624), he concludes that the stars were made for man, not man for the stars. Calder\u00f3n de la Barca wrote the 1641 comedy \"Astrologo Fingido\" (The Pretended Astrologer); the plot was borrowed by the French playwright Thomas Corneille for his 1651 comedy \"Feint Astrologue\".\nThe most famous piece of music influenced by astrology is the orchestral suite \"The Planets\". Written by the British composer Gustav Holst (1874\u20131934), and first performed in 1918, the framework of \"The Planets\" is based upon the astrological symbolism of the planets. Each of the seven movements of the suite is based upon a different planet, though the movements are not in the order of the planets from the Sun. The composer Colin Matthews wrote an eighth movement entitled \"Pluto, the Renewer\", first performed in 2000, as the suite was written prior to Pluto's discovery. In 1937, another British composer, Constant Lambert, wrote a ballet on astrological themes, called \"Horoscope\". In 1974, the New Zealand composer Edwin Carr wrote \"The Twelve Signs: An Astrological Entertainment\" for orchestra without strings. Camille Paglia acknowledges astrology as an influence on her work of literary criticism \"Sexual Personae\" (1990). The American comedian Harvey Sid Fisher is known for his comedic songs about astrology.\nAstrology features strongly in Eleanor Catton's \"The Luminaries\", recipient of the 2013 Man Booker Prize.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2123", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2123", "title": "Abyssinia (disambiguation)", "text": "Abyssinia is a historical name for the Ethiopian Empire.\nAbyssinia may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "2125", "revid": "2821695", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2125", "title": "Algebraic extension", "text": "Extension of a mathematical field with polynomial roots\nIn mathematics, an algebraic extension is a field extension \"L\"/\"K\" such that every element of the larger field L is algebraic over the smaller field K; that is, every element of L is a root of a non-zero polynomial with coefficients in K. A field extension that is not algebraic, is said to be transcendental, and must contain transcendental elements, that is, elements that are not algebraic.\nThe algebraic extensions of the field formula_1 of the rational numbers are called algebraic number fields and are the main objects of study of algebraic number theory. Another example of a common algebraic extension is the extension formula_2 of the real numbers by the complex numbers.\nSome properties.\nAll transcendental extensions are of infinite degree. This in turn implies that all finite extensions are algebraic. The converse is not true however: there are infinite extensions which are algebraic. For instance, the field of all algebraic numbers is an infinite algebraic extension of the rational numbers.\nLet \"E\" be an extension field of \"K\", and \"a\" \u2208 \"E\". The smallest subfield of \"E\" that contains \"K\" and a is commonly denoted formula_3 If \"a\" is algebraic over \"K\", then the elements of \"K\"(\"a\") can be expressed as polynomials in \"a\" with coefficients in \"K\"; that is, formula_4, the smallest ring containing \"K\" and a. In this case, formula_5 is a finite extension of K and all its elements are algebraic over K. In particular, formula_5 is a K-vector space with basis formula_7, where \"d\" is the degree of the minimal polynomial of a. These properties do not hold if a is not algebraic. For example, formula_8 and they are both infinite dimensional vector spaces over formula_9\nAn algebraically closed field \"F\" has no proper algebraic extensions, that is, no algebraic extensions \"E\" with \"F\" &lt; \"E\". An example is the field of complex numbers. Every field has an algebraic extension which is algebraically closed (called its algebraic closure), but proving this in general requires some form of the axiom of choice.\nAn extension \"L\"/\"K\" is algebraic if and only if every sub \"K\"-algebra of \"L\" is a field.\nProperties.\nThe following three properties hold:\nThese finitary results can be generalized using transfinite induction:\nThis fact, together with Zorn's lemma (applied to an appropriately chosen poset), establishes the existence of algebraic closures.\nGeneralizations.\nModel theory generalizes the notion of algebraic extension to arbitrary theories: an embedding of \"M\" into \"N\" is called an algebraic extension if for every \"x\" in \"N\" there is a formula \"p\" with parameters in \"M\", such that \"p\"(\"x\") is true and the set\nformula_10\nis finite. It turns out that applying this definition to the theory of fields gives the usual definition of algebraic extension. The Galois group of \"N\" over \"M\" can again be defined as the group of automorphisms, and it turns out that most of the theory of Galois groups can be developed for the general case.\nRelative algebraic closures.\nGiven a field \"k\" and a field \"K\" containing \"k\", one defines the relative algebraic closure of \"k\" in \"K\" to be the subfield of \"K\" consisting of all elements of \"K\" that are algebraic over \"k\", that is all elements of \"K\" that are a root of some nonzero polynomial with coefficients in \"k\"."}
{"id": "2126", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2126", "title": "Ani DiFranco", "text": "American musician (born 1970)\nAngela Maria \"Ani\" DiFranco (; born September 23, 1970) is an American-Canadian singer-songwriter. She has released more than 20 albums. DiFranco's music has been classified as folk rock and alternative rock, although it has additional influences from punk, funk, hip hop and jazz. She has released all her albums on her own record label, Righteous Babe.\nDiFranco supports many social and political movements by performing benefit concerts, appearing on benefit albums and speaking at rallies. Through the Righteous Babe Foundation, DiFranco has backed grassroots cultural and political organizations supporting causes including abortion rights and LGBT visibility. She counts American folk singer and songwriter Pete Seeger among her mentors.\nDiFranco released a memoir, \"No Walls and the Recurring Dream\", on May 7, 2019, via Viking Books and made \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list.\nOn February 9, 2024, DiFranco made her Broadway debut in \"Hadestown\" as Persephone, reprising the role she played in the concept album of the same name.\nEarly life and education.\nDiFranco was born in Buffalo, New York, on September 23, 1970, the daughter of Elizabeth (Ross) and Dante Americo DiFranco, who had met while attending the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Her father was of Italian descent, and her mother was from Montreal. DiFranco started playing Beatles covers at local bars and busking with her guitar teacher, Michael Meldrum, at the age of nine. By 14 she was writing her own songs. She played them at bars and coffee houses throughout her teens. DiFranco graduated from the Buffalo Academy for Visual and Performing Arts high school at 16 and began attending classes at Buffalo State College. She was living by herself, having moved out of her mother's apartment after she became an emancipated minor when she was 15.\nCareer.\nDiFranco started her own record company, Righteous Babe Records, in 1989 at age 19. She released her self-titled debut album in the winter of 1990, shortly after relocating to New York City. There, she took poetry classes at The New School, where she met poet Sekou Sundiata, who was to become a friend and mentor. She toured steadily for the next 15 years, pausing only to record albums. Appearances at Canadian folk festivals and increasingly larger venues in the U.S. reflected her increasing popularity on the North American folk and roots scene. Throughout the early and mid-1990s DiFranco toured solo and also as a duo with Canadian drummer Andy Stochansky.\nIn September 1995, DiFranco participated in a concert at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland Ohio, inaugurating the opening of the Woody Guthrie Archives in New York City. She later released a CD on Righteous Babe of the concert \"Til We Outnumber Em\" featuring artists such as DiFranco, Billy Bragg, Ramblin' Jack Elliott, Arlo Guthrie, Indigo Girls, Dave Pirner, Tim Robbins, and Bruce Springsteen with 100 percent of proceeds going to the Woody Guthrie Foundation and Archives and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Museum educational department.\nIn 1996, bassist Sara Lee joined the touring group, whose live rapport is showcased on the 1997 album \"Living in Clip\". DiFranco would later release Lee's solo album \"Make It Beautiful\" on Righteous Babe. In 1998, Stochansky left to pursue a solo career as a singer-songwriter. A new touring ensemble consisting of Jason Mercer on bass, Julie Wolf on keyboards, and Daren Hahn on drums, augmented at times by a horn section, accompanied DiFranco on tour between 1998 and 2002.\nThe 1990s were a period of heightened exposure for DiFranco, as she continued playing ever larger venues around the world and attracted international attention of the press, including cover stories in \"Spin\", \"Ms.\", and \"Magnet\", among others, as well as appearances on MTV and VH1. Her playfully ironic cover of the Bacharach/David song \"Wishin' and Hopin'\" appeared under the opening titles of the film \"My Best Friend's Wedding\".\nShe guest starred on a 1998 episode of the Fox sitcom \"King of the Hill\", as the voice of Peggy's feminist guitar teacher, Emily.\nBeginning in 1999, Righteous Babe Records began releasing albums by other artists including Sara Lee, Sekou Sundiata, Arto Lindsay, Bitch and Animal, That One Guy, Utah Phillips, Hamell on Trial, Andrew Bird, Kurt Swinghammer, Buddy Wakefield, Ana\u00efs Mitchell and Nona Hendryx.\nOn September 11, 2001, DiFranco was in Manhattan and later penned the poem \"Self Evident\" about the experience. The poem was featured in the book \"It's a Free Country: Personal Freedom in America After September 11\". The poem's title also became the name of DiFranco's first book of poetry released exclusively in Italy by Minimum Fax. It was later also featured in \"Verses\", a book of her poetry published in the U.S. by Seven Stories press. DiFranco has written and performed many spoken-word pieces throughout her career and was showcased as a poet on the HBO series \"Def Poetry\" in 2005.\nSince her 2005 release \"Knuckle Down\" (co-produced by Joe Henry) DiFranco's touring band and recordings have featured bass player Todd Sickafoose and in turns other musicians such as Allison Miller, Andy Borger, Herlin Riley, and Terence Higgins on drums and Mike Dillon on percussion and vibes. On September 11, 2007, she released the first retrospective of her career, a two-disc compilation entitled \"Canon\" and simultaneously a retrospective collection of poetry book \"Verses\". On September 30, 2008, she released \"Red Letter Year\".\nIn 2009, DiFranco appeared at Pete Seeger's 90th birthday celebration at Madison Square Garden, debuting her revamped version of the 1930s labor anthem \"Which Side Are You On?\" in a duet with Bruce Cockburn and also duetting with Kris Kristofferson on the folk classic \"There's a Hole in the Bucket\". DiFranco released an album on January 17, 2012, \"\u00bfWhich Side Are You On?\". It includes collaborations with Pete Seeger, Ivan Neville, Cyril Neville, Skerik, Adam Levy, Righteous Babe recording artist Ana\u00efs Mitchell, CC Adcock, and a host of New Orleans\u2013based horn players known for their work in such outfits as Galactic, Bonerama, and Rebirth Brass Band. In 2014, she released her eighteenth album, \"Allergic to Water\". In 2017, she released her nineteenth, \"Binary\".\nOn May 7, 2019, DiFranco released a memoir, \"No Walls and the Recurring Dream\", via Viking Books. It is described as a \"coming-of-age story\". In 2021, DiFranco released the album \"Revolutionary Love\" which was largely inspired by Valarie Kaur's book \"See No Stranger.\"\nPersonal life.\nDiFranco came out as bisexual in her twenties, and has written songs about love and sex with women and men. She addressed the controversy about her sexuality in the song \"In or Out\" on the album \"Imperfectly\" (1992). However, in 2015 she told the blog GoPride.com that she was \"not so queer anymore, but definitely a woman-centered woman and just a human rights-centered artist.\" In a 2019 interview with \"Jezebel\", she stated that she preferred the term \"queer\" because \"bisexual\" \"always sounded very medical, like something you do to a frog in 9th grade science or something\", and further added that \"the irony is I'm pretty fuckin' hetero, which is unfortunate for me because many of my deepest connections are with women. But, naw, I just like what's in boys' pants better.\" In 1998, she married her sound engineer Andrew Gilchrist in a Unitarian Universalist service in Canada. DiFranco and Gilchrist divorced in 2003.\nIn 1990, she wrote \"Lost Woman Song\", inspired by abortions she had at ages eighteen and twenty.\nDiFranco's father died in the summer of 2004. In July 2005, DiFranco developed tendinitis and took a nine-month hiatus from touring. In January 2007 DiFranco gave birth to her first child, a daughter, at her Buffalo home. She married the child's father, Mike Napolitano, also her regular producer, in 2009. In an interview on September 13, 2012, DiFranco mentioned that she was pregnant with her second child. In April 2013, she gave birth to her second child, a son.\nShe has resided in the Bywater, New Orleans, neighborhood since 2008.\nDiFranco signed the October 2023 Artists4Ceasefire open letter to Joe Biden calling for a ceasefire during the Israeli bombardment of Gaza.\nShe has described herself as an atheist. On the subject of religion, DiFranco has stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Well, I'm not a religious person myself. I'm an atheist. I think religion serves a lot of different purposes in people's lives, and I can recognize the value of that, you know, the value of ceremony, the value of community, or even just having a forum to get together and talk about ideas, about morals \u2013 that's a cool concept. But then, of course, institutional religions are so problematic.\nDiFranco has spoken critically of cancel culture, saying it is \"just gonna get us nowhere\" and \"The human family can't divorce each other\". DiFranco herself has received criticism for planning a 2013 songwriting retreat at Nottoway, a former slave plantation. She cancelled the retreat three days after the news broke, writing on her website, \"I needed a wake-up call and you gave it to me.\" In a 2019 interview, she said of her choices at the time, \"I should have found the ultimate humility to put down my own hurt, and all of the misconceptions or mis-truths out there. You have to make yourself accountable. There's a greater pain that's bigger than me, and it's more important.\"\nShe wrote in her memoir that she \"[sympathized] with both sides\" regarding the controversial trans-exclusionary policies of the Michigan Womyn's Music Festival. In a 2019 interview, she elaborated on this statement, discussing her perception that cisgender women were being \"asked again ... to move over and make room for somebody else,\" and later expressed that she understood the difficulty \"for anybody outside of a very specific group to experience it the way that group does,\" saying that \"maybe [women's spaces] should be a little more [inclusive]\".\nDiFranco is the subject of the 2024 documentary film \"1-800-On-Her-Own\".\nCritical reception.\nDiFranco has been a critical success for much of her career, with a career album average of 55 on Metacritic. \"Living in Clip\", DiFranco's 1998 double live album, is the only one to achieve gold record status to date. DiFranco was praised by \"The Buffalo News\" in 2006 as \"Buffalo's leading lady of rock music\".\nStarting in 2003, DiFranco was nominated four consecutive times for Best Recording Package at the Grammy Awards, winning in 2004 for \"Evolve\".\nMusic.\nStyle.\nDiFranco's guitar playing is often characterized by a signature staccato style, rapid fingerpicking and many alternate tunings. She delivers many of her lines in a speaking style notable for its rhythmic variation. Her lyrics, which often include alliteration, metaphor, word play and a more or less gentle irony, have also received praise for their sophistication.\nAlthough DiFranco's music has been classified as both folk rock and alternative rock, she has reached across genres since her earliest albums incorporating first punk, then funk, hiphop, and jazz influences.\nWhile primarily an acoustic guitarist she has used a variety of instruments and styles: brass instrumentation was prevalent in 1998's \"Little Plastic Castle\"; a simple walking bass in her 1997 cover of Hal David and Burt Bacharach's \"Wishin' and Hopin'\"; strings on the 1997 live album \"Living in Clip\" and 2004's \"Knuckle Down\"; and electronics and synthesizers in 1999's \"To the Teeth\" and 2006's \"Reprieve\".\nDiFranco has stated that \"folk music is not an acoustic guitar\u00a0\u2013 that's not where the heart of it is. I use the word 'folk' in reference to punk music and rap music. It's an attitude, it's an awareness of one's heritage, and it's a community. It's subcorporate music that gives voice to different communities and their struggle against authority.\"\nMusical collaborations, cover versions, and samples.\nDiFranco has collaborated with a wide range of artists. In 1997, she appeared on Canadian songwriter Bruce Cockburn's \"Charity of Night\" album. In 1998, she produced fellow folksinger Dan Bern's album \"Fifty Eggs\".\nShe developed a deep association with folksinger and social activist Utah Phillips throughout the mid-1990s, sharing her stage and her audience with the older musician until his death in 2008 and resulting in two collaborative albums: \"The Past Didn't Go Anywhere\" (1996) and \"Fellow Workers\" (1999, with liner notes by Howard Zinn). \"The Past\" is built around Phillips's storytelling, an important part of his art that had not previously been documented on recordings; on the album, DiFranco provides musical settings for his speaking voice. The followup, \"Fellow Workers\", was recorded live in Daniel Lanois's Kingsway Studio in New Orleans and features Phillips fronting DiFranco's touring band for a collection of songs and stories.\nPrince recorded two songs with DiFranco in 1999, \"Providence\" on her \"To the Teeth\" album, and \"Eye Love U, But Eye Don't Trust U Anymore\" on Prince's \"Rave Un2 the Joy Fantastic\" album. Funk and soul jazz musician Maceo Parker and rapper Corey Parker have both appeared on DiFranco's albums and featured appearances by her on theirs. Parker and DiFranco toured together in 1999.\nShe has appeared on several compilations of the songs of Pete Seeger and frequented his Hudson Clearwater Revival Festival. In 2001, she appeared on Brazilian artist Lenine's album \"Falange Canibal\". In 2002, her rendition of Greg Brown's \"The Poet Game\" appeared on \"Going Driftless: An Artist's Tribute to Greg Brown\". Also in 2002 she recorded a duet with Jackie Chan of the Irving Gordon song \"Unforgettable\" for a record of unlikely collaborations, \"When Pigs Fly: Songs You Never Thought You'd Hear\".\nIn 2005, she appeared on Dar Williams' record \"My Better Self\", duetting on William's cover of Pink Floyd's \"Comfortably Numb\". She performed with Cyndi Lauper on \"Sisters of Avalon\" a track from Lauper's 2005 \"The Body Acoustic\" album. In 2006, she produced Hamell on Trial's album \"Songs for Parents Who Enjoy Drugs\". In 2008, she appeared on Todd Sickafoose's album \"Tiny Resisters\". In 2010, she co-produced a track with Margaret Cho called \"Captain Cameltoe\" for the comedian's \"Cho Dependant\" album. In 2011, she appeared on Rob Wasserman's album \"Note of Hope\", an exploration of the writings of Woody Guthrie with musical accompaniment, though the track in which she appeared, \"Voice\", was actually recorded 13 years earlier. Also in 2011 she duetted with Greg Dulli on the Twilight Singers record \"Dynamite Steps\".\nOther artists have covered and sampled DiFranco's work throughout the years. Her spoken word poem \"Self Evident\" was covered by Public Enemy founder Chuck D's group called Impossebulls. Alana Davis had some commercial success with DiFranco's song \"32 Flavors\". Samples from the track \"Coming Up\" were used by DJ Spooky in his album \"Live Without Dead Time\", produced for AdBusters Magazine in 2003. In 2010, DiFranco played Persephone on Ana\u00efs Mitchell's album Hadestown.\nDiFranco was approached by Zoe Boekbinder to work on their \"Prison Music Project\", an album of collaborations between incarcerated and formerly incarcerated writers and musicians on the outside. DiFranco co-produced the project with Boekbinder and co-wrote and performed \"Nowhere but Barstow and Prison\". The album \"Long Time Gone\" was released on Righteous Babe Records in 2020 after ten years in the making.\nLyrical content.\nAlthough much of DiFranco's material is autobiographical, it is often also strongly political. Many of her songs are concerned with contemporary social issues such as racism, sexism, sexual abuse, homophobia, reproductive rights, poverty, and war. In 2008, she donated a song to Aid Still Required's CD to assist with the restoration of the devastation done to Southeast Asia from the 2004 tsunami. The combination of personal and political is partially responsible for DiFranco's early popularity among politically active college students, particularly those of the left wing, some of whom set up fan pages on the web to document DiFranco's career as early as 1994. DiFranco's rapid rise in popularity in the mid-1990s was fueled mostly by personal contact and word of mouth rather than mainstream media.\nLabel independence.\nDiFranco cites her anti-corporate ethos for the main reason she decided to start her own label. This has allowed her a considerable degree of creative freedom over the years, including, for example, providing all instrumentals and vocals and recording the album herself at her home on an analog 8-track reel to reel, and handling much of the artwork and packaging design for her 2004 album \"Educated Guess\". She has referenced this independence from major labels in song more than once, including \"The Million You Never Made\" (\"Not a Pretty Girl\"), which discusses the act of turning down a lucrative contract, \"The Next Big Thing\" (\"Not So Soft\"), which describes an imagined meeting with a label head-hunter who evaluates the singer based on her looks, and \"Napoleon\" (\"Dilate\"), which sympathizes sarcastically with an unnamed friend who did sign with a label.\nThe business grew organically starting in 1990 with the first cassette tape. Connections were made when women in colleges started duplicating and sharing tapes. Offers to play at colleges started coming in and her popularity grew largely by word of mouth and through women's groups or organizations. Zango and Goldenrod, two music distributors specializing in women's music, started carrying DiFranco's music. They sold music to independent music stores and women's book stores. In 1995, Righteous Babe Records signed with Koch International for DiFranco's release of \"Not a Pretty Girl\". Her records could then be found in large and small record stores alike.\nDiFranco has occasionally joined with Prince in discussing publicly the problems associated with major record companies. Righteous Babe Records employs a number of people in her hometown of Buffalo. In a 1997 open letter to \"Ms.\" magazine she expressed displeasure that what she considers a way to ensure her own artistic freedom was seen by others solely in terms of its financial success.\nActivism.\nFrom the earliest days of her career, DiFranco has lent her voice and her name to a broad range of social movements, performing benefit concerts, appearing on benefit albums, speaking at rallies, and offering info table space to organizations at her concerts and the virtual equivalent on her website, among other methods and actions. In 1999, she created her own not-for-profit organization; as the Buffalo News has reported, \"Through the Righteous Babe Foundation, DiFranco has backed various grassroots cultural and political organizations, supporting causes ranging from abortion rights to gay visibility.\"\nDuring the first Gulf War, DiFranco participated in the anti-war movement. In early 1993 she played Pete Seeger's Clearwater Folk Festival for the first time. In 1998, she was a featured performer in the Dead Man Walking benefit concert series raising money for Sister Helen Prejean's \"Not in Our Name\" anti-death penalty organization. DiFranco's commitment to opposing the death penalty is longstanding; she has also been a long time supporter of the Southern Center for Human Rights.\nDuring the 2000 U.S. presidential election, she actively supported and voted for Green Party candidate Ralph Nader, though in an open letter she made clear that if she lived in a swing state, she would vote for Al Gore to prevent George W. Bush from being elected.\nIn 2004, DiFranco visited Burma in order to learn about the Burmese resistance movement and the country's fight for democracy. During her travels she met with then-detained resistance leader Aung San Suu Kyi. Her song \"In The Way\" was later featured on \"For the Lady\", a benefit CD that donated all proceeds to the United States Campaign for Burma.\nDuring the 2004 presidential primaries, she supported liberal, anti-war Democrat Dennis Kucinich, who appeared on stage with her during several of her concerts. After the primary season ended, and John Kerry was the clear Democratic candidate, DiFranco launched a \"Vote Dammit!\" tour of swing states encouraging audience members to vote. In 2005, she lobbied Congress against the proliferation of nuclear power in general and the placement of nuclear waste dumps on Indian land in particular. In 2008, she again backed Kucinich in his bid for the presidency.\nIn 2002, Righteous Babe Records established the \"Aiding Buffalo's Children\" program in conjunction with members of the local community to raise funds for Buffalo's public school system. To kick off the program, DiFranco donated \"a day's pay\"\u2014the performance fee from her concert that year at Shea's Performing Arts Center\u2014 to ABC and challenged her fans to do the same. Aiding Buffalo's Children has since been folded into the Community Foundation of Greater Buffalo, contributing to a variety of charitable funds.\nIn 2005, when Hurricane Katrina devastated DiFranco's newly adopted home town of New Orleans, she collected donations from fans around the world through The Righteous Babe Store website for the Katrina Piano Fund, helping musicians replace instruments lost in the hurricane, raising over $47,500 for the cause.\nIn 2010, after the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, she performed at the \"For Our Coast\" benefit concert joining Marianne Faithfull, C.\u00a0C. Adcock and others at the Acadiana Center for the Arts Theater in Lafayette, raising money for Gulf Aid Acadiana, and the Gulf Aid show with Lenny Kravitz, Mos Def, and others at Mardi Gras World River City in New Orleans, both shows raising money to help protect the wetlands, clean up the coast and to assist the fishermen and their families affected by the spill.\nDiFranco sits on the board for The Roots of Music, founded by Rebirth Brass Band drummer Derrick Tabb. The organization provides free marching band instruction to children in the New Orleans area in addition to academic tutoring and mentoring.\nDiFranco joined about 500,000 people at the March for Women's Lives in DC in April 2004. As an honored guest she marched in the front row for the three-mile route, along with Margaret Cho, Janeane Garofalo, Whoopi Goldberg, Gloria Steinem and others. Later in the day, DiFranco played a few songs on the main stage in front of the Capitol, including \"Your Next Bold Move\".\nScot Fisher, formerly Righteous Babe label president and DiFranco's manager for many years, has been a longtime advocate of the preservation movement in Buffalo. In 1999, he and DiFranco purchased a decaying church on the verge of demolition in downtown Buffalo and began the lengthy process of restoring it. In 2006, the building opened its doors again, first briefly as \"The Church\" and then as \"Babeville\", housing two concert venues, the record label's business office, and Hallwalls Contemporary Arts Center.\nDiFranco is a member of the Toronto-based charity Artists Against Racism for which she participated in a radio PSA.\nOn July 21, 2006, she received the Woman of Courage Award at the National Organization for Women (NOW) Conference and Young Feminist Summit in Albany, New York. DiFranco was one of the first musicians to receive the award, given each year to a woman who has set herself apart by her contributions to the feminist movement.\nIn 2009, DiFranco received the Woody Guthrie Award for being a voice of positive social change.\nIn October 2023, DiFranco signed an open letter to Joe Biden, President of the United States, of artists calling for a ceasefire of the Israeli bombardment of Gaza.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2127", "revid": "27335766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2127", "title": "Arene (disambiguation)", "text": "An Arene, or aromatic hydrocarbon, is a hydrocarbon with alternating double and single bonds between carbon atoms forming rings.\nArene may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "2128", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2128", "title": "Anaheim Angels", "text": ""}
{"id": "2129", "revid": "49768436", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2129", "title": "Arizona Diamondbacks", "text": "Major League Baseball franchise in Phoenix, Arizona\nThe Arizona Diamondbacks (often referred to as the D-backs) are an American professional baseball team based in Phoenix, Arizona. The Diamondbacks compete in Major League Baseball (MLB) as a member club of the National League (NL) West Division. The franchise was established on March 9, 1995 and began play in 1998 as an expansion team. The team plays its home games at Chase Field. Along with the Tampa Bay Rays, the Diamondbacks are one of the newest teams in the MLB and are the youngest team to win a World Series, doing so in only their fourth season of existence in 2001.\nAfter a fifth-place finish in their inaugural season, the Diamondbacks made several off-season acquisitions, including future Hall of Fame pitcher Randy Johnson, who won four consecutive Cy Young Awards in his first four seasons with the team. In 1999, Arizona won 100 games and their first division championship. In 2001, they won the World Series over the three-time defending champion New York Yankees, becoming the fastest expansion team in MLB history to win the World Series and the first and only men's major professional sports team in Arizona to win a championship. 22 years later they won their second NLCS and returned to the World Series, losing to the Texas Rangers.\nFrom 1998 to 2025, the Diamondbacks had an overall record of 2,167\u20132,267 ().\nHistory.\nOn March 9, 1995, Phoenix was awarded an expansion franchise to begin play for the season. A $130 million franchise fee was paid to Major League Baseball (MLB). On January 16, 1997, owners of existing MLB teams voted to put the Diamondbacks in the National League. The Diamondbacks' first major league game was played against the Colorado Rockies on March 31, 1998, at Bank One Ballpark. The ballpark was renamed Chase Field in 2005, as a result of Bank One's merger with JPMorgan Chase.\nSince their debut, the Diamondbacks have won two Wild Card Series, five NL West division titles, two NL pennants, and the 2001 World Series. They were the fastest expansion franchise in baseball history to win a World Series after defeating the Yankees in Game 7 during the 2001 postseason.\nAfter beating the Philadelphia Phillies 4\u20132 in Game 7 of the 2023 NLCS at Citizens Bank Park in Philadelphia, the Diamondbacks returned to the World Series for the first time since 2001 \u2013 against the Texas Rangers on October 27, 2023.\nThey lost the series 4\u20131, with the clinching Game 5 loss at home in Arizona on November 1, 2023.\nLogos and uniforms.\n1998\u20132006.\nThe Diamondbacks' original colors were purple, black, teal, and copper. Their logo was an italicized block letter \"A\" with a diamond pattern, with the crossbar represented by a snake's tongue. This period saw the Diamondbacks wear several uniform combinations.\nAt home, the Diamondbacks wore cream uniforms with purple pinstripes. The primary sleeved uniform, worn from 1998 to 2000, featured the full team name (\"Diamond\" and \"Backs\" stacked together) in front and chest numbers. The alternate sleeveless version contained the \"A\" logo on the right chest and was paired with purple undershirts. Before the 2001 season, the sleeved uniform was changed to feature the \"A\" logo. In all three uniforms, player names were teal with purple trim, and numbers were purple with white with teal trim.\nThe Diamondbacks' primary road gray uniform also had purple pinstripes. The first version featured \"Arizona\" in purple with white and teal trim along with black drop shadows, with chest numbers added. Player names were in purple with white trim, and numbers were teal with white and purple trim. In 2001, the uniform became sleeveless with black undershirts, and the lettering scheme was changed to purple with white, copper, and black accents.\nThe alternate home purple uniform featured \"Arizona\" in teal with white and copper trim and black drop shadows. The letters were rendered in teal with copper and white trim, but were changed to copper with teal and white trim after only one season. This set was worn until 2002.\nThe alternate road black uniform featured the \"A\" logo on the right chest, while letters were purple with white trim and numbers were teal with white and purple trim. A zigzag pattern of teal, copper, and purple was featured on the sleeves. In 2001, the uniform was changed to feature \"Arizona\" in front. The letters became purple with white and copper trim.\nThe Diamondbacks initially wore four different cap versions. The primary home cap is all-purple, while the road cap is black with a teal brim. They also wore a cream cap with purple brim and a teal cap with purple brim. All designs featured the primary \"A\" logo. In 1999, the road cap became all-black and contained the alternate \"D-snake\" logo rendered in copper. Also, the teal and cream alternate caps were dropped.\nThe left sleeve of all four uniforms contained the snake logo with the full team name until the 2004 season, when it became exclusive to the road black uniform.\n2007\u20132015.\nThe franchise unveiled new uniforms and colors of Sedona red, Sonoran sand, and black on November 8, 2006. The red shade is named for the sandstone canyon at Red Rock State Park near Sedona, while the beige (sand) shade is named for the Sonoran Desert. A sleeve patch was added featuring a lowercase \"d\" and \"b\" configured to look like a snake's head. The team also kept the \"D\" logo, which was slightly altered and put on an all-red cap to be used as their game cap. They kept the \"A\" logo with the new colors applied to it, with a solid black cap used as the alternate cap. Arizona's updated color scheme bore a striking resemblance to the Houston Astros' color scheme (brick red, sand, and black) that the Astros used until 2012, as well as the NHL's Phoenix Coyotes, whose adoption of those colors predated the Diamondbacks by four years.\nThe white home uniform featured \"D-Backs\" in red with sand and black trim. The road gray uniform featured \"Arizona\" in red with sand and black trim. Player names were red with black trim while numbers were black with red trim.\nThe alternate red uniform contained \"D-Backs\" in sand with red and black trim, with player names in sand with black trim and numbers in black with sand trim.\nThere were two versions of the alternate black uniform. One design has the alternate \"A\" logo on the right chest, while the other has \"Arizona\" written in red with black and sand trim. The latter was introduced in 2013 as a tribute to the victims of the Yarnell Hill Fire. On both uniforms, player names were sand with red trim and numbers in red with sand trim.\n2016\u20132023.\nBefore the 2016 season, the Diamondbacks reincorporated teal into its color scheme while keeping Sedona Red, Sonoran Sand, and black. They also unveiled eight different uniform combinations, including two separate home white and away grey uniforms. One major difference between the two sets is that the non-teal uniforms feature a snakeskin pattern on the shoulders, while the teal-trimmed uniforms include a charcoal/grey snakeskin pattern on the back. Arizona also kept the throwback pinstriped sleeveless uniforms from their 2001 championship season for use during Thursday home games.\nStarting with the 2020 season, the Diamondbacks made slight redesigns to their uniforms. The snakeskin patterns were removed while the teal-trimmed grey uniforms were retired. The team also reverted to a standard grey uniform after wearing a darker shade on the previous set. Two home white uniforms remain in use: the primary Sedona Red and the alternate teal. They would also wear two black uniforms: one with the primary \"A\" logo on the left chest and the other with \"Los D-Backs\" trimmed in teal. Three cap designs were also unveiled, all with a black base: the primary \"A\" cap, the teal-trimmed \"snake\" cap (paired exclusively on the teal alternates), and the sand-trimmed \"snake\" cap with red brim (paired exclusively on the Sedona Red alternates). The Nike swoosh logo is also placed on the right chest near the shoulder. In 2022, the Diamondbacks introduced a red \"A\" cap with black brim.\nIn 2021, the Diamondbacks were one of seven teams to wear Nike \"City Connect\" uniforms. The design is primarily sand and has \"Serpientes\" in black script lettering emblazoned in front. The first \"S\" in \"Serpientes\" was shaped to resemble a rattlesnake. The right sleeve has the flag of Arizona patch recolored to the Diamondbacks' red, sand, and black scheme, and the left sleeve has the \"A\" logo recolored to black and sand. Numerals are in red. The cap is primarily sand with black brim and has the \"A\" logo in black and sand; the regular batting helmet is used with the uniform. Initially, the Diamondbacks wore white pants with this uniform, but has since switched to sand pants.\nBefore the 2023 season, the Diamondbacks promoted the alternate white uniform with teal accents to its primary home uniform and retired the previous Sedona Red white uniform. This is due to a new Nike rule that limits teams to four regular uniforms plus the \"City Connect\" uniform.\n2024 to present.\nComing off their second World Series appearance in 2023, the Diamondbacks unveiled refreshed uniform designs starting in 2024. Turquoise returned full-time as an accent color on all uniforms along with Sedona red and black, but sand was removed except on the \"City Connect\" uniform. The home uniform is now a cream base with black piping, featuring the \"A\" logo on the left chest. The road grey uniform with black piping featured \"Arizona\" in Sedona red with teal and black outlines. The alternate black uniform with teal piping shared the same features as the home uniform. The alternate Sedona red uniform incorporated the full \"Diamondbacks\" wordmark in black with teal and Sedona red outlines, along with teal numbers trimmed in black on the left chest. All uniforms featured the snake head alternate logo on either sleeve, with the sponsor logo (Avnet since 2023) on the other sleeve. The home cap is Sedona red with black brim and featured the \"A\" logo, and its all-black counterpart is worn with both the home and black alternate uniform. The road cap is black with Sedona red trim and featured the return of the \"D-snake\" logo and is worn with both the road and alternate Sedona red uniform. The all-Sedona red alternate cap shared the same features as the road cap and is worn with the Sedona red uniform.\nIn 2025, the Diamondbacks released a second \"City Connect\" uniform, updating the \"Serpientes\" wordmark but recolored to the original purple and teal colors. The uniforms take designs from all their different uniform combinations since they became a franchise in 1998. The jersey pays tribute to the original jersey with the Heritage Pinstripes worn from 1998\u22122006 as well as its \u201cevolutionary jersey\u201d from 2016\u22122019 by blending pinstripes with a snakeskin pattern. The jersey still features the word \"Serpientes\" with the \"S\" remaining the same from their previous version of their city connect, with the rest being a new design. The faux sleeves pay tribute to the 2001 World Series-winning team, which featured sleeveless jerseys that had a different colored sleeve. The sleeves also feature the Flag of Arizona on one sleeve, the state outline with a baseball silhouette and the year 1998, the founding year of the club, plus features a light color of teal in the shape of 48, as Arizona is the 48th state in the union. The trim on the sleeve is in teal and was used on the team uniform from 1998\u22122006, which is in the shape of a Diamondback Rattlesnake skin. The collar features the phrase \"Arizona Born\", pays tribute to the team's home state. The cap is in the original purple and has a teal brim that features the \"S\" Serpientes logo.\nRadio and television.\nOn July 18, 2023, a federal bankruptcy court granted Bally Sports' parent company Diamond Sports Group a motion to decline its contract with the Diamondbacks as part of its chapter 11 bankruptcy. As a result, Major League Baseball's local media division assumed production of the Diamondbacks' regional telecasts (maintaining staff such as commentators) and distributed them via local television providers and MLB.tv. As of 2024, these games are branded as DBacks.TV. Games air on the following cable providers and networks:\nThe primary television play-by-play voice for the team's first nine seasons of play was Thom Brennaman, who also broadcast baseball and college football games nationally for Fox Television. Brennaman was the TV announcer for the Chicago Cubs and Cincinnati Reds (along with his father Marty Brennaman) before being hired by Diamondbacks founder Jerry Colangelo in 1996, two years before the team would begin play.\nIn October 2006, Brennaman left the Diamondbacks to call games with his father for the Reds beginning in 2007, signing a four-year deal.\nOn November 1, 2006, the team announced that the TV voice of the Milwaukee Brewers since 2002, Daron Sutton, would be hired as the Diamondbacks primary TV play-by-play voice. Sutton signed a five-year contract with a team option for three more years. Sutton's signature chants included \"let's get some runs\" when the D-backs trail in late innings.\nFormer Diamondbacks and Cubs first baseman Mark Grace and knuckleballer Tom Candiotti were the Diamondbacks primary color analysts for the 2006 and 2007 seasons. Former Diamondbacks third baseman Matt Williams also did color commentary on occasion, as did Cardinals and NBC broadcast legend Joe Garagiola, a longtime Phoenix-area resident and father of Joe Garagiola Jr., the first GM of the Diamondbacks.\nThe Diamondbacks announced in July 2007 that for the 2008 season, all regionally broadcast Diamondbacks TV games would be shown exclusively on Fox Sports Arizona (subsequently Bally Sports Arizona) and a few could possibly be shown on the national \"MLB on Fox\" telecasts. Bally Sports Arizona is seen in 2.8\u00a0million households in Arizona and New Mexico. The previous flagship station since the inaugural 1998 season was KTVK (Channel 3), a popular over-the-air independent station (and former longtime ABC affiliate) in Phoenix.\nFrom 2009 to 2012, Grace and Sutton were tagged as the main broadcasters of the Diamondbacks with pre-game and postgame shows on Fox Sports Arizona, being hosted by Joe Borowski.\nOn June 21, 2012, Sutton was suspended indefinitely amid rumors of insubordination. On August 24, the team announced that Grace had requested an indefinite leave of absence after being arrested for his second DUI in less than two years. Grace was later indicted on four DUI counts.) For the remainder of the 2012 season, Sutton was replaced by Greg Schulte (Jeff Munn replaced Schulte on the radio broadcast) and Grace was replaced by Luis Gonzalez. At the end of the 2012 season, the team announced that neither Sutton nor Grace would return for the 2013 season.\nOn October 18, 2012, the team announced that Bob Brenly would return as a broadcaster to replace Grace and that he would be joined by then-ESPN personality Steve Berthiaume.\nThe English language flagship radio station is KTAR. Greg Schulte was the regular radio play-by-play voice, a 25-year veteran of sports radio in the Phoenix market, also well known for his previous work on Phoenix Suns, Arizona Cardinals, and Arizona State University (ASU) broadcasts. It was announced in February 2023 that he would be retiring after the 2023 MLB season. He would call games with analyst Tom Candiotti.\nJeff Munn served as a backup radio play-by-play announcer until 2016; he served as the regular public address announcer at Chase Field in the early days of the franchise. He previously served as the public address announcer for the Suns in the 1990s at what became Footprint Center. He is also the play-by-play radio voice for ASU women's basketball. Mike Ferrin served in the same role for six years before parting ways with the team, and he was replaced by Chris Garagiola in December 2021.\nSpanish broadcasts.\nThe flagship Spanish language radio station is KHOV-FM 105.1 with Oscar Soria, Rodrigo L\u00f3pez, and Richard Saenz.\nGames were televised in Spanish on KPHE-LP with Oscar Soria and Jerry Romo as the announcers, but this arrangement ended prior to the 2009 season due to the team switching fully to Fox Sports Arizona and the lack of carriage of KPHE-LP on the Cox cable system.\nAchievements.\nBaseball Hall of Famers.\nArizona Diamondbacks Hall of Famers\nAffiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum\nArizona Diamondbacks\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFord C. Frick Award recipients.\nArizona Diamondbacks Ford C. Frick Award recipients\nAffiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAll-time leaders.\nPitching.\nAll stats are as of February 8, 2025, from the Arizona Diamondbacks website.\nRivalries.\nLos Angeles Dodgers.\nThe rivalry between the Diamondbacks and the Los Angeles Dodgers has been one of the fiercest divisional matchups for several years. Animosity between the two teams began to escalate during the 2010s in multiple incidents involving either team throwing pitches at one another or instigating into large-scale brawls between both benches. After eliminating the Diamondbacks and clinching the division on September 19, 2013, multiple Dodgers players celebrated the win by jumping into the pool at Chase Field. The two sides met during the 2017 National League Division Series as the Diamondbacks were swept 3\u20130 by the Dodgers en route to their appearance in the World Series that season. The Dodgers led the series 257\u2013191 with a 3\u20130 lead in the postseason. After clinching the 2023 NL Wild Card berth and defeating the Milwaukee Brewers in the National League Wild Card Series, the Diamondbacks played the Dodgers again in the 2023 NLDS. There, the Diamondbacks emphatically swept the Dodgers to even the all-time postseason record between the two clubs at 3\u20133.\nColorado Rockies.\nThe Diamondbacks developed an on-and-off rivalry with the Colorado Rockies, often attributed to both teams being the newest in the division. Colorado had joined the NL West in 1993, while the Diamondbacks are the newest team in the league, joining in 1998. The two teams have met twice in the postseason; notably during the 2007 National League Championship Series, which saw the Rockies enter the postseason as a wild card and go on to upset the division champion Diamondbacks in a sweep en route to the franchise's lone World Series appearance. The two teams met again in the 2017 National League Wild Card Game, which Arizona won.\nMinor league affiliations.\nThe Arizona Diamondbacks farm system consists of seven minor league affiliates.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2130", "revid": "49912180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2130", "title": "Aesthetics", "text": "Philosophical study of beauty and art\nAesthetics is a visual branch of philosophy that studies beauty, taste, and related phenomena. In a broad sense, it includes the philosophy of art, which examines the nature of art, artistic creativity, the meanings of artworks, and audience appreciation.\nAesthetic properties are features that influence the appeal of objects. They include aesthetic values, which express positive or negative qualities, like the contrast between beauty and ugliness. Philosophers debate whether aesthetic properties have objective existence or depend on the subjective experiences of observers. According to a common view, aesthetic experiences are associated with disinterested pleasure detached from practical concerns. Taste is a subjective sensitivity to aesthetic qualities, and differences in taste can lead to disagreements about aesthetic judgments.\nArtworks are artifacts or performances typically created by humans, encompassing diverse forms such as painting, music, dance, architecture, and literature. Some definitions focus on their intrinsic aesthetic qualities, while others understand art as a socially constructed category. Art interpretation and criticism seek to identify the meanings of artworks. Discussions focus on elements such as what an artwork represents, which emotions it expresses, and what the author's underlying intent was.\nMany fields investigate aesthetic phenomena, examining their roles in ethics, religion, and everyday life as well as the psychological processes involved in aesthetic experiences. Comparative aesthetics analyzes the similarities and differences between traditions such as Western, Indian, Chinese, Islamic, and African aesthetics. Aesthetic thought has its roots in antiquity but only emerged as a distinct field of inquiry in the 18th century when philosophers systematically engaged with its foundational concepts.\nDefinition.\nAesthetics, sometimes spelled \"esthetics\", is the systematic study of beauty, art, and taste. As a branch of philosophy, it examines which types of aesthetic phenomena there are, how people experience them, and how objects evoke them. This field also investigates the nature of aesthetic judgments, the meaning of artworks, and the problem of art criticism. Key questions in aesthetics include \"What is art?\", \"Can aesthetic judgments be objective?\", and \"How is aesthetic value related to other values?\". One characterization distinguishes between three main approaches to aesthetics: the study of aesthetic concepts and judgments, the study of aesthetic experiences and other mental responses, and the study of the nature and features of aesthetic objects. In a slightly different sense, the term \"aesthetics\" can also refer to particular theories of beauty or to beautiful appearances.\nAesthetics is closely related to the philosophy of art, and the two terms are often used interchangeably since both involve the philosophical study of aesthetic phenomena. One difference is that the philosophy of art focuses on art, whereas the scope of aesthetics also includes other domains, such as beauty in nature and everyday life. Accordingly, one outlook argues that the philosophy of art is a subfield of aesthetics. However, the precise relation between the two fields is disputed, and another characterization holds that the philosophy of art is the broader discipline. This view asserts that aesthetics mainly addresses aesthetic properties, while the philosophy of art also investigates non-aesthetic features of artworks, belonging to fields such as metaphysics, epistemology, philosophy of language, and ethics.\nEven though the philosophical study of aesthetic problems originated in antiquity, it was not until the 18th century that aesthetics emerged as a distinct branch of philosophy when philosophers engaged in systematic inquiry into its principles. The Latin term was coined by the philosopher Alexander Baumgarten in 1735, initially defined as the study of sensibility or sensations of beautiful objects. The term comes from the ancient Greek words , meaning 'perceptible things', , meaning 'perceive, see', and , meaning 'sensation, perception'. The earliest known use in the English language happened in a translation by W. Hooper in the 1770s.\nBasic concepts.\nPhilosophers rely on several basic concepts in their inquiry. They examine aesthetic objects and the properties or features responsible for their appeal, such as beauty. Researchers study the experience and pleasure these objects evoke, the judgments about them, and taste as an underlying sensitivity. However, this field comes with theoretical difficulties caused by disagreements about the definitions of and relations between these concepts. Similarly, the exact boundaries of the domain of aesthetics as a whole are disputed\u2014it is controversial whether there is a group of essential features shared by all aesthetic phenomena or whether they are more loosely related through family resemblances.\nAesthetic properties and objects.\nAesthetic properties are features of an object that shape its appeal or factors that influence aesthetic evaluations. For instance, when an art critic describes an artwork as \"great\", \"vivid\", or \"amusing\", they express aesthetic properties of this artwork. Some aesthetic properties focus on aesthetic value in general, like \"beautiful\" and \"ugly\", while others center on more specific forms of value, such as \"graceful\" and \"elegant\". Aesthetic properties can also refer to perceptual qualities of objects like \"balanced\" and \"vivid\", to representational aspects like \"realistic\" and \"distorted\", or to emotional responses such as \"joyful\" and \"angry\".\nThe precise distinction between aesthetic and non-aesthetic properties is disputed. According to one proposal, aesthetic properties require a specific aesthetic sensitivity in addition to the sensory perception of non-aesthetic properties, going beyond simple colors, shapes, and sounds. Aesthetic properties are associated with evaluations, but not all are intrinsically good or bad. For example, being a realistic representation may be aesthetically good in some artistic contexts and bad in others.\nThe school of realism argues that aesthetic properties are objective, mind-independent features of reality. A related proposal asserts that they are emergent properties dependent on non-aesthetic properties. According to this view, the beauty of a painting may emerge from the right combination of colors and shapes. A different position holds that aesthetic properties are response-dependent, for example, that features of objects only qualify as aesthetic properties if they evoke aesthetic experiences in observers. The terms \"aesthetic property\" and \"aesthetic quality\" are often used interchangeably to refer to aspects such as beauty, sublimity, and grandeur. However, some philosophers distinguish the two, associating aesthetic properties with objective features and aesthetic qualities with subjective experiences and emotional responses.\nAn aesthetic object is an object with aesthetic properties. One interpretation suggests that aesthetic objects are material entities that evoke aesthetic experiences. According to this view, if a person admires an oil painting, then the physical canvas and paint make up the aesthetic object. Another interpretation, associated with the school of phenomenology, argues that aesthetic objects are not material but intentional objects. Intentional objects are part of the content of experiences, and their existence depends on the perceiver. An intentional object may accurately reflect a material object, as in the case of veridical perceptions, but can also fail to do so, which happens during perceptual illusions. The phenomenological perspective focuses on the intentional object given in experience rather than the material object considered independently of the perceiver.\nAesthetic values and beauty.\nAesthetic values are a special type of aesthetic property. They express the sensory appeal of an object as a qualitative measure of its aesthetic merit, encompassing both positive and negative evaluations. Aesthetic values contrast with values in other domains, such as moral, epistemic, religious, and economic values.\nThe aesthetic value of beauty is often singled out as a central topic of aesthetics. It is a key aspect of human experience, influencing both personal decisions and cultural developments. Often-cited examples of beautiful objects include landscapes, sunsets, humans, and artworks. As a positive value, beauty contrasts with ugliness as its negative counterpart. Beauty is typically understood as a quality of objects that involves balance or harmony and evokes admiration or pleasure when perceived, but its precise definition is debated. Some theories understand beauty as an objective feature of external objects. Others emphasize its subjective nature, linking it to personal experience and perception. They argue that \"beauty is in the eye of the beholder\" rather than in the perceived object. Another central debate concerns the features that all beautiful objects have in common. The so-called \"classical conception of beauty\" is rooted in classical antiquity and the Italian Renaissance. Focusing on objective features, it asserts that beauty is a harmonious arrangement of parts into a coherent whole. Aesthetic hedonism, by contrast, is a subjective theory holding that a thing is beautiful if it acts as a source of aesthetic pleasure. Other conceptions define beautiful objects in terms of intrinsic value, the manifestation of ideal forms, or as what evokes love and passion.\nIn pre-modern philosophy, beauty was often treated as the only aesthetic value. This outlook holds that beauty encompasses all that is aesthetically commendable and serves as a unifying concept of the whole domain of aesthetics. As discussions of aesthetic phenomena expanded, additional aesthetic values were proposed. For example, the sublime is another value of things that inspire feelings of awe and fear. Further suggested values include charm, elegance, harmony, and grace.\nAesthetic experiences, attitude, and pleasure.\nAn aesthetic experience is an appreciation of beauty or an awareness of other aesthetic features. In its most typical form, it is a sensory perception of a natural object or an artwork. However, it can also take other forms, such as aesthetic imagination of fictional objects described in literature. Internalist theories, like Monroe Beardsley's view, explain aesthetic experience from a first-person perspective, focusing on aspects internal to the experience, such as focus and intensity. By contrast, externalist theories, such as George Dickie's position, argue that the key element of aesthetic experiences comes from the perceived external objects and their aesthetic properties.\nSeveral features are associated with aesthetic experiences, but it is controversial whether any of them are essential. Aesthetic experiences usually appreciate an object for its own sake because of its sensory properties, resulting in aesthetic pleasure from a positive evaluation of the object. This pleasure is typically said to be detached from practical concerns and can involve selfless absorption, allowing imaginative freedom or free play of mental faculties in addition to sensory perception. Some theorists associate this free play with an absence of conceptual activity. Aesthetic experiences may also be normative, meaning that certain responses are appropriate, like the positive appreciation of beauty, but others are not, such as the positive appreciation of ugliness.\nA central aspect of aesthetic experience is the aesthetic attitude\u2014a special way of observing or engaging with art and nature. This attitude involves a form of pure appreciation of perceptual qualities detached from personal desires and practical concerns. It is disinterested in this sense by engaging with an object for its own sake without ulterior motives or practical consequences. For example, the experience of a violent storm through the aesthetic attitude may focus on its intricate patterns of lightning and thunder rather than preparing for its immediate dangers. One characterization understands the aesthetic attitude as a natural form of apprehension that occurs on its own in certain situations. Another outlook holds that the aesthetic attitude is a voluntary stance people can choose to adopt toward any object. There is debate about the extent and type of emotional engagement a disinterested stance requires, for instance, whether fear during a horror movie can be disinterested.\nThe aesthetic attitude is sometimes contrasted with other attitudes, such as the practical attitude, which is interested in usefulness and seeks to utilize or manipulate objects to achieve specific goals. Similarly, it differs from the scientific attitude, which aims to explain phenomena and acquire factual knowledge about the world. Some philosophers, such as Arthur Schopenhauer and Martin Heidegger, suggest that the aesthetic attitude can reveal aspects of reality obscured in other attitudes.\nAesthetic experience is further associated with aesthetic pleasure\u2014a form of enjoyment in response to natural and artistic beauty. It is typically characterized as disinterested pleasure. It contrasts with interested pleasure that arises from the satisfaction of desires, such as the joy of achieving a personal goal or indulging in a particular type of food one craves. Another difference is that aesthetic pleasure does not depend on the existence of the enjoyed object, like enjoying the beauty of a sunset in a dream. The joy in achieving a personal goal, by contrast, would be frustrated if one discovered that the achievement was merely a dream. Philosophers like Immanuel Kant argue that aesthetic pleasure is preconceptual, meaning that it arises from a free interplay between imagination and understanding rather than from cognitive judgments or conceptual analysis. One view distinguishes refined from unrefined aesthetic pleasures based on whether the pleasure is evoked by a cultivated taste or an immediate, instinctual response.\nAesthetic pleasure is central to the characterization of many aesthetic phenomena that are said to involve or evoke such pleasure. However, the view that aesthetic pleasure is the defining characteristic of the entire aesthetic domain is controversial. It faces challenges in explaining phenomena such as the sublime, drama, tragedy, and forms of modern art, which may evoke diverse emotions not primarily linked to pleasure.\nAesthetic judgments and taste.\nAesthetic judgments are assessments of the aesthetic features and values of objects, expressed in statements like \"this music is beautiful\". They can apply both to natural objects and artworks. Aesthetic judgments also include assessments about how or why an object has aesthetic value without explicitly determining its overall aesthetic worth, as in the statement \"this music is balanced\". Many debates in aesthetics concern the nature of aesthetic judgments, in particular, whether they can be as objective and universal as empirical judgments made by natural scientists. Subjectivists argue that aesthetic judgments express personal feelings and dislikes without universal validity. This view is contested by objectivists, who hold that aesthetic judgments describe objective features that are independent of the particular preferences of the judging individual. Intermediate views suggest that the standards of aesthetic judgment are grounded in stable shared dispositions rather than variable individual preferences, resulting in a form of subjective universality. This position is reflected in Kant's view, which identifies four core features of aesthetic judgments: they are subjective, universal, disinterested, and involve an interplay of sense, imagination, and understanding.\nPhilosophers such as Francis Hutcheson and David Hume argue that there are general aesthetic principles or universal criteria that are applied when making aesthetic judgments. Particularists, by contrast, assert that the unique nature of each aesthetic object requires a case-by-case evaluation that cannot be fully subsumed under general principles. A related debate between rationalism and the immediacy thesis concerns whether aesthetic judgments are mediated through concept application and reasoning or emerge directly from sensory intuition.\nAesthetic judgments rely on taste, which is a sensitivity to aesthetic qualities, a capacity to feel aesthetic pleasure, or an ability to discern beauty and other aesthetic qualities. Taste is a type of preference expressed in immediate reactions and is sometimes understood as an inner sense or cognitive faculty. Differences in taste are often used to explain why people disagree about aesthetic judgments and why the judgments of some people, such as art critics with extensive experience and a refined sense, carry more weight than those of casual observers. Taste varies both among cultures and among individuals within a culture. However, there are also some cross-cultural agreements. Various philosophers argue that taste can be learned to some extent and that the judgments of experienced observers follow similar standards, suggesting the existence of social norms of right and wrong aesthetic assessments.\nThe term \"aesthetic universal\" refers to aspects of taste and other aesthetic phenomena that are shared across different cultures and societies, indicating common features of human nature underlying aesthetics. Suggested general tendencies include the dispositions to engage in artistic expressions or to derive aesthetic pleasure from appreciating these expressions. The existence of more specific shared tendencies is debated. An example is the idea that humans generally find savanna-like landscapes with open grassy plains and scattered trees pleasing.\nArt.\nArt is a central topic of aesthetics and the main subject of the philosophy of art. It encompasses diverse forms, including painting, sculpture, music, dance, literature, and theater. This field covers both artworks and the skills or activities involved in their creation. Artworks are artifacts or performances typically created by humans. They differ in this respect from naturally occurring aesthetic objects, like landscapes and sunsets.\nDefinitions.\nA central debate in the philosophy of art concerns the definition of art or how to distinguish it from non-art. There are many theories, each offering a unique perspective on the nature of art.\nEssentialist approaches argue that there is an essence or a set of inherent features shared by all artworks and only by them. They often define artworks in terms of other aesthetic concepts, such as \"representation\", \"beauty\", or \"aesthetic experience\". An early object-centered approach, first proposed by Plato, characterizes artworks as representations that seek to reflect or imitate certain aspects of reality. Another definition suggests that artworks are objects designed to evoke aesthetic experiences or pleasure. A related approach proposes that all artworks have certain aesthetic properties in common, such as beauty. Aesthetic formalism argues that specific formal features, such as a \"significant form\", are the hallmark of art. Artist-centered approaches see artistic activity as the essential aspect of artworks. One conception understands artworks as special vehicles through which artists express emotions and other mental states.\nConventionalist definitions view art as a socially constructed category. This means that it does not primarily depend on the inherent properties of objects, for example, what they represent or what forms they have. Instead, art is defined by social and cultural agreements, which are subject to change. A key motivation for this approach has been the emergence of modern art, which has challenged many earlier conceptions. Conventionalist definitions can explain, for instance, that even mundane ready-made objects like a urinal are considered art if conventions say so. Institutional theories argue that the conventions are set by social institutions of the art world. Because of this social dependence, an object considered art in one society may not be art in another society. Historical theories, another form of conventionalism, assert that the category of art depends on established traditions and historical contexts. They claim that an object becomes part of this category if it stands in the right relation to these traditions, for example, by being created in an artistic context and resembling other recognized artworks.\nThere are also hybrid theories that combine elements from other theories. For instance, one approach holds that an object is an artwork if it either meets certain aesthetic standards or is conventionally regarded as art. The diversity of proposed definitions and the difficulties in reconciling them have led some philosophers to argue against the existence of precise criteria. Some conclude that a definition is strictly impossible. Others provide vague characterizations, suggesting that the domain of art is characterized by overlapping similarities, known as family resemblance.\nOntology and categories.\nThe ontology of art seeks to discern the fundamental categories of being to which all artworks belong. Universalists argue that artworks are universals\u2014general or repeatable entities that can have several instances at the same time. For example, a novel can have many copies, a film can have many screenings, and a photo can have many prints. One version of this view distinguishes artworks as types from their instances, which are considered tokens of this type. Particularists reject the idea that artworks are universals, arguing instead that they are particulars or unique concrete entities. For them, if there are several instances, then the artwork is the collection or sum of all instances. According to this view, Alfred Stieglitz's photograph The Steerage is not a type underlying its prints but rather the collection or sum of all prints together.\nA similar discussion addresses whether artworks are material objects, which exist independent of observers, or intentional objects, which exist in the experience of observers. Pluralists argue that different types of artworks belong to distinct ontological categories. Contextualists accept this view and further propose that the ontological category depends on the context of discussion. Deflationism is skeptical about the fundamental existence of artworks in any form. It acknowledges that the term \"art\" may be practically useful in everyday language but rejects that it refers to any fundamental entities of reality.\nArtworks are categorized in many ways. Some distinctions focus on the medium used to express artistic ideas. For example, paintings typically use paint, such as oil or acrylic paint, which is distributed on a surface, whereas dance involves bodily movements. Similarly, music is performed using instruments and voice to produce sounds, and literature relies on language. Hybrid forms like opera and film combine several of these elements. Another distinction is between performance works and object works. Performance works, like a song performed on stage, are dynamically enacted in time, whereas object works, like a painting, have a more static nature. Artworks can also be classified by art historic style, such as impressionism and surrealism, and by their intended purpose, like political and religious art.\nMeaning.\nThe meaning of an artwork is what is involved in understanding it or comprehending what it communicates, encompassing factors such as representation and expression. Certain aspects of meaning may be directly accessible while others require in-depth interpretation, for example, to grasp symbolic or metaphorical elements. Understanding influences aesthetic experience, and for certain artworks, a comprehensive understanding may be required to fully appreciate them. One approach to the analysis of meaning is the distinction between form and content. Content refers to what is presented, such as the depicted topic, expressed ideas, and conceptual messages. Form refers to how the content is presented, such as medium, technique, composition, and style. Form encompasses modes of presentation in different art forms, like color and spatial arrangement in painting, harmony and rhythm in music, and narrative voice and plot structure in literature.\nRepresentation and expression.\nRepresentation is a depiction of real or imagined entities. For example, a portrait painting represents a person, while a fantasy novel represents an imaginary chain of events. Similarity is a crucial element in many forms of artistic representation, meaning that the artwork resembles the depicted entity. However, representation can also happen through other means, such as conventional symbols and established codes. It is particularly prevalent in certain art forms and styles, such as classical art and realism. Since antiquity, representation has been a key concept in theories of art, such as Plato's idea of defining art as imitation. However, it is controversial whether representation plays a central role in all art forms, including music and abstract modern art.\nExpression is the conveyance of psychological states, such as emotions, moods, and attitudes. For example, a painter may depict a barren landscape in muted colors to express sadness, while a musician might use a fast tempo and upbeat melody to convey excitement. The expressed mental states often align with the artist's personal experience. However, this is not necessarily the case, and artists may explore psychological states they observed in others or entirely fictional experiences. An artwork can express a mental state like sadness by evoking it in the experience of the audience. Alternatively, the expression can also happen if observers recognize the presence of sadness in the artwork even if they do not personally feel it. Expression theories consider expression a core feature of artworks. They characterize artworks as expressions of the artist's mind, focusing on creativity and originality in the manifestation of aesthetic experiences.\nInterpretation and criticism.\nThe process of interpretation is the attempt to uncover the meaning of an artwork to understand its significance and value. In the widest sense, interpretation encompasses any way of assigning meaning, including obvious descriptions of depicted entities and explanations of literal word meanings. In philosophy of art, the term is typically used in a narrower sense for assignments of meaning that involve deeper analysis and creative thought, such as the examination of mirrors and visual ambiguities in Diego Vel\u00e1zquez's 1656 painting \"Las Meninas\" to explore the relation between painter, viewer, and depicted topic. Interpretations aim to discover underlying aspects that are relevant to the understanding and appreciation of the artwork. The terms \"interpretation\" and \"criticism\" are sometimes used interchangeably. However, criticism is typically associated with more components, like a general description of the criticized artwork and a classification of style and genre. Criticism also explains the art-historical background and evaluates positive and negative qualities.\nCritics sometimes propose conflicting interpretations of the same artwork. According to critical monism, there is only one comprehensive correct interpretation, implying that conflicting interpretations cannot both be correct. Critical pluralism, by contrast, asserts that there can be different but equally valid interpretations and that it is not always possible to determine which of two conflicting interpretations is superior. A similar debate addresses whether interpretations can be true or false in an objective sense.\nSeveral frameworks of interpretation have been proposed. According to intentionalism, the meaning of an artwork is determined by the author's intent\u2014their reasons and motives that led to the creation of the artwork. This typically involves analyzing the ideas the artist aimed to express but can also include a biographical analysis to learn about psychological and social circumstances in the artist's life.\nIntentionalism is a controversial theory, termed \"intentional fallacy\" by its critics. Some objections point to cases where the author's intention cannot be known, where the author cannot be identified, or where no traditional author exists, as in artworks created by artificial intelligence. In these cases, meaning would be inaccessible or non-existent. Other objections assert that an artist may fail to accurately express their intention or may manifest unintended aesthetic features, suggesting that an artwork can contain both less and more than the artist intended.\nAn alternative to intentionalism argues that meaning is determined by artistic, stylistic, linguistic, and other cultural conventions. For example, linguistic conventions determine the literal meanings of words and thereby influence the overall meaning of a poem. Another framework holds that meaning is shaped by how the audience, rather than the author, interprets or would interpret the intention underlying the work. Artistic formalism proposes a different approach by focusing interpretation exclusively on formal or perceptual features of artworks.\nAestheticism and instrumentalism are theories about the value of art. Aestheticism asserts that the primary value of art lies in its intrinsic aesthetic merits, independent of any external purposes. This idea of the autonomy of art is expressed in the slogan \"art for art's sake\". Strong forms of aestheticism not only disregard external purposes but see them as detrimental influences that undermine artistic integrity. Instrumentalism, by contrast, explains the value of art by the effects it has on other domains. It understands art as a means to things such as moral education, spiritual growth, therapeutic benefits, and social cohesion.\nThe individual arts.\nThe individual arts are practices or disciplines in the domain of art. They encompass a wide range of fields, including traditionally established forms such as painting, music, and literature, as well as newer types like video games. One classification divides them into visual arts, literary arts, and performance arts. However, the boundaries between these categories are not always clear, and alternative classifications have been proposed.\nPainting is a visual art in which a painter applies colors to a surface. It allows for a diverse range of motives and styles, and is often considered a paradigm form of art. The representation of real entities plays a central role in many forms of painting, ranging from landscapes and people to historic events. This process involves artistic choices that go beyond simple replication, such as guiding the viewer's attention to specific aspects or highlighting important but easily overlooked features. The issue of representation is also crucial in photography, a visual art shaped by technological developments in camera design and editing processes. A key topic in the philosophy of photography concerns its mechanical manner of authentically representing real objects, frequently drawing parallels and distinctions with painting. The status of photographs as true artworks is disputed, with critics arguing that the mechanical nature of capturing images lacks the necessary artistic creativity.\nMusic is a performance art in which sounds are combined to create aesthetic patterns, relying on aspects such as melody and rhythm. Unlike painting and photography, it is typically less associated with objective representation and more closely linked to the expression of emotions. A key discussion in the philosophy of music concerns the definition of music or the criteria under which a combination of sounds qualifies as music. Proposals range from objective criteria, such as the patterns of how sounds are organized, to subjective criteria, focusing on audience experience and interpretation. Dance is another performance art in which dancers create aesthetic patterns through a series of bodily movements, often following a choreography. It is typically accompanied by music and shares with music an emphasis on expressive features.\nArchitecture is the art or craft of designing and building, encompassing a wide range of structures from monuments and cathedrals to skyscrapers and residential homes. It typically combines aesthetic with functional goals, seeking to create buildings that are both visually appealing and practically useful. This dual nature is a central topic of the philosophy of architecture, with one theory suggesting that mere buildings can be distinguished from artistic architecture by the presence of decorative elements. Sculpture is another art form that, like architecture, involves the creation of three-dimensional works. Sculptures are usually static objects made of robust materials like stone, metal, and wood, but may also include dynamic elements, as is the case for kinetic sculptures. Key discussions in the philosophy of sculpture address the definition, representational aspects, and aesthetic features of sculptures as well as the influence of the chosen material.\nLiterature has language as its primary medium. In its widest sense, literature encompasses any written document. However, the term is typically used in a narrower sense in aesthetics for forms of writing that belong to the high arts, such as poems, novels, and drama. Literature as an art is often characterized by its deliberate, elaborate, and organized use of language, but there is no universally accepted demarcation between artistic literature and other forms of writing. Poetry is a distinct form of literature often written in verses composed of several lines that may follow specific patterns, such as meter and rhyme. Many poems are characterized by an economical use of language that seeks to evoke specific experiences while being difficult to paraphrase.\nTheater is a performance art that combines elements from other art forms. It typically includes a carefully prepared set or stage where actors perform, usually incorporating storytelling and sound design to create immersive experiences. Theater is performed before a live audience, which can create a sense of immediacy that is less prevalent in related art forms, such as film. Film also integrates aspects from various artistic disciplines but relies more heavily on technological means of recording and editing. Films can involve actors but may also include animated characters or document real-life events. They are normally the result of collaborative efforts of many people, which complicates the identification of a singular author in the traditional sense.\nVideo games are a more recent form of art. Like theater and film, they usually blend visual, auditory, and narrative elements. They typically stand out through their emphasis on player interaction, allowing active exploration of and engagement with the game world. The status of films and video games as serious forms of art is disputed. Proponents tend to emphasize their aesthetic qualities, while critics often point to their association with mass production and popular culture as counterarguments. For video games, a related debate centers on the elements of competition and winning, questioning whether these elements run counter to the spirit of art.\nIn various fields.\nAesthetic phenomena are investigated in several fields. Some areas examine the relationship between aesthetics and other branches of philosophy or compare different artistic traditions, while others study aesthetic elements in everyday life or engage in scientific inquiry using empirical methods.\nEthics.\nEthics is the branch of philosophy that studies moral phenomena in general and right behavior in particular. Artworks can have ethical consequences by influencing how people feel, perceive, and evaluate their circumstances. For example, artworks can glorify violence and reinforce biases, just as they can inspire empathy and challenge societal norms. As a result, art is also relevant to the field of politics since it can steer political sentiment to legitimize authority or mobilize resistance, thereby influencing voter attitudes. However, artworks can also explore morally relevant topics without expressing a clear positive or negative evaluation, such as a novel examining an ethical dilemma without favoring one solution over the others. \nSince both ethics and aesthetics deal with values, philosophers seek to clarify the relationship between moral and aesthetic values, proposing several theories of their interaction. Ethicism asserts that the moral value of an artwork can increase its aesthetic value, while ethical defects may undermine its artistic merit. This view is reversed by immoralism, which suggests that in some cases, moral flaws enhance aesthetic experience. Autonomism rejects both positions, arguing that these domains of evaluation are independent.\nPsychology and related fields.\nScientific approaches rooted in psychology and related fields employ empirical methods to conduct inquiries and justify hypotheses. The psychology of aesthetics examines the mental processes involved in the perception and appreciation of beauty and art, using methods such as experimentation, observation, and surveys. \nExperimental aesthetics is an early and influential approach pioneered by Gustav Fechner. It follows a bottom-up methodology that starts with human sensation, investigating preferences to simple physical stimuli, such as basic colors and shapes. Gestalt psychology relies on a more holistic outlook, examining how composition and object placement influence aesthetic experience, like the relationship between balanced organization and a sense of calm. Some works, such as Daniel Berlyne's approach, shift the focus from perception to emotion, suggesting that features like novelty and complexity cause arousal and that the right amount of arousal is pleasurable. \nPsychological analysis also examines the temporal structure of aesthetic experiences of art. One outlook identifies two phases: an initial impression in which the observer forms a rough general idea of the artwork's topic, structure, and meaning, followed by a focal analysis of more specific features. Research further explores how circumstances influence aesthetic experience, like the contrast between encountering a painting in a museum or a shopping mall. In addition to physical circumstances, social and personal factors also influence aesthetic experience, such as group dynamics, prior knowledge, and the motivation for seeking the experience.\nEvolutionary psychology analyzes mental phenomena as products of natural selection. It asserts that genetic variations responsible for new capacities are passed on to future generations if they enhance survival and reproduction. Adopting this approach, evolutionary aesthetics interprets beauty and other aesthetic experiences as adaptive traits that guide fitness-relevant preferences. Examples are aesthetic preferences for environments conducive to survival, such as landscapes resembling the African savannah, and sexual selection by identifying genetically fit mates. By focusing on the relatively permanent biological nature of humans, evolutionary psychology sees aesthetic values as universal or transcultural patterns of taste and appreciation, contrasting with subjectivist theories that understand aesthetic values as cultural constructs.\nNeuroaesthetics applies neuroscientific insights and methods to study the relationship between brain activity and aesthetic experience. Aesthetic experiences arise from brain processes responsible for organizing sensory stimuli, forming cognitive interpretations, and generating emotional responses. Neuroaesthetics examines these processes using empirical methods, including neuroimaging techniques like fMRI. In one type of experiment, participants view artworks, some considered beautiful and others ugly, with researchers noting that the brain area known as the orbitofrontal cortex is more active when viewing beautiful paintings.\nCognitive science, another field, employs an interdisciplinary approach to study mental phenomena by examining how they access and transform information. An influential theory, suggested by Ernst Gombrich, analyzes aesthetic experience through the interplay of low-level and high-level information processes: sensory processes provide low-level information, which is organized and interpreted using high-level conceptual background knowledge. Another approach analyzes aesthetic representation through the modularity of mind\u2014the hypothesis that the mind is composed of mental modules that function independently. It argues that paintings represent real objects by triggering the same mental modules responsible for the recognition of those objects.\nComparative aesthetics.\nComparative aesthetics examines diverse aesthetic traditions, analyzing the similarities and differences in their standards of beauty and theoretical approaches. For example, the focus in Western aesthetics on high art and its separation from everyday affairs is not common in most other traditions, for which art is typically closely integrated with practical functions in everyday life, including religion and moral education. Artistic differences between different traditions also encompass dominant media, common styles, and chosen motifs.\nThe comparison of cultural products from different traditions presents conceptual challenges associated with tradition-specific aesthetic concepts and standards of evaluation. The uncritical application of standards from one tradition to evaluate the works of another can result in cultural imperialism. At the same time, these differences provide opportunities to artists and philosophers to incorporate new elements and explore novel perspectives.\nIndian aesthetics draws a close connection between artistic activity and religious practice. It argues that artistic expression is a spiritual endeavor that should be informed by knowledge of the self and reality, express devotion to the divine, and avoid attachments to the fruits of the activity. Traditional Indian aesthetics analyzes art in terms of basic life emotions, called rasas, such as delight, humor, sadness, and anger. It sees art as a play that imitates reality by conveying experiences of the rasas. Its focus is on the universal expressions of human emotional life rather than person-specific feelings. This school of thought identifies artistic creativity as the ability to harness the full potential of the medium, like colors, sounds, and words, to convey experiential universals. For the audience, it recommends an aesthetic attitude characterized by a psychic distance from private concerns to transcend the personal self and become receptive to universal elements.\nChinese aesthetics emphasizes the spontaneous nature of artistic creativity and its connection to the moral and spiritual domains. It argues that art should foster harmony within society and align with the natural order of the universe. In this role, art is both self-expression and self-cultivation aimed at promoting social well-being. The main focus of Chinese aesthetics is on poetry, painting, and calligraphy, known as the three perfections. This tradition influenced Japanese aesthetics, which is characterized by its interest in nature. Different art styles in this tradition are shaped by religious outlooks, particularly Shinto and Buddhism. Japanese theories of art stress the interrelation between the experience of the artist and the response of the audience.\nIslamic philosophers see art as a means of communicating philosophical and religious truths, making them accessible to the general public without requiring abstract theoretical thought. Thinkers such as Al-Farabi and Avicenna argued that imagination rather than reasoning underlies artistic creation and appreciation. According to this view, art imitates reality and evokes emotions to convey underlying truths and positively influence behavior. Religious teachings play a central role in Islamic aesthetics. For example, the belief that Allah is transcendent and boundless has resulted in the avoidance of figurative depictions and the emphasis on abstract art forms.\nAfrican aesthetics emphasizes the intuitive and emotional nature of art, highlighting its communal function in social life. Early scholarship on this tradition was typically conducted from an ethnocentric perspective using Western aesthetic standards to interpret and evaluate African art. This usually resulted in the portrayal of African artworks as exotic curiosities that lack the sophistication of high art. The emergence of indigenous scholarship in the 20th century sought to correct this interpretation, arguing that the emphasis on moral, emotional, and intuitive aspects reflects different artistic standards rather than a deficiency. This school of thought, often associated with the concept of N\u00e9gritude, focuses on the importance of feelings in contrast to abstraction and intellectual analysis.\nEnvironment, everyday life, and religion.\nEnvironmental aesthetics deals with the appreciation of nature, including elements such as forests, mountain ranges, rivers, and flowers. It encompasses both transient appearances, such as the fleeting beauty of a landscape during sunset, and enduring aspects, such as the majesty of a centuries-old tree. This field focuses on sensory and formal qualities associated with beauty and related aesthetic qualities. In this respect, it contrasts with the philosophy of art, which typically emphasizes the interpretation of underlying meanings associated with expression and representation. However, some approaches to environmental aesthetics also consider the impact of background knowledge on the aesthetic experience of nature. For instance, ecological awareness of the intricate relationships within an ecosystem can shape the appreciation of a woodland environment by understanding it as a habitat of diverse species.\nIn its broadest sense, environmental aesthetics encompasses the appreciation of any environment, including those created by humans. This inquiry is closely associated with everyday aesthetics, which examines aesthetic phenomena encountered in daily life. Everyday aesthetics covers both public and private environments, ranging from modern cities and industrial sites to private homes and backyards, as well as personal adornments and consumer products, such as clothing, hairstyles, industrial design, and web design. The aesthetics of popular art, a related discipline, investigates aesthetic qualities in popular culture and compares the evaluative standards of popular art with those of high or fine art. For example, it studies the contrast between commercial mass art and experimental avant-garde and explores specific types of popular art, such as kitsch.\nArt plays a central role in the field of religion and manifests in many forms, including paintings, sculptures, architecture, music, dance, and literature. Its key characteristic comes from its religious function, such as conveying theological and moral teachings, representing symbolic truths, inspiring religious experiences, and aiding devotional practices. Religious art is part of all major religions and was the dominant art form during ancient and medieval times. However, its influence began to wane in the modern period due to secularization. This shift is also reflected in developments in the philosophy of art that introduced a focus on disinterestedness and the autonomy of aesthetic experience from external purposes, including religious goals.\nOthers.\nVarious theories of aesthetics are associated with specific philosophical schools of thought. Marxist aesthetics examines the relationship between art, class structure, and social ideology, exploring how art can enforce or challenge established power hierarchies. Feminist aesthetics criticizes male biases in aesthetic theory and artistic practice while discussing alternatives. It investigates unfair social institutions and aesthetic standards that disadvantage women and exclude them from the art world. An example is the male gaze\u2014a cultural phenomenon that treats women as objects of male spectatorship rather than as artistic creators. Postmodern aesthetics is a diverse movement that challenges established concepts and theories in the field of aesthetics. It typically rejects the focus on disinterested pleasure, the autonomy of art from other domains, and the distinction between high and popular art. It tends to promote a pluralism that embraces diversity, playfulness, and irony.\nThe term mathematical beauty refers to aesthetic qualities of abstract mathematical concepts and theories. For instance, a mathematical proof may be considered beautiful if it demonstrates a profound insight in an effective manner or reveals an underlying unity of seemingly disparate mathematical ideas. Similarly, the aesthetics of science examines aesthetic judgments about scientific theories and practices, including the role of beauty and creativity in the construction of models.\nComputer art involves the use of computers in the creation of artworks. It can take many forms, ranging from minor digital enhancements of existing artworks to entirely new creations generated using complex algorithms. Its abstract nature, based on symbolic representation and manipulation of electronic signals, distinguishes computer art from traditional forms of art, which rely on more tangible media. This medium offers new artistic possibilities, such as virtual reality and interactivity. Rapid developments in artificial intelligence in the 21st century have significantly impacted computer art. They include the emergence of generative models\u2014systems that are trained using existing media to create new texts, images, music, or videos in response to verbal descriptions of the intended result. Examples include ChatGPT, Stable Diffusion, MuseNet, and RunwayML.\nMeta-aesthetics examines the fundamental assumptions and concepts underlying aesthetics. It asks about the existence of aesthetic facts, the meaning of aesthetic statements, and the ways of acquiring aesthetic knowledge. A central meta-aesthetic debate between realism and anti-realism addresses whether there are mind-independent aesthetic facts. A related discussion between cognitivism and non-cognitivism considers whether aesthetic statements can be objectively true or primarily express personal emotions.\nHistory.\nAncient.\nAesthetics has its roots in ancient thought, which typically interpreted beauty as a metaphysical phenomenon associated with the order of the cosmos. In ancient Greek philosophy, early explorations of the nature of beauty are found in Pythagorean philosophy in the 5th and 4th centuries BCE. This tradition proposed that beauty arises from the proportion and harmony between different elements, an idea later also examined by the Stoics. Plato (427\u2013347 BCE) analyzed pure beauty as an immutable form that exists independently of matter. He argued that material entities are beautiful if they participate in the form of beauty. Plato understood art as a craft that seeks to imitate and represent material entities. He acknowledged that art has some didactic value but was overall critical of it, asserting that its derivative nature, based on imitation of sensible features, cannot lead to true knowledge.\nAristotle (384\u2013322 BCE) examined aesthetics through the lens of poetry. He agreed with Plato's idea that art is a form of imitation but adopted a more positive outlook, proposing that it can reveal universal truths. Aristotle suggested that successful artistic imitation is pleasurable and can have therapeutic or cathartic effects. By linking this pleasure to beauty, he tried to explain why the imitation of unpleasurable phenomena, like tragic stories, can be enjoyable. Also influenced by Plato, Plotinus (204\u2013270 CE) argued that beauty is not based on sensory symmetries or simple proportions but embodies an underlying order, harmony, and unity associated with the ultimate source of creation.\nIn ancient India, the Natya Shastra, traditionally attributed to Bharata (c.\u2009200 BCE\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009200 CE), formulated the rasa theory of art. This theory posits that the goal of art is to convey fundamental life emotions as experiential universals of human existence. In ancient China, the philosophy of art was shaped by Confucianism. It emphasized self-cultivation and the relation between nature and human culture.\nMedieval.\nDuring the medieval period, the rise of Christianity led Western aesthetic thinkers to blend ancient Greek thought with religious teachings, often in the form of philosophical theology. Influenced by Plato and Plotinus, Augustine of Hippo (354\u2013430 CE) explored the distinction between artistic creation, which transforms matter, and divine creation, which brings forth existence out of nothing. He thought that all beauty originates from God and analyzed it in terms of unity, equality, number, proportion, and order. Thomas Aquinas defined beauty as what brings pleasure upon perception. For him, the mind plays a central role in this process since beauty lies in the immaterial form of the perceived object that the mind recognizes in the sensory data. Aquinas saw beauty as a basic category of being and identified it with proportion, radiance, and integrity.\nAn integration of Greek philosophy and religious thought also happened in the Islamic world. Al-Farabi (c.\u2009878\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009950 CE) associated beauty with pleasure and understood it as a degree of perfection and a divine attribute of Allah. Avicenna (c.\u2009980 \u2013 1037 CE) distinguished sensible from intelligible beauty and explored psychological processes underlying aesthetic judgments, such as the role of imagination.\nMeanwhile in India, the rasa theory of art expanded to also encompass devotional practices, including efforts to portray or evoke profound religious experiences of the union with the divine. For example, Abhinavagupta (c.\u2009950\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091025 CE) elaborated the spiritual dimension of the rasa theory, drawing a sharp distinction between ordinary worldly emotions and rasas as transcendent aesthetic emotions.\nIn Chinese thought, Xie He (c.\u20095th to 6th centuries CE) combined Daoist and Confucian ideas, suggesting that artists align with the natural order of the universe and spontaneously express the movement of life in their artworks. He also proposed a set of basic principles of painting. Guo Xi (c.\u20091020\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091090 CE) argued that artworks reflect the moral character and spiritual outlook of the artist, which he saw as a central factor of the artwork's aesthetic value. During this period, the growing influence of Buddhism on Chinese aesthetic thought led to an artistic shift from objective reality to subjective experiences as a result of Buddhist teachings on the illusory nature of reality.\nThe medieval period in the West came to an end with the emergence of the Renaissance starting in the 15th century. This change led to the revival of classical aesthetic ideals while secularization paved the way for rationalist inquiries into general laws of beauty and empiricist analyses of sensory and emotional experiences in the subsequent Age of Enlightenment.\nModern and contemporary.\nModern aesthetics emerged in the 18th century as philosophers systematically engaged with its foundational concepts while carefully formulating and critiquing major positions. A key step in this process happened through the philosophy of Alexander Baumgarten (1714\u20131762), who first conceived aesthetics as a distinct field of inquiry: the science of sensory cognitions or the study of what is sensed and imagined. In British philosophy, Francis Hutcheson (1694\u20131746) followed ideas of the third Earl of Shaftesbury (1671\u20131713) and provided an early theory of taste, conceptualizing it as an inner sense responsible for aesthetic apprehension. This outlook inspired David Hume (1711\u20131776) to develop a subjective theory of beauty, understanding it as a pleasurable sentiment caused by perceptions. He integrated this perspective with the existence of intersubjective standards of beauty as principles of taste governing which objects are experienced as beautiful.\nImmanuel Kant (1724\u20131804) expanded Hume's idea that aesthetic judgments are both subjective and universally valid, arguing that the underlying pleasure must be disinterested to follow universal standards. According to Kant, this type of pleasure comes from a free play in which the mental faculties of imagination and understanding harmoniously interact. In response to earlier theories by Edmund Burke (1729\u20131797), Kant also examined the sublime as a distinct aesthetic quality.\nKant's thought inspired diverse developments in German philosophy. Friedrich Schiller (1759\u20131805) saw art as a unifying phenomenon that synthesizes different basic human drives in a type of play. F. W. J. von Schelling (1775\u20131854) shared a similar perspective, arguing that art reconciles opposites and reveals the underlying unity of the self and nature. G. W. F. Hegel (1770\u20131831) studied aesthetics through his philosophical system of absolute idealism, seeing artistic beauty as the sensory manifestation of truth. He analyzed art history from antiquity to his present day as a series of progressive stages of this manifestation.\nCombining Kantian and Indian philosophy, Arthur Schopenhauer (1788\u20131860) understood disinterested aesthetic experience as a suspension of the will, resulting in a temporary peace of mind by interrupting the cycle of striving and suffering. He inspired the Chinese philosopher Wang Guowei (1877\u20131927), who integrated Schopenhauer's ideas with Buddhist thought. Wang viewed the goal of art as the creation of worlds within the world, which are open to disinterested reflection. Friedrich Nietzsche (1844\u20131900) rejected the disinterestedness of aesthetic experience and the autonomy of art from other domains. Instead, he considered art an expression of the struggle between opposing life forces, seeing it as a vehicle of transformation and life affirmation.\nFollowing the thought of Karl Marx (1818\u20131883), Marxist aesthetic philosophers like Leon Trotsky (1879\u20131940) and Georg Luk\u00e1cs (1885\u20131971) examined how art reflects and shapes social ideologies and power hierarchies. Drawing from Marxist ideas, Theodor Adorno (1903\u20131969) critiqued the commodification of art and explored its ability to express alienation and challenge societal norms. Also adopting a Marxist perspective, Walter Benjamin (1892\u20131940) studied how advances in technological reproducibility transform art.\nRomanticist thought emphasized artistic originality, creativity, and the expression of profound feelings, as formulated in the works of J. W. von Goethe (1749\u20131832), William Wordsworth (1770\u20131850), and Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772\u20131834). It saw artworks as products of human genius that defy rule-based understanding. This school of thought inspired the theory of expressionism, which asserts that the primary function of art is to communicate emotions and other mental states. It was examined by thinkers such as Leo Tolstoy (1828\u20131910), Benedetto Croce (1866\u20131952), and R. G. Collingwood (1889\u20131943). Intentionalism, a closely related position, focuses on the author's intent as the source of meaning of artworks. Monroe Beardsley (1915\u20131985) opposed this view, arguing that meaning is not fixed by private intentions. Sigmund Freud (1856\u20131939) and Carl Jung (1875\u20131961) interpreted art through a psychoanalytic perspective as expressions of the unconscious, an approach also later explored by Richard Wollheim (1923\u20132005).\nIn the late 19th and early 20th centuries, aestheticism became a prominent view in English-speaking philosophy. For example, Walter Pater (1839\u20131894) and Oscar Wilde (1854\u20131900) proposed that art is an end in itself without an ulterior purpose. Pragmatists rejected this outlook and the idea that aesthetic experience is disinterested. For instance, John Dewey (1859\u20131952) proposed that the value of art lies in the unique experiences it provides, which can lead to individual and societal improvements. Formalism became another influential theory of art in the early 20th century. It dismisses the focus on expressive and representational aspects and argues instead that artworks are defined by formal features, like the arrangement of perceptual qualities. Clive Bell (1881\u20131964), a major proponent of this view, termed this arrangement \"significant form\".\nThe emergence of Dadaism and conceptual art challenged traditional definitions of art based on intrinsic features of artworks. As a result, anti-essentialism, which understands art as a social construct without an inherent essence, gained prominence in the second half of the 20th century, exemplified in the theories of Frank Sibley (1923\u20131996) and Nelson Goodman (1906\u20131998). These developments inspired Arthur C. Danto (1924\u20132013) and George Dickie (1926\u20132020) to propose institutional definitions, arguing that social conventions set by the art world determine which objects are artworks. Mary Mothersill (1923\u20132008) challenged these developments. She aimed to restore earlier conceptions of beauty associated with Aquinas, Hume, and Kant, focusing on the apprehension of aesthetic qualities.\nIn continental philosophy, the school of phenomenology studied the immediate experience of art. For example, it examined how artworks can depict unreal objects, how imagination is involved in the process, and how art can reveal features of reality. This tradition is closely related to existentialist aesthetics, which views artworks as expressions of human freedom that can authentically portray central aspects of the human condition. The philosophy of Martin Heidegger (1889\u20131976) influenced both traditions. He criticized the focus on disinterested pleasure found in modern philosophy of art, arguing that artworks can reveal truths about human existence and provide new perspectives of understanding. Heidegger's student Hans-Georg Gadamer (1900\u20132002) further investigated the relation between art and truth, examining aesthetic experience and traditional theories through phenomenological analysis and hermeneutic interpretation.\nPostmodern thinkers, like Roland Barthes (1915\u20131980) and Jacques Derrida (1930\u20132004), challenged the separation of art from everyday life and the idea that artworks have a stable meaning or universal value. They suggested instead that artistic merit depends on historical and cultural contexts. Starting in the 1970s, feminist perspectives challenged male-centric theories and practices within aesthetic philosophy and the art world. For example, Simone de Beauvoir (1908\u20131986) and Luce Irigaray (1930\u2013present) explored how feminine perspectives are marginalized by masculine standards.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2132", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2132", "title": "Ara Pacis Augustae", "text": ""}
{"id": "2134", "revid": "47012757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2134", "title": "Ark of the Covenant", "text": "Chest containing the Ten Commandments\nThe Ark of the Covenant, also known as the Ark of the Testimony or the Ark of God, was a religious storage chest and relic held to be the most sacred object by the Israelites.\nReligious tradition describes it as a wooden storage chest decorated in solid gold accompanied by an ornamental lid known as the Seat of Mercy. According to the Book of Exodus and First Book of Kings in the Hebrew Bible and the Old Testament, the Ark contained the Tablets of the Law, by which God delivered the Ten Commandments to Moses at Mount Sinai. According to the Book of Exodus, the Book of Numbers, and the Epistle to the Hebrews in the New Testament, it also contained Aaron's rod and a pot of manna. The biblical account relates that approximately one year after the Israelites' exodus from Egypt, the Ark was created according to the pattern that God gave to Moses when the Israelites were encamped at the foot of Mount Sinai. Thereafter, the gold-plated acacia chest's staves were lifted and carried by the Levites approximately 2,000 cubits () in advance of the people while they marched. God spoke with Moses \"from between the two cherubim\" on the Ark's cover. \nJewish tradition holds various views on the Ark\u2019s fate, including that it was taken to Babylon, hidden by King Josiah in the Temple or underground chambers, or concealed by Jeremiah in a cave on Mount Nebo. The Ethiopian Orthodox Church asserts it is housed in Axum; the Lemba people of southern Africa claim ancestral possession with a replica in Zimbabwe; some traditions say it was in Rome or Ireland but lost, though no verified evidence conclusively confirms its location today. It is honored by Samaritans, symbolized in Christianity as a type of Christ and the Virgin Mary, mentioned in the Quran, and viewed with spiritual significance in the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith. The Ark of the Covenant has been prominently featured in modern films such as \"Raiders of the Lost Ark\" and other literary and artistic works, often depicted as a powerful and mysterious relic with both historical and supernatural significance.\nThere are ongoing academic discussions among biblical scholars and archeologists regarding the history of the Ark's movements around the Ancient Near East as well as the history and dating of the Ark narratives in the Hebrew Bible. There is additional scholarly debate over possible historical influences that led to the creation of the Ark, including Bedouin or Egyptian influences.\nBiblical account.\nConstruction and description.\nAccording to the Book of Exodus, God instructed Moses to build the Ark during his 40-day stay upon Mount Sinai. He was shown the pattern for the tabernacle and furnishings of the Ark, and told that it would be made of shittim wood (also known as acacia wood) to house the Tablets of Stone. Moses instructed Bezalel and Oholiab to construct the Ark.\nThe Book of Exodus gives detailed instructions on how the Ark is to be constructed. It is to be &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442 cubits in length, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+1\u20442 cubits breadth, and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+1\u20442 cubits height (approximately ) of acacia wood. Then it is to be gilded entirely with gold, and a crown or molding of gold is to be put around it. Four rings of gold are to be attached to its four corners, two on each side\u2014and through these rings staves of shittim wood overlaid with gold for carrying the Ark are to be inserted; and these are not to be removed.\nMobile vanguard.\nThe biblical account continues that, after its creation by Moses, the Ark was carried by the Israelites during their 40 years of wandering in the desert. Whenever the Israelites camped, the Ark was placed in the tent of meeting, inside the Tabernacle.\nWhen the Israelites, led by Joshua toward the Promised Land, arrived at the banks of the River Jordan, the Ark was carried in the lead, preceding the people, and was the signal for their advance. During the crossing, the river grew dry as soon as the feet of the priests carrying the Ark touched its waters, and remained so until the priests\u2014with the Ark\u2014left the river after the people had passed over. As memorials, twelve stones were taken from the Jordan at the place where the priests had stood.\nDuring the Battle of Jericho, the Ark was carried around the city once a day for six days, preceded by the armed men and seven priests sounding seven trumpets of rams' horns. On the seventh day, the seven priests sounding the seven trumpets of rams' horns before the Ark compassed the city seven times, and, with a great shout, Jericho's wall fell down flat and the people took the city.\nAfter the defeat at Ai, Joshua lamented before the Ark. When Joshua read the Law to the people between Mount Gerizim and Mount Ebal, they stood on each side of the Ark. The Ark was then kept at Shiloh after the Israelites finished their conquest of Canaan. We next hear of the Ark in Bethel, where it was being cared for by the priest Phinehas, the grandson of Aaron. According to this verse, it was consulted by the people of Israel when they were planning to attack the Benjaminites at the Battle of Gibeah. Later the Ark was kept at Shiloh again, where it was cared for by Hophni and Phinehas, two sons of Eli.\nCapture by the Philistines.\nAccording to the biblical narrative, a few years later the elders of Israel decided to take the Ark onto the battlefield to assist them against the Philistines, having recently been defeated at the battle of Eben-Ezer. They were again heavily defeated, with the loss of 30,000 men. The Ark was captured by the Philistines, and Hophni and Phinehas were killed. The news of its capture was at once taken to Shiloh by a messenger \"with his clothes rent, and with earth upon his head\". The old priest, Eli, fell dead when he heard it, and his daughter-in-law, bearing a son at the time the news of the Ark's capture was received, named him Ichabod\u2014explained as \"The glory has departed Israel\" in reference to the loss of the Ark. Ichabod's mother died at his birth.\nThe Philistines took the Ark to several places in their country, and at each place misfortune befell them. At Ashdod it was placed in the temple of Dagon. The next morning Dagon was found prostrate, bowed down, before it; and on being restored to his place, he was on the following morning again found prostrate and broken. The people of Ashdod were smitten with tumors; a plague of rodents was sent over the land. This may have been the bubonic plague. The affliction of tumours was also visited upon the people of Gath and of Ekron, whither the Ark was successively removed.\nReturn of the Ark to the Israelites.\nAfter the Ark had been among them for seven months, the Philistines, on the advice of their diviners, returned it to the Israelites, accompanying its return with an offering consisting of golden images of the tumors and mice wherewith they had been afflicted. The Ark was set up in the field of Joshua of Beit Shemesh, and the people of Beit Shemesh offered sacrifices and burnt offerings according to the first five verses of 1 Samuel 6. Verse 19, 1 Samuel 6 states that out of curiosity, the people of Beit Shemesh gazed at the Ark, and as a punishment, God struck down seventy of them (fifty thousand and seventy in some translations). The men of Beit Shemesh sent to Qiryath Ye'arim to have the Ark removed in verse 21, and it was taken to the house of Abinadab, whose son Eleazar was sanctified to keep it. Qiryath Ye'arim remained the abode of the Ark for twenty years, according to 1 Samuel 7.\nUnder Saul, the Ark was with the army before he first met the Philistines, but the king was too impatient to consult it before engaging in battle. In 1 Chronicles 13, it is stated that the people were not accustomed to consulting the Ark in the days of Saul.\nDuring the reign of King David.\nIn the biblical narrative, at the beginning of his reign over the United Monarchy, King David removed the Ark from Kirjath-jearim amid great rejoicing. On the way to Zion, Uzzah, one of the drivers of the cart that carried the Ark, put out his hand to steady the Ark, and was struck dead by God for touching it. The place was subsequently named \"Perez-Uzzah\", literally 'outburst against Uzzah', as a result. David, in fear, carried the Ark aside into the house of Obed-edom the Gittite, instead of carrying it on to Zion, and it stayed there for three months.\nOn hearing that God had blessed Obed-edom because of the presence of the Ark in his house, David had the Ark brought to Zion by the Levites, while he himself, \"girded with a linen ephod[...] danced before the Lord with all his might\" and in the sight of all the public gathered in Jerusalem, a performance which caused him to be scornfully rebuked by his first wife, Saul's daughter Michal. In Zion, David put the Ark in the tent he had prepared for it, offered sacrifices, distributed food, and blessed the people and his own household. David used the tent as a personal place of prayer.\nThe Levites were appointed to minister before the Ark. David's plan of building a temple for the Ark was stopped on the advice of the prophet Nathan. The Ark was with the army during the siege of Rabbah; and when David fled from Jerusalem at the time of Absalom's conspiracy, the Ark was carried along with him until he ordered Zadok the priest to return it to Jerusalem.\nThe Temple of King Solomon.\nAccording to the Biblical narrative, when Abiathar was dismissed from the priesthood by King Solomon for having taken part in Adonijah's conspiracy against David, his life was spared because he had formerly borne the Ark. Solomon worshipped before the Ark after his dream in which God promised him wisdom.\nDuring the construction of Solomon's Temple, a special inner room, named ('Holy of Holies'), was prepared to receive and house the Ark; and when the Temple was dedicated, the Ark\u2014containing the original tablets of the Ten Commandments\u2014was placed therein. When the priests emerged from the holy place after placing the Ark there, the Temple was filled with a cloud, \"for the glory of the Lord had filled the house of the Lord\".\nWhen Solomon married Pharaoh's daughter, he caused her to dwell in a house outside Zion, as Zion was consecrated because it contained the Ark. King Josiah also had the Ark returned to the Temple, from which it appears to have been removed by one of his predecessors (cf. 2 Chronicles 33\u201334 and 2 Kings 21\u201323).\nDuring the reign of King Hezekiah.\nPrior to king Josiah who is the last biblical figure mentioned as having seen the Ark, king Hezekiah had seen the Ark. Hezekiah is also known for protecting Jerusalem against the Assyrian Empire by improving the city walls and diverting the waters of the Gihon Spring through a tunnel known today as Hezekiah's Tunnel, which channeled the water inside the city walls to the Pool of Siloam.\nIn a noncanonical text known as the Treatise of the Vessels, Hezekiah is identified as one of the kings who had the Ark and the other treasures of Solomon's Temple hidden during a time of crisis. This text lists the following hiding places, which it says were recorded on a bronze tablet: (1) a spring named Kohel or Kahal with pure water in a valley with a stopped-up gate; (2) a spring named Kotel (or \"wall\" in Hebrew); (3) a spring named Zedekiah; (4) an unidentified cistern; (5) Mount Carmel; and (6) locations in Babylon.\nTo many scholars, Hezekiah is also credited as having written all or some of the Book of Kohelet (Ecclesiastes in the Christian tradition), in particular the famously enigmatic epilogue. Notably, the epilogue appears to refer to the Ark story with references to almond blossoms (i.e., Aaron's rod), locusts, silver, and gold. The epilogue then cryptically refers to a pitcher broken at a fountain and a wheel broken at a cistern.\nAlthough scholars disagree on whether the Pool of Siloam's pure spring waters were used by pilgrims for ritual purification, many scholars agree that a stepped pilgrimage road between the pool and the Temple had been built in the first century CE. This roadway has been partially excavated, but the west side of the Pool of Siloam remained unexcavated, as of 2016.\nThe invasion of the Kingdom of Babylon.\nIn 587 BC, when the Babylonians destroyed Jerusalem, an ancient Greek version of the biblical third Book of Ezra, 1 Esdras, suggests that Babylonians took away the vessels of the ark of God, but does not mention taking away the Ark:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And they took all the holy vessels of the Lord, both great and small, with the vessels of the ark of God, and the king's treasures, and carried them away into Babylon\nIn Rabbinic literature, the final disposition of the Ark is disputed. Some rabbis hold that it must have been carried off to Babylon, while others hold that it must have been hidden lest it be carried off into Babylon and never brought back. A late 2nd-century rabbinic work known as the states the opinions of these rabbis that Josiah, the king of Judah, stored away the Ark, along with the jar of manna, and a jar containing the holy anointing oil, the rod of Aaron which budded and a chest given to Israel by the Philistines.\nService of the Kohathites.\nThe Kohathites were one of the Levite houses from the Book of Numbers. Theirs was the responsibility to care for \"the most holy things\" in the tabernacle. When the camp, then wandering the Wilderness, set out the Kohathites would enter the tabernacle with Aaron and cover the ark with the screening curtain and \"then they shall put on it a covering of fine leather, and spread over that a cloth all of blue, and shall put its poles in place.\" The ark was one of the items of the tent of meeting that the Kohathites were responsible for carrying.\nJewish tradition on location today.\nThe Talmud in Yoma suggests that the Ark was removed from the Temple towards the end of the era of the First Temple and the Second Temple never housed it. According to one view, it was taken to Babylon when Nebuchadnezzar conquered Jerusalem in 587 BCE, exiling King Jeconiah along with the upper classes.\nAnother perspective proposes that Josiah, king of Judah, hid the Ark in anticipation of the Temple's destruction. Where it was hidden remains uncertain. One account in the Talmud mentions a priest's suspicion of a tampered stone in a chamber designated for wood storage, hinting at the Ark's concealment.\nAlternatively, it has been suggested that the Ark remained underground in the Holy of Holies. Some of the Chazal, including the Radak and Maimonides, propose that Solomon designed tunnels beneath the Temple to safeguard the Ark that Josiah later used. Attempts to excavate this area have yielded little due to political sensitivities.\nAn opinion found in the II Maccabees 2:4-10, asserts that Jeremiah hid the Ark and other sacred items in a cave on Mount Nebo (now in Jordan), anticipating the Neo-Babylonian invasion.\nArchaeology and historical context.\nArchaeological evidence shows strong cultic activity at Kiriath-Jearim in the 8th and 7th centuries BC, well after the ark was supposedly removed from there to Jerusalem. In particular, archaeologists found a large elevated podium, associated with the Northern Kingdom and not the Southern Kingdom, which may have been a shrine. Thomas R\u00f6mer suggests that this may indicate that the ark was not moved to Jerusalem until much later, possibly during the reign of King Josiah (reigned c.\u2009640\u2013609 BCE). He notes that this might explain why the ark featured prominently in the history before Solomon, but not after. Additionally, 2 Chronicles 35:3 indicates that it was moved during King Josiah's reign. However, Yigal Levin argues that there is no evidence that Kiriath-Jearim was a cultic center in the monarchical era or that it ever housed any \"temple of the Ark\".\nK. L. Sparks believes the story of the Ark was written independently around the 8th century BC in a text referred to as the \"Ark Narrative\" and then incorporated into the main biblical narrative just before the Babylonian exile.\nR\u00f6mer also suggests that the ark may have carried sacred stones \"of the kind found in the chests of pre-Islamic Bedouins\" and speculates that these may have been either a statue of Yahweh or a pair of statues depicting both Yahweh and his companion goddess Asherah. In contrast, Scott Noegel has argued that the parallels between the ark and these practices remain \"unconvincing\" in part because the Bedouin objects lack the ark's distinctive structure, function, and mode of transportation. Unlike the ark, the Bedouin chests \"contained no box, no lid, and no poles,\" they did not serve as the throne or footstool of a god, they were not overlaid with gold, did not have \"kerubim\" figures upon them, there were no restrictions on who could touch them, and they were transported on horses or camels.\nNoegel suggests that the ancient Egyptian Solar barque is a more plausible model for the Israelite ark, since Egyptian barques had all the features just mentioned. He adds that the Egyptians also were known to place written covenants beneath the feet of statues, proving a further parallel to the placement of the covenantal tablets inside the ark.\nLevin holds that some biblical texts suggest that the Ark of the Covenant was only one among many other different arks at regional shrines prior to the centralization of worship in Jerusalem, although Raanan Eichler disagrees. While Clifford Mark McCormick has questioned whether the Ark ever existed, other scholars such as Eichler, David A. Falk, Roger D. Isaacs, and Adam R. Hemmings have defended its historicity and antiquity based on linguistic evidence and significant parallels with similar artifacts from New Kingdom Egypt.\nReferences in Abrahamic religions.\nTanakh.\nThe Ark is first mentioned in the Book of Exodus and then numerous times in Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges, I Samuel, II Samuel, I Kings, I Chronicles, II Chronicles, Psalms, and Jeremiah.\nIn the Book of Jeremiah, it is referenced by Jeremiah, who, speaking in the days of Josiah, prophesied a future time, possibly the end of days, when the Ark will no longer be talked about or be made use of again:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRashi comments on this verse that \"The entire people will be so imbued with the spirit of sanctity that God's Presence will rest upon them collectively, as if the congregation itself was the Ark of the Covenant.\"\nSecond Book of Maccabees.\nAccording to Second Maccabees, at the beginning of chapter 2:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The records show that it was the prophet Jeremiah who[...] prompted by a divine message[...] gave orders that the Tent of Meeting and the ark should go with him. Then he went away to the mountain from the top of which Moses saw God's promised land. When he reached the mountain, Jeremiah found a cave-dwelling; he carried the tent, the ark, and the incense-altar into it, then blocked up the entrance. Some of his companions came to mark out the way, but were unable to find it. When Jeremiah learnt of this he reprimanded them. \"The place shall remain unknown\", he said, \"until God finally gathers his people together and shows mercy to them. The Lord will bring these things to light again, and the glory of the Lord will appear with the cloud, as it was seen both in the time of Moses and when Solomon prayed that the shrine might be worthily consecrated.\"\nThe \"mountain from the top of which Moses saw God's promised land\" would be Mount Nebo, located in what is now Jordan.\nSamaritan tradition.\nSamaritan tradition claims that the Ark of the Covenant had been kept at a sanctuary on Mt. Gerizim.\nNew Testament.\nThe physical ark of the Old Testament.\nIn the New Testament, the Ark is mentioned in the Letter to the Hebrews and the Revelation to St. John. Hebrews 9:4 states that the Ark contained \"the golden pot that had manna, and Aaron's rod that budded, and the tablets of the covenant.\" says the prophet saw God's temple in heaven opened, \"and the ark of his covenant was seen within his temple.\"\nThe Blessed Virgin Mary as the \u201cNew Ark\u201d.\nIn the Gospel of Luke, the author's accounts of the Annunciation and Visitation are constructed using eight points of literary parallelism to compare Mary to the Ark.\nThe contents of the ark were seen by Church Fathers including Thomas Aquinas as symbolic of the attributes of Jesus Christ: the manna as the Holy Eucharist; Aaron's rod as Jesus' eternal priestly authority; and the tablets of the Law, as the Lawgiver himself. Thomas Aquinas compared the two types of materials of the ark to the two natures of Christ in the hypostatic union (Jesus having human and divine natures). He wrote, \"The Ark, wherein were the Law and the manna, signified Christ, who is 'the living bread that came down from Heaven' and 'the fulfillment of the Law'. Moreover, the wood overlaid with gold signifies that Christ was true man and true God.\"\nCatholic scholars connect the pregnant, birthing Woman of the Apocalypse from , with the Blessed Virgin Mary, whom they identify as the \"Ark of the New Covenant.\" Carrying the saviour of mankind within her, she herself became the Holy of Holies. This is the interpretation given in the third century by Gregory Thaumaturgus, and in the fourth century by Saint Ambrose, Saint Ephraem of Syria and Saint Augustine. The Catechism of the Catholic Church teaches that Mary is a metaphorical version of the ark: \"Mary, in whom the Lord himself has just made his dwelling, is the daughter of Zion in person, the ark of the covenant, the place where the glory of the Lord dwells. She is 'the dwelling of God[...] with men.\"\nSaint Athanasius, the bishop of Alexandria, is credited with writing about the connections between the Ark and the Virgin Mary: \"O noble Virgin, truly you are greater than any other greatness. For who is your equal in greatness, O dwelling place of God the Word? To whom among all creatures shall I compare you, O Virgin? You are greater than them all O (Ark of the) Covenant, clothed with purity instead of gold! You are the Ark in which is found the golden vessel containing the true manna, that is, the flesh in which Divinity resides\" (\"Homily of the Papyrus of Turin\").\nQuran.\nThe Ark is referred to in the Quran (Surah Al-Baqara: 248):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Their prophet further told them, \u201cThe sign of Saul\u2019s kingship is that the Ark will come to you\u2014containing reassurance from your Lord and relics of the family of Moses and the family of Aaron, which will be carried by the angels. Surely in this is a sign for you, if you \u02f9truly\u02fa believe.\"\nThe Ark in other faiths.\nAccording to Uri Rubin, the Ark of the Covenant has a religious basis in Islam (and the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith), which gives it special significance.\nClaims of current status.\nAccording to the Book of Maccabees.\nThe Book of 2 Maccabees 2:4\u201310, written around 100 B.C. claims that the prophet Jeremiah, following \u201cbeing warned by God\" before the Babylonian invasion, took the Ark, the Tabernacle, and the Altar of Incense, and buried them in a cave, informing those of his followers who wished to find the place that it should remain unknown \"until the time that God should gather His people again together, and receive them unto mercy.\"\nEthiopia.\nThe Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church claims to possess the Ark of the Covenant in Axum. The Ark is kept under guard in a treasury near the Church of Our Lady Mary of Zion. Replicas of the tablets within the Ark, or \"tabots\", are kept in every Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church. Each tabot is kept in its own holy of holies, each with its own dedication to a particular saint; the most popular of these include Saint Mary, Saint George and Saint Michael.\nThe \"Kebra Nagast\" is often said to have been composed to legitimise the Solomonic dynasty, which ruled the Ethiopian Empire following its establishment in 1270, but this is not the case. It was originally composed in some other language (Coptic or Greek), then translated into Arabic, and translated into Ge\u02bdez in 1321. It narrates how the Ark of the Covenant was brought to Ethiopia by Menelik I with divine assistance, while a forgery was left in the Temple in Jerusalem. Although the \"Kebra Nagast\" is the best-known account of this belief, the belief predates the document. Abu al-Makarim, writing in the last quarter of the twelfth century, makes one early reference to this belief that they possessed the Ark. \"The Abyssinians possess also the Ark of the Covenant\", he wrote, and, after a description of the object, describes how the liturgy is celebrated upon the Ark four times a year, \"on the feast of the great nativity, on the feast of the glorious Baptism, on the feast of the holy Resurrection, and on the feast of the illuminating Cross.\"\nIn his controversial 1992 book \"The Sign and the Seal\", British writer Graham Hancock reports on the Ethiopian belief that the ark spent several years in Egypt before it came to Ethiopia via the Nile River, where it was kept on the islands of Lake Tana for about four hundred years and finally taken to Axum. Archaeologist John Holladay of the University of Toronto called Hancock's theory \"garbage and hogwash\"; Edward Ullendorff, a former professor of Ethiopian Studies at the University of London, said he \"wasted a lot of time reading it.\" In a 1992 interview, Ullendorff says that he examined the ark held in the church in Axum in 1941. Describing the ark there, he says, \"They have a wooden box, but it's empty. Middle- to late-medieval construction, when these were fabricated ad hoc.\"\nOn 25 June 2009, the patriarch of the Orthodox Church of Ethiopia, Abune Paulos, said he would announce to the world the next day the unveiling of the Ark of the Covenant, which he said had been kept safe and secure in a church in Axum. The following day, he announced that he would not unveil the Ark after all, but that instead he could attest to its current status.\nSouthern Africa.\nThe Lemba people of South Africa and Zimbabwe have claimed that their ancestors carried the Ark south, calling it the \"ngoma lungundu\" \"voice of God\", eventually hiding it in a deep cave in the Dumghe mountains, their spiritual home.\nOn 14 April 2008, in a UK Channel 4 documentary, Tudor Parfitt, taking a literalist approach to the Biblical story, described his research into this claim. He says that the object described by the Lemba has attributes similar to the Ark. It was of similar size, was carried on poles by priests, was not allowed to touch the ground, was revered as a voice of their God, and was used as a weapon of great power, sweeping enemies aside.\nIn his book \"The Lost Ark of the Covenant\" (2008), Parfitt also suggests that the Ark was taken to Arabia following the events depicted in the Second Book of Maccabees, and cites Arabic sources which maintain it was brought in distant times to Yemen. Genetic Y-DNA analyses in the 2000s have established a partially Middle-Eastern origin for a portion of the male Lemba population but no specific Jewish connection. Lemba tradition maintains that the Ark spent some time in a place called Sena, which might be Sena, Yemen. Later, it was taken across the sea to East Africa and may have been taken inland at the time of Great Zimbabwe. According to their oral traditions, it self-destructed sometime after the Lemba's arrival with the Ark. Using a core from the original, the Lemba priests constructed a new one. This replica was discovered in a cave by a Swedish-German missionary named Harald Philip Hans von Sicard in the 1940s and eventually found its way to the Museum of Human Sciences in Harare.\nEurope.\nRome.\nThe 2nd century Rabbi Eliezer ben Jose claimed that he saw somewhere in Rome the mercy-seat lid of the ark. According to his account, a bloodstain was present and was told that it was a stain from the blood which the Jewish high priest sprinkled thereon on the Day of Atonement.\"\nAccordingly, another tale claims that the Ark was kept within the Basilica of Saint John Lateran, surviving the pillages of Rome by King of the Visigoths Alaric I and King of the Vandals Gaiseric but was eventually lost when the basilica burned in the fifth century.\nIreland.\nBetween 1899 and 1902, the British-Israel Association of London carried out limited excavations of the Hill of Tara in Ireland looking for the Ark of the Covenant. Irish nationalists, including Maud Gonne and the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland (RSAI), campaigned successfully to have them stopped before they destroyed the hill. A non-invasive survey by archaeologist Conor Newman carried out from 1992 until 1995 found no evidence of the Ark.\nThe British Israelites believed that the Ark was located at the grave of the Egyptian princess Tea Tephi, who according to Irish legend came to Ireland in the 6th century BC and married Irish King \u00c9rim\u00f3n. Because of the historical importance of Tara, Irish nationalists like Douglas Hyde and W. B. Yeats voiced their protests in newspapers, and in 1902 Maud Gonne led a campaign against the excavations at the site.\nMalaita Island.\nMany Malaitans claim that the ark of covenant is buried somewhere deep in the jungle of their island. They have a family tradition that they are a lost Jewish tribe from Zedekiah the high priest of Israel. And that he came there in the year 66 AD to bury it. This idea has been recently presented in the article \u201cArk of Covenant Location Discovered!\u201d by Mike Edery. In the article, he argues that a Torah code from the Baal Shem Tov reveals its current location on Malaita island.\nAdditionally in the year 2013, a journalist by the name of Mathew Fishbane had visited the island in the hopes of finding the ark on Malaita island. He interviewed several Malaitans who gave the story of how the ark ended up there. Although he was unable to find it, the legend still lives on today.\nIn literature and the arts.\nPhilip Kaufman conceived of the Ark of the Covenant as the main plot device of Steven Spielberg's 1981 adventure film \"Raiders of the Lost Ark\", where it is found by Indiana Jones in the Egyptian city of Tanis in 1936. \nIn the Danish family film \"The Lost Treasure of the Knights Templar\" from 2006, the main part of the treasure found in the end is the Ark of the Covenant. The power of the Ark comes from static electricity stored in separated metal plates like a giant Leyden jar.\nIn Harry Turtledove's novel \"Alpha and Omega\" (2019) the ark is found by archeologists, and the characters have to deal with the proven existence of God.\nThe Ark has been depicted many times in art for two thousand years, some examples are in the article above, a few more are here.\nYom HaAliyah.\nYom HaAliyah (Aliyah Day) () is an Israeli national holiday celebrated annually on the tenth of the Hebrew month of Nisan to commemorate the Israelites crossing the Jordan River into the Land of Israel while carrying the Ark of the Covenant.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2136", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2136", "title": "Angles (tribe)", "text": "A Germanic people from present-day northern Germany\nThe Angles (, ) were one of the main Germanic peoples who settled in Great Britain in the post-Roman period. They founded several kingdoms of the Heptarchy in Anglo-Saxon England. Their name, which probably derives from the Angeln peninsula, is the root of the name \"England\" (\"Engla land\", \"Land of the Angles\"), and \"English\", in reference to both for its people and language. According to Tacitus, writing around 100 AD, a people known as Angles (Anglii) lived beyond (apparently northeast of) the Langobards and Semnones, who lived near the River Elbe.\nEtymology.\nThe name of the Angles may have been first recorded in Latinised form, as \"Anglii\", in the \"Germania\" of Tacitus. It is thought to derive from the name of the area they originally inhabited, the Angeln peninsula, which is on the Baltic Sea coast of Schleswig-Holstein. \nTwo related theories have been advanced, which attempt to give the name a Germanic etymology:\nIn Old English, the same term refers the Angles before and after the migration to Britain. As most Germanic settlers in Britain during this time were Angles, the settled area became referred to as England (\"Engla land\", \"the land or country of the Angles\"). While Latin and Celtic-speaking populations referred to the Germanic speakers in Britain in general by terms related to \"Saxons\", they came to refer to themselves as (\"Angles\", \"English people\"). \"Angle\" and related terms therefore have some ambiguity in their scope. From is also derived \"English\" (). \nAccording to , the brothers Dan and Angul were made rulers by the consent of their people because of their bravery and the Danes and Angles are respectively named from them.\nGreco-Roman historiography.\nTacitus.\nThe earliest surviving mention of the Angles is in chapter 40 of Tacitus's \"Germania\" written around AD 98. Tacitus describes the \"Anglii\" as one of the more remote Suebic tribes living beyond the Semnones and Langobardi, who lived near the lower Elbe, and were better known to the Romans. He grouped the Angles with several other tribes in that region, the Reudigni, Aviones, Varini, Eudoses, Suarines, and Nuithones. According to Tacitus, they were all living behind ramparts of rivers and woods, and therefore inaccessible to attack.\nHe gives no precise indication of their geographical situation but states that, together with the six other tribes, they worshipped Nerthus, or Mother Earth, whose sanctuary was located on \"an island in the Ocean\". The Eudoses are generally considered to be the Jutes and these names have been associated with localities in Jutland or on the Baltic coast. The coast contains sufficient estuaries, inlets, rivers, islands, swamps, and marshes to have been inaccessible to those not familiar with the terrain, such as the Romans, who considered it unknown and inaccessible.\nThe majority of scholars believe that the Anglii lived on the coasts of the Baltic Sea, probably in the southern part of the Jutland peninsula. This view is based partly on Old English and Danish traditions regarding persons and events of the fourth century, and partly because striking affinities to the cult of Nerthus as described by Tacitus are to be found in pre-Christian Scandinavian religion.\nPtolemy.\nSurviving versions of the work of Ptolemy, who wrote around AD 150, in his \"Geography\" (2.10), describe the Angles in a confusing manner. In one passage, the \"Sueboi Angeilloi\" (or \"Suevi Angili\"), are described as living inland between the northern Rhine and central Elbe, but apparently not touching either river, with the Suebic Langobardi on the Rhine to their west, and the Suebic Semnones on the Elbe stretching to their east, forming a band of Suebic peoples. This positioning of the Langobardi and Angli is unexpected, as are the positions of many of the peoples in this passage. The text is believed to result from the combining of different types of older texts. As pointed out by Gudmund Sch\u00fctte, the neighbouring Langobards appear in two places, and the ones near the Rhine appears to be there by mistake. Sch\u00fctte, in his analysis, believes that the Angles are placed correctly relative to the Langobardi to their west, but that these have been positioned in the wrong place. The Langobardi also appear in the expected position on the lower Elbe, and the Angles would be expected to their northeast, based upon Tacitus.\nAnother theory is that all or part of the Angles dwelt or moved among other coastal people, perhaps confederated up to the basin of the Saale (in the neighbourhood of the ancient canton of Engilin) on the Unstrut valleys below the Kyffh\u00e4userkreis, from which region the \"Lex Anglorum et Werinorum hoc est Thuringorum\" is believed by many to have come. The ethnic names of Frisians and Warines are also attested in these Saxon districts.\nProcopius.\nAn especially early reference to the Angli in Britain is by the 6th-century Byzantine historian Procopius (who however expressed doubts about the stories he had heard\u2014apparently from Frankish diplomats\u2014about events in the west). He does not mention the Saxons, but he states that an island called \"Brittia\" (which he says is separate and distinct from Britain itself) was settled by three nations, each ruled by its own king: the Angili, Frissones, and Brittones. Each nation was so prolific that it sent large numbers of individuals every year to the Franks, who allow them to settle in the part of their land which appears to be more deserted, and by this means they say [the Franks] are winning over the island. Thus it actually happened that not long ago the king of the Franks, in sending some of his intimates on an embassy to the Emperor Justinian in Byzantium, sent with them some of the Angili, thus seeking to establish his claim that this island was ruled by him. Procopius says that the Angles had recently sailed a large army of 400 ships from Brittia to Europe, to the Rhine, to enforce a marriage agreement with the Warini who he said were living north of the Franks at that time.\nMedieval historiography.\nBede (died 735) stated that the Anglii, before coming to Great Britain, dwelt in a land called Angulus, \"which lies between the province of the Jutes and the Saxons, and remains unpopulated to this day.\" A similar account, possibly based on Bede's, is given by the 9th-century \"Historia Brittonum\". King Alfred the Great and the chronicler \u00c6thelweard identified this place with Angeln, in the province of Schleswig (though it may then have been of greater extent), and this identification agrees with the indications given by Bede.\nIn the Norwegian seafarer Ohthere of H\u00e5logaland's account of a two-day voyage from the Oslo fjord to Schleswig, he reported the lands on his starboard bow, and Alfred appended the note \"on these islands dwelt the \"Engle\" before they came hither\". Confirmation is afforded by English and Danish traditions relating to two kings named Wermund and Offa of Angel, from whom the Mercian royal family claimed descent and whose exploits are connected with Angeln, Schleswig, and Rendsburg.\nDanish tradition has preserved record of two governors of Schleswig, father and son, in their service, Frowinus (Freawine) and Wigo (Wig), from whom the royal family of Wessex claimed descent. During the fifth century, the Anglii invaded Great Britain, after which time their name does not recur on the continent except in the title of the legal code issued to the Thuringians: \"Lex Angliorum et Werinorum hoc est Thuringorum\".\nThe Angles are the subject of a legend about Pope Gregory I, who happened to see a group of Angle children from Deira for sale as slaves in the Roman market. As the story was told by Bede, Gregory was struck by the unusual appearance of the slaves and asked about their background. When told they were called \"Anglii\" (Angles), he replied with a Latin pun that translates well into English: \"Bene, nam et angelicam habent faciem, et tales angelorum in caelis decet esse coheredes\" (It is well, for they have an angelic face, and such people ought to be co-heirs of the angels in heaven). Supposedly, this encounter inspired the pope to launch a mission to bring Christianity to their countrymen.\nArchaeology.\nThe province of Schleswig has proved rich in prehistoric antiquities that date apparently from the fourth and fifth centuries. A large cremation cemetery has been found at Borgstedt, between Rendsburg and Eckernf\u00f6rde, and it has yielded many urns and brooches closely resembling those found in pagan graves in England. Of still greater importance are the great deposits at Thorsberg moor (in Angeln) and Nydam, which contained large quantities of arms, ornaments, articles of clothing, agricultural implements, etc., and in Nydam, even ships. By the help of these discoveries, Angle culture in the age preceding the migration into Britannia can be pieced together.\nAnglian kingdoms in England.\nAccording to sources such as the \"History\" of Bede, after the invasion of Britannia, the Angles split up and founded the kingdoms of Northumbria, East Anglia, and Mercia. H. R. Loyn has observed in this context that \"a sea voyage is perilous to tribal institutions\", and the apparently tribe-based kingdoms were formed in England. Early times had two northern kingdoms (Bernicia and Deira) and two midland ones (Middle Anglia and Mercia), which had by the seventh century resolved themselves into two Angle kingdoms, viz., Northumbria and Mercia.\nNorthumbria held suzerainty amidst the Germanic presence in the British Isles in the 7th century, but was eclipsed by the rise of Mercia in the 8th century. Both kingdoms fell in the great assaults of the Danish Viking armies in the 9th century. Their royal houses were effectively destroyed in the fighting, and their Angle populations came under the Danelaw. Further south, the Saxon kings of Wessex withstood the Danish assaults. Then in the late 9th and early 10th centuries, the kings of Wessex defeated the Danes and took control of areas inhabited by Angles that were formerly in the Danelaw.\nThey united their house in marriage with the surviving Angle royalty and were accepted by the Angles as their kings, ultimately resulting in the Kingdom of England. The regions of East Anglia and Northumbria are still known by their original titles. Northumbria once stretched as far north as what is now southeast Scotland, including Edinburgh, and as far south as the Humber Estuary and even the River Witham.\nThe rest of that people stayed at the centre of the Angle homeland in the northeastern portion of the modern German \"Bundesland\" of Schleswig-Holstein, on the Jutland Peninsula. There, a small peninsular area is still called Angeln today and is formed as a triangle drawn roughly from modern Flensburg on the Flensburger Fjord to the City of Schleswig and then to Maasholm, on the Schlei inlet.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2137", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2137", "title": "Aster CT-80", "text": "1982 personal computer\nThe Aster CT-80 is a 1982 personal computer developed by the small Dutch company MCP (later renamed to Aster Computers), was sold in its first incarnation as a kit for hobbyists. Later it was sold ready to use. It consisted of several Eurocard PCB's with DIN 41612 connectors, and a backplane all based on a 19-inch rack configuration. It was the first commercially available Dutch personal/home computer. The Aster computer could use the software written for the popular Tandy TRS-80 computer while fixing many of the problems of that computer, but it could also run CP/M software, with a large amount of free memory Transient Program Area, (TPA) and a full 80\u00d725 display, and it could be used as a Videotext terminal. Although the Aster was a clone of the TRS-80 Model I it was in fact more compatible with the TRS-80 Model III and ran all the software of these systems including games. It also had a built-in speaker which was compatible with such games software.\nModels.\nThree models were sold. The first model (launched June 1982) looked like the IBM PC, a rectangular base unit with two floppy drives on the front, and a monitor on top with a separate detachable keyboard. The second incarnation was a much smaller unit the width of two 5&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444\" floppy drives stacked on top of each other, and the third incarnation looked like a flattened Apple with a built-in keyboard.\nAll units ran much faster than the original TRS-80, at 4 MHz, (with a software selectable throttle to the original speed for compatibility purposes) and the display supported upper and lower case, hardware snow suppression (video ram bus arbitration logic), and an improved character font set. The floppy disk interface supported dual density, and disk capacities up to 800 KB, more than four times the capacity of the original TRS-80. A special version of NewDos/80, (an improved TRS-DOS compatible Disk operating system) was used to support these disk capacities when using the TRS-80 compatibility mode.\nFor the educational market a version of the first model was produced with a new plastic enclosure (the First Asters had an all-metal enclosure) that also had an opening on the top in which a cassette recorder could be placed. This model was used in a cluster with one Aster (with disk drives) for the teacher, and eight disk less versions for the pupils. The pupils could download software from the teachers computer through a network based on a fast serial connection, as well as sending back their work to the teachers computer. There was also hardware in place through which the teacher could see the display of each pupils screen on his own monitor.\nWorking modes.\nThe Aster used 64 KB of RAM and had the unique feature of supporting two fundamentally different internal architectures: when turned on without a boot floppy or with a TRS-DOS floppy, the Aster would be fully TRS-80 compatible, with 48 KB of RAM. When the boot loader detected a CP/M floppy, the Aster would reconfigure its internal memory architecture on the fly to optimally support CP/M with 60 KB free RAM for programs (TPA) and an 80 x 25 display. This dual-architecture capability only existed on one other TRS-80 clone, the LOBO Max-80.\nWith a special configuration tool, the CT-80 could reconfigure its floppy drivers to read and write the floppies of about 80 other CP/M systems.\nA third mode was entered with a special boot floppy which turned the Aster into a Videotex terminal with a 40x25 display and a Videotex character set, The software used the built in RS-232 interface of the Aster to control a modem through which it could contact a Prestel service provider.\nSales.\nMost Aster CT-80's (about 10 thousand of them) were sold to schools for computer education, in a project first known as the \"honderd scholen project\" (one hundred schools project), but which later involved many more than just one hundred schools. MCP received this order from the Dutch government because their computer met all the technical and other demands, including the demand that the computers should be of Dutch origin and should be built in the Netherlands. Another important demand was that the computers could be used in a network (Aster developed special software and hardware for that). Later however the Government turned around and gave 50% of the order to Philips and their P2000 homecomputer even though the P2000 did not meet all the technical demands, was made in Austria and did not have network hardware nor software.\nCompany.\nAster computers was based in the small town of Arkel near the town of Gorinchem.\nInitially Aster computer b.v. was called MCP (Music print Computer Product), because it was specialized in producing computer assisted printing of sheet music. The director of the company was interested in Microprocessor technology and noticed there was a market for selling kits to computer building amateurs, so they started selling electronic kits to hobbyists, and employed four persons at that time . They also assembled kits for people without soldering skills, especially the \"junior Computer\" from Elektor (a copy of the KIM-1), and the ZX80 from Sinclair. Among the kits sold there were also alternative floppy disk drives for TRS-80 computers. But these needed the infamous TRS-80 expansion interface, which was very expensive, and had a very unreliable floppy disk controller because it used the WD1771 floppy disk controller chip without an external \"data separator\". To fix this problem MCP developed a small plugin board which could be plugged into the socket for the WD1771, and which contained a data separator, and a socket for the WD1791 to support dual-density operation. Still, the expansion interface was expensive and due to its design it was also unreliable. So they decided to also develop their own alternative in the form of an improved floppy disk controller and printer interface that could be built right into a floppy disk enclosure. The lack of RAM expansion offered by this solution was solved by a service in which the 16\u00a0KB RAM chips inside the base unit would be replaced by 64\u00a0KB RAM chips.\nWhile this went on MCP renamed itself to \"MCP CHIP\" but ran into problems with the German computer magazine \"CHIP\", and had to return to its former name. At that time MCP did also sell imported home computers like the TRS-80, the Video Genie (another TRS-80 clone), the Luxor ABC 80 and the Apple II.\nThey also sold the exotic Olivetti M20, a very early 16-bit personal computer that was one of the very few systems to use a Z8000 CPU.\nAfter designing their own fully functional replacement for the TRS-80 expansion interface (which was never commercialized) the company realized that they could do better than just re-designing the expansion interface. They observed that the TRS-80 was a great computer but it lacked in several areas. The display logic and resulting display 'snow' was irritating, as was the missing lower case support, the CPU speed could be improved, the quality and layout of the keyboard was bothersome, and the floppy disk capacity and reliability was low. Also the more interesting software offered for CP/M systems could not run well on a TRS-80. So they decided to design a TRS-80 and CP/M software-compatible computer system, which (following the lead of Apple Computer) they decided to name after a \"typical Dutch flower\". So they called it the Aster CT-80 (CP/M/Tandy-1980). Why they went with Aster, and not the more well known Tulip is unknown, perhaps they thought it would be to presumptuous, or perhaps the fact that \"Aster\" is also a Dutch girls' name has something to do with it. Remarkably \"Aster\" was also the name given to a Dutch Supercomputer much later, in 2002.\nThe first version of the Aster consisted of four \"Eurocards\", one Z80 CPU card with 64\u00a0KB memory, one Motorola MC6845-based video card, one double density floppy disk controller card and one \"keyboard/RS-232/cassette interface\" card. Plus a \"backplane card\", (which connected all the other cards) and a keyboard. And was intended for hobbyists, to be sold as a kit consisting of the parts and the PCB's for the computer and attached keyboard. After selling a few kits, MCP became convinced there was a much bigger market for an improved model sold as a completed working system. However the original kit version lacked many features that prevented its use as a serious computer system. Because the original designer had left the company another employee completely redesigned most of the system, (adding a display snow remover circuit, true 80/64 column text mode support, (with different size letters for TRS-80 and CP/M mode, so that in TRS-80 mode the full screen was also used, not just a 64\u00d716 portion of the 80\u00d725 screen) with an improved font set (adding \"gray scale\" version of the TRS-80 mozaik graphics and many special PETSCII like characters), and a more flexible and reliable floppy disk controller and keyboard interface plus many other small improvements), also an enclosure was developed for the main computer system, (in the form of a 19-inch rack for the Eurocards) and for two floppy disk drives and the power supply. A software engineer was hired to write the special \"dual boot mode\" BIOS and the special CP/M BIOS. The \"dual boot mode\" BIOS actually discovered whether a TRS-DOS, or Aster CP/M disk was placed in the drive, and would, depending on the type of disk, reorganise the internal memory architecture of the system, to either be 100% TRS-80 compatible or optimally support CP/M, with as much \"workspace\" as possible, and the 80\u00d725 video mode. It also was responsible for switching to ROM BASIC when the system was turned on with the break key pressed, and later supported a primitive LAN system, using the RS-232 port with modified cabling. The very first of the ready made computers were sold with the \"kit\" versions of the euro cards, the version with redesigned cards came a month or so later.\nSoon the little shop became much too small and they moved to a much larger factory building nearby (formerly a window glass factory), and started mass-producing the Aster for a period of a few years, in which time its staff grew twentyfold.\nAfter the Aster having been a few years on the Market Tandy released its own improved model, the TRS-80 Model III computer which solved many of the same problems that the Aster also had solved, but the model 3 still did not fully support CP/M as the Aster did. In the meantime IBM had released its original IBM PC, which incidentally looked remarkably like the Asters base with floppy drives + separate keyboard set-up.\nThe Aster was chosen for Dutch schools by the Dutch ministry of education, in a set-up with eight disk-less Asters, and one Aster with high-capacity floppy drives all connected by a LAN based on the Aster's high-speed serial port hardware, and special cables that permitted that any single computer on the LAN could broadcast to all other computers. The floppy based system was operated by the teacher who could send programs from his floppy disk, and data, to the student's disk-less systems thanks to the special BIOS in those systems. The students could send programs and data back to the teacher through the same LAN, or could save to a cassette recorder built into the disk-less units. Through a special \"video-switch\" the teacher was also able to see a copy of each student's display on his own screen. About a thousand of such systems were sold for many hundreds of Dutch schools.\nBecause of cash flow problems (resulting from growing too fast, insufficient financial backing, technical problems, and a sudden problem with Z80 processor deliveries) the company suddenly folded even before it came to full fruition.\nPerhaps the Aster computer inspired another Dutch computer firm to name their computer after another typical Dutch flower\u2014the Tulip's Tulip System-1 which appeared about the same time Aster folded.\nMost of the engineers who designed the hardware and software of the Aster went on to design hardware and software for the (then new) MSX system for a company called \"Micro Technology b.v.\".\nUnreleased add ons.\nTo enhance and modernize the Aster CT-80 the company also designed three alternative video display adapters to supplement or replace the TRS-80 compatible video card, (due to the modular nature of the Aster it was simply a matter of changing the video card, and/or CPU card to upgrade the system):\nA hard disk interface was also in the works, which would, add a SCSI interface, and the necessary software. A working prototype was developed that added a 40MB hard disk.\nOn the software front, work was being done to implement the replacement for the aging \"user interface\" of CP/M, (the Command Console Processor CCP) with the more modern ZCPR.\nFinally a replacement for the aging Z80 processor was being developed in the form of an Intel 8086 board, and additional 512K 16 bit memory boards. Such replacements of CPU and memory system components were possible because the Aster CT-80 was designed to use a backplane that was designed to support both 8 and 16 bit processors, and used a modular Eurocard based design with slots to spare for expansion. In theory the system could support the Z80 and the 8086 simultaneously. Plans were formulated to support CP/M-86 and even MS-DOS.\nNone of these extensions to the system became available because the company folded before any of them could be released.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2138", "revid": "26118843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2138", "title": "Arthur Wellesley", "text": "Arthur Wellesley may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "2139", "revid": "49681265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2139", "title": "Lists of animated television series", "text": "These are lists of animated television series. Animated television series are television programs produced by means of animation. Animated series produced for theaters are not included in this lists; for those, see List of animated short film series. These lists include compilation series of theatrical shorts such as \"The Bugs Bunny Show\" since they often feature some new wrap-around animation.\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis article includes . &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "2140", "revid": "1216158", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2140", "title": "Atlanta Braves", "text": "Major League Baseball franchise\nThe Atlanta Braves are an American professional baseball team based in the Atlanta metropolitan area. The Braves compete in Major League Baseball (MLB) as a member club of the National League (NL) East Division. The club was founded in Boston, Massachusetts, in 1871 as the Boston Red Stockings. The Braves are one of two remaining National League charter franchises that debuted in 1876 and are the oldest continuously operating professional sports franchise in North America. The franchise was known by various names until it adopted the Boston Braves name in 1912.\nAfter 81 seasons and one World Series title in Boston, the club moved to Milwaukee, Wisconsin, in 1953. With a roster of star players such as Hank Aaron, Eddie Mathews, and Warren Spahn, the Milwaukee Braves won the World Series in 1957. Despite the team's success, fan attendance declined. The club's owners moved the team to Atlanta, Georgia, in 1966.\nThe Braves did not find much success in Atlanta until 1991. From 1991 to 2005, the Braves were one of the most successful teams in baseball, winning an unprecedented 14 consecutive division titles, making an MLB record eight consecutive National League Championship Series appearances, and producing one of the greatest pitching rotations in the history of baseball including Hall of Famers Greg Maddux, John Smoltz, and Tom Glavine.\nThe club has won an MLB record 23 divisional titles, 18 National League pennants, and four World Series championships. The Braves are the only Major League Baseball franchise to have won the World Series in three different home cities. At the end of the 2025 season, the Braves' overall win\u2013loss record is 11,190\u201311,035\u2013154 (). Since moving to Atlanta in 1966, the Braves have an overall win\u2013loss record of 4,926\u20134,547\u20138 () through the end of 2025.\nHistory.\nBoston (1871\u20131952).\n1871\u20131913.\nThe Cincinnati Red Stockings, formed in 1869, were the first openly all-professional baseball team but disbanded after the 1870 season. Manager Harry Wright and players moved to Boston, forming the \"Boston Red Stockings\", a charter team in the National Association of Professional Base Ball Players (NAPBBP). Led by the Wright brothers, Ross Barnes, and Al Spalding, they dominated the National Association, winning four of five championships. The original Boston Red Stockings team and its successors can lay claim to being the oldest continuously playing franchise in American professional sports.\nThe club was known as the Boston Red Caps when they played the first National League game in 1876, winning against the Philadelphia Athletics. Despite a weaker roster in the league's first year, they rebounded to secure the 1877 and 1878 pennants. Managed by Frank Selee, they were a dominant force in the 19th century, winning eight pennants. By 1898, the team was known as the Beaneaters and they won 102 games that season, with stars like Hugh Duffy, Tommy McCarthy, and \"Slidin'\" Billy Hamilton.\nIn 1901, the American League was introduced, causing many Beaneaters players including stars Duffy and Jimmy Collins to leave for clubs of the rival league. The team struggled, having only one winning season from 1900 to 1913. In 1907, they temporarily dropped the red color from their stockings due to infection concerns.\nThe club underwent various nickname changes until becoming the Braves before the 1912 season. The president of the club, John M. Ward named the club after the owner, James Gaffney. Gaffney was called one of the \"braves\" of New York City's political machine, Tammany Hall, which used a Native American chief as their symbol.\n1914: Miracle.\nIn 1914, the Boston Braves experienced a remarkable turnaround in what would become one of the most memorable seasons in baseball history. Starting with a dismal 4\u201318 record, the Braves found themselves in last place, trailing the league-leading New York Giants by 15 games after losing a doubleheader to the Brooklyn Robins on July 4. However, the team rebounded with an incredible hot streak, going 41\u201312 from July 6 to September 5. On August 3, Joseph Lannin the president of the Red Sox, offered Fenway Park to the Braves free of charge for the remainder of the season since their usual home, the South End Grounds, was too small. On September 7 and 8, they defeated the Giants in two out of three games, propelling them into first place. Despite being in last place as late as July 18, the Braves secured the pennant, becoming the only team under the old eight-team league format to achieve this after being in last place on the Fourth of July. They were in last place as late as July 18, but were close to the pack, moving into fourth on July 21 and second place on August 12.\nThe Braves entered the 1914 World Series led by captain and National League Most Valuable Player, Johnny Evers. The Boston club were slight underdogs against Connie Mack's Philadelphia A's. However, they swept the Athletics and won the world championship. Inspired by their success, owner Gaffney constructed a modern park, Braves Field, which opened in August 1915 and was the largest park in the majors at the time, boasting 40,000 seats and convenient public transportation access.\n1915\u20131952.\nFrom 1917 to 1933, the Boston Braves struggled. After a series of different owners, Emil Fuchs bought the team in 1923. Fuchs brought his longtime friend, pitching great Christy Mathewson, as part of the syndicate that bought the club. However, the death of pitching legend in 1925 left Fuchs in control. Despite Fuchs' commitment to success, the team faced challenges overcoming the damage from previous years. It wasn't until 1933 and 1934, under manager Bill McKechnie, that the Braves became competitive, but it did little to help the club's finances.\nIn an effort to boost fan attendance and finances, Fuchs orchestrated a deal with the New York Yankees to acquire Babe Ruth in 1935. Ruth was appointed team vice president with promises of profit shares and managerial prospects. Initially, Ruth seemed to provide a spark on opening day, but his declining skills became evident. Ruth's inability to run and poor fielding led to internal strife, and it became clear that his titles were symbolic. Ruth retired on June 1, 1935, shortly after hitting his last three home runs. The Braves finished the season with a dismal 38\u2013115 record, marking the franchise's worst season.\nFuchs lost control of the team in August 1935, leading to a rebranding attempt as the Boston Bees, but it did little to alter the team's fortune. Construction magnate Lou Perini took over, eventually restoring the Braves' name. Despite World War II causing a brief setback, the team, led by pitcher Warren Spahn, enjoyed impressive seasons in 1946 and 1947 under Perini's ownership.\nIn 1948, the team won the pennant, behind the pitching of Spahn and Johnny Sain. The remainder of the rotation was so thin that in September, \"Boston Post\" writer Gerald Hern wrote this poem about the pair:\n&lt;poem&gt;\nFirst we'll use Spahn\nthen we'll use Sain\nThen an off day\nfollowed by rain\nBack will come Spahn\nfollowed by Sain\nAnd followed\nwe hope\nby two days of rain.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe poem received such a wide audience that the sentiment, usually now paraphrased as \"Spahn and Sain and pray for rain\", entered the baseball vocabulary.\nThe 1948 World Series, which the Braves lost in six games to the Indians, turned out to be the Braves' last hurrah in Boston. On March 13, 1953, Perini announced he was moving the club to Milwaukee. Perini cited advent of television and the lack of enthusiasm for the Braves in Boston as the key factors in deciding to move the franchise.\nMilwaukee (1953\u20131965).\nThe Milwaukee Braves' move to Wisconsin for the 1953 season was an immediate success, as they drew a National League-record 1.8 million fans and finished the season second in the league. Manager Charlie Grimm was named NL Manager of the Year.\nThroughout the 1950s, the Braves were a National League power; driven by sluggers Eddie Mathews and Hank Aaron, the team won two pennants and finished second twice between 1956 and 1959. In 1957, Aaron's MVP season led the Braves to their first pennant in nine years, then a World Series victory against the formidable New York Yankees. Despite a strong start in the World Series rematch the following season, the Braves ultimately lost the last three games and the World Series. The 1959 season ended in a tie with the Los Angeles Dodgers, who defeated the Braves in a playoff. The ensuing years saw fluctuating success, including the Braves finishing fifth in 1963, their first time in the \"second division\".\nIn 1962, team owner Louis Perini sold the Braves to a Chicago-based group led by William Bartholomay. Bartholomay intended to move the team to Atlanta in 1965, but legal hurdles kept them in Milwaukee for an extra season.\nAtlanta (1966\u2013present).\n1966\u20131974.\nAfter arriving in Atlanta in 1966, the Braves found success in 1969, with the onset of divisional play by winning the first National League West Division title. In the National League Championship Series the Braves were swept by the \"Miracle Mets\". They would post only two winning seasons between 1970 and 1981. Fans in Atlanta had to be satisfied with the achievements of Hank Aaron, who by the end of the 1973 season, had hit 713 home runs, one short of Ruth's record. On April 4, opening day of the next season, he hit No. 714 in Cincinnati, and on April 8, in front of his home fans and a national television audience, he finally beat Ruth's mark with a home run to left-center field off left-hander Al Downing of the Los Angeles Dodgers. Aaron spent most of his career as a Milwaukee and Atlanta Brave before being traded to the Milwaukee Brewers on November 2, 1974.\nTed Turner and Time Warner era.\n1976\u20131977: Ted Turner buys the team.\nIn 1976, the team was purchased by media magnate Ted Turner, owner of superstation WTBS, as a means to keep the team (and one of his main programming staples) in Atlanta. Turner used the Braves as a major programming draw for his fledgling cable network, making the Braves the first franchise to have a nationwide audience and fan base. WTBS marketed the team as \"The Atlanta Braves: America's Team\", a nickname that still sticks in some areas of the country, especially the South. The financially strapped Turner used money already paid to the team for their broadcast rights as a down-payment. Turner quickly gained a reputation as a quirky, hands-on baseball owner. On May 11, 1977, Turner appointed himself manager, but because MLB passed a rule in the 1950s barring managers from holding a financial stake in their teams, Turner was ordered to relinquish that position after one game (the Braves lost 2\u20131 to the Pittsburgh Pirates to bring their losing streak to 17 games).\n1978\u20131990.\nThe Braves didn't enjoy much success between 1978 and 1990, however, in the 1982 season, led by manager Joe Torre, the Braves secured their first divisional title since 1969. The team was led by standout performances from key players like Dale Murphy, Bob Horner, Chris Chambliss, Phil Niekro, and Gene Garber. The Braves were swept in the NLCS in three games by the Cardinals. Murphy won the Most Valuable Player award for the National League in 1982 and 1983.\n1991\u20132005: 14 consecutive division titles.\nFrom 1991 to 2005, the Atlanta Braves enjoyed a remarkable era of success in baseball, marked by a record-setting 14 consecutive division titles, five National League pennants, and a World Series championship in 1995. Bobby Cox returned as manager in 1990, leading the team's turnaround after finishing the previous season with the worst record in baseball. Notable developments included the drafting of Chipper Jones in 1990 and the hiring of general manager John Schuerholz from the Kansas City Royals.\nThe Braves' remarkable journey began in 1991, known as the \"Worst to First\" season. Overcoming a shaky start, the Braves bounced back led by young pitchers Tom Glavine and John Smoltz. The team secured the NL pennant in a memorable playoff race, ultimately losing a closely contested World Series to the Minnesota Twins. The following year, the Braves won the NLCS in dramatic fashion against the Pirates but fell short in the World Series against the Toronto Blue Jays.\nIn 1993, the Braves strengthened their pitching staff with the addition of Cy Young Award winner Greg Maddux in free agency. Despite posting a franchise-best 104 wins, they lost in the NLCS to the Philadelphia Phillies. The team moved to the Eastern Division in 1994, sparking a heated rivalry with the New York Mets.\nThe player's strike cut short the 1994 season just before the division championships, but the Braves rebounded in 1995, defeating the Cleveland Indians to win the World Series. With this World Series victory, the Braves became the first team in Major League Baseball to win world championships in three different cities. The Braves reached the World Series in 1996 and 1999 but were defeated both times by the New York Yankees.\nIn 1996, Time Warner acquired Ted Turner's Turner Broadcasting System, including the Braves. Despite their continued success with a ninth consecutive division title in 2000, the Braves faced postseason disappointment with a sweep by the St. Louis Cardinals in the NLDS. The team won division titles from 2002 to 2004 but experienced early exits in the NLDS each year.\nLiberty Media era.\nLiberty Media buys the team.\nIn December 2005, Time Warner put the club up for sale, leading to negotiations with Liberty Media. After over a year of talks, a deal was reached in February 2007 for Liberty Media to acquire the Braves for $450 million, a magazine publishing company, and $980 million in cash. The sale, valued at approximately $1.48 billion, was contingent on approval from 75 percent of MLB owners and Commissioner Bud Selig.\nBobby Cox and Chipper Jones retire.\nBobby Cox's final year as manager in 2010 saw the Braves return to the postseason for the first time since 2005. The team secured the NL Wild Card but fell to the San Francisco Giants in the National League Division Series in four closely contested games, marking the conclusion of Bobby Cox's managerial career. The following season the Braves suffered a historic September collapse to miss the postseason. The club bounced back in 2012 and returned to the postseason in Chipper Jones' final season. The Braves won 94 games in 2012, but that wasn't enough to win the NL East, so they faced the St. Louis Cardinals in the inaugural Wild Card Game. Chipper Jones last game was a memorable one: the Braves lost the one game playoff 6\u20133, but the game would be remembered for a controversial infield fly call that helped end a Braves rally in the 8th inning.\nTruist Park and return to the World Series.\nIn 2017, the Atlanta Braves began playing at Truist Park, replacing Turner Field as their home stadium. Following an MLB investigation into international signing rule violations, general manager John Coppolella resigned and faced a baseball ban. Alex Anthopoulos took over as the new general manager. The team's chairman, Terry McGuirk, apologized for the scandal and expressed confidence in Anthopoulos' integrity. A new on field mascot named Blooper was introduced at a fan event before the 2017 season. Under Anthopoulos, the Braves made the playoffs in six of his first seven seasons. In 2020 the Braves reached the National League Championship Series, but ultimately lost to the Dodgers after leading 3\u20131.\nIn the 2021 season, the Braves won the National League East with an 88\u201373 record. In the postseason, they quickly defeated the Milwaukee Brewers in the NL Division Series 3\u20131. The Braves again faced the Dodgers in the 2021 NLCS, and won in six games to take Atlanta's first National League pennant since 1999. The Braves advanced to the World Series. They defeated the Houston Astros in six games to win their fourth World Series title.\nEnd of postseason run and Brian Snitker era.\nThe Braves failed to qualify for the postseason in 2025, ending a streak of seven consecutive appearances. After 49 years with the organization, including ten seasons as manager, the team announced that Snitker would step down from his managerial role and transition into an advisory position with the club. In November 2025, the Braves announced that longtime bench coach Walt Weiss would be promoted to manager. Weiss, a former All-Star shortstop also spent part of his playing career in Atlanta.\nLogos and uniforms.\nThe Braves logos have evolved over the years, featuring a Native American warrior from 1945 to 1955, followed by a laughing Native American with a mohawk and a feather from 1956 to 1965. The modern logo, introduced in 1987, includes the cursive word \"Braves\" with a tomahawk below it.\nUniforms adopted that year evoked their 1950s classic look. For the 2023 season, the Braves had four uniform combinations, including the classic white home and gray road uniforms, a navy blue road jersey for alternate games, and two alternate uniforms for home games - a Friday night red uniform and a City Connect uniform worn on Saturdays, paying tribute to Hank Aaron. The City Connect uniform features \"The A\" across the chest, accompanied by a cap with the \"A\" logo and 1974 uniform colors.\nWorld Series championships.\nOver the 120 years since the inception of the World Series (119 total World Series played), the Braves franchise has won a total of four World Series Championships. The Braves are the only franchise to have won a World Series in three different cities.\nBallparks.\nFormer parks.\nThe Boston Braves played at the South End Grounds from their inception. After a fire destroyed the park in 1894, the club temporarily played at the Congress Street Grounds until the South End Grounds could be rebuilt. During the 1914 season, it became evident that the South End Grounds was too small to accommodate larger crowds, prompting the team to play some games at Fenway Park. To address the need for a larger venue, Braves Field was built in 1915.\nBraves Field remained the club's home in Boston until the team relocated to Milwaukee. Milwaukee County Stadium was constructed in 1950 to attract a Major League Baseball team and became the Braves' new home in 1953. The team played there until moving to Atlanta in 1966.\nThe city of Atlanta constructed Atlanta\u2013Fulton County Stadium in 1965 after reaching an agreement with the Braves to relocate from Milwaukee. The Braves played at Atlanta\u2013Fulton County Stadium until 1997, when they moved to Turner Field. Originally built as Centennial Olympic Stadium for the 1996 Summer Olympics, the venue was later converted into a ballpark for the Braves. Turner Field served as the Braves' home ballpark through the 2016 season.\nCurrent parks.\nTruist Park.\nThe Atlanta Braves home ballpark has been Truist Park since 2017. Truist Park is located approximately 10 miles (16\u00a0km) northwest of downtown Atlanta in the unincorporated community of Cumberland, in Cobb County, Georgia. The Braves opened Truist Park on April 14, 2017, with a four-game sweep of the San Diego Padres. The park received positive reviews. Woody Studenmund of the Hardball Times called the park a \"gem\" saying that he was impressed with \"the compact beauty of the stadium and its exciting approach to combining baseball, business and social activities.\" J.J. Cooper of Baseball America praised the \"excellent sight lines for pretty much every seat.\"\nCoolToday Park.\nSince 2019, the Braves have played spring training games at CoolToday Park in North Port, Florida. The ballpark opened on March 24, 2019, with the Braves' 4\u20132 win over the Tampa Bay Rays. The Braves left Champion Stadium, their previous Spring Training home, near Orlando, to reduce travel times and to get closer to other teams' facilities. CoolToday Park also serves as the Braves' year-round rehabilitation facility.\nMajor rivalry.\nNew York Mets.\nAlthough their first major confrontation occurred when the Mets swept the Braves in the 1969 NLCS, the rivalry did not become especially heated until the 1994 season when division realignment put both the Mets and the Braves in the National League East division.\nThe Braves faced the Mets in the 1999 National League Championship Series. The Braves initially took a 3\u20130 series lead, seemingly on the verge of a sweep, but the Mets rallied in Game 4 and Game 5. Despite the Mets' resilience, the Braves eventually won the series in Game 6 with Andruw Jones securing a dramatic walk-off walk, earning their 5th National League pennant of the decade. In 2022, the Braves and Mets both finished with 101 wins. The National League East title and a first-round bye came down to a crucial three-game series at Truist Park from September 30 to October 2. The Mets entered with a slight lead but faltered as the Braves swept the series. Atlanta claimed the NL East division title and first-round bye, by winning the season series against the Mets.\nSince the Mets joined the league, both teams have won two World Series titles. The Braves have captured six NL pennants, while the Mets have won five. The Braves hold the advantage in the all-time head-to-head record between the two teams at 516\u2013425. However, the Mets have the upper hand in playoff matchups with a 5\u20134 record.\nNationwide fanbase.\nIn addition to having strong fan support in the Metro Atlanta area and the state of Georgia, the Braves have been referred to as \"America's Team\" in reference to the team's games being broadcast nationally on TBS from the 1970s until 2007, giving the team a nationwide fan base.\nThe Braves boast heavy support within the Southeastern United States particularly in states such as Mississippi, Alabama, South Carolina, North Carolina, Tennessee and Florida.\nTomahawk chop.\nIn 1991, fans of the Atlanta Braves popularized the \"tomahawk chop\" during games. The use of foam tomahawks faced criticism from Native American groups, who regarded it as demeaning. Despite protests, the Braves' public relations director defended it as a \"proud expression of unification and family.\" The controversy resurfaced in 2019 when Cherokee Nation member and St. Louis Cardinals pitcher Ryan Helsley found the chop insulting, prompting the Braves to modify their in-game experience. During the off-season, discussions ensued with Native American representatives, and amid pressure in 2020 to change their name, the Braves announced ongoing talks about the chop but insisted the team name would remain unchanged.\nThe debate over the tomahawk chop continued into 2021. While some Native American leaders, like Richard Sneed, the Principal Chief of the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians, expressed personal indifference or tolerance, acknowledging it as an acknowledgment of Native American strength, others vehemently opposed it. Sneed emphasized larger issues facing Native American communities and questioned the focus on the chop. The Eastern Cherokee Band of Indians and the Braves initiated efforts to incorporate Cherokee language and culture into the team's activities, stadium, and merchandise, aiming for greater cultural sensitivity despite differing opinions within the Native American community.\nAchievements.\nAwards.\nBraves players have won seven Most Valuable Player (MVP) awards, with Dale Murphy notably earning the honor in back-to-back years, 1982 and 1983. Five Braves pitchers have received the Cy Young Award, given to the league's best pitcher, including Greg Maddux, who won it three consecutive times in 1993, 1994, and 1995.\nTwo Braves managers have been named Manager of the Year, with Bobby Cox winning the award three times, in 1991, 2004, and 2005. Additionally, seven Braves players have been honored with the Rookie of the Year awards.\nRetired numbers.\nThe Braves have retired eleven numbers in the history of the franchise. Most recently, Andruw Jones' number 25 was retired in 2023. Other retired numbers include Chipper Jones' number 10, John Smoltz's number 29, Bobby Cox's number 6, Tom Glavine's number 47, and Greg Maddux's number 31. Additionally, the Braves have retired Hank Aaron's number 44, Dale Murphy's number 3, Phil Niekro's number 35, Eddie Mathews' number 41, and Warren Spahn's number 21. Jackie Robinson's number 42 is also retired across all of Major League Baseball, with the exception of Jackie Robinson Day.\nSix of the eleven numbers (Cox, Jones, Jones, Smoltz, Maddux and Glavine) were on the Braves at the same time. Of the eleven Braves whose numbers have been retired, all who are eligible for the National Baseball Hall of Fame have been elected with the exceptions of Dale Murphy and Andruw Jones. The color and design of the retired numbers on commemorative markers and other in-stadium signage reflect the primary uniform design at the time the player was on the team.\nBaseball Hall of Famers.\nAtlanta Braves Hall of Famers\nAffiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum\nBoston Braves\nMilwaukee Braves\nAtlanta Braves\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMinor league affiliates.\nThe Atlanta Braves farm system consists of six minor league affiliates.\nRadio and television.\nThe Braves regional games are broadcast on FanDuel Sports Network Southeast with a limited number of select games on Peachtree TV (Atlanta's CW, WPCH 17.1) and the Peachtree Sports Network (PSN). Brandon Gaudin serves as the play-by-play announcer and C.J. Nitkowski as lead analyst. Jeff Francoeur and Tom Glavine will also join the broadcast for a few games during the season. Peter Moylan, Nick Green, and John Smoltz also appear in the booth for select games as in-game analysts.\nThe radio broadcast team is led by the tandem of play-by-play announcer Ben Ingram and analyst Joe Simpson. Braves games are broadcast across Georgia and seven other states on at least 172 radio affiliates, including flagship station 680 The Fan in Atlanta and stations as far away as Richmond, Virginia; Louisville, Kentucky; and the US Virgin Islands. The games are carried on at least 82 radio stations in Georgia.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2141", "revid": "8125662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2141", "title": "Atari ST", "text": "Line of home computers from Atari Corporation\nAtari ST is a line of personal computers from Atari Corporation and the successor to the company's 8-bit computers. The initial model, the Atari 520ST, had limited release in April\u2013June 1985, and was widely available in July. It was the first personal computer with a bitmapped color graphical user interface, using a version of Digital Research's GEM environment from February 1985. The Atari 1040ST, released in 1986 with 1\u00a0MB of memory, was the first home computer with a cost per kilobyte of RAM under US$1/KB.\nAfter Jack Tramiel purchased the assets of the Atari, Inc. consumer division in 1984 to create Atari Corporation, the 520ST was designed in five months by a small team led by Shiraz Shivji. Alongside the Macintosh, Amiga, Apple IIGS, and Acorn Archimedes, the ST is part of a mid-1980s generation of computers with 16 or 16/32-bit processors, 256\u00a0KB or more of RAM, and mouse-controlled graphical user interfaces. \"ST\" officially stands for \"Sixteen/Thirty-two\", referring to the Motorola 68000's 16-bit external bus and 32-bit internals.\nThe ST was sold with either Atari's color monitor or less expensive monochrome monitor. Color graphics modes are available only on the former while the highest-resolution mode requires the monochrome monitor. Most models can display the color modes on a TV. In Germany and some other markets, the ST gained a foothold for CAD and desktop publishing. With built-in MIDI ports, it was popular for music sequencing and as a controller of musical instruments among amateur and professional musicians. The Atari ST's primary competitor was the Amiga from Commodore. \nThe 520ST and 1040ST were followed by the Mega series, the STE, and the portable STacy. In the early 1990s, Atari released three final evolutions of the ST with significant technical differences from the original models: TT030 (1990), Mega STE (1991), and Falcon (1992). Atari discontinued the entire ST computer line in 1993, shifting the company's focus to the Jaguar video game console.\nDevelopment.\nThe Atari ST was born from the rivalry between home computer makers Atari, Inc. and Commodore International. Jay Miner, one of the designers of the custom chips in the Atari 2600 and Atari 8-bit computers, tried to convince Atari management to create a new chipset for a video game console and computer. When his idea was rejected, he left Atari to form a small think tank called Hi-Toro in 1982 and began designing the new \"Lorraine\" chipset.\nHi-Toro, by then renamed Amiga, ran out of capital to complete Lorraine's development. Atari, now owned by Warner Communications, paid Amiga to continue its work. In return, Atari received exclusive use of the Lorraine design for one year as a video game console. After that time, Atari had the right to add a keyboard and market the complete computer, designated the 1850XLD.\nTramel Technology.\nAfter leaving Commodore International in January 1984, Jack Tramiel formed Tramel (without an \"i\") Technology, Ltd. with his sons and other ex-Commodore employees and, in April, began planning a new computer. Interested in Atari's overseas manufacturing and worldwide distribution network, Tramiel negotiated with Warner in May and June 1984. He secured funding and bought Atari's consumer division, which included the console and home computer departments, in July. The arcade video game division remained part of Warner. As executives and engineers left Commodore to join Tramel Technology, Commodore filed lawsuits against four former engineers for infringement of trade secrets. The Tramiels did not purchase the employee contracts with the assets of Atari, Inc. and re-hired approximately 100 of the 900 former employees. Tramel Technology soon changed its name to Atari Corporation.\nCommodore and Amiga.\nAmid rumors that Tramiel was negotiating to buy Atari, Amiga Corp. entered discussions with Commodore. This led to Commodore wanting to purchase Amiga Corporation outright, which Commodore believed would cancel any outstanding contracts, including Atari's. Instead of Amiga Corp. delivering Lorraine to Atari, Commodore delivered a check of $500,000 on Amiga's behalf, in effect returning the funds Atari invested in Amiga for the chipset. Tramiel countered by suing Amiga Corp. on August 13, 1984, seeking damages and an injunction to bar Amiga (and effectively Commodore) from producing anything with its technology.\nThe lawsuit left the Amiga team in limbo during mid-1984. Commodore eventually moved forward, with plans to improve the chipset and develop an operating system. Commodore announced the Amiga 1000 with the Lorraine chipset in July 1985, but it wasn't available in quantity until 1986. The delay gave Atari time to deliver the Atari 520ST in June 1985. In March 1987, the two companies settled the dispute out of court in a closed decision.\nST hardware.\nThe lead architect of the new computer project at Tramel Technology and Atari Corporation was ex-Commodore employee Shiraz Shivji, who previously worked on the Commodore 64's development. Different CPUs were investigated, including the 32-bit National Semiconductor NS32000, but engineers were disappointed with its performance, and they moved to the Motorola 68000. The Atari ST design was completed in five months in 1984, concluding with it being shown at the January 1985 Consumer Electronics Show.\nA custom sound processor called AMY had been in development at Atari, Inc. and was considered for the new ST computer design. The chip needed more time to complete, so AMY was dropped in favor of a commodity Yamaha YM2149F variant of the General Instrument AY-3-8910.\nOperating system.\nSoon after the Atari buyout, Microsoft suggested to Tramiel that it could port Windows to the platform, but the delivery date was out by two years. A proposal to write a new operating system was rejected as Atari management was unsure whether the company had the required expertise.\nDigital Research was working on a new GUI-based system called Crystal, soon to become GEM, but was fully committed to the Intel platform. A team from Atari was sent to Digital Research headquarters to work on a port to the 68000. Atari's Leonard Tramiel oversaw \"Project Jason\" (also known as The Operating System) for the ST series, named for designer and developer Jason Loveman.\nGEM is based on CP/M-68K, a direct port of CP/M to the 68000. By 1985, CP/M was becoming increasingly outdated; it did not support subdirectories, for example. Digital Research was also in the process of building GEMDOS, a disk operating system for GEM, and debated whether a port of it could be completed in time for product delivery in June. The decision was eventually taken to port it, resulting in a GEMDOS file system which became part of Atari TOS (for \"The Operating System\", colloquially known as the \"Tramiel Operating System\"). This gave the ST a fast, hierarchical file system, essential for hard drives, and provided programmers with function calls similar to MS-DOS. The Atari ST character set is based on codepage 437.\nRelease.\nAfter six months of intensive effort following Tramiel's takeover, Atari announced the 520ST at the Winter Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas in January 1985. \"InfoWorld\" assessed the prototypes shown at computer shows as follows:Pilot production models of the Atari machine are much slicker than the hand-built models shown at earlier computer fairs; it doesn't look like a typical Commodore 64-style, corner-cutting, low-cost Jack Tramiel product of the past.Atari unexpectedly displayed the ST at Atlanta COMDEX in May. Similarities to the original Macintosh and Tramiel's role in its development resulted in it being nicknamed Jackintosh. Atari's rapid development of the ST amazed many, but others were skeptical, citing its \"cheap\" appearance, Atari's uncertain financial health, and poor relations between Tramiel-led Commodore and software developers.\nIn early 1985, the 520ST shipped to the press, developers, and user groups, and in early July 1985 for general retail sales. It saved the company. Atari ST print advertisements stated, \"America, We Built It For You\", and quoted Atari president Sam Tramiel: \"We promised. We delivered. With pride, determination, and good old ATARI know how\". By November, Atari stated that more than 50,000 520STs had been sold, \"with U.S. sales alone well into five figures\". The machine had gone from concept to store shelves in a little under one year.\nAtari had intended to release the 130ST with 128\u00a0KB of RAM and the 260ST with 256\u00a0KB. However, the ST initially shipped without TOS in ROM and required booting TOS from floppy, taking 206\u00a0KB RAM away from applications. The 260ST was launched in Europe on a limited basis. Early models have six ROM sockets for easy upgrades to TOS. New ROMs were released a few months later and were included in new machines and as an upgrade for older machines.\nAtari originally intended to include GEM's Graphical Device Operating System (GDOS), which allows programs to send GEM VDI (Virtual Device Interface) commands to drivers loaded by GDOS. This allows developers to send VDI instructions to other devices simply by pointing to it. However, GDOS was not ready at the time the ST started shipping and was included in software packages and with later ST machines. Later versions of GDOS support vector fonts.\nA limited set of GEM fonts were included in the ROMs, including the ST's standard 8x8 pixel graphical character set. It contains four characters which can be placed together in a square, forming the face of J. R. \"Bob\" Dobbs (the figurehead of the Church of the SubGenius).\nThe ST was less expensive than most contemporaries, including the Macintosh Plus, and is faster than many. Largely as a result of its price and performance factor, the ST became fairly popular, especially in Europe where foreign-exchange rates amplified prices. The company's English advertising slogan of the era was \"Power Without the Price\". An Atari ST and terminal emulation software was much cheaper than a Digital VT220 terminal, commonly needed by offices with central computers.\nBy late 1985, the 520STM added an RF modulator for TV display.\nIndustry reaction.\n\"Computer Gaming World\" stated that Tramiel's poor pre-Atari reputation would likely make computer stores reluctant to deal with the company, hurting its distribution of the ST. One retailer said, \"If you can believe Lucy when she holds the football for Charlie Brown, you can believe Jack Tramiel\"; another said that because of its experience with Tramiel, \"our interest in Atari is zero, zilch\". Neither Atari nor Commodore could persuade large chains like ComputerLand or BusinessLand to sell its products. Observers criticized Atari's erratic discussion of its stated plans for the new computer, as it shifted between using mass merchandisers, specialty computer stores, and both. When asked at COMDEX, Atari executives could not name any computer stores that would carry the ST. After a meeting with Atari, one analyst said, \"We've seen marketing strategies changed before our eyes\".\nTramiel's poor reputation influenced potential software developers. One said, \"Dealing with Commodore is like dealing with Attila the Hun. I don't know if Tramiel will be following his old habits ... I don't see a lot of people rushing to get software on the machine.\" Large business-software companies like Lotus, Ashton-Tate, and Microsoft did not promise software for either the ST or Amiga, and the majority of software companies were hesitant to support another platform beyond the IBM PC, Apple, and Commodore 64. Philippe Kahn of Borland said, \"These days, if I were a consumer, I'd stick with companies [such as Apple and IBM] I know will be around\".\nAt Las Vegas COMDEX in November 1985, the industry was surprised by more than 30 companies exhibiting ST software while the Amiga had almost none. After Atlanta COMDEX, \"The New York Times\" reported that \"more than 100 software titles will be available for the [ST], most written by small software houses that desperately need work\", and contrasted the \"small, little-known companies\" at Las Vegas with the larger ones like Electronic Arts and Activision, which planned Amiga applications.\nTrip Hawkins of Electronic Arts said, \"I don't think Atari understands the software business. I'm still skeptical about its resources and its credibility.\" Although Michael Berlyn of Infocom promised that his company would quickly publish all of its games for the new computer, he doubted many others would soon do so. Spinnaker and Lifetree were more positive, both promising to release ST software. Spinnaker said that \"Atari has a vastly improved attitude toward software developers. They are eager to give us technical support and machines\". Lifetree said, \"We are giving Atari high priority\". Some, such as Software Publishing Corporation, were unsure of whether to develop for the ST or the Amiga. John C. Dvorak wrote that the public saw both Commodore and Atari as selling \"cheap disposable\" game machines, in part because of their computers' sophisticated graphics.\nDesign.\nThe original 520ST case design was created by Ira Velinsky, Atari's chief Industrial Designer. It is wedge-shaped, with bold angular lines and a series of grilles cut into the rear for airflow. The keyboard has soft tactile feedback and rhomboid-shaped function keys across the top. It is an all-in-one unit, similar to earlier home computers like the Commodore 64, but with a larger keyboard with cursor keys and a numeric keypad. The original has an external floppy drive (SF354) and AC adapter. Starting with the 1040ST, the floppy drive and power supply are integrated into the base unit.\nPorts.\nThe ports on the 520ST remained largely unchanged over its history. \nStandard.\nBecause of its bi-directional design, the Centronics printer port can be used for joystick input, and several games used available adaptors that used the printer socket, providing two additional 9-pin joystick ports.\nMonitor.\nThe ST supports a monochrome or colour monitor. The colour hardware supports two resolutions: 320 \u00d7 200 pixels, with 16 of 512 colours; and 640 \u00d7 200, with 4 of 512 colours. The monochrome monitor was less expensive and has a single resolution of 640 \u00d7 400 at 71.25\u00a0Hz. The attached monitor determines available resolutions, so each application either supports both types of monitors or only one. Most ST games require colour with productivity software favouring the monochrome. The Philips CM8833-II was a popular color monitor for the Atari ST.\nFloppy drive.\nAtari initially used single-sided 3.5 inch floppy disk drives that could store up to 360\u00a0KB. Later drives were double-sided and stored 720\u00a0KB. Some commercial software, particularly games, shipped by default on single-sided disks, even supplying two 360\u00a0KB floppies instead of a single double-sided one, to avoid alienating early adopters. \nSome software uses formats which allow the full disk to be read by double-sided drives but still lets single-sided drives access side A of the disk. Many magazine coverdisks (such as the first 30 issues of \"ST Format\") were designed this way, as were a few games. The music in \"Carrier Command\" and the intro sequence in \"Populous\" are not accessible to single-sided drives, for example. \nSTs with double-sided drives can read disks formatted by MS-DOS, but IBM PC compatibles can not read Atari disks because of differences in the layout of data on track 0.\nLater systems.\n1040ST.\nAtari upgraded the basic design in 1986 with the 1040STF, stylized as 1040STF: essentially a 520ST with twice the RAM and with the power supply and a double-sided floppy drive with twice the capacity, and built-in instead of external. This adds to the size of the machine, but reduces cable clutter. The joystick and mouse ports, formerly on the right side of the machine, are in a recess underneath the keyboard. An \"FM\" variant includes an RF modulator allowing a television to be used instead of a monitor.\nThe trailing \"F\" and \"FM\" were often dropped in common usage. In \"BYTE\" magazine's March 1986 cover photo of the system, the name plate reads 1040STFM but in the headline and article it's simply \"1040ST\". \nThe 1040ST is one of the earliest personal computers shipped with a base RAM configuration of 1\u00a0MB. With a list price of US$ in the US, \"BYTE\" hailed it as the first computer to break the $1000 per megabyte price barrier. \"Compute!\" noted that the 1040ST is the first computer with one megabyte of RAM to sell for less than $2,500.\nA limited number of 1040STFs shipped with a single-sided floppy drive of 360KB storage capacity verses 720KB in the double sided version.\nWe can find also lot of 520 STF versions in Europe, early models are dated 1986, December and have also a single-sided floppy drive of 360KB storage capacity.\nMega.\nInitial sales were strong, especially in Europe, where Atari sold 75% of its computers. West Germany became Atari's strongest market, with small business owners using them for desktop publishing and CAD.\nTo address this growing market segment, Atari introduced the ST1 at Comdex in 1986. Renamed to Mega, it includes a high-quality detached keyboard, a stronger case to support the weight of a monitor, and an internal bus expansion connector. An optional 20\u00a0MB hard drive can be placed below or above the main case. Initially equipped with 2 or 4\u00a0MB of RAM (a 1\u00a0MB version, the Mega 1, followed), the Mega machines can be combined with Atari's laser printer for a low-cost desktop publishing package.\nA custom blitter coprocessor improved some graphics performance, but was not included in all models. Developers wanting to use it had to detect its presence in their programs. Properly written applications using the GEM API automatically make use of the blitter.\nSTE.\nIn late 1989, Atari Corporation released the 520STE and 1040STE (also written STE), enhanced version of the ST with improvements to the multimedia hardware and operating system. It features an increased color palette of 4,096 colors from the ST's 512 (though the maximum displayable palette without programming tricks is still limited to 16 in the lowest 320 \u00d7 200 resolution, and even fewer in higher resolutions), genlock support, and a blitter coprocessor (stylized as \"BLiTTER\") which can quickly move large blocks of data (particularly, graphics data) around in RAM. The STE is the first Atari with PCM audio; using a new chip, it added the ability to play back 8-bit (signed) samples at 6258\u00a0Hz, 12,517\u00a0Hz, 25,033\u00a0Hz, and even 50,066\u00a0Hz, via direct memory access (DMA). The channels are arranged as either a mono track or a track of LRLRLRLR... bytes. RAM is now much more simply upgradable via SIMMs.\nTwo enhanced joystick ports were added (two normal joysticks can be plugged into each port with an adapter), with the new connectors placed in more easily accessed locations on the side of the case. The enhanced joystick ports were re-used in the Atari Jaguar console and are compatible.\nThe STE models initially had software and hardware conflicts resulting in some applications and video games written for the ST line being unstable or even completely unusable, primarily caused by programming direct hardware calls which bypassed the operating system. Furthermore, even having a joystick plugged in would sometimes cause strange behavior with a few applications (such as the WYSIWYG word-processor application 1st Word Plus). \"Sleepwalker\" was the only STE-only game from a major publisher, but there were STe enhancements in games such as \"Another World\", \"Zool\" and \"The Chaos Engine\", as well as exclusives from smaller companies.\nThe last STE machine, the Mega STE, is an STE in a grey Atari TT case that had a switchable 16\u00a0MHz, dual-bus design (16-bit external, 32-bit internal), optional Motorola 68881 FPU, built-in 1.44\u00a0MB \"HD\" 3&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442-inch floppy disk drive, VME expansion slot, a network port (very similar to that used by Apple's LocalTalk) and an optional built-in 3&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442\" hard drive. It also shipped with TOS 2.00 (better support for hard drives, enhanced desktop interface, memory test, 1.44\u00a0MB floppy support, bug fixes). It was marketed as more affordable than a TT but more powerful than an ordinary ST.\nAtari TT.\nIn 1990, Atari released the high-end workstation-oriented Atari TT030, based on a 32\u00a0MHz Motorola 68030 processor. The \"TT\" name (\"Thirty-two/Thirty-two\") continued the nomenclature because the 68030 chip has 32-bit buses both internally and externally. Originally planned with a 68020 CPU, the TT has improved graphics and more powerful support chips. The case has a new design with an integrated hard-drive enclosure.\nFalcon.\nThe final model of ST computer is the Falcon030. Like the TT, it is 68030-based, at 16\u00a0MHz, but with improved video modes and an on-board Motorola 56001 audio digital signal processor. Like the Atari STE, it supports sampling frequencies above 44.1\u00a0kHz; the sampling master clock is 98340\u00a0Hz (which can be divided by a number between 2 and 16 to get the actual sampling frequencies). It can play the STE sample frequencies (up to 50066\u00a0Hz) in 8 or 16 bit, mono or stereo, all by using the same DMA interface as the STE, with a few additions. It can both play back and record samples, with 8 mono channels and 4 stereo channels, allowing musicians to use it for recording to hard drive. Although the 68030 microprocessor can use 32-bit memory, the Falcon uses a 16-bit bus, which reduces performance and cost. In another cost-reduction measure, Atari shipped the Falcon in an inexpensive case much like that of the STF and STE. Aftermarket upgrade kits allow it to be put in a desktop or rack-mount case, with the keyboard separate.\nReleased in 1992, the Falcon was discontinued by Atari the following year. In Europe, C-Lab licensed the Falcon design from Atari and released the C-Lab Falcon Mk I, identical to Atari's Falcon except for slight modifications to the audio circuitry. The Mk II added an internal 500\u00a0MB SCSI hard disk; and the Mk X further added a desktop case. C-Lab Falcons were also imported to the US by some Atari dealers.\nSoftware.\nAs with the Atari 8-bit computers, software publishers attributed their reluctance to produce Atari ST products in part to\u2014as \"Compute!\" reported in 1988\u2014the belief in the existence of a \"higher-than-normal amount of software piracy\". That year, WordPerfect threatened to discontinue the Atari ST version of its word processor because the company discovered that pirate bulletin board systems (BBSs) were distributing it, causing \"ST-Log\" to warn that \"we had better put a stop to piracy \"now\" ... it can have harmful effects on the longevity and health of your computer\". A positive review of \"Typhoon Thompson\" in \"Antic\" concluded:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Lastly, to any pirates out there, this game is good. It is certainly worth buying. It's also the first major ST game effort by Broderbund and if you steal it, it may well be their last. Don't spoil things for the rest of the ST community by being a jerk and putting this game on your pirate board.\nIn 1989, magazines published a letter by Gilman Louie, head of Spectrum HoloByte. He stated that he had been warned by competitors that releasing a game like \"Falcon\" on the ST would fail because BBSs would widely disseminate it. Within 30 days of releasing the non-copy protected ST version, the game was available on BBSs with maps and code wheels. Because the ST market was smaller than that for the IBM PC, it was more vulnerable to piracy which, Louie said, seemed to be better organized and more widely accepted for the ST. He reported that the Amiga version sold in six weeks twice as much as the ST version in nine weeks, and that the Mac and PC versions had four times the sales. \"Computer Gaming World\" stated \"This is certainly the clearest exposition ... we have seen to date\" of why software companies produced less software for the ST than for other computers.\nSeveral third-party OSes were developed for, or ported to, the Atari ST. Unix clones include Idris, Minix, and the MiNT OS which was developed specifically for the Atari ST.\nAudio and MIDI.\nTaking advantage of the ST's MIDI ports, plenty of professional Music sequencing and notation software was released, including the forerunners of the popular Windows and macOS applications Cubase and Logic Pro (the latter as Creator, Notator, Notator-SL, and Notator Logic). Another popular and powerful ST music sequencer application, KCS, contains a \"Multi-Program Environment\" that allows ST users to run other applications, such as the synthesizer patch editing software XoR (later known as Unisyn), from within the sequencer application. MasterTracks Pro originated for the Apple II; an ST version and then an IBM PC version later followed. It continued on Windows and macOS, along with the original company's notation application, Encore.\nMusic tracker software such as the TCB Tracker became popular on the ST, aiding the production of quality music from the Yamaha synthesizer, now called chiptunes.\nDue to the ST having comparatively large amounts of memory for the time, sound sampling packages became feasible. Replay Professional features a sound sampler using the ST cartridge port to read in parallel from the cartridge port from the ADC. For output of digital sound, it uses the on-board frequency output, sets it to 128\u00a0kHz (inaudible) and then modulates the amplitude of that.\nApplications.\nProfessional desktop publishing software includes Timeworks Publisher, PageStream and Calamus. Word processors include WordPerfect, Microsoft Write, AtariWorks, Signum, Script and First Word (bundled with the machine). Spreadsheets include 3D-Calc, and databases include Zoomracks. Graphics applications include NEOchrome, DEGAS &amp; DEGAS Elite, Deluxe Paint, STAD, and Cyber Paint (which author Jim Kent would later evolve into Autodesk Animator) with advanced features such as 3D design and animation. The Spectrum 512 paint program uses rapid palette switching to expand the on-screen color palette to 512 (up to 46 colors per scan line).\n3D computer graphics applications (like Cyber Studio CAD-3D, which author Tom Hudson later developed into Autodesk 3D Studio), brought 3D modelling, sculpting, scripting, and computer animation to the desktop. Video capture and editing applications use dongles connected to the cartridge port for low frame rate, mainly silent and monochrome, but progressed to sound and basic color in still frames. At the end, Spectrum 512 and CAD-3D teamed up to produce realistic 512-color textured 3D renderings, but processing was slow, and Atari's failure to deliver a machine with a math coprocessor had Hudson and Yost looking towards the PC as the future before a finished product could be delivered to the consumer.\nGarry Kasparov became the first chess player to register a copy of ChessBase, a popular commercial database program for storing and searching records of chess games. The first version was built for Atari ST with his collaboration in January 1987. In his autobiography \"Child of Change\", he regards this facility as \"the most important development in chess research since printing\".\nGraphical touchscreen point of sale software for restaurants was originally developed for Atari ST by Gene Mosher under the ViewTouch copyright and trademark. Instead of using GEM, he developed a GUI and widget framework for the application using the NEOchrome paint program.\nSoftware development.\nThe 520ST was bundled with both Digital Research Logo and Atari ST BASIC. Third-party BASIC systems with better performance were eventually released: HiSoft BASIC, GFA BASIC, FaST BASIC, DBASIC, LDW BASIC, Omikron BASIC, BASIC 1000D and STOS. In the later years of the Atari ST, Omikron Basic was bundled with it in Germany.\nAtari's initial development kit from Atari is a computer and manuals. The $ cost discouraged development. The later Atari Developer's Kit consists of software and manuals for $. It includes a resource kit, C compiler (first Alcyon C, then Mark Williams C), debugger, 68000 assembler, and non-disclosure agreement. The third-party Megamax C development package was $.\nOther development tools include 68000 assemblers (MadMac from Atari, HiSoft Systems's Devpac, TurboAss, GFA-Assembler), Pascal (OSS Personal Pascal, Maxon Pascal, PurePascal), Modula-2, C compilers (Lattice C, Pure C, Megamax C, GNU C, Aztec C, AHCC), LISP, and Prolog.\nGames.\nThe ST had success in gaming due to the low cost, fast performance, and colorful graphics compared to contemporary PCs or 8-bit systems. ST game developers include Steve Bak, Peter Molyneux, Doug Bell, Jeff Minter, \u00c9ric Chahi, Jez San, and David Braben.\nWhen the Atari ST was released in 1985, it seemed to be aimed at the professional market. However, the inclusion of two joystick ports and a low-resolution mode of 320x200 pixels, with 16 colours from a 512-colour palette, hinted at its potential for gaming. Initially, it was uncertain whether these new 16-bit machines could really deliver a next-generation gaming experience, as the games at launch didn't show a significant visual improvement over the 8-bit systems of the time. \nAfter a while, the first ST games began to appear that people were attracted to: \nAs developers became more familiar with the ST's capabilities, they were able to exploit its full potential. This resulted in games with visuals that far surpassed anything seen on 8-bit systems. Notable examples include \nIt wasn't long before ST games were gracing the covers of leading computer game magazines. It became standard practice to develop games on the ST and then port them to other platforms. Several of these titles went on to have a significant impact on the history of computer gaming: \nBeyond the mainstream releases, there was also a flourishing scene of games designed specifically for the Atari ST's monochrome mode. With its 640x400 resolution, coupled with the crisp display of Atari's SM124 monitor, this mode provided a canvas for some truly distinctive games, offering unique aesthetics and gameplay: \nThe Atari ST enjoyed a period of dominance throughout the second half of the 1980s, but its influence began to diminish as the next decade dawned. Competitors with custom chips gained the upper hand for a time until the PC took over. During this period, games were predominantly developed on these rival systems and subsequently ported to the ST. The inherent nature of game conversions meant that the original, optimised for its native hardware, often suffered compromises in the translation. A prime example is [Wolfchild], a superb game in its original form, but the ST version was noticeably inferior due to a rushed port. \nWhile the enhanced capabilities of the Atari 1040 STE were welcomed by the Atari ST community, the number of games that utilised them was limited. This was largely due to the relatively small user base of STe owners, making exclusive STe development commercially unviable. However, some titles did manage to garner positive attention beyond the Atari community: \nThe Atari Falcon, intended as the successor to the ST/STe, found a dedicated following within the Atari scene, resulting in a vibrant homebrew community. Sadly, the Falcon's overall market penetration was insufficient to make a widespread impact. Notable titles include: \nAlthough often overlooked by mainstream publications, the Atari ST gaming scene remains active. Dedicated Atari enthusiasts continue to develop and release new games. Notable examples include: \nBeyond the ongoing development of new games, the Atari ST community maintains a presence through various initiatives. Notably gatherings and dedicated MIDI Maze events demonstrate the enduring popularity of networked play on the ST. \nSocial media platforms, particularly YouTube, feature numerous channels dedicated to showcasing Atari ST games. Online resources like AtariMania (archiving), Atari-Forum (community), Atari Legend (the central Atari ST portal), and AtariCrypt (a diverse hub) serve as essential pillars of the community, ensuring the Atari ST remains an active platform.\nAtari ST eSports.\nThe ST Offline Tournament (STOT) \nis an offline gaming tournament for games created for the Atari ST. It is run in a dedicated section of Atari-Forum.com.\nThe STOT is divided into seasons. Each season lasts a year and consists of 12 rounds. Each round lasts one month and features one or more games. At the end of each \nmonth, the player with the highest score wins. \nEither the organisers announce the game(s) for a round or a vote is held on the forum. If new Atari ST games are released, they take priority and will be played as soon as possible. \nPlayers come from all over the world and play either on real hardware or emulators.\n To participate, you need a forum account. \nSTOT was founded in 2007 by Thorsten Butschke, ChrisTos and SSB. At that time, the first high score club tournaments on Atari Age appeared, and the goal was to create something similar for Atari ST games. The first game was Superfly. In 2011, the tournaments stopped due to a lack of time to organise them. However, due to demand from various players, the tournament was restarted in 2023.\nThe most remarkable gamers are Xerus, who dominated the first four seasons, and Wietze, who won most of the rounds he participated in during the later seasons.\nSome authors have also supported the STOT by providing special versions or prizes.\nEmulators.\nSpectre GCR emulates the Macintosh. MS-DOS emulators were released in the late 1980s. PC-Ditto has a software-only version, and a hardware version that plugs into the cartridge slot or kludges internally. After running the software, an MS-DOS boot disk is required to load the system. Both run MS-DOS programs in CGA mode, though much more slowly than on an IBM PC. Other options are the PC-Speed (NEC V30), AT-Spee (Intel 80286), and ATonce-386SX (Intel 80386SX) hardware emulator boards.\nMusic industry.\nThe ST's low cost, built-in MIDI ports, and fast, low-latency response times made it a favorite with musicians.\nTechnical specifications.\nAll STs are made up of both custom and commercial chips.\nST/STF/STM/STFM.\nAs originally released in the 520ST:\nVery early machines have the OS on a floppy disk before a final version was burned into ROM. This version of TOS was bootstrapped from a small core boot ROM.\nIn 1986, most production models became STFs, with an integrated single- (520STF) or double-sided (1040STF) double density floppy disk drive built-in, but no other changes. Also in 1986, the \"520STM\" (or \"520STM\") added an RF modulator for allowing the low and medium resolution color modes when connected to a TV. Later \"F\" and \"FM\" models of the 520 had a built-in double-sided disk drive instead of a single-sided one.\nSTE.\nAs originally released in the 520STE/1040STE:\nModels.\nThe members of the ST family are listed below, in roughly chronological order:\nUnreleased.\nThe 130ST was intended to be a 128\u00a0KB variant. It was announced at the 1985 CES alongside the 520ST but never produced. The 4160STE was a 1040STE, but with 4\u00a0MB of RAM. A small quantity of development units were produced, but the system was never officially released. Atari did produce a quantity of 4160STE metallic case badges which found their way to dealers, so it's not uncommon to find one attached to systems which were originally 520/1040STE. No such labels were produced for the base of the systems.\nRelated systems.\nAtari Transputer Workstation is a standalone machine developed in conjunction with Perihelion Hardware, containing modified ST hardware and up to 17 transputers capable of massively parallel operations for tasks such as ray tracing.\nClones.\nFollowing Atari's departure from the computer market, both Medusa Computer Systems and Milan Computer manufactured Atari Falcon/TT-compatible machines with 68040 and 68060 processors. The FireBee is an Atari ST/TT clone based on the Coldfire processor. The GE-Soft Eagle is a 32\u00a0MHz TT clone.\nPeripherals.\nSatandisk.\nSatanDisk is a SD and MMC card adapter for Atari 16-bit computers, such as the Atari ST, invented in 2007. The objective is to replace mechanical hard drives available from Atari (SH204, SH205 and Megafile) and compatible products. The interface allows the connection of an SD or MMC card to be attached to the ACSI (hard disk) port of Atari computers, and has been tested to be compatible with TOS versions 1.02 to 2.06. The maximum supported size is 4 GB. The device appears to the system as any regular ACSI attached hard disk, but has so far only been successfully used with the proprietary and commercial HDDriver driver package.\nIn 2009 the developer Jookie (Miroslav NOHAJ) introduced a successor UltraSatan which supports two SD/MMC cards in parallel. The adapter features hot-plug capability of the cards and includes a battery backed up RTC chip. Additionally to the commercial HDDriver it is supported by the free ICD PRO.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2142", "revid": "42660583", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2142", "title": "List of artificial intelligence projects", "text": "The following is a list of current and past, non-classified notable artificial intelligence projects.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2144", "revid": "244946", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2144", "title": "Aaliyah", "text": "American singer (1979\u20132001)\nAaliyah Dana Haughton (; January 16, 1979\u00a0\u2013 August 25, 2001) was an American singer, actress, dancer, and model. Known as the \"Princess of R&amp;B\" and \"Queen of Urban Pop\", she is credited with helping to redefine contemporary R&amp;B, pop, and hip hop. Aaliyah's accolades include three American Music Awards and two MTV VMAs, along with five Grammy Award nominations.\nBorn in Brooklyn and raised in Detroit, she first gained recognition at the age of 10, when she appeared on the television show \"Star Search\" and performed in concert alongside Gladys Knight. At the age of 12, Aaliyah signed with Jive Records and her uncle Barry Hankerson's Blackground Records. Hankerson introduced her to R. Kelly, who became her mentor, as well as lead songwriter and producer of her debut album, \"Age Ain't Nothing but a Number\" (1994). The album sold three million copies in the United States and was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). After allegations of an illegal marriage with Kelly, Aaliyah ended her contract with Jive and signed with Atlantic Records.\nAaliyah worked with record producers Timbaland and Missy Elliott for her second album, \"One in a Million\" (1996), which sold three million copies in the United States and more than eight million copies worldwide. In 2000, Aaliyah made her acting debut in the action film \"Romeo Must Die\", alongside Jet Li. She contributed to the film's soundtrack, which was supported by her single \"Try Again.\" The song topped the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 solely through airplay, becoming the first in the chart's history to do so. After completing the film, Aaliyah subsequently filmed her starring role in \"Queen of the Damned\" (which was released posthumously), and released her third album, \"Aaliyah\" (2001), which topped the \"Billboard\" 200. The album spawned the singles \"We Need a Resolution\", \"Rock the Boat\", and \"More Than a Woman\".\nOn August 25, 2001, at the age of 22, Aaliyah was killed in a plane crash along with eight other people on board, when the overloaded aircraft she was traveling in crashed shortly after takeoff. The pilot was later found to have traces of cocaine and alcohol in his body and was not qualified to fly the aircraft designated for the flight. Aaliyah's family filed a wrongful death lawsuit against the aircraft's operator, which was settled out of court. After her death, Aaliyah's music has continued to achieve commercial success, aided by several posthumous releases, including the compilation albums \"I Care 4 U\" (2002) and \"Ultimate Aaliyah\" (2005). She has sold 8.1\u00a0million albums in the US and an estimated 24 to 32 million albums worldwide.\nEarly life.\nAaliyah Dana Haughton was born on January 16, 1979, in Brooklyn, New York, the younger child of Diane and Michael \"Miguel\" Haughton, a warehouse worker. She was of African-American, Jamaican, and Native American descent. Her name is the feminine form of the Arabic \"Ali\", meaning \"highest, most exalted one, the best.\" Aaliyah was fond of her name, calling it \"beautiful\" and saying she was \"very proud of it\" and strove to live up to her name every day. When she was five years old, her family moved to Detroit, Michigan, where she was raised along with her older brother, Rashad. In Detroit, her father began working in the warehouse business, one of his brother-in-law Barry Hankerson's widening interests. Her mother stayed home and raised her and her brother. Her mother enrolled her in voice lessons at an early age. Eventually, she started performing at weddings, church choir, and charity events. Aaliyah attended a Catholic school, Gesu Elementary, where in first grade she was cast in the stage play \"Annie\" which inspired her to become an entertainer.\nAaliyah's mother was a vocalist, and her uncle Hankerson was an entertainment lawyer who had been married to Gladys Knight. As a child, Aaliyah traveled with Knight and worked with an agent in New York City to audition for commercials and television programs, including \"Family Matters\". After failing to land a role on the show she continued her acting through the Gesu Players. In 1989 at age ten she appeared on \"Star Search\", where she performed \"My Funny Valentine\". Aaliyah chose to begin auditioning. Her mother made the decision to drop her surname. She auditioned for several record labels and at age 11 appeared in concerts alongside Knight. After attending a Gladys Knight concert with music executive Suge Knight, and seeing Aaliyah perform on stage, rapper Tupac Shakur wanted to sign her to a record deal.\nAaliyah attended Detroit schools and believed she was well-liked, but she was teased for her short stature. By age 15, however, she came to love her height. Her mother told her to be happy she was small and complimented her. Although some children disliked Aaliyah, she determined, \"You always have to deal with people who are jealous, but there were so few it didn't even matter. The majority of kids supported me, which was wonderful.\" Even in her adult life, she considered herself small. She had \"learned to accept and love\" herself and added: \"the most important thing is to think highly of yourself because if you don't, no one else will.\"\nDuring her audition for acceptance to the Detroit High School for the Fine and Performing Arts, Aaliyah sang \"Ave Maria\" in Latin. Aaliyah held a 4.0 grade-point average when graduating from high school. She reflected: \"I wanted to keep that 4.0. Being in the industry, you know, I don't want kids to think, 'I can just sing and forget about school.' I think it's very important to have an education, and even more important to have something to fall back on.\" She considered a future career teaching music, music history or drama if she did not make a living as a recording artist because, as she reasoned, \"when you pick a career it has to be something you love.\"\nCareer.\n1991\u20131995: \"Age Ain't Nothing but a Number\".\nAfter Hankerson signed a distribution deal with Jive Records, he signed Aaliyah to his Blackground Records label at the age of 12. Hankerson later introduced her to recording artist and producer R. Kelly, who became Aaliyah's mentor, as well as lead songwriter and producer of her first album, recorded when she was 14. Aaliyah's debut album, \"Age Ain't Nothing but a Number\", was released under her mononym \"Aaliyah\", by Jive and Blackground Records on May 24, 1994; it debuted at number 24 on the \"Billboard\" 200 chart, selling 38,000 copies in its first week. It peaked at number 18 on the \"Billboard\" 200 and it was certified two times Platinum by the RIAA. To date the album has sold over 3 million copies in the US. In Canada, the album was certified gold by Music Canada for 50,000 copies in shipments. In 2014, \"Vibe\" magazine estimated that the album had sold six million copies globally.\nUpon its release, \"Age Ain't Nothing But a Number\" received generally favorable reviews from music critics. Some writers noted that Aaliyah's \"silky vocals\" and \"sultry voice\" blended with Kelly's new jack swing helped define R&amp;B in the 1990s. Her sound was also compared to that of female quartet En Vogue. Christopher John Farley of \"Time\" magazine called the album a \"beautifully restrained work\", noting that Aaliyah's \"girlish, breathy vocals rode calmly on R. Kelly's rough beats.\" Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic felt that the album had its \"share of filler\", but described the singles as \"slyly seductive.\" He also wrote that the songs on the album were \"frequently better\" than that of Kelly's second studio album, \"12 Play\". The single \"At Your Best (You Are Love)\" was criticized by \"Billboard\" for being out of place on the album and for its length.\nAaliyah's debut single, \"Back &amp; Forth\", peaked at number 5 on the Hot 100 and topped the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs chart for three weeks. Two more singles charted: a cover of the Isley Brothers' \"At Your Best (You Are Love)\" peaked at number 6 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, and the album's title track, \"Age Ain't Nothing but a Number\", peaked at number 75. Additionally, she released \"The Thing I Like\" as part of the soundtrack to the 1994 film \"A Low Down Dirty Shame\". In August 1995, Aaliyah was featured on the single remix to Junior M.A.F.I.A.'s song \"I Need You Tonight.\"\n1996\u20132000: \"One in a Million\" and \"Romeo Must Die\".\nIn February 1996, Aaliyah was featured on the Kris Kross single \"Live and Die for Hip Hop\", which also featured Jermaine Dupri (the song's producer) and rapper Da Brat. That year, Aaliyah left Jive Records and signed with Atlantic Records. She worked with record producers Timbaland and Missy Elliott, who contributed to her second studio album, \"One in a Million\". Elliott recalled Timbaland and herself being nervous to work with Aaliyah, since Aaliyah had already released her successful debut album while Elliott and Timbaland were just starting out. Elliott also feared she would be a diva, but reflected that Aaliyah \"came in and was so warming; she made us immediately feel like family.\" The album yielded the lead single \"If Your Girl Only Knew\", which peaked at number 11 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and topped the \"Billboard\" Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs for two weeks. It also generated the singles \"Hot Like Fire\" and \"4 Page Letter\". \"One in a Million\" peaked at number 18 on the \"Billboard\" 200, and was certified double platinum by the RIAA on June 16, 1997, denoting shipments of two million copies. The album went on to sell 3 million copies in the US and over eight million copies worldwide. The year after her album was released, Aaliyah was featured on Timbaland &amp; Magoo's debut single, \"Up Jumps da Boogie\".\nIn 1997 Aaliyah graduated with a 4.0 GPA from the Detroit High School for the Fine and Performing Arts, where she majored in drama. The same year, she began her acting career, playing herself in the police drama television series \"New York Undercover\". During this time, Aaliyah participated in the Children's Benefit Concert, a charity concert at the Beacon Theatre in New York. She also became the spokesperson for the Tommy Hilfiger Corporation. During her campaign with Tommy Hilfiger, the company sold over 2,400 pairs of the red, white and blue baggy jeans she wore in their advertisements. In December 1997, she performed the Christmas carol \"What Child Is This?\" at the annual Christmas in Washington television special. She also contributed to the soundtrack album for the animated film \"Anastasia\", performing a cover version of \"Journey to the Past\" that earned songwriters Lynn Ahrens and Stephen Flaherty a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Original Song. Aaliyah performed the song at the 1998 Academy Awards ceremony, becoming the youngest singer to perform at the event. Also in 1998, she released the song \"Are You That Somebody?\" which was featured on the \"Dr. Dolittle\" soundtrack. The song peaked at number 21 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and earned Aaliyah her first Grammy Award nomination.\nIn 1999, Aaliyah landed her first big-screen acting role in \"Romeo Must Die\". She starred opposite martial artist Jet Li, playing a couple who fall in love amid their warring families. Released on March 24, 2000, the movie grossed US$18.6\u00a0million in its first weekend, ranking number two at the box office. Aaliyah purposely stayed away from reviews of the film to \"make it easier on\" herself, but she heard \"that people were able to get into me, which is what I wanted.\" In contrast, some critics felt there was no chemistry between her and Jet Li, as well as viewing the film as too simplistic. This was echoed by Elvis Mitchell of \"The New York Times\", who wrote that while Aaliyah was \"a natural\" and the film was conceived as a spotlight for both her and Li, \"they have so little chemistry together you'd think they're putting out a fire instead of shooting off sparks.\nIn addition to acting, Aaliyah served as an executive producer of the film's soundtrack, for which she contributed four songs. \"Try Again\" was released as a single from the soundtrack; the song topped the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, making Aaliyah the first artist to top the chart based solely on airplay; this led the song to be released in a 12-inch vinyl and 7-inch single. The music video won the Best Female Video and Best Video from a Film awards at the 2000 MTV Video Music Awards. It also earned her a Grammy Award nomination for Best Female R&amp;B Vocalist. The soundtrack went on to sell 1.5\u00a0million copies in the United States.\n2001: \"Aaliyah\" and \"Queen of the Damned\".\nAfter completing \"Romeo Must Die\", Aaliyah began to work on her second film, \"Queen of the Damned\". She played the role of an ancient vampire, Queen Akasha, which she described as a \"manipulative, crazy, sexual being\". Filming both Romeo Must Die and \"Queen of the Damned\" delayed the release of the album. Aaliyah had not intended for her albums to have such a gap between them. \"I wanted to take a break after \"One in a Million\" to just relax, think about how I wanted to approach the next album. Then, when I was ready to start back up, \"Romeo\" happened, and so I had to take another break and do that film and then do the soundtrack, then promote it. The break turned into a longer break than I anticipated.\" Ultimately, she filmed \"Queen of the Damned\" and recorded her third album at the same time so that it could be released in 2001. Aaliyah enjoyed balancing her singing and acting careers. Though she called music a \"first\" for her, she also had been acting since she was young and had wanted to begin acting \"at some point in my career\", but \"wanted it to be the right time and the right vehicle\" and felt \"Romeo Must Die\" \"was it\". Connie Johnson of the \"Los Angeles Times\" argued that Aaliyah having to focus on her film career may have caused her to not give the album \"the attention it merited.\"\nDuring the recording stages for the album, Aaliyah's publicist disclosed that the album's release date was most likely in October 2000. Eventually, she finished recording the album in March 2001; after a year of recording tracks that began in March of the previous year.\n\"Aaliyah\" was released five years after \"One in a Million\" on July 17, 2001, and it debuted at number two on the \"Billboard\" 200, selling 187,000 copies in its first week. The first single from the album, \"We Need a Resolution\", peaked at number 59 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. The week after Aaliyah's death, her third album rose from number 19 to number 1 on the \"Billboard\" 200. \"Rock the Boat\" was released as a posthumous single. The music video premiered on BET's \"Access Granted\", and it became the most viewed and highest rated episode in the history of the show. The song peaked at number 14 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. Promotional posters for \"Aaliyah\" that had been put up in major cities such as New York and Los Angeles became makeshift memorials for grieving fans. In February 2002, the album was certified double Platinum by the RIAA.\n\"More than a Woman\" and \"I Care 4 U\" were released as posthumous singles and peaked within the top 25 of the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. \"More than a Woman\" reached number one on the UK singles chart making Aaliyah the first female deceased artist to reach number one on the UK singles chart. \"More than a Woman\" was replaced by George Harrison's \"My Sweet Lord\" which is the only time in the UK singles chart's history when a dead artist has replaced another dead artist at number one.\nAaliyah was signed to appear in several future films, including a romantic film titled \"Some Kind of Blue\", and a Whitney Houston\u2013produced remake of the 1976 film \"Sparkle\". Houston recalled Aaliyah being \"so enthusiastic\" about the film; the project was shelved after she died. Before her death, Aaliyah filmed some scenes for the sequels of \"The Matrix\" as the character Zee. A portion of her role in \"The Matrix Reloaded\" was filmed; these unused scenes were included in the tribute section of the \"Matrix Ultimate Collection\" series.\nArtistry.\nVoice.\nAaliyah had the vocal range of a soprano, and with the release of her debut album \"Age Ain't Nothing but a Number\", writer Dimitri Ehrlich of \"Entertainment Weekly\" compared her style and sound to R&amp;B group En Vogue. Ehrlich also expressed that Aaliyah's \"silky vocals are more agile than those of self-proclaimed queen of hip-hop soul Mary J. Blige.\" In her review for Aaliyah's second studio album \"One in a Million\" \"Vibe\" magazine, music critic Dream Hampton said that Aaliyah's \"deliciously feline\" voice has the same \"pop appeal\" as Janet Jackson's. According to \"Rolling Stone\" \"the most remarkable thing about Aaliyah's voice, besides its flexibility and crisp range, was its almost preternatural poise \u2014 she always seemed to be holding her power in reserve, to know every side of the scenarios she described\". While, Si\u00e2n Pattenden from \"Mixmag\" stated that, \"She doesn't try to toss the caber with vocal athleticism. There's no shouting, screeching, wailing or jazz-style noodling. Everything is underplayed: Ms Haughton's range is displayed by the slightest high-octave backing and tiniest harmonies\".\nAaliyah herself said her vocal styling consisted of her singing softly while utilizing her falsetto. She further explained saying, \"My signature style is breathy, tone-y, airy. It's simple but I can ride a crazy track.\" Although she frequently sang in a softer tone, there were moments when she utilized other facets of her voice. \"Never Givin' Up\" (1996) and \"The One I Gave My Heart To\" (1997) are a few stand-out vocal highlights. Daryl Simmons the producer of \"The One I Gave My Heart To\", recalled Aaliyah doing opera vocal warm-up exercises in preparation for the songs recording. While commenting on her doing opera vocal warm ups Simmons mentioned, \"It was the furthest thing I would have ever thought that she could do. It just blew my mind.\" The song's writer, Diane Warren praised her vocals on the song, saying: \"It showed her vocal range, and I know a couple of people thought she wouldn't be able to do that song. I thought, 'No, she'll be able to do that.\" \"Variety\" echoed a similar sentiment as Warren, saying \"The One I Gave My Heart To\" \"showcased Aaliyah's ability to hit higher notes.\" Discussing her approach on \"Never Givin' Up\" producer Craig King said, \"lyrically and vocally she just took you to places that you didn't know she could go\".\nMusical style.\nFrom the very beginning, she opted \"for an edgier, more mature sound\", and her songs were often uptempo and at the same time often dark, revolving around \"matters of the heart\". She \"easily straddled the hip-hop and pop worlds, never projecting the frilliness of her ing\u00e9nue peers\". After her R. Kelly\u2013produced debut album, Aaliyah worked with Timbaland and Missy Elliott, whose productions were more electronic. The duo \"mixed choppy, nervous rhythms over loops of computer-generated backing tracks, and incorporating harmonies which \u2013 within the genre's limited horizons \u2013 seemed daring\". They also created, the \"Freeze-and-stop style of singing on top of bass-heavy instrumentals\" which became Aaliyah's signature style. In 2001, Aaliyah called her sound \"street but sweet\", pairing feminine vocals with a gritty urban rhythm track. In another interview she further spoke about her artistry, saying, \"I love to fuse other types of music with my own\". She explored a wide range of genres such as R&amp;B, pop, hip hop, funk, soul, and dance-pop. Altogether, Aaliyah's music can be described as alternative R&amp;B, progressive soul, and neo soul, according to \"Time\"'s Farley.\nAaliyah released \"musically risky singles into a notoriously fickle pop market\", without being \"concerned about conforming to the stereotypes of the marketplace\". Her songs \"gracefully walk a line between commerciality and experimentation\". Aaliyah's records tend to have a \"crisp production\" and \"staccato arrangements\" that \"extend genre boundaries\" while containing \"old-school\" soul music. Kelefah Sanneh of \"The New York Times\" called her \"a digital diva who wove a spell with ones and zeroes\", and writes that her songs comprised \"simple vocal riffs, repeated and refracted to echo the manipulated loops that create digital rhythm\", as Timbaland's \"computer-programmed beats fitted perfectly with her cool, breathy voice to create a new kind of electronic music.\" \nIn \"The New Rolling Stone Album Guide\" (2004), Keith Harris said of her lyrical content that \"When it came to sexual availability, she was between En Vogue maliciously taunting 'You're never gonna get it' and Tweet blankly cooing 'Oops, there goes my shirt.'\" Lyrically, \"Her first two albums carefully toed the line between adolescence and adulthood, displaying a woman exploring the terrain of love, trust, and lust; one who exuded a playful innocence while hinting at a more sultry side.\" Aaliyah did not usually write her own lyrics. The only time she had a hand in writing is on the song \"Death of a Playa\" from the \"Hot Like Fire\" single (1997). She co-wrote that song with her brother Rashad Haughton, and \"it reflects Aaliyah's dark perspective on romance\". Of her role in crafting her music, Aaliyah said, \"I like to have the final say but I was trained as a singer, actress and dancer, the interpreter, bringing other people's words to life. I need the songs to reflect me in one way or another\". \nAs her albums progressed, writers felt that Aaliyah matured, calling her progress a \"near-flawless declaration of strength and independence\". ABC News noted that her music was \"evolving from the punchy pop-influenced hip hop and R&amp;B to a more mature, introspective sound\", on her third album. \"NME\" called her third album \"radical\" and said that it was \"intended to consolidate her position as U.S. R&amp;B's most experimental artist\". Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic described her album \"Aaliyah\" as \"a statement of maturity and a stunning artistic leap forward\", and called it one of the strongest urban soul records of its time. She portrayed \"unfamiliar sounds, styles and emotions\", but managed to please critics with the contemporary sound it contained. Ernest Hardy of \"Rolling Stone\" felt that Aaliyah was displaying stronger technique, giving her best vocal performances on the album.\nInfluences.\nAs an artist, Aaliyah said she was inspired by a number of performers. These include Michael Jackson, Stevie Wonder, Sade, Trent Reznor of Nine Inch Nails, Korn, Donnie Hathaway, Johnny Mathis, Janet Jackson, Whitney Houston, and Barbra Streisand. Aaliyah said that Michael Jackson's \"Thriller\" was her \"favorite album\" and that \"nothing will ever top \"Thriller\".\" She said she had always wanted to work with Janet Jackson, to whom she had often been compared, saying, \"I admire her a great deal. She's a total performer\u00a0... I'd love to do a duet with Janet Jackson.\" Jackson reciprocated Aaliyah's affection, saying, \"I've loved her from the beginning because she always comes out and does something different, musically.\" Jackson also said she would have enjoyed collaborating with Aaliyah.\nMusic videos.\nAccording to director Paul Hunter from day one, \"Aaliyah wanted her videos to stand out from clips by other R&amp;B singers\". He stated, \"You can watch programming all day and see a certain type of video by female artists, \"Then when one of hers comes on its something special, something different to look at. That's what she was about.\" Christopher John Farley from \"Time\" stated that Aaliyah's \"videos, for the most part, are about mood, not about storylines... Her videos are usually lushly shot and infused with sexual tension, though not in overt and obvious ways\".\nAlisha Acquaye from \"Teen Vogue\" felt that, \"There's much to gather while watching an Aaliyah music video\" in fact, she thinks that watching them is \"actually an understatement\". Acquaye further explained, \"There's a state of hypnosis you submit to as she envelops you through sight and sound, tugging at your heartstrings. Between a sequence of sensual, strong movements, infectious instrumentals, and intuitive lyrics that spark emotions of desire, sex, and empowerment, you are enraptured in Aaliyah's physical presence\".\nMost of Aaliyah's videos included dance routines. While discussing her video choreography \"Billboard\" mentioned that she \"coined the smooth choreography and tomboyish style that would inspire [R&amp;B]'s future generations for years to come\". \"Vibe\" praised several videos saying, \"Looking back on her videos like \"Try Again\" and \"Are You That Somebody\", Aaliyah's talent in all of those techniques of dancing are apparent, as she's able to hit every syncopated word and beat with ease as if she's moving on air\". Kyann-Sian Williams from \"NME\" named \"Are You That Somebody?\" as a visual that, \"pushed the boundaries when it came to dance breaks in music videos\". Williams declared, \"Until that time, dance breaks were usually reserved for boybands like *NSync and the Backstreet Boys, but Aaliyah claimed it for R&amp;B stars too\".\nPublic image.\nAaliyah focused on her public image while protecting her private life. She felt that it was \"important\u00a0... to differentiate yourself from the rest of the pack\". \"USA Today\" said, \"Her slinky vocal style and eye-popping videos made her a crossover star, while her persistent protection of her privacy added an air of intrigue about her\". According to Aaliyah, \"I put a lot of pressure on myself to be true to myself and not let anything else influence me to do what someone else is doing. Being a little edgy and sexy is me. My image isn't a put-on. I'm happy to put over that dark edge in my videos, because it's always been there. I used to wear my sunglasses or have my hair over one eye a lot more when I was younger. [Now] I'm happy with all aspects of myself.\"\nShe often wore baggy clothes and sunglasses, stating that she wanted to be herself. Aaliyah also wore black clothing, starting a trend for similar fashion among women in United States and Japan. In 1998, she hired a personal trainer to keep in shape, and exercised five days a week and ate diet foods. As her career progressed, \"she went through so many fashion revamps\". For example, when she changed her hairstyle, Aaliyah took her mother's advice and covered her left eye, much like Veronica Lake. The look has become known as her signature and been referred to as fusion of \"unnerving emotional honesty\" and \"a sense of mystique\". In regards to her fashion choices, writer Jeff Lorez described her as a \"model of understatement\". According to Lorez, \"She's beautiful, but hardly in a high-gloss, supermodel way\u2014more like a really good-looking girl next door. And rather than bling-blinging her ice in a ghetto-fabulous manner befitting her Trumped-up surroundings, she blings on the down-low: A subtle bracelet here, a winking pendant there, offset by her simple black jeans and matching sweater. Tr\u00e9s cool\". Former TRL host Carson Daly said that she was \"cutting edge, always one step ahead of the curve and that the TRL audience looks to her to figure out what's hot and what's new\".\nAaliyah was often praised for her \"clean-cut image\" and \"moral values\". Robert Christgau of \"The Village Voice\" wrote of Aaliyah's artistry and image, \"she was lithe and dulcet in a way that signified neither jailbait nor hottie\u2014an ingenue whose selling point was sincerity, not innocence and the obverse it implies.\" Emil Wilbekin, told CNN: \"Aaliyah is an excellent role model because she started her career in the public eye at age 15 with a gold album,\" Age Ain't Nothing but a Number\". And then her second album, \"One in a Million\" went double platinum. She had the leading role in \"Romeo Must Die\", which was a box office success. She's won numerous awards, several MTV music video awards, and aside from her professional successes, many of her lyrics are very inspirational and uplifting. She also carried herself in a very professional manner. She was well-spoken. She was beautiful, but she didn't use her beauty to sell her music. She used her talent. Many young hip-hop fans greatly admire her.\"\nShe was also seen by others as a sex symbol and did not have a problem with being considered one. \"I know that people think I'm sexy and I am looked at as that, and it is cool with me\", she stated. \"It's wonderful to have sex appeal. If you embrace it, it can be a very beautiful thing. I am totally cool with that. Definitely. I see myself as sexy. If you are comfortable with it, it can be very classy and it can be very appealing.\" Aaliyah also felt though her image was \"risque and sexy\", it was important to remain respectable because she wanted to make songs that everyone could relate to without it being vulgar. When she participated in fashion designer Tommy Hilfiger's All America Tour Tommy Jean ads, she wore boxer shorts, baggy jeans and a tube top. Hilfiger's brother, Andy, called it \"a whole new look\" that was \"classy but sexy\". The single \"We Need a Resolution\" was argued to have transformed \"the once tomboy into a sexy grown woman\".\nPersonal life.\nIn a 1995 interview with \"Honey\", Aaliyah stated that she was Catholic and she attended church whenever she was at home. In 2001, she told \"Vibe\" magazine that she was mostly a homebody and liked \"the simple things in life.\"\nFamily.\nAaliyah's family played a major role in the course of her career. Beginning in 1995, Aaliyah's father Michael Haughton served as her personal manager, and her mother assisted him. Aaliyah's brother Rashad Haughton and her cousin Jomo Hankerson were with her when she worked. After her father became ill, her brother Rashad became her manager.\nAaliyah was known to have usually been accompanied by members of her family. Her brother Rashad stated that the filming of \"Rock the Boat\" was the only time her family was not present during a video shoot. In October 2001, Rashad said: \"It really boggles everyone [that] from Day One, every single video she ever shot there's always been myself or my mother or my father there. The circumstances surrounding this last video were really strange because my mother had eye surgery and couldn't fly. That really bothered her because she always traveled. My dad had to take care of my mom at that time. And I went to Australia to visit some friends. We really couldn't understand why we weren't there. You ask yourself maybe we could have stopped it. But you can't really answer the question. There's always gonna be that question of why.\" Her friend Kidada Jones said in the last year of Aaliyah's life, her parents had given her more freedom and she had spoken about wanting a family.\nRelationship with R. Kelly.\nAaliyah reportedly developed an intimate relationship with R. Kelly during the recording of her debut album. She told \"Vibe\" magazine in 1994 that she and Kelly would \"go watch a movie\" and \"go eat\" when she got tired and would then \"come back and work\". She described the relationship between her and Kelly as \"rather close.\" In December 1994, Aaliyah told the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" that whenever she was asked about being married to Kelly, she urged them not to believe \"all that mess\" and that she and Kelly were \"close\" and \"people took it the wrong way\".\nWith the release of \"Age Ain't Nothing but a Number\", rumors circulated about a relationship between Aaliyah and Kelly, including the allegation that they had secretly married without her parents' knowledge. \"Vibe\" magazine later revealed a marriage certificate that listed the couple married on August 31, 1994, in Sheraton Gateway Suites in Rosemont, Illinois. Aaliyah, who was 15 at the time, was listed as 18 on the certificate; R. Kelly was 27. The marriage was annulled by her parents in February 1995, but the pair denied the allegations, saying that neither was married and that the certificate was a forgery.\nJamie Foster Brown in the 1994 issue of \"Sister 2 Sister\" wrote that \"R. Kelly told me that he and Aaliyah got together, and it was just magic.\" Brown also reported hearing about a sexual relationship between them. \"I've been hearing about Robert and Aaliyah for a while\u2014that she was pregnant. Or that she was coming and going in and out of his house. People would see her walking his dog, 12 Play, with her basketball cap and sunglasses on. Every time I asked the label, they said it was platonic. But I kept hearing complaints from people about her being in the studio with all those men.\" Brown later added \"at 15, you have all those hormones and no brains attached to them\".\nIn his 2011 book \"The Man Behind the Man: Looking from the Inside Out\", Demetrius Smith Sr., Kelly's former tour manager, revealed that Kelly married Aaliyah after she told him that she was pregnant. In the 2019 documentary \"Surviving R. Kelly\", Smith described how he helped Aaliyah forge the necessary documents to show she was 18 to marry Kelly. Smith also said he was \"not proud\" of his role in facilitating their marriage. Additionally, the documentary revealed that Jovante Cunningham, a former backup dancer, claimed to have witnessed Kelly having sex with Aaliyah on his tour bus.\nAaliyah admitted in court documents that she had lied about her age. In May 1997, she filed suit in Cook County seeking to have all records of the marriage expunged because she was not old enough under state law to get married without her parents' consent. It was reported that she cut off all professional and personal ties with Kelly after the marriage was annulled and ceased contact with him. In a 2014 interview, Aaliyah's cousin Jomo Hankerson said that she \"got villainized\" for her relationship with Kelly and the scandal over the marriage made it difficult to find producers for her second album. \"We were coming off of a multi-platinum debut album and except for a couple of relationships with Jermaine Dupri and Puffy, it was hard for us to get producers on the album.\" Hankerson also expressed confusion over why \"they were upset\" with Aaliyah given her age at the time.\nAaliyah was known to avoid answering questions about Kelly after the professional split. During an interview with Christopher John Farley, she was asked whether she was still in contact with him and would ever work with him again. Farley said Aaliyah responded with a \"firm, frosty 'no'\" to both questions. \"Vibe\" magazine said Aaliyah changed the subject anytime \"you bring up the marriage with her\". A spokeswoman for Aaliyah said in 2000 that when \"R. Kelly comes up, she doesn't even speak his name, and nobody's allowed to ask about it at all.\" Kelly later said that Aaliyah had opportunities to address their relationship after they separated professionally but chose not to. In 2019, Damon Dash revealed to \"Hip Hop Motivation\" that Aaliyah did not even speak of her relationship with Kelly in private; he tried multiple times to discuss it with her, but she would only say that Kelly was a \"bad man\". Dash said he was unable to watch \"Surviving R. Kelly\" because its interviews with visibly traumatized girls struggling to discuss their encounters with Kelly reminded him of how Aaliyah behaved when trying to recount her relationship with Kelly. Dash later appeared in \"\" in 2020.\nOther allegations were made about Kelly regarding underage girls in the years after Aaliyah's death, and their marriage was used as an example of his involvement with them. He has refused to discuss his relationship with her, citing her death. \"Out of respect for her, and her mom and her dad, I will not discuss Aaliyah. That was a whole other situation, a whole other time, it was a whole other thing, and I'm sure that people also know that.\" In 2016, Kelly said that he was as in love with Aaliyah as he was with \"anybody else.\" Aaliyah's mother, Diane Haughton, reflected that everything \"that went wrong in her life\" began with her relationship with Kelly.\nAfter the documentary \"Surviving R. Kelly\" aired in January 2019, pressure from the public using the Mute R. Kelly hashtag escalated and RCA Records dropped Kelly from the label. In February 2019, Kelly was indicted on ten counts of aggravated criminal sexual abuse. In July 2019, he was arrested on federal charges of sex crimes, human trafficking, child pornography, racketeering, and obstruction of justice. When his trial began in August 2021, Kelly faced 22 federal criminal charges that involved allegedly abusing 11 girls and women between 1994 and 2018. Aaliyah's illegal marriage to Kelly was heavily featured in the court case. On September 27, 2021, a federal court jury found Kelly guilty of nine counts including racketeering, sexual exploitation of a child, kidnapping, bribery, sex trafficking, and a violation of the Mann Act. The judge ordered that Kelly remain in custody pending sentencing, which was set for May 4, 2022. On June 29, 2022, Kelly was sentenced to 30 years in prison.\nRelationship with Damon Dash.\nAaliyah was dating the co-founder of Roc-A-Fella Records, Damon Dash, at the time of her death. Although they were not formally engaged, Dash claimed the couple had planned to marry in interviews given after Aaliyah's death. In the summer of 2000, Aaliyah was introduced to Dash by his accountant and they formed a friendship. Aaliyah never publicly addressed their relationship as anything but platonic. Due to their hectic work schedules, Aaliyah and Dash were separated for long periods of time. Jay-Z mentioned Aaliyah and Dash in the remix of her song \"Miss You\", released in 2003. In August 2021, Dash told \"Entertainment Tonight\"'s Kevin Frazier, \"I was reflecting [that] there hasn't been one day since she's passed, not one in the 20 years, that I haven't either heard her name, heard her record, or seen a picture of her ... Every single day she's present in my life and I feel lucky for that.\"\nDeath.\nOn August 25, 2001, at 6:50\u00a0p.m. (EDT), Aaliyah and some employees of her record company boarded a twin-engine Cessna 402 light aircraft at the Marsh Harbour Airport in Abaco Islands, the Bahamas, to travel to Opa-Locka Airport in Florida after they completed filming the video for \"Rock the Boat\". They had a flight scheduled the next day, but with filming finishing early, Aaliyah and her entourage were eager to return to the US and decided to leave immediately. The designated airplane was smaller than the Cessna 404 on which they had originally arrived, but the whole party and all the equipment were accommodated on board. The plane crashed and caught fire shortly after takeoff, about from the end of the runway. Aaliyah and the eight others on board\u2014pilot Luis Morales III, hair stylist Eric Forman, Anthony Dodd, security guard Scott Gallin, family friend Keith Wallace, make-up stylist Christopher Maldonado, and Blackground Records employees Douglas Kratz and Gina Smith\u2014were killed.\nThe passengers had grown impatient because the Cessna was supposed to arrive at 4:30\u00a0pm. EDT, but did not arrive until 6:15\u00a0pm. Another charter pilot, Lewis Key, said he overheard passengers arguing with their pilot, Luis Morales, before takeoff, adding that Morales warned them that there was too much weight for a \"safe flight\". Key added: \"He tried to convince them the plane was overloaded, but they insisted they had chartered the plane and they had to be in Miami Saturday night.\" Key indicated that Morales gave in to the passengers and that he had trouble starting one of the engines.\nAccording to findings from an inquest conducted by the coroner's office in the Bahamas, Aaliyah had \"severe burns and a blow to the head\" in addition to severe shock and a weak heart. The coroner theorized that she went into such a state of shock that even if she had survived the crash, her recovery would have been nearly impossible given the severity of her injuries. The bodies were taken to the morgue at Princess Margaret Hospital in Nassau, where they were kept for relatives to help identify them. Some of them were badly burned.\nAs the subsequent investigation determined, the aircraft was overloaded by when it attempted to take off, and was carrying one more passenger than it was certified for. The National Transportation Safety Board reported, \"The airplane was seen lifting off the runway, and then nose down, impacting in a marsh on the south side of the departure end of runway 27.\" The report indicated that the pilot was not approved to fly the plane. Morales falsely obtained his FAA license by showing hundreds of hours never flown, and he may also have falsified how many hours he had flown to get a job with his employer, Blackhawk International Airways. Additionally, toxicology tests performed on Morales revealed traces of cocaine and alcohol in his system.\nFuneral.\nAaliyah's private funeral Mass was held on August 31, 2001, at the Church of St. Ignatius Loyola in Manhattan, following a procession from the Frank E. Campbell Funeral Chapel. Her body was set in a silver-plated copper-deposit casket, which was carried in a horse-drawn, glass hearse. An estimated 800 mourners attended the procession.\nAmong those in attendance at the private ceremony were Missy Elliott, Timbaland, Gladys Knight, Lil' Kim, and Sean Combs. After the service, 22 white doves were released to symbolize each year of her life.\nAaliyah's brother Rashad delivered the eulogy and described his sister as giving him strength: \"Aaliyah, you left, but I'll see you always next to me and I can see you smiling through the sunshine. When our life is over, our book is done. I hope God keeps me strong until I see her again.\" He read the names of the other victims of the crash and concluded by asking mourners to pray for them as well. As Diane Haughton and the mourners left, they sang Aaliyah's song \"One in a Million\".\nPosthumous releases.\n2001\u20132014: \"Queen of the Damned\", compilations, and single releases.\nImmediately after Aaliyah's death, there was uncertainty over whether the music video for \"Rock the Boat\" would ever air. It made its world premiere on BET's \"Access Granted\" on October 9, 2001. She won two posthumous awards at the American Music Awards of 2002; Favorite Female R&amp;B Artist and Favorite R&amp;B/Soul Album for \"Aaliyah\". Her second and final film, \"Queen of the Damned\", was released in February 2002. Before its release, Aaliyah's brother, Rashad, re-dubbed some of her lines during post-production. It grossed US$15.2\u00a0million in its first weekend, ranking number one at the box office. On the first anniversary of Aaliyah's death, a candlelight vigil was held in Times Square; millions of fans observed a moment of silence; and throughout the United States, radio stations played her music in remembrance. In December 2002, a collection of both previously unreleased and released material was issued as Aaliyah's first posthumous album, \"I Care 4 U\". A portion of the proceeds was donated to the Aaliyah Memorial Fund, a program that benefits the Revlon UCLA Women's Cancer Research Program and Harlem's Sloan Kettering Cancer Center. It debuted at number three on the US \"Billboard\" 200, selling 280,000 copies in its first week. The album's lead single, \"Miss You\", peaked at number three on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and topped the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs chart for three weeks. In August of the following year, luxury fashion house Dior donated profits from sales in honor of Aaliyah.\nIn April 2005, Aaliyah's second posthumous album, a double CD+DVD box set titled \"Ultimate Aaliyah\", was released in the United Kingdom by Blackground Records. A documentary movie \"Aaliyah Live in Amsterdam\" was released in 2011, shortly before the tenth anniversary of Aaliyah's death. The documentary, by Pogus Caesar, contained previously unseen footage shot of her career beginnings in 1995 when she was appearing in the Netherlands.\nIn March 2012, music producer Jeffrey \"J-Dub\" Walker announced that the song \"Steady Ground\", which he produced for Aaliyah's third album, would be included in a posthumous Aaliyah album. Aaliyah's brother Rashad denied Walker's claim. On August 5, 2012, Blackground Records released the track \"Enough Said\" which was produced by Noah \"40\" Shebib and features Canadian rapper Drake. Four days later, Jomo Hankerson claimed a posthumous album was being produced that would feature new production by Timbaland and Missy Elliot, who both later denied being involved with the project. The album was scheduled to be released by the end of 2012 by Blackground Records, but its release was shelved. In June 2013, Aaliyah was featured on the track \"Don't Think They Know\" by Chris Brown, which appears on Brown's sixth studio album, \"X\". Timbaland voiced his disapproval for \"Enough Said\" and \"Don't Think They Know\" in July 2013, but later apologized to Chris Brown, explaining that Aaliyah and her death were a \"very sensitive subject\".\n2015\u2013present: Merchandise, catalog rerelease, and \"Unstoppable\".\nIn May 2015, Aaliyah was featured on the Tink track \"Million\", which contained samples from her song \"One in a Million\". In September 2015, \"Aaliyah by Xyrena\", an official tribute fragrance, was announced. On December 25, 2015, Timbaland released the mixtape \"Kings Stay Kings\" which includes the unreleased Aaliyah song \"Shakin\" featuring rapper Strado. In June 2018, MAC Cosmetics released a cosmetics collection inspired by Aaliyah, The Aaliyah for Mac collection which was priced at $250 and sold out within minutes. MAC and i-D Magazine partnered up to release a short film titled \"A-Z of Aaliyah\" which coincided with the launch. On August 21, 2019, the Madame Tussauds museum unveiled a wax figure of Aaliyah at their Las Vegas location, modeled on her appearance in the \"Try Again\" music video. Four days later, Aaliyah's family announced that they were in talks with record companies to discuss the future of her discography.\nIn March 2021, Funko Pop! released an Aaliyah figurine. In August 2021, Blackground Records announced that Aaliyah's recorded works would be re-released on physical, digital, and streaming services in a deal between the label and Empire Distribution. Aaliyah's estate issued a statement in response to the announcement, denouncing the \"unscrupulous endeavor to release Aaliyah's music without any transparency or full accounting to the estate\". \"One in a Million\" was reissued on August 20. After the album's re-release, \"One in a Million\" re-entered the UK Official Hip Hop and R&amp;B Albums Chart Top 40 at number eight. In the US, the album reached the top ten on the \"Billboard\" 200 for the first time at number ten, selling 26,000 album-equivalent units in the week ending of August 26. \"Aaliyah\" was reissued September 10, 2021. After the album's re-release, \"Aaliyah\" re-entered the UK Official Hip Hop and R&amp;B Albums Chart Top 40 at number seven and re-entered the US Billboard 200 chart at number 13. In celebration of the reissue, Blackground released an animated commercial titled \"It's Been A Long Time\" (in a similar style to the album's original 2001 commercial), directed by Takahiro Tanaka, showing Aaliyah resurrecting her music from out of a large underground vault. Compilation albums \"I Care 4 U\" and \"Ultimate Aaliyah\" were reissued October 8, 2021. \"Ultimate Aaliyah\" peaked at number 8 on the UK R&amp;B Albums Chart Top 40 and charted for the first time in the US at number 41 on the \"Billboard\" 200.\nOn August 25, 2021, Barry Hankerson revealed in an interview with Big Tigger for WVEE that a posthumous album titled \"Unstoppable\" would be released in \"a matter of weeks\". The album was said to feature Drake, Snoop Dogg, Ne-Yo, Chris Brown, Future and use previously unreleased vocals from before Aaliyah's passing. On December 17, 2021, Background Records released the posthumous Aaliyah single \"Poison\" featuring The Weeknd. On January 4, 2022, Hankerson claimed that \"Unstoppable\" would be released later that month, however, it did not see a release and there was no related announcement from the label. In January 2024, Blackground Records hinted in an Instagram post that the release was \"coming\". \nOn January 16, 2025, Mattel released an Aaliyah Barbie Doll modeled on her appearance in the \"One in a Million\" music video. On May 2, 2025, Blackground Records 2.0 released the single \"Gone\", by Aaliyah, with former collaborator Tank. The single was released exclusively to the record label's streaming app, BLKStream, but saw a wider release to streaming and digital download sites on August 1, 2025. \"Gone\" peaked at number one on the Adult R&amp;B Airplay Chart, becoming Aaliyah's first number one on that chart; \"Gone\" also peaked at number 13 on the R&amp;B/Hip Hop Airplay chart. A 2D music video was released on August 1, 2025, along with the announcement of a \"3D holographic experience\" provided by the Meta Quest app Soapbox\nLegacy.\nAaliyah has been credited for helping redefine R&amp;B, pop and hip hop in the 1990s, \"leaving an indelible imprint on the music industry as a whole.\" According to \"Billboard\", she revolutionized R&amp;B with her sultry mix of pop, soul and hip hop. Peter Piatkowski from \"PopMatters\", stated, \"Much like Janet Jackson's Control set a template of sorts for dance-pop divas in the 1980s, Aaliyah's patented brand of Black pop, which was a m\u00e9lange of hip-hop, electropop, and soul, set a standard against which other young urban-pop singers were judged\". In a 2001 review of her third album, Ernest Hardy from \"Rolling Stone\" professed that Aaliyah's impact on R&amp;B and pop has been enormous. Steve Huey of AllMusic wrote Aaliyah ranks among the \"elite\" artists of the R&amp;B genre, as she \"played a major role in popularizing the stuttering, futuristic production style that consumed hip-hop and urban soul in the late 1990s.\" Critic Bruce Britt stated that by combining \"schoolgirl charm with urban grit, Aaliyah helped define the teen-oriented sound that has resulted in contemporary pop phenom's like Brandy, Christina Aguilera and Destiny's Child\".\nDescribed as one of \"R&amp;B's most important artists\" during the 1990s, her second studio album, \"One in a Million\", became one of the most influential R&amp;B albums of the decade. Music critic Simon Reynolds cited \"Are You That Somebody?\" as \"the most radical pop single\" of 1998. Kelefah Sanneh of \"The New York Times\" wrote that rather than being the song's focal point, Aaliyah \"knew how to disappear into the music, how to match her voice to the bass line\", and consequently \"helped change the way popular music sounds; the twitchy, beat-driven songs of Destiny's Child owe a clear debt to 'Are You That Somebody'.\" Sanneh asserted that by the time of her death in 2001, Aaliyah \"had recorded some of the most innovative and influential pop songs of the last five years.\" Music publication \"Popdust\" called Aaliyah an unlikely queen of the underground for her influence on the underground alternative music scene. The publication also mentioned that the forward-thinking music Aaliyah made with Timbaland and the experimental music being made by many underground alternative artists are \"somewhat cut from the same cloth\". While compiling a list of artists that take cues from Aaliyah, MTV Hive stated that it's easy to spot her influence on underground movements like dubstep, strains of indie pop, and lo-fi R&amp;B movements. Erika Ramirez, an associate editor of \"Billboard\", said at the time of Aaliyah's career \"there weren't many artists using the kind of soft vocals the ways she was using it, and now you see a lot of artists doing that and finding success\". Ramirez argued that Aaliyah's second album \"One in a Million\" was \"very much ahead of its time, with the bass and electro kind of R&amp;B sounds that they produced\", and that the sound, \"really stood out\" at its time, was being replicated.\nThere has been continuing belief that Aaliyah would have achieved greater career success had it not been for her death. Emil Wilbekin mentioned the deaths of The Notorious B.I.G. and Tupac Shakur in conjunction with hers and added: \"Her just-released third album and scheduled role in a sequel to \"The Matrix\" could have made her another Janet Jackson or Whitney Houston\". Director of \"Queen of the Damned\" Michael Rymer said of Aaliyah, \"God, that girl could have gone so far\" and spoke of her having \"such a clarity about what she wanted. Nothing was gonna step in her way. No ego, no nervousness, no manipulation. There was nothing to stop her.\" On July 18, 2014, it was announced that Alexandra Shipp replaced Zendaya for the role of Aaliyah for the Lifetime TV biopic movie \"\", which premiered on November 15, 2014. Zendaya drew criticism because people felt that she was too light skinned and did not greatly resemble Aaliyah. She voiced her strong respect for Aaliyah before dropping out of the project. She explained her choice to withdraw from the film in videos on Instagram. Aaliyah's family has been vocal in their disapproving of the film. Her cousin Jomo Hankerson stated the family would prefer a \"major studio release along the lines\" of \"What's Love Got to Do with It\", the biopic based on the life of Tina Turner. Aaliyah's family has consulted a lawyer to stop Lifetime from using \"any of the music, or any of the photographs and videos\" they own and Jomo Hankerson claimed the TV network \"didn't reach out.\" On August 9, 2014, it was announced that Chattrisse Dolabaille and Izaak Smith had been cast as Aaliyah's collaborators Missy Elliott and Timbaland. Dolabaille and Smith both received criticism for their appearances in comparison with that of Missy Elliot and Timbaland. Despite negative reviews, the film's premiere drew 3.2 million viewers, becoming the second highest rated television movie of 2014.\nOn August 17, 2021, Atria Books (an imprint of Simon &amp; Schuster) published Kathy Iandoli's \"Baby Girl: Better Known as Aaliyah\", a biography that draws on interviews with Aaliyah's friends, mentors and family, and document how her career influenced a new generation of artists. It has not been authorized by the Haughton family. On August 5, 2022, Beyonc\u00e9 released \"The Queens Remix\" to her single \"Break My Soul\", in which she name-drops Aaliyah, along with other cultural icons. On June 14, 2023, Aaliyah was the subject of the documentary \"Superstar: Aaliyah\", which was broadcast on ABC. The documentary included interviews with Damon Dash, Barry Hankerson, Sevyn Streeter, Will.i.am, Justine Skye, and author Kathy Iandoli, and discussed Aaliyah's life, career and legacy.\nAchievements.\nAaliyah has sold 8.1\u00a0million albums in the United States and an estimated 24 to 32 million albums worldwide. Throughout the years, she has earned several honorific nicknames, including \"Princess of R&amp;B\", \"Pop Princess\", and \"Queen of Urban Pop\", \nas she \"proved she was a muse in her own right\". While Ernest Hardy of \"Rolling Stone\" dubbed her the \"undisputed queen of the midtempo come-on\". She also has been referred to as a pop and R&amp;B icon for her impact on those genres.\nAt the 2001 MTV Video Music Awards, Aaliyah was honored by Janet Jackson, Missy Elliott, Timbaland, Ginuwine and her brother, Rashad, who all paid tribute to her. Also during 2001, the United States Social Security Administration ranked the name Aaliyah as one of the 100 most popular names for newborn girls. In 2003, Aaliyah was ranked as one of \"The Top 40 Women of the Video Era\" in VH1's \"The Greatest\" series. Also, in 2003 in memory of Aaliyah, the Entertainment Industry Foundation created the Aaliyah Memorial Fund to donate money raised to charities she supported. In 2008, she was ranked at number 18 on BET's \"Top 25 Dancers of All Time\". In December 2009, \"Billboard\" ranked Aaliyah at number 70 on its Top Artists of the Decade, while her album \"Aaliyah\" was ranked at number 181 on the magazine's Top 200 Albums of the Decade. In 2010, \"Billboard\" listed her as the tenth most successful female R&amp;B artist of the past 25 years, and 27th most successful R&amp;B artist overall. In 2011, Essence ranked her at number 14 on its 50 Most Influential R&amp;B Starts list. In 2012, VH1 ranked her number 48 on their \"Greatest Women in Music\". In 2014, \"NME\" ranked her at number 18 on its 100 most influential artist list. In August 2018, \"Billboard\" ranked Aaliyah at number 47 on their Top 60 Female Artists of All-Time list. In 2020, the publication included her on its list of the 100 Greatest Music Video Artists of All Time. \"Rolling Stone\" ranked her at number 40 on their 200 Best Singers of All Time list. In September 2023, she was inducted into the National Rhythm &amp; Blues Hall of Fame. In March 2025, \"Billboard\" ranked Aaliyah at number 47 on its Top 100 Women Artists of the 21st Century list. In June the publication ranked her at number 40 on its the \"75 Best R&amp;B Artists of All Time\" list.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2145", "revid": "41195652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2145", "title": "Albigensians", "text": ""}
{"id": "2146", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2146", "title": "Alexander Solzhenitsyn", "text": ""}
{"id": "2147", "revid": "50814234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2147", "title": "Armour", "text": "Covering used to protect from physical injury or damage\nArmour (Commonwealth English) or armor (American English; see spelling differences) is a covering used to protect an object, individual, or vehicle from physical injury or damage, especially direct contact weapons or projectiles during combat, or from a potentially dangerous environment or activity (e.g. cycling, construction sites, etc.). Personal armour is used to protect soldiers and war animals. Vehicle armour is used on warships, armoured fighting vehicles, and some combat aircraft, mostly ground attack aircraft.\nA second use of the term \"armour\" describes armoured forces, armoured weapons, and their role in combat. After the development of armoured warfare, tanks and mechanised infantry and their combat formations came to be referred to collectively as \"armour\".\nEtymology.\nThe word \"armour\" began to appear in the Middle Ages as a derivative of Old French. It is dated from 1297 as a \"mail, defensive covering worn in combat\". The word originates from the Old French , itself derived from the Latin meaning \"arms and/or equipment\", with the root meaning \"arms or gear\".\nPersonal.\nArmour has been used throughout recorded history. It has been made from a variety of materials, beginning with the use of leathers or fabrics as protection and evolving through chain mail and metal plate into today's modern composites. For much of military history the manufacture of metal personal armour has dominated the technology and employment of armour.\nArmour drove the development of many important technologies of the Ancient World, including wood lamination, mining, metal refining, vehicle manufacture, leather processing, and later decorative metal working. Its production was influential in the Industrial Revolution, and furthered commercial development of metallurgy and engineering. Armour was also an important factor in the development of firearms, which in turn revolutionised warfare.\nHistory.\nSignificant factors in the development of armour include the economic and technological necessities of its production. For instance, plate armour first appeared in Medieval Europe when water-powered trip hammers made the formation of plates faster and cheaper. At times the development of armour has paralleled the development of increasingly effective weaponry on the battlefield, with armourers seeking to create better protection without sacrificing mobility.\nWell-known armour types in European history include the lorica hamata, lorica squamata, and the lorica segmentata of the Roman legions, the mail hauberk of the early medieval age, and the full steel plate harness worn by later medieval and renaissance knights, and breast and back plates worn by heavy cavalry in several European countries until the first year of World War I (1914\u20131915). The samurai warriors of Feudal Japan utilised many types of armour for hundreds of years up to the 19th century.\nEarly.\nThe first record of body armor in history was found on the Stele of Vultures in ancient Sumer in today's south Iraq, and various forms of scale mail can be seen in surviving records from the New Kingdom of Egypt, Zhou dynasty China, and dynastic India. Cuirasses and helmets were manufactured in Japan as early as the 4th century. \"Tank\u014d\", worn by foot soldiers and \"keik\u014d\", worn by horsemen were both pre-samurai types of early Japanese armour constructed from iron plates connected together by leather thongs. Japanese lamellar armour (\"keiko\") passed through Korea and reached Japan around the 5th century. These early Japanese lamellar armours took the form of a sleeveless jacket, leggings and a helmet.\nArmour did not always cover all of the body; sometimes no more than a helmet and leg plates were worn. The rest of the body was generally protected by means of a large shield. An example of armies equipping their troops in this fashion were the Aztecs (13th to 15th century CE).\nIn East Asia, many types of armour were commonly used at different times by various cultures, including scale armour, lamellar armour, laminar armour, plated mail, mail, plate armour, and brigandine. Around the dynastic Tang, Song, and early Ming Period, cuirasses and plates (mingguangjia) were also used, with more elaborate versions for officers in war. The Chinese, during that time used partial plates for \"important\" body parts instead of covering their whole body since too much plate armour hinders their martial arts movement. The other body parts were covered in cloth, leather, lamellar, or mountain pattern armor. In pre-Qin dynasty times, leather armour was made out of various animals, with more exotic ones such as the rhinoceros.\nMail, sometimes called \"chainmail\", made of interlocking iron rings is believed to have first appeared some time after 300 BC. Its invention is credited to the Celts; the Romans are thought to have adopted their design.\nGradually, small additional plates or discs of iron were added to the mail to protect vulnerable areas. Hardened leather and splinted construction were used for arm and leg pieces. The coat of plates was developed, an armour made of large plates sewn inside a textile or leather coat.\n13th to 18th century Europe.\nEarly plate in Italy, and elsewhere in the 13th\u201315th century, were made of iron. Iron armour could be carburised or case hardened to give a surface of harder steel. Plate armour became cheaper than mail by the 15th century as it required much less labour and labour had become much more expensive after the Black Death, though it did require larger furnaces to produce larger blooms. Mail continued to be used to protect those joints which could not be adequately protected by plate, such as the armpit, crook of the elbow and groin. Another advantage of plate was that a lance rest could be fitted to the breast plate.\nThe small skull cap evolved into a bigger true helmet, the bascinet, as it was lengthened downward to protect the back of the neck and the sides of the head. Additionally, several new forms of fully enclosed helmets were introduced in the late 14th century.\nProbably the most recognised style of armour in the world became the plate armour associated with the knights of the European Late Middle Ages, but continuing to the early 17th century Baroque period in all European countries.\nBy 1400, the full harness of plate armour had been developed in armouries of Lombardy. Heavy cavalry dominated the battlefield for centuries in part because of their armour.\nIn the early 15th century, advances in weaponry allowed infantry to defeat armoured knights on the battlefield. The quality of the metal used in armour deteriorated as armies became bigger and armour was made thicker, necessitating breeding of larger cavalry horses. If during the 14\u201315th centuries armour seldom weighed more than 15\u00a0kg, then by the late 16th century it weighed 25\u00a0kg. The increasing weight and thickness of late 16th century armour therefore gave substantial resistance.\nIn the early years of low velocity firearms, full suits of armour, or breast plates actually stopped bullets fired from a modest distance. Crossbow bolts, if still in use, would seldom penetrate good plate, nor would any bullet unless fired from close range. In effect, rather than making plate armour obsolete, the use of firearms stimulated the development of plate armour into its later stages. For most of that period, it allowed horsemen to fight while being the targets of defending arquebusiers without being easily killed. Full suits of armour were actually worn by generals and princely commanders right up to the second decade of the 18th century. It was the only way they could be mounted and survey the overall battlefield with safety from distant musket fire.\nThe horse was afforded protection from lances and infantry weapons by steel plate barding. This gave the horse protection and enhanced the visual impression of a mounted knight. Late in the era, elaborate barding was used in parade armour.\nLater.\nGradually, starting in the mid-16th century, one plate element after another was discarded to save weight for foot soldiers.\nBack and breast plates continued to be used throughout the entire period of the 18th century and through Napoleonic times, in many European heavy cavalry units, until the early 20th century. From their introduction, muskets could pierce plate armour, so cavalry had to be far more mindful of the fire. In Japan, armour continued to be used until the late 19th century, with the last major fighting in which armour was used, this occurred in 1868. Samurai armour had one last short lived use in 1877 during the Satsuma Rebellion.\nThough the age of the knight was over, armour continued to be used in many capacities. Soldiers in the American Civil War bought iron and steel vests from peddlers (both sides had considered but rejected body armour for standard issue). The effectiveness of the vests varied widely, some successfully deflected bullets and saved lives, but others were poorly made and resulted in tragedy for the soldiers. In any case the vests were abandoned by many soldiers due to their increased weight on long marches, as well as the stigma they got for being cowards from their fellow troops.\nAt the start of World War I, thousands of the French Cuirassiers rode out to engage the German Cavalry. By that period, the shiny metallic cuirass was covered in a dark paint and a canvas wrap covered their elaborate Napoleonic style helmets, to help mitigate the sunlight being reflected off the surfaces, thereby alerting the enemy of their location. Their armour was only meant for protection against edged weapons such as bayonets, sabres, and lances. Cavalry had to be wary of repeating rifles, machine guns, and artillery, unlike the foot soldiers, who at least had a trench to give them some protection.\nPresent.\nToday, ballistic vests, also known as flak jackets, made of ballistic cloth (e.g. kevlar, dyneema, twaron, spectra etc.) and ceramic or metal plates are common among police officers, security guards, corrections officers and some branches of the military.\nThe US Army has adopted Interceptor body armour, which uses Enhanced Small Arms Protective Inserts (ESAPIs) in the chest, sides, and back of the armour. Each plate is rated to stop a range of ammunition including 3 hits from a 7.62\u00d751 NATO AP round at a range of . Dragon Skin is another ballistic vest which is currently in testing with mixed results. As of 2019, it has been deemed too heavy, expensive, and unreliable, in comparison to more traditional plates, and it is outdated in protection compared to modern US IOTV armour, and even in testing was deemed a downgrade from the IBA.\nThe British Armed Forces also have their own armour, known as Osprey. It is rated to the same general equivalent standard as the US counterpart, the Improved Outer Tactical Vest, and now the Soldier Plate Carrier System and Modular Tactical Vest.\nThe Russian Armed Forces also have armour, known as the 6B43, all the way to 6B45, depending on variant. Their armour runs on the GOST system, which, due to regional conditions, has resulted in a technically higher protective level overall.\nVehicle.\nThe first modern production technology for armour plating was used by navies in the construction of the ironclad warship, reaching its pinnacle of development with the battleship. The first tanks were produced during World War I. Aerial armour has been used to protect pilots and aircraft systems since the First World War.\nIn modern ground forces' usage, the meaning of armour has expanded to include the role of troops in combat. After the evolution of armoured warfare, mechanised infantry were mounted in armoured fighting vehicles and replaced light infantry in many situations. In modern armoured warfare, armoured units equipped with tanks and infantry fighting vehicles serve the historic role of heavy cavalry, light cavalry, and dragoons, and belong to the armoured branch of warfare.\nHistory.\nShips.\nThe first ironclad battleship, with iron armour over a wooden hull, , was launched by the French Navy in 1859 prompting the British Royal Navy to build a counter. The following year they launched , which was twice the size and had iron armour over an iron hull. After the first battle between two ironclads took place in 1862 during the American Civil War, it became clear that the ironclad had replaced the unarmoured line-of-battle ship as the most powerful warship afloat.\nIronclads were designed for several roles, including as high seas battleships, coastal defence ships, and long-range cruisers. The rapid evolution of warship design in the late 19th century transformed the ironclad from a wooden-hulled vessel which carried sails to supplement its steam engines into the steel-built, turreted battleships and cruisers familiar in the 20th century. This change was pushed forward by the development of heavier naval guns (the ironclads of the 1880s carried some of the heaviest guns ever mounted at sea), more sophisticated steam engines, and advances in metallurgy which made steel shipbuilding possible.\nThe rapid pace of change in the ironclad period meant that many ships were obsolete as soon as they were complete, and that naval tactics were in a state of flux. Many ironclads were built to make use of the ram or the torpedo, which a number of naval designers considered the crucial weapons of naval combat. There is no clear end to the ironclad period, but towards the end of the 1890s the term \"ironclad\" dropped out of use. New ships were increasingly constructed to a standard pattern and designated battleships or armoured cruisers.\nTrains.\nArmoured trains saw use from the mid-19th to the mid-20th century, including the American Civil War (1861\u20131865), the Franco-Prussian War (1870\u20131871), the First and Second Boer Wars (1880\u201381 and 1899\u20131902), the Polish\u2013Soviet War (1919\u20131921), the First (1914\u20131918) and Second World Wars (1939\u20131945) and the First Indochina War (1946\u20131954). The most intensive use of armoured trains was during the Russian Civil War (1918\u20131920).\nArmoured fighting vehicles.\nAncient siege engines were usually protected by wooden armour, often covered with wet hides or thin metal to prevent being easily burned.\nMedieval war wagons were horse-drawn wagons that were similarly armoured. These contained guns or crossbowmen that could fire through gun-slits.\nThe first modern armoured fighting vehicles were armoured cars, developed c.\u20091900. These started as ordinary wheeled motor-cars protected by iron shields, typically mounting a machine gun.\nDuring the First World War, the stalemate of trench warfare on the Western Front spurred the development of the tank. It was envisioned as an armoured machine that could advance under fire from enemy rifles and machine guns, and respond with its own heavy guns. It used caterpillar tracks to cross ground broken up by shellfire and trenches.\nAircraft.\nWith the development of effective anti-aircraft artillery in the period before the Second World War, military pilots, once the \"knights of the air\" during the First World War, became far more vulnerable to ground fire. As a response, armour plating was added to aircraft to protect aircrew and vulnerable areas such as engines and fuel tanks. Self-sealing fuel tanks functioned like armour in that they added protection but also increased weight and cost.\nPresent.\nTank armour has progressed from the Second World War armour forms, now incorporating not only harder composites, but also reactive armour designed to defeat shaped charges. As a result of this, the main battle tank (MBT) conceived in the Cold War era can survive multiple rocket-propelled grenade strikes with minimal effect on the crew or the operation of the vehicle. The light tanks that were the last descendants of the light cavalry during the Second World War have almost completely disappeared from the world's militaries due to increased lethality of the weapons available to the vehicle-mounted infantry.\nThe armoured personnel carrier (APC) was devised during the First World War. It allows the safe and rapid movement of infantry in a combat zone, minimising casualties and maximising mobility. APCs are fundamentally different from the previously used armoured half-tracks in that they offer a higher level of protection from artillery burst fragments, and greater mobility in more terrain types. The basic APC design was substantially expanded to an infantry fighting vehicle (IFV) when properties of an APC and a light tank were combined in one vehicle.\nNaval armour has fundamentally changed from the Second World War doctrine of thicker plating to defend against shells, bombs and torpedoes. Passive defence naval armour is limited to kevlar or steel (either single layer or as spaced armour) protecting particularly vital areas from the effects of nearby impacts. Since ships cannot carry enough armour to completely protect against anti-ship missiles, they depend more on defensive weapons destroying incoming missiles, or causing them to miss by confusing their guidance systems with electronic warfare.\nAlthough the role of the ground attack aircraft significantly diminished after the Korean War, it re-emerged during the Vietnam War, and in the recognition of this, the US Air Force authorised the design and production of what became the A-10 dedicated anti-armour and ground-attack aircraft that first saw action in the Gulf War.\nHigh-voltage transformer fire barriers are often required to defeat ballistics from small arms as well as projectiles from transformer bushings and lightning arresters, which form part of large electrical transformers, per https://. Such fire barriers may be designed to inherently function as armour, or may be passive fire protection materials \"augmented by armour\", where care must be taken to ensure that the armour's reaction to fire does not cause issues with regards to the fire barrier being armoured to defeat explosions and projectiles in addition to fire, especially since both functions must be provided simultaneously, meaning they must be fire-tested together to provide realistic evidence of fitness for purpose.\nCombat drones use little to no vehicular armour as they are not crewed vessels, this results in them being lightweight and small in size.\nAnimal armour.\nHorse armour.\nBody armour for war horses has been used since at least 2000 BC. Cloth, leather, and metal protection covered cavalry horses in ancient civilisations, including ancient Egypt, Assyria, Persia, and Rome. Some formed heavy cavalry units of armoured horses and riders used to attack infantry and mounted archers. Armour for horses is called \"barding\" (also spelled \"bard\" or \"barb\") especially when used by European knights.\nDuring the late Middle Ages as armour protection for knights became more effective, their mounts became targets. This vulnerability was exploited by the Scots at the Battle of Bannockburn in the 14th century, when horses were killed by the infantry, and for the English at the Battle of Cr\u00e9cy in the same century where longbowmen shot horses and the then dismounted French knights were killed by heavy infantry. Barding developed as a response to such events.\nExamples of armour for horses could be found as far back as classical antiquity. Cataphracts, with scale armour for both rider and horse, are believed by many historians to have influenced the later European knights, via contact with the Byzantine Empire.\nSurviving period examples of barding are rare; however, complete sets are on display at the Philadelphia Museum of Art, the Wallace Collection in London, the Royal Armouries in Leeds, and the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City. Horse armour could be made in whole or in part of cuir bouilli (hardened leather), but surviving examples of this are especially rare.\nElephant armour.\nWar elephants were first used in ancient times without armour, but armour was introduced because elephants injured by enemy weapons would often flee the battlefield. Elephant armour was often made from hardened leather, which was fitted onto an individual elephant while moist, then dried to create a hardened shell. Alternatively, metal armour pieces were sometimes sewn into heavy cloth. Later lamellar armour (small overlapping metal plates) was introduced. Full plate armour was not typically used due to its expense and the danger of the animal overheating.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2148", "revid": "9088688", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2148", "title": "Armoured fighting vehicle", "text": "Combat vehicle with both armament and armour\nAn armoured fighting vehicle (British English) or armored fighting vehicle (American English) (AFV) is an armed combat vehicle protected by armour, generally combining operational mobility with offensive and defensive capabilities. AFVs can be wheeled or tracked. Examples of AFVs are tanks, armoured cars, assault guns, self-propelled artilleries, infantry fighting vehicles (IFV), and armoured personnel carriers (APC).\nArmoured fighting vehicles are classified according to their characteristics and intended role on the battlefield. The classifications are not absolute; two countries may classify the same vehicle differently, and the criteria change over time. For example, relatively lightly armed armoured personnel carriers were largely superseded by infantry fighting vehicles with much heavier armament in a similar role.\nSuccessful designs are often adapted to a wide variety of applications. For example, the MOWAG Piranha, originally designed as an APC, has been adapted to fill numerous roles such as a mortar carrier, infantry fighting vehicle, and assault gun.\nArmoured fighting vehicles began to appear in use in World War I with the armoured car, the tank, the self-propelled gun, and the personnel carrier seeing use. By World War II, armies had large numbers of AFVs, together with other vehicles to carry troops this permitted highly mobile manoeuvre warfare.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEvolution.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe concept of a highly mobile and protected fighting unit has been around for centuries; from Hannibal's war elephants to Leonardo's contraptions, military strategists endeavoured to maximize the mobility and survivability of their soldiers.\nArmoured fighting vehicles were not possible until internal combustion engines of sufficient power became available at the start of the 20th century.\nHistory.\nPre-modern.\nModern armoured fighting vehicles represent the realization of an ancient concept \u2013 that of providing troops with mobile protection and firepower. Armies have deployed war machines and cavalries with rudimentary armour in battle for millennia. Use of these animals and engineering designs sought to achieve a balance between the conflicting needs of mobility, firepower and protection.\nSiege machine.\nSiege engines, such as battering rams and siege towers, would often be armoured in order to protect their crews from enemy action. Polyidus of Thessaly developed a very large movable siege tower, the \"helepolis\", as early as 340 BC, and Greek forces used such structures in the Siege of Rhodes (305 BC).\nThe idea of a protected fighting vehicle has been known since antiquity. Frequently cited is Leonardo da Vinci's 15th-century sketch of a mobile, protected gun-platform; the drawings show a conical, wooden shelter with apertures for cannons around the circumference. The machine was to be mounted on four wheels which would be turned by the crew through a system of hand cranks and cage (or \"lantern\") gears. Leonardo claimed: \"I will build armoured wagons which will be safe and invulnerable to enemy attacks. There will be no obstacle which it cannot overcome.\" Modern replicas have demonstrated that the human crew would have been able to move it over only short distances.\nWar wagon.\nHussite forces in Bohemia developed war wagons \u2013 medieval horse-drawn wagons that doubled as wagon forts \u2013 around 1420 during the Hussite Wars. These heavy wagons were given protective sides with firing slits; their heavy firepower came from either a cannon or from a force of hand-gunners and crossbowmen, supported by light cavalry and infantry using pikes and flails. Heavy arquebuses mounted on wagons were called \"arquebus \u00e0 croc\". These carried a ball of about . \nModern.\nBy the end of World War II, most modern armies had vehicles to carry infantry, artillery and anti-aircraft weaponry. Most modern AFVs are superficially similar in design to their World War II counterparts, but with significantly better armour, weapons, engines, electronics, and suspension. The increase in the capacity of transport aircraft makes possible and practicable the transport of AFVs by air. Many armies are replacing some or all of their traditional heavy vehicles with lighter airmobile versions, often with wheels instead of tracks.\nArmored road trains.\nIn the spring of 1900 Lord Roberts ordered six armored road trains for use in South Africa; in December 1901 four armored road trains were delivered after testing. Each train was pulled by a John Fowler &amp; Co steam tractor; with three armored wagons that could be used to carry troops and supplies. However hese engines had their armor removed after being delivered, and were used by the Imperial Military Railway.\nArmed and armoured car.\nThe first modern AFVs were armed cars, dating back virtually to the invention of the motor car. The British inventor F. R. Simms designed and built the Motor Scout in 1898. It was the first armed, petrol-engine powered vehicle ever built. It consisted of a De Dion-Bouton quadracycle with a Maxim machine gun mounted on the front bar. An iron shield offered some protection for the driver from the front, but it lacked all-around protective armour.\nThe armoured car was the first modern fully armoured fighting vehicle. The first of these was the Simms's Motor War Car, also designed by Simms and built by Vickers, Sons &amp; Maxim in 1899. The vehicle had Vickers armour 6\u00a0mm thick and was powered by a four-cylinder 3.3-litre 16 hp Cannstatt Daimler engine giving it a maximum speed of around . The armament, consisting of two Maxim guns, was carried in two turrets with 360\u00b0 traverse.\nAnother early armoured car of the period was the French Charron, Girardot et Voigt 1902, presented at the \"Salon de l'Automobile et du cycle\" in Brussels, on 8 March 1902. The vehicle was equipped with a Hotchkiss machine gun, and with 7\u00a0mm armour for the gunner. \nThe Spanish Schneider-Brilli\u00e9 was the first armored vehicle to be used in combat, being first used in the Kert Campaign. The vehicle was equipped with two machineguns and built from a bus chassis.\nArmored cars also saw limited use in the Italo-Turkish War. \nArmoured cars were first used in large numbers on both sides during World War I as scouting vehicles.\nTank.\nIn 1903, H. G. Wells published the short story \"The Land Ironclads,\" positing indomitable war machines that would bring a new age of land warfare, the way steam-powered ironclad warships had ended the age of sail.\nWells's literary vision was realized in 1916, when, amidst the pyrrhic standstill of the Great War, the British Landship Committee deployed revolutionary armoured vehicles to break the stalemate. The tank was envisioned as an armoured machine that could cross ground under fire from machine guns and reply with its own mounted machine guns and naval artillery. These first British tanks of World War I moved on caterpillar tracks that had substantially lower ground pressure than wheeled vehicles, enabling them to pass the muddy, pocked terrain and slit trenches of the Battle of the Somme.\nTroop transport.\nThe tank eventually proved highly successful and, as technology improved, it became a weapon that could cross large distances at much higher speeds than supporting infantry and artillery. The need to provide the units that would fight alongside the tank led to the development of a wide range of specialised AFVs, especially during the Second World War (1939\u20131945).\nThe armoured personnel carrier, designed to transport infantry troops to the frontline, emerged towards the end of World War I. During the first actions with tanks, it had become clear that close contact with infantry was essential in order to secure ground won by the tanks. Troops on foot were vulnerable to enemy fire, but they could not be transported in the tank because of the intense heat and noxious atmosphere. In 1917, Lieutenant G. J. Rackham was ordered to design an armoured vehicle that could fight and carry troops or supplies. The Mark IX tank was built by Armstrong, Whitworth &amp; Co., although just three vehicles had been finished at the time of the Armistice in November 1918, and only 34 were built in total.\nTankette.\nDifferent tank classifications emerged in the interwar period. The tankette was conceived as a mobile, two-man model, mainly intended for reconnaissance. In 1925, Sir John Carden and Vivian Loyd produced the first such design to be adopted \u2013 the Carden Loyd tankette. Tankettes saw use in the Royal Italian Army during the Italian invasion of Ethiopia (1935\u20131936), the Spanish Civil War (1936\u20131939), and during World War II. The Imperial Japanese Army used tankettes in China for infantry support, reconnaissance and later for jungle warfare.\nSelf-propelled artillery.\nThe British Gun Carrier Mark I, the first Self-propelled artillery, was fielded in 1917. It was based on the first tank, the British Mark I, and carried a heavy field-gun. The next major advance was the Birch gun (1925), developed for the British motorised warfare experimental brigade (the Experimental Mechanized Force). This mounted a field gun, capable of the usual artillery trajectories and even anti-aircraft use, on a tank chassis.\nDuring World War II, most major military powers developed self-propelled artillery vehicles. These had guns mounted on a tracked chassis (often that of an obsolete or superseded tank) and provided an armoured superstructure to protect the gun and its crew. The first British design, \"Bishop\", carried the 25 pdr gun-howitzer in an extemporised mounting on a tank chassis that severely limited the gun's performance. It was replaced by the more effective Sexton. The Germans built many lightly armoured self-propelled anti-tank guns using captured French equipment (for example Marder I), their own obsolete light tank chassis (Marder II), or ex-Czech chassis (Marder III). These led to better-protected tank destroyers, built on a medium-tank chassis such as the Jagdpanzer IV or the Jagdpanther.\nAnti-aircraft vehicle.\nThe Self-propelled anti-aircraft weapon debuted in WWI. The German 88\u00a0mm anti-aircraft gun was truck-mounted and used to great effect against British tanks, and the British QF 3-inch 20 cwt was mounted on trucks for use on the Western Front. Although the Birch gun was a general purpose artillery piece on an armoured tracked chassis, it was capable of elevation for anti-aircraft use. Vickers Armstrong developed one of the first SPAAGs based on the chassis of the Mk.E 6-ton light tank/Dragon Medium Mark IV tractor, mounting a Vickers QF-1 \"Pom-Pom\" gun of 40\u00a0mm. The Germans fielded the Sd.Kfz. 10/4 and 6/2, cargo halftracks mounting single 20\u00a0mm or 37\u00a0mm AA guns (respectively) by the start of the war.\nSelf-propelled multiple rocket-launcher.\nRocket launchers such as the Soviet Katyusha originated in the late 1930s. The Wehrmacht fielded self-propelled rocket artillery in World War II \u2013 the Panzerwerfer and Wurfrahmen 40 equipped half-track armoured fighting vehicles. Many modern multiple rocket launchers are self propelled by either truck or tank chassis.\nDesign.\nSurvivability.\nThe level of armour protection between AFVs varies greatly \u2013 a main battle tank will normally be designed to take hits from other tank guns and anti-tank missiles, whilst light reconnaissance vehicles are often only armoured \"just in case\". Whilst heavier armour provides better protection, it makes vehicles less mobile (for a given engine power), limits its air-transportability, increases cost, uses more fuel and may limit the places it can go \u2013 for example, many bridges may be unable to support the weight of a main battle tank. A trend toward composite armour is taking the place of steel \u2013 composites are stronger for a given weight, allowing the tank to be lighter for the same protection as steel armour, or better protected for the same weight. Armour is being supplemented with active protection systems on a number of vehicles, allowing the AFV to protect itself from incoming projectiles.\nThe level of protection also usually varies considerably throughout the individual vehicle too, depending on the role of the vehicle and the likely direction of attack. For example, a main battle tank will usually have the heaviest armour on the hull front and the turret, lighter armour on the sides of the hull and the thinnest armour on the top and bottom of the tank. Other vehicles \u2013 such as the MRAP family \u2013 may be primarily armoured against the threat from IEDs and so will have heavy, sloped armour on the bottom of the hull.\nFirepower.\nWeaponry varies by a very wide degree between AFVs \u2013 lighter vehicles for infantry carrying, reconnaissance or specialist roles may have only a autocannon or machine gun (or no armament at all), whereas heavy self-propelled artillery will carry howitzers, mortars or rocket launchers. These weapons may be mounted on a pintle, affixed directly to the vehicle or placed in a turret or cupola.\nThe greater the recoil of the weapon on an AFV, the larger the turret ring needs to be. A larger turret ring necessitates a larger vehicle. To avoid listing to the side, turrets on amphibious vehicles are usually located at the centre of the vehicle.\nGrenade launchers provide a versatile launch platform for a plethora of munitions including, smoke, phosphorus, tear gas, illumination, anti-personnel, infrared and radar-jamming rounds.\nTurret stabilization is an important capability because it enables firing on the move and prevents crew fatigue.\nManeuverability.\nModern AFVs have primarily used either petrol (gasoline) or diesel piston engines. More recently, gas turbines have been used. Most early AFVs used petrol engines, as they offer a good power-to-weight ratio. However, they fell out of favour during World War II due to the flammability of the fuel.\nMost current AFVs are powered by a diesel engine; modern technology, including the use of turbo-charging, helps to overcome the lower power-to-weight ratio of diesel engines compared to petrol.\nGas turbine (turboshaft) engines offer a very high power-to-weight ratio and were starting to find favour in the late 20th century \u2013 however, they offer very poor fuel consumption and as such some armies are switching from gas turbines back to diesel engines (i.e. the Russian T-80 used a gas turbine engine, whereas the later T-90 does not). The US M1 Abrams is a notable example of a gas turbine powered tank.\nModern classification by type and role.\nNotable armoured fighting vehicles extending from post-World War I to today.\nTank.\nThe tank is an all terrain AFV incorporating artillery which is designed to fill almost all battlefield roles and to engage enemy forces by the use of direct fire in the frontal assault role. Though several configurations have been tried, particularly in the early experimental \"golden days\" of tank development, a standard, mature design configuration has since emerged to a generally accepted pattern. This features a main tank gun or artillery gun, mounted in a fully rotating turret atop a tracked automotive hull, with various additional secondary weapon systems throughout.\nPhilosophically, the tank is, by its very nature, an offensive weapon. Being a protective encasement with at least one gun position, it is essentially a pillbox or small fortress (though these are static fortifications of a purely defensive nature) that can move toward the enemy \u2013 hence its offensive utility. Psychologically, the tank is a force multiplier that has a positive morale effect on the infantry it accompanies. It also instills fear in the opposing force who can often hear and even feel their arrival.\nTank classifications.\nTanks were classified either by size or by role.\nClassification by relative size was common, as this also tended to influence the tanks' role.\nOver time, tanks tended to be designed with heavier armour and weapons, increasing the weight of all tanks, so these classifications are relative to the average for the nation's tanks for any given period. An older tank design might be reclassified over time, such as a tank being first deployed as a medium tank, but in later years relegated to light tank roles.\nTanks were also classified by roles that were independent of size, such as cavalry tank, cruiser tank, fast tank, infantry tank, \"assault\" tank, or \"breakthrough\" tank. Military theorists initially tended to assign tanks to traditional military infantry, cavalry, and artillery roles, but later developed more specialized roles unique to tanks.\nIn modern use, the heavy tank has fallen out of favour, being supplanted by more heavily armed and armoured descendant of the medium tanks \u2013 the universal main battle tank. The light tank has, in many armies, lost favour to cheaper, faster, lighter armoured cars; however, light tanks (or similar vehicles with other names) are still in service with a number of forces as reconnaissance vehicles, most notably the Russian Marines with the PT-76, the British Army with the Scimitar, and the Chinese Army with the Type 63.\nMain battle tank.\nModern main battle tanks or \"universal tanks\" incorporate recent advances in automotive, artillery, armour, and electronic technology to combine the best characteristics of the historic medium and heavy tanks into a single, all-around type. They are also the most expensive to mass-produce. A main battle tank is distinguished by its high level of firepower, mobility and armour protection relative to other vehicles of its era. It can cross comparatively rough terrain at high speeds, but its heavy dependency on fuel, maintenance, and ammunition makes it logistically demanding. It has the heaviest armour of any AFVs on the battlefield, and carries a powerful precision-guided munition weapon systems that may be able to engage a wide variety of both ground targets and air targets. Despite significant advances in anti-tank warfare, it still remains the most versatile and fearsome land-based weapon-systems of the 21st-century, valued for its shock action and high survivability.\nTankette.\nA tankette is a tracked armed and armoured vehicle resembling a small \"ultra-light tank\" or \"super-light tank\" roughly the size of a car, mainly intended for light infantry support or scouting. Tankettes were introduced in the mid-1920s as a reconnaissance vehicle and a mobile machine gun position They were one or two-man vehicles armed with a machine gun. Colloquially it may also simply mean a \"small tank\".\nTankettes were designed and built by several nations between the 1920s and 1940s following the British Carden Loyd tankette which was a successful implementation of \"one man tank\" ideas from Giffard Le Quesne Martel, a British Army engineer. They were very popular with smaller countries. Some saw some combat (with limited success) in World War II. However, the vulnerability of their light armour eventually caused the concept to be abandoned. However, the German Army uses a modern design of air-transportable armoured weapons carriers, the Wiesel AWC, which resembles the concept of a tankette.\n\"Super\"-heavy tank.\nThe term \"super-heavy tank\" has been used to describe armoured fighting vehicles of extreme size, generally over 75 tonnes. Programs have been initiated on several occasions with the aim of creating an invincible siegeworks/breakthrough vehicle for penetrating enemy formations and fortifications without fear of being destroyed in combat. Examples were designed in World War I and World War II (such as the Panzer VIII Maus), along with a few in the Cold War. However, few working prototypes were built and there is no clear evidence any of these vehicles saw combat, as their immense size would have made most designs impractical.\nMissile tank.\nA missile tank is a tank fulfilling the role of a main battle tank, but using only anti-tank surface-to-surface missiles for main armament. Several nations have experimented with prototypes, notably the Soviet Union during the tenure of Nikita Khrushchev (projects Object 150 (IT-1) Object 167, Object 137Ml, Object 155Ml, Object 287, Object 775),\nFlame tank.\nA flame tank is an otherwise-standard tank equipped with a flamethrower, most commonly used to supplement combined arms attacks against fortifications, confined spaces, or other obstacles. The type only reached significant use in the Second World War, during which the United States, Soviet Union, Germany, Italy, Japan and the United Kingdom (including members of the British Commonwealth) all produced flamethrower-equipped tanks. Usually, the flame projector replaced one of the tank's machineguns, however, some flame projectors replaced the tank's main gun. Fuel for the flame weapon was generally carried inside the tank, although a few designs mounted the fuel externally, such as the armoured trailer used on the Churchill Crocodile.\nFlame tanks have been superseded by thermobaric weapons such as the Russian TOS-1.\nInfantry tank.\nThe idea for this tank was developed during World War I by British and French. The infantry tank was designed to work in concert with infantry in the assault, moving mostly at a walking pace, and carrying heavy armour to survive defensive fire. Its main purpose was to suppress enemy fire, crush obstacles such as barbed-wire entanglements, and protect the infantry on their advance into and through enemy lines by giving mobile overwatch and cover. The French Renault FT was the first iteration of this concept.\nThe British and French retained the concept between the wars and into the Second World War era. Because infantry tanks did not need to be fast, they could carry heavy armour. One of the best-known infantry tanks was the Matilda II of World War II. Other examples include the French R-35, the British Valentine, and the British Churchill.\nCruiser tank.\nA cruiser tank, or cavalry tank, was designed to move fast and exploit penetrations of the enemy front. The idea originated in \"Plan 1919\", a British plan to break the trench deadlock of World War I in part via the use of high-speed tanks. The first cruiser tank was the British Whippet.\nBetween the wars, this concept was implemented in the \"fast tanks\" pioneered by J. Walter Christie. These led to the Soviet BT tank series and the British cruiser tank series.\nDuring World War II, British cruiser tanks were designed to complement infantry tanks, exploiting gains made by the latter to attack and disrupt the enemy rear areas. In order to give them the required speed, cruiser designs sacrificed armour and armament compared to the infantry tanks. Pure British cruisers were generally replaced by more capable medium tanks such as the US Sherman and, to a lesser extent, the Cromwell by 1943.\nThe Soviet fast tank (\"bistrokhodniy tank\", or BT tank) classification also came out of the infantry/cavalry concept of armoured warfare and formed the basis for the British cruisers after 1936. The T-34 was a development of this line of tanks as well, though their armament, armour, and all-round capability places them firmly in the medium tank category.\nArmoured car.\nThe armoured car is a wheeled, often lightly armoured, vehicle adapted as a fighting machine. Its earliest form consisted of a motorised ironside chassis fitted with firing ports. By World War I, this had evolved into a mobile fortress equipped with command equipment, searchlights, and machine guns for self-defence. It was soon proposed that the requirements for the armament and layout of armoured cars be somewhat similar to those on naval craft, resulting in turreted vehicles. The first example carried a single revolving cupola with a Vickers gun; modern armoured cars may boast heavier armament \u2013 ranging from twin machine guns to large calibre cannon.\nSome multi-axled wheeled fighting vehicles can be quite heavy, and superior to older or smaller tanks in terms of armour and armament. Others are often used in military marches and processions, or for the escorting of important figures. Under peacetime conditions, they form an essential part of most standing armies. Armoured car units can move without the assistance of transporters and cover great distances with fewer logistical problems than tracked vehicles.\nDuring World War II, armoured cars were used for reconnaissance alongside scout cars. Their guns were suitable for some defence if they encountered enemy armoured fighting vehicles, but they were not intended to engage enemy tanks. Armoured cars have since been used in the offensive role against tanks with varying degrees of success, most notably during the South African Border War, Toyota War, the Invasion of Kuwait, and other lower-intensity conflicts.\nAerosledge.\nAn \"aerosledge\" is a type of propeller-driven snowmobile, running on skis, used for communications, mail deliveries, medical aid, emergency recovery and border patrolling in northern Russia, as well as for recreation. Aerosledges were used by the Soviet Red Army during the Winter War and World War II.\nSome early aerosledges were built by young Igor Sikorsky in 1909\u201310, before he built multi-engine airplanes and helicopters. They were very light plywood vehicles on skis, propelled by old airplane engines and propellers.\nScout car.\nA \"scout car\" is a military armoured reconnaissance vehicle, capable of off-road mobility and often carrying mounted weapons such as machine guns for offensive capabilities and crew protection. They often only carry an operational crew aboard, which differentiates them from wheeled armoured personnel carriers (APCs) and infantry mobility vehicles (IMVs), but early scout cars, such as the open-topped US M3 scout car could carry a crew of seven. The term is often used synonymously with the more general term armoured car, which also includes armoured civilian vehicles. They are also differentiated by being designed and built for purpose, as opposed to improvised \"technicals\" which might serve in the same role.\nReconnaissance vehicle.\nA \"reconnaissance vehicle\", also known as a \"scout vehicle\", is a military vehicle used for forward reconnaissance. Both tracked and wheeled reconnaissance vehicles are in service. In some countries, light tanks such as the M551 Sheridan and AMX-13 are also used by scout platoons. Reconnaissance vehicles are usually designed with a low profile or small size and are lightly armoured, relying on speed and cover to escape detection. Their armament ranges from a medium machine gun to an autocannon. Modern examples are often fitted with ATGMs and a wide range of sensors.\nArmoured reconnaissance is the combination of terrestrial reconnaissance with armoured warfare by using tanks and wheeled or tracked armoured reconnaissance vehicles. While the mission of reconnaissance is to gather intelligence about the enemy with the use of reconnaissance vehicles, armoured reconnaissance adds the ability to fight for information, and to have an effect on and to shape the enemy through the performance of traditional armoured tasks. Some armoured personnel carriers and infantry mobility vehicle, such as the M113, TPz Fuchs, and Cadillac Gage Commando double in the reconnaissance role.\nInternal security vehicle.\nAn internal security vehicle (ISV), also known as an armoured security vehicle (ASV), is a combat vehicle used for suppressing civilian unrest. Security vehicles are typically armed with a turreted heavy machine gun and auxiliary medium machine gun. The vehicle is designed to minimize firepower dead space. Non-lethal water cannons and tear gas cannons can provide suppressive fire in lieu of unnecessary deadly fire.\nThe vehicle must be protected against weapons typical of riots. Protection from improvised incendiary devices is achieved though coverage of the air intake and exhaust ports as well as a strong locking mechanism on the fuel opening. Turret and door locks prevent access to the interior of the vehicle by rioters. Vision blocks, ballistic glass and window shutters and outside surveillance cameras allow protected observation from within the vehicle. Wheeled 4x4 and 6x6 configurations are typical of security vehicles. Tracked security vehicles are often cumbersome and leave negative political connotations for being perceived as an imperial invading force.\nMilitary light utility vehicle.\nMilitary light utility vehicles are the lightest weight class of military vehicles. It refers to light 4x4 military vehicles with light or no armour and all-terrain mobility. This type of vehicle originated in the first half of the 20th century when horses and other draft animals were replaced with mechanization. Light utility vehicles such as the Willys Jeep were frequently mounted with .50-calibre machineguns and other small weapons for hit-and-run tactics in World War II, especially by the British Special Air Service who used Jeeps to raid Axis airfields during the North Africa campaign. After the war, vehicles like the Toyota Mega Cruiser and Humvee filled this role. In the 21st century, improvised explosive devices continue to pose threat to mobile infantry resulting in light utility vehicles being made heavier and with more armour.\nImprovised fighting vehicle.\nAn improvised fighting vehicle is a combat vehicle resulting from modifications to a civilian or military non-combat vehicle in order to give it a fighting capability. Such modifications usually consist of the grafting of armour plating and weapon systems. Various militaries have procured such vehicles, ever since the introduction of the first automobiles into military service.\nDuring the early days, the absence of a doctrine for the military use of automobiles or of an industry dedicated to producing them, lead to much improvisation in the creation of early armoured cars, and other such vehicles. Later, despite the advent of arms industries in many countries, several armies still resorted to using ad hoc contraptions, often in response to unexpected military situations, or as a result of the development of new tactics for which no available vehicle was suitable. The construction of improvised fighting vehicles may also reflect a lack of means for the force that uses them. This is especially true in underdeveloped countries and even in developing countries, where various armies and guerrilla forces have used them, as they are more affordable than military-grade combat vehicles.\nModern examples include military gun truck used by units of regular armies or other official government armed forces, based on a conventional military cargo truck, that is able to carry a large weight of weapons and armour. They have mainly been used by regular armies to escort military convoys in regions subject to ambush by guerrilla forces. \"Narco tanks\", used by Mexican drug cartels in the Mexican drug war, are built from such trucks, which combines operational mobility, tactical offensive, and defensive capabilities.\nTroop carriers.\nTroop-carrying AFVs are divided into three main types \u2013 armoured personnel carriers (APCs), infantry fighting vehicles (IFVs) and infantry mobility vehicles (IMV). The main difference between the three is their intended role \u2013 the APC is designed purely to transport troops and is armed for self-defence only \u2013 whereas the IFV is designed to provide close-quarters and anti-armour fire support to the infantry it carries. IMV is a wheeled armoured personnel carrier serving as a military patrol, reconnaissance or security vehicle.\nArmoured personnel carrier.\nArmoured personnel carriers (APCs) are intended to carry infantry quickly and relatively safely to the point where they are deployed. In the Battle of Amiens, 8 August 1918, the British Mk V* tank (a lengthened Mark V) carried a small number of machine gunners as an experiment, but the men were debilitated by the conditions inside the vehicle. Later that year the first purpose-built APC, the British Mk IX tank (Mark Nine), appeared. In 1944, the Canadian general Guy Simonds ordered the conversion of redundant armoured vehicles to carry troops (generically named \"Kangaroos\"). This proved highly successful, even without training, and the concept was widely used in the 21st Army Group. Post-war, specialised designs were built, such as the Soviet BTR-60 and US M113.\nInfantry fighting vehicle.\nAn \"infantry fighting vehicle\" (\"IFV\"), also known as a \"mechanized infantry combat vehicle\" (\"MICV\"), is a type of armoured fighting vehicle used to carry infantry into battle and provide direct fire support. The first example of an IFV was the West German Sch\u00fctzenpanzer Lang HS.30 which served in the Bundeswehr from 1958 until the early 1980s.\nIFVs are similar to armoured personnel carriers (APCs) and infantry carrier vehicles (ICVs), designed to transport a section or squad of infantry (generally between five and ten men) and their equipment. They are differentiated from APCs\u00a0\u2013 which are purely \"troop-transport\" vehicles armed only for self-defence\u00a0\u2013 because they are designed to give direct fire support to the dismounted infantry and so usually have significantly enhanced armament. IFVs also often have improved armour and some have firing ports (allowing the infantry to fire personal weapons while mounted).\nThey are typically armed with an autocannon of 20 to 57\u00a0mm calibre, 7.62mm machine guns, anti-tank guided missiles (ATGMs) and/or surface-to-air missiles (SAMs). IFVs are usually tracked, but some wheeled vehicles fall into this category. IFVs are generally less heavily armed and armoured than main battle tanks. They sometimes carry anti-tank missiles to protect and support infantry against armoured threats, such as the NATO TOW missile and Soviet Bastion, which offer a significant threat to tanks. Specially equipped IFVs have taken on some of the roles of light tanks; they are used by reconnaissance organizations, and light IFVs are used by airborne units which must be able to fight without the heavy firepower of tanks.\nInfantry mobility vehicle.\nAn \"infantry mobility vehicle\" (\"IMV\") or \"protected patrol vehicle\" (\"PPV\") is a wheeled armoured personnel carrier (APC) serving as a military patrol, reconnaissance or security vehicle. Examples include the ATF Dingo, AMZ Dzik, AMZ Tur, Mungo ESK, and Bushmaster IMV. This term also applies to the vehicles currently being fielded as part of the MRAP program.\nIMVs were developed in response to the threats of modern counterinsurgency warfare, with an emphasis on Ambush Protection and Mine-Resistance. Similar vehicles existed long before the term IMV was coined, such as the French VAB and South African Buffel. The term is coming more into use to differentiate light 4x4 wheeled APCs from the traditional 8x8 wheeled APCs. It is a neologism for what might have been classified in the past as an armoured scout car, such as the BRDM, but the IMV is distinguished by having a requirement to carry dismountable infantry. The up-armoured M1114 Humvee variant can be seen as an adaptation of the unarmoured Humvee to serve in the IMV role.\nAmphibious vehicles.\nMany modern military vehicles, ranging from light wheeled command and reconnaissance, through armoured personnel carriers and tanks, are manufactured with amphibious capabilities. Contemporary wheeled armoured amphibians include the French V\u00e9hicule de l'Avant Blind\u00e9 and V\u00e9hicule Blind\u00e9 L\u00e9ger. The latter is a small, lightly armoured 4\u00d74 all-terrain vehicle that is fully amphibious and can swim at 5.4\u00a0km/h. The VAB (\"V\u00e9hicule de l'Avant Blind\u00e9\" \u2013 'armoured vanguard vehicle') is a fully amphibious armoured personnel carrier powered in the water by two water jets, that entered service in 1976 and produced in numerous configurations, ranging from basic personnel carrier, anti-tank missile platform.\nDuring the Cold War the Soviet bloc states developed a number of amphibious APCs, fighting vehicles and tanks, both wheeled and tracked. Most of the vehicles the Soviets designed were amphibious, or could ford deep water. Wheeled examples are the BRDM-1 and BRDM-2 4x4 armoured scout cars, as well as the BTR-60, BTR-70, BTR-80, BTR-94 and BTR-90 8x8 armoured personnel carriers.\nDuring the 1930s and 1940s, Japan produced a number of amphibious tank designs, including prototypes such as the Sumida amphibious armored car (AMP), SR I-Go, SR II Ro-Go, SR III Ha-Go, Type 1 Mi-Sha (a/k/a Type 1 Ka-Mi) and Type 5 To-Ku. Production amphibious tanks during World War II included the Type 2 Ka-Mi, and Type 3 Ka-Chi; production amphibious transports included the F B swamp vehicle and Type 4 Ka-Tsu APC. All production units were for use by the Japanese Special Naval Landing Forces in campaigns in the Pacific with amphibious operations.\nThe United States started developing a long line of Landing Vehicle Tracked (LVT) designs from c.\u20091940. The US Marine Corps currently uses the AAV7-A1 Assault Amphibious Vehicle, which was to be succeeded by the Expeditionary Fighting Vehicle, which was capable of planing on water and can achieve water speeds of 37\u201346\u00a0km/h. The EFV project has been cancelled.\nA significant number of tracked armoured vehicles that are primarily intended for land-use, have some amphibious capability, tactically useful inland, reducing dependence on bridges. They use their tracks, sometimes with added propeller or water jets for propulsion. As long as the banks have a shallow enough slopes to enter or leave the water they can cross rivers and water obstacles.\nSome heavy tanks can operate amphibiously with a fabric skirt to add buoyancy. The Sherman DD tank used in the Normandy landings had this setup. When in water the waterproof float screen was raised and propellers deployed. Some modern vehicles use a similar skirt.\nAirborne vehicles.\nLightweight armoured fighting vehicles designed or modified to be carried by aircraft and delivered by air drop, helicopter lift, glider, or air landing with infantry to provide heavier tactical firepower and mobility. The air-equivalent to amphibious vehicles, the main advantage of airborne forces is their ability to be deployed into combat zones without land passage, as long as the airspace is accessible. Airborne vehicles are limited only by the tonnage capacity of their transport aircraft. Airborne vehicles typically lack the armour and supplies necessary for prolonged combat, so they are utilized for establishing an airhead to bring in larger forces before carrying out other combat objectives. One modern example is the German Wiesel AWC. The USA also created the M22 Locust as a way to aid paratroopers/ being paradropped in as it was very lightly armoured and very small.\nArmoured engineering vehicle.\nModern engineering AFV's utilize chassis based on main battle tank platforms: these vehicles are as well armoured and protected as tanks, designed to keep up with tanks, breach obstacles to help tanks get to wherever it needs to be, perform utility functions necessary to expedite mission objectives of tanks, and to conduct other earth-moving and engineering work on the battlefield. These vehicles go by different names depending upon the country of use or manufacture. In the United States the term \"combat engineer vehicle (CEV)\" is used, in the United Kingdom the term \"Armoured Vehicle Royal Engineers (AVRE)\" is used, while in Canada and other commonwealth nations the term \"armoured engineer vehicle (AEV)\" is used. There is no set template for what such a vehicle will look like, yet likely features include a large dozer blade or mine ploughs, a large calibre demolition cannon, augers, winches, excavator arms and cranes, or lifting booms.\nAlthough the term \"armoured engineer vehicle\" is used specifically to describe these multi-purpose tank-based engineering vehicles, that term is also used more generically in British and Commonwealth militaries to describe all heavy tank-based engineering vehicles used in the support of mechanized forces. Thus, \"armoured engineer vehicle\" used generically would refer to AEV, AVLB, Assault Breachers, and so on. Good examples of this type of vehicle include the UK Trojan AVRE, the Russian IMR, and the US M728 Combat Engineer Vehicle.\nBreaching vehicle.\nA breaching vehicle is especially designed to clear pathways for troops and other vehicles through minefields and along roadside bombs and other improvised explosive devices. These vehicles are equipped with mechanical or other means for the breaching of man-made obstacles. Common types of breaching vehicles include mechanical flails, mine plough vehicles, and mine roller vehicles.\nArmoured bulldozer.\nThe armoured bulldozer is a basic tool of combat engineering. These combat engineering vehicles combine the earth moving capabilities of the bulldozer with armour which protects the vehicle and its operator in or near combat. Most are civilian bulldozers modified by addition of vehicle armour/military equipment, but some are tanks stripped of armament and fitted with a dozer blade. Some tanks have bulldozer blades while retaining their armament, but this does not make them armoured bulldozers as such, because combat remains the primary role \u2013 earth moving is a secondary task.\nArmoured recovery vehicle.\nAn \"armoured recovery vehicle\" (\"ARV\") is a type of vehicle recovery armoured fighting vehicle used to repair battle- or mine-damaged as well as broken-down armoured vehicles during combat, or to tow them out of the danger zone for more extensive repairs. To this end the term \"armoured repair and recovery vehicle\" (\"ARRV\") is also used.\nARVs are normally built on the chassis of a main battle tank (MBT), but some are also constructed on the basis of other armoured fighting vehicles, mostly armoured personnel carriers (APCs). ARVs are usually built on the basis of a vehicle in the same class as they are supposed to recover; a tank-based ARV is used to recover tanks, while an APC-based one recovers APCs, but does not have the power to tow a much heavier tank.\nArmoured vehicle-launched bridge.\nAn \"armoured vehicle-launched bridge\" (\"AVLB\") is a combat support vehicle, sometimes regarded as a subtype of combat engineering vehicle, designed to assist militaries in rapidly deploying tanks and other armoured fighting vehicles across rivers. The AVLB is usually a tracked vehicle converted from a tank chassis to carry a folding metal bridge instead of weapons. The AVLB's job is to allow armoured or infantry units to cross water, when a river too deep for vehicles to wade through is reached, and no bridge is conveniently located (or sufficiently sturdy, a substantial concern when moving 60-ton tanks).\nThe bridge layer unfolds and launches its cargo, providing a ready-made bridge across the obstacle in only minutes. Once the span has been put in place, the AVLB vehicle detaches from the bridge, and moves aside to allow traffic to pass. Once all of the vehicles have crossed, it crosses the bridge itself and reattaches to the bridge on the other side. It then retracts the span ready to move off again. A similar procedure can be employed to allow crossings of small chasms or similar obstructions. AVLBs can carry bridges of or greater in length. By using a tank chassis, the bridge layer is able to cover the same terrain as main battle tanks, and the provision of armour allows them to operate even in the face of enemy fire. However, this is not a universal attribute: some exceptionally sturdy 6x6 or 8x8 truck chassis have lent themselves to bridge-layer applications.\nCombat engineer section carriers.\n\"Combat engineer section carriers\" are used to transport sappers (combat engineers) and can be fitted with bulldozers' blades and other mine-breaching devices. They are often used as APCs because of their carrying ability and heavy protection. They are usually armed with machine guns and grenade launchers and usually tracked to provide enough tractive force to push blades and rakes. Some examples are the U.S. M113 APC, IDF Puma, Nagmachon, Husky, and U.S. M1132 ESV (a Stryker variant).\nAir defence vehicles.\nAn anti-aircraft vehicle, also known as a self-propelled anti-aircraft gun (SPAAG) or self-propelled air defense system (SPAD), is a mobile vehicle with a dedicated anti-aircraft capability.\nSpecific weapon systems used include machine guns, anti-aircraft autocannons, larger anti-air guns, or surface-to-air-missiles, and some mount both guns and longer-ranged missiles (e.g. the Pantsir-S1). Platforms used include both trucks and heavier combat vehicles such as armored personnel carriers and tanks, which add protection from aircraft, artillery, and small arms fire for front line deployment.\nAnti-aircraft guns are usually mounted in a quickly-traversing turret with a high rate of elevation, for tracking fast-moving aircraft. They are often in dual or quadruple mounts, allowing a high rate of fire. In addition, most anti-aircraft guns can be used in a direct-fire role against surface targets to great effect. In the early 21st century, missiles (generally mounted on similar turrets) largely supplanted anti-aircraft guns, though guns have recently shown revived utility against slow, low-flying drones.\nSelf-propelled artillery.\nSelf-propelled artillery vehicles give mobility to artillery. Within the term are covered self-propelled guns (or howitzers) and rocket artillery. They are highly mobile, usually based on tracked chassis carrying either a large howitzer or other field gun or alternatively a mortar or some form of rocket or missile launcher. They are usually used for long-range indirect bombardment support on the battlefield.\nIn the past, self-propelled artillery has included direct-fire \"Gun Motor Carriage\" vehicles, such as assault guns and tank destroyers (also known as self-propelled anti-tank guns). These have been heavily armoured vehicles, the former providing danger-close fire-support for infantry and the latter acting as specialized anti-tank vehicles.\nModern self-propelled artillery vehicles may superficially resemble tanks, but they are generally lightly armoured, too lightly to survive in direct-fire combat. However, they protect their crews against shrapnel and small arms and are therefore usually included as armoured fighting vehicles. Many are equipped with machine guns for defence against enemy infantry.\nThe key advantage of self-propelled over towed artillery is that it can be brought into action much faster. Before towed artillery can be used, it has to stop, unlimber and the guns set up. To move position, the guns must be limbered up again and brought \u2013 usually towed \u2013 to the new location. By comparison, self-propelled artillery in combination with modern communications, can stop at a chosen location and begin firing almost immediately, then quickly move on to a new position. This ability is very useful in a mobile conflict and particularly on the advance.\nConversely, towed artillery was and remains cheaper to build and maintain. It is also lighter and can be taken to places that self-propelled guns cannot reach, so despite the advantages of the self-propelled artillery, towed guns remain in the arsenals of many modern armies.\nAssault gun.\nAn assault gun is a gun or howitzer mounted on a motor vehicle or armoured chassis, designed for use in the direct fire role in support of infantry when attacking other infantry or fortified positions.\nHistorically, the custom-built fully armoured assault guns usually mounted the gun or howitzer in a fully enclosed casemate on a tank chassis. The use of a casemate instead of a gun turret limited these weapons' field of fire, but allowed a larger gun to be fitted relative to the chassis, more armour to be fitted for the same weight, and provided a cheaper construction. In most cases, these turretless vehicles also presented a lower profile as a target for the enemy.\nSelf-propelled siege gun.\n \nSelf-Propelled siege guns often carry cannons or mortars in excess of 400mm. The carrying platform could be multiple vehicles, built for use on train rails, or a purpose-built chassis.\nMortar carrier.\nA mortar carrier, or self-propelled mortar, is a self-propelled artillery vehicle carrying one or more mortar as its primary weapon. Mortar carriers cannot be fired while on the move and some must be dismounted to fire. In U.S. Army doctrine, mortar carriers provide close and immediate indirect fire support for maneuver units while allowing for rapid displacement and quick reaction to the tactical situation. The ability to relocate not only allows fire support to be provided where it is needed faster, but also allows these units to avoid counter-battery fire. Mortar carriers have traditionally avoided direct contact with the enemy. Many units report never using secondary weapons in combat.\nPrior to the Iraq War, American 120\u00a0mm mortar platoons reorganized from six M1064 mortar carriers and two M577 fire direction centres (FDC) to four M1064 and one FDC. The urban environment of Iraq made it difficult to utilize mortars. New technologies such as mortar ballistic computers and communication equipment and are being integrated. Modern era combat is becoming more reliant on direct fire support from mortar carrier machine guns.\nMultiple rocket launcher.\nA multiple rocket launcher is a type of unguided rocket artillery system. Like other rocket artillery, multiple rocket launchers are less accurate and have a much lower (sustained) rate of fire than batteries of traditional artillery guns. However, they have the capability of simultaneously dropping many hundreds of kilograms of explosive, with devastating effect.\nThe Korean Hwacha is an example of an early weapon system with a resemblance to the modern-day multiple rocket launcher. The first self-propelled multiple rocket launchers \u2013 and arguably the most famous \u2013 were the Soviet BM-13 Katyushas, first used during World War II and exported to Soviet allies afterwards. They were simple systems in which a rack of launch rails was mounted on the back of a truck. This set the template for modern multiple rocket launchers. The first modern multiple rocket launcher was the German \"15 cm Nebelwerfer 41\" of the 1930s, a small towed artillery piece. Only later in World War II did the British deploy similar weapons in the form of the Land Mattress.The Americans mounted tubular launchers atop M4 Sherman tanks to create the T34 Calliope rocket launching tank, only used in small numbers, as their closest equivalent to the Katyusha.\nMissile vehicle.\nMissile vehicles are trucks or tractor units designed to carry rockets or missiles. The missile vehicle may be a self-propelled unit, or the missile holder/launcher may be on a trailer towed by a prime mover. They are used in the military forces of a number of countries in the world. Long missiles are commonly transported parallel to the ground on these vehicles, but elevated into an inclined or vertical position for launching.\nTank destroyer.\nTank destroyers and tank hunters are armed with an anti-tank gun or anti-tank missile launcher, and are designed specifically to engage enemy armoured vehicles. Many have been based on a tracked tank chassis, while others are wheeled. Since World War II, main battle tanks have largely replaced gun-armed tank destroyers; although lightly armoured anti-tank guided missile (ATGM) carriers are commonly used for supplementary long-range anti-tank engagements.\nIn post-Cold War conflict, the resurgence of expeditionary warfare has seen the emergence of gun-armed wheeled vehicles, sometimes called \"protected gun systems\", which may bear a superficial resemblance to tank destroyers, but are employed as direct fire support units typically providing support in low intensity operations such as Iraq and Afghanistan. These have the advantage of easier deployment, as only the largest air transports can carry a main battle tank, and their smaller size makes them more effective in urban combat.\nMany forces' IFVs carry anti-tank missiles in every infantry platoon, and attack helicopters have also added anti-tank capability to the modern battlefield. But there are still dedicated anti-tank vehicles with very heavy long-range missiles, or intended for airborne use. There have also been dedicated anti-tank vehicles built on ordinary armoured personnel carrier or armoured car chassis. Examples include the U.S. M901 ITV (Improved TOW Vehicle) and the Norwegian NM142, both on an M113 chassis, several Soviet ATGM launchers based on the BRDM scout car, the British FV438 Swingfire and FV102 Striker and the German \"Raketenjagdpanzer\" series built on the chassis of the HS 30 and Marder IFVs.\nArmoured train.\nAn \"armoured train\" is a railway train protected with armour. They are usually equipped with rail cars armed with artillery, autocannons, machine guns, tank turrets and anti-aircraft guns. They were mostly used during the late 19th to mid-20th century, when they offered an innovative way to quickly move large amounts of firepower. Their use was discontinued in most countries when road vehicles became much more powerful and offered more flexibility, and because armoured trains were too vulnerable to track sabotage and attacks from the air. However, the Russian Federation used improvised armoured trains in the Second Chechen War in the late 1990s and 2000s. Armoured trains carrying ballistic missiles have also been used.\nThe rail cars on an armoured train were designed for many tasks, such as carrying artillery and machine guns, infantry units, anti-tank and anti-aircraft guns. During World War II, the Germans would sometimes put a \"Fremdger\u00e4t\" (captured AFVs such as the French Somua S-35 or Czech PzKpfw 38(t)), or obsolescent Panzer II light tanks on a flatbed rail car, which could quickly be offloaded by means of a ramp and used away from the railway line to chase down enemy partisans.\nDifferent types of armour were used to protect armoured trains from attack. In addition to various metal plates, concrete and sandbags were used in some cases on armoured trains.\nArmoured trains were sometimes escorted by a kind of rail-tank called a draisine. One such example was the Italian 'Littorina' armoured trolley, which had a cab in the front and rear, each with a control set so it could be driven down the tracks in either direction. Littorina mounted two dual 7.92mm MG13 machine gun turrets from Panzer I light tanks.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2149", "revid": "45710782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2149", "title": "Armor", "text": ""}
{"id": "2151", "revid": "8771785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2151", "title": "Anton Drexler", "text": "German far-right politician (1884\u20131942)\nAnton Drexler (13 June 1884 \u2013 24 February 1942) was a German far-right political agitator for the \"V\u00f6lkisch\" movement in the 1920s. He founded the German Workers' Party (DAP), the pan-German and anti-Semitic antecedent of the Nazi Party (NSDAP). Drexler mentored his successor in the NSDAP, Adolf Hitler, during his early years in politics.\nEarly life.\nBorn in Munich, Drexler was a machine-fitter before becoming a railway toolmaker and locksmith in Berlin. He is believed to have been disappointed with his income, and to have played the zither in restaurants to supplement his earnings. Drexler did not serve in the armed forces during World War I because he was deemed physically unfit for service.\nPolitics.\nDuring World War I, Drexler joined the German Fatherland Party, a short-lived far-right party active during the last phase of the war, which played a significant role in the emergence of the stab-in-the-back myth and the defamation of certain politicians as the \"November Criminals\".\nIn March 1918, Drexler founded a branch of the Free Workers' Committee for a Good Peace (\"Der Freie Arbeiterausschuss f\u00fcr einen guten Frieden\") league. Karl Harrer, a journalist and member of the Thule Society, convinced Drexler and several others to form the Political Workers' Circle (\"Politischer Arbeiter-Zirkel\") in 1918. The members met periodically for discussions about nationalism and antisemitism.\nGerman Workers' Party.\nTogether with Harrer, Drexler founded the German Workers' Party (DAP) in Munich on 5 January 1919. At a DAP meeting in Munich on 12 September 1919, the main speaker was Gottfried Feder, who held a lecture on the subject of 'the breaking of interest slavery'. When Feder's lecture concluded, Adolf Hitler\u2014who attended the meeting as part of his assignment from the German Army to watch political agitators\u2014got involved in a heated political argument with a visitor, Professor Adalbert Baumann, who questioned the soundness of Feder's arguments and in turn spoke in favour of Bavarian separatism. In vehemently attacking the man's arguments, Hitler made an impression on the other party members with his oratorical abilities, and according to him, the professor left the hall defeated. Drexler approached Hitler and gave him a copy of his pamphlet \"My Political Awakening\". Hitler later claimed the literature reflected the ideals he already held since his own \"political awakening\". Impressed with Hitler, Drexler encouraged him to join the DAP. On the orders of his army superiors, Hitler applied to join the party.\nOnce accepted, Hitler began to make the party more public by drawing people in with his speaking abilities, leading up to his organizing the party's biggest meeting yet, which attracted 2,000 people to the Hofbr\u00e4uhaus in Munich on 24 February 1920. It was in this speech that Hitler, for the first time, enunciated the twenty-five points of the German Worker's Party's manifesto that he had authored with Drexler and Feder. Through these points, he gave the organisation a foreign policy, including the abrogation of the Treaty of Versailles, a Greater Germany, Eastern expansion, and exclusion of Jews from citizenship. On the same day the party was renamed the National Socialist German Workers' Party (\"Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei\", NSDAP).\nFollowing an intraparty dispute, Hitler angrily tendered his resignation on 11 July 1921. However, Drexler and the party's governing committee members realised that the resignation of their leading public figure and speaker would mean the end of the party. So Dietrich Eckart was asked by the Party leadership to speak with Hitler and relay the conditions in which he would agree to return. Hitler announced he would rejoin the party on the condition that he would replace Drexler as party chairman, with dictatorial powers and the title of \"F\u00fchrer\", and that the party headquarters would remain in Munich. The committee agreed and he rejoined the party as member 3,680. Drexler was thereafter moved to the purely symbolic position of honorary president.\nDrexler was also a member of a \"v\u00f6lkisch\" political club for affluent members of Munich society known as the Thule Society. His membership in the Nazi Party ended when it was temporarily outlawed in 1923 following the Beer Hall Putsch, although Drexler had not taken part in the coup attempt. In 1924, he was elected to the Bavarian state parliament for the V\u00f6lkisch-Social Bloc party (VSB), in which he served as vice president until 1928. He played no role in the Nazi Party's re-founding in February 1925 and rejoined only after Hitler ascended to national power in 1933. In May 1925, he founded a group with other VSB deputies, the \"Nationalsozialer Volksbund\" (National Social People's League), but it was dissolved in 1927\u20131928. Drexler received the Nazi Party's Blood Order in 1934, and was still occasionally used as a propaganda tool until about 1937, but was never allowed any power within the party.\nDeath.\nDrexler died in Munich in February 1942 after a lengthy illness due to alcoholism.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2152", "revid": "44522647", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2152", "title": "All Quiet on the Western Front", "text": "1929 novel by Erich Maria Remarque\nAll Quiet on the Western Front () is a semi-autobiographical novel by Erich Maria Remarque, a German veteran of World War I. The book describes the German soldiers' extreme physical and mental trauma during the war as well as the detachment from civilian life felt by many upon returning home from the war. It is billed by some as \"the greatest war novel of all time\".\nThe novel was first published in November and December 1928 in the German newspaper and in book form in late January 1929. The book and its sequel, \"The Road Back\" (1931), were among the books banned and burned in Nazi Germany. \"All Quiet on the Western Front\" sold 2.5 million copies in 22 languages in its first 18 months in print.\nThree film adaptations of the book have been made, each of which was lauded. The 1930 American adaptation, directed by Lewis Milestone, won two Academy Awards. The 1979 British-American adaptation, a television film by Delbert Mann, won a Golden Globe Award and an Emmy Award. The 2022 German adaptation, directed by Edward Berger, won four Academy Awards.\nTitle and translation.\nThe 1929 English translation by Arthur Wesley Wheen gives the title as\" All Quiet on the Western Front\". The literal translation of \"\" is \"Nothing New in the West,\" with \"West\" being the Western Front; the phrase refers to the content of an official communiqu\u00e9 at the end of the novel.\nBrian Murdoch's 1993 translation rendered the phrase as \"there was nothing new to report on the Western Front\" within the narrative. However, in the foreword, he explains his retention of the original book title:\nAlthough it does not match the German exactly, Wheen's title has justly become part of the English language and is retained here with gratitude.\nThe phrase \"\" has become a colloquial expression meaning stagnation, or lack of visible change, in any context.\nMurdoch also explains how, owing to the time it was published, Wheen's translation was obliged to Anglicise some lesser-known German references and lessen the impact of certain passages while omitting others entirely. Murdoch's translation is more accurate to the original text and completely unexpurgated.\nPlot summary.\nThe book centers on Paul B\u00e4umer, a German soldier on the Western Front during World War I. Before the war, Paul lived with his parents and sister in a charming German village. He attended school, where the patriotic speeches of his teacher Kantorek led the whole class to volunteer for the Imperial German Army shortly after the start of the Great War. At the training camp, where they meet Himmelsto\u00df, his class is scattered over the platoons amongst Frisian fishermen, peasants and labourers, with whom they soon become friends. B\u00e4umer arrives at the Western Front with his friends and schoolmates (Albert, Kemmerich, Leer, M\u00fcller, and a number of other characters). There they meet Stanislaus Katczinsky, an older recalled reservist, nicknamed Kat, who becomes Paul's mentor.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"We are not youth any longer. We don't want to take the world by storm. We are fleeing from ourselves, from our life. We were eighteen and had begun to love life and the world; and we had to shoot it to pieces\"\nWhile fighting at the front, B\u00e4umer and his comrades engage in frequent battles and endure the treacherous and filthy conditions of trench warfare. The battles fought here have no names and only meager pieces of land are gained, which are often lost again later. Remarque often refers to the living soldiers as old and dead, emotionally drained and shaken.\nPaul visits home, and the contrast with civilian life highlights the cost of the war on his psyche. The town has not changed since he went off to war, but he has: he finds that he does \"not belong here any more, it is a foreign world\". Paul recovers the books and writings he had left in his childhood room, but finds his passion for literature to have been completely erased by the trauma of war. He feels disconnected from most of the townspeople, who ask him \"stupid and distressing\" questions about his experiences or lecture him about strategy and advancing to Paris while insisting that Paul and his friends know only their \"own little sector\" but nothing of the big picture. Indeed, the only person he remains connected to is his dying mother, with whom he shares a tender yet restrained relationship. In the end, he concludes that he \"ought never to have come [home] on leave\".\nPaul is glad to return and reunite with his comrades. Soon after, he volunteers to go on a patrol and kills a Frenchman in hand-to-hand combat for the first time. He watches the man die slowly in agony for hours. He is remorseful and devastated, asking for forgiveness from the man's corpse. He later confesses to Kat and Albert, who try to comfort him and reassure him that it is only part of the war. Paul and his company receive a temporary reprieve from the horrid rations and living conditions of the trenches when they are instead sent to a supply depot in an occupied French town. They enjoy food and luxuries taken from the depot or looted from the town but continue to lose men to Allied shelling, culminating in Paul and Albert being wounded while evacuating civilians and needing to be diverted to a Catholic hospital far behind the lines. Albert eventually has his leg amputated, whilst Paul is deemed fit for service and returned to the front.\nBy the closing months of the war, German morale is almost nonexistent as the men realize they are only fighting to delay an armistice. The Americans have recently joined the war as both they and the British begin outperforming the far more poorly equipped Germans. In despair, Paul watches as his friends fall one by one. Kat's death is the last straw that finally causes Paul to lose his will to live. In the final chapter he comments that peace is coming soon but he does not see the future as bright and shining with hope. Paul feels that he has no aims left in life and that their generation will be different and misunderstood.\nIn October 1918, Paul is finally killed on a remarkably peaceful day. The situation report from the frontline states a simple phrase: \"All quiet on the Western Front.\" Paul's corpse displays a calm expression on its face, \"as though almost glad the end had come.\"\nThemes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"One of the great legacies of World War I is that as soon as the Armistice is signed, the enemy is war itself, not the Germans, Russians, or French. The book captures it and becomes the definitive anti-war statement of the Great War\"\nDr. Thomas Doharty\nAt the beginning of the book, Remarque writes, \"This book is to be neither an accusation nor a confession, and least of all an adventure, for death is not an adventure to those who stand face to face with it. It will try simply to tell of a generation of men who, even though they may have escaped (its) shells, were destroyed by the war.\" The book does not focus on heroic stories of bravery, but rather gives a view of the conditions in which the soldiers find themselves. The monotony between battles, the constant threat of artillery fire and bombardments, the struggle to find food, the lack of training of young recruits (meaning lower chances of survival), and the overarching role of random chance in the lives and deaths of the soldiers are described in detail.\nAnother major theme is the concept of blind nationalism. Remarque often emphasizes that the boys were not forced to join the war effort against their will, but rather by a sense of patriotism and pride. Kantorek called Paul's platoon the \"Iron Youth\", teaching his students a romanticized version of warfare with glory and duty to the Fatherland. It is only when the boys go to war and have to live and fight in dirty, cramped trenches with little protection from enemy bullets and shells while contending with hunger and sickness that they realize just how dispiriting it is to actually serve in the army.\nPublication and reception.\nFrom November 10 to December 9, 1928, \"All Quiet on the Western Front\" was published in serial form in \"Vossische Zeitung\" magazine. It was released in book form the following year to great success, selling one and a half million copies that same year. Although publishers had worried that interest in World War I had waned more than 10 years after the armistice, Remarque's realistic depiction of trench warfare from the perspective of young soldiers struck a chord with the war's survivors\u2014veterans and civilians alike\u2014and provoked strong reactions, both positive and negative, around the world.\nWith \"All Quiet on the Western Front\", Remarque emerged as an eloquent spokesman for a generation that had been, in his own words, \"destroyed by war, even though it might have escaped its shells.\" Remarque's harshest critics, in turn, were his countrymen, many of whom felt the book denigrated the German war effort, and that Remarque had exaggerated the horrors of war to further his pacifist agenda. The strongest voices against Remarque came from the emerging Nazi Party and its ideological allies. In 1933, when the Nazis rose to power, \"All Quiet on the Western Front\" became one of the first degenerate books to be publicly burnt; in 1930, screenings of the Academy Award-winning film based on the book were met with Nazi-organized protests and mob attacks on both movie theatres and audience members.\nObjections to Remarque's portrayal of the World War I German soldiers were not limited to those of the Nazis in 1933. Dr. Karl Kroner was concerned about Remarque's depiction of the medical personnel as being inattentive, uncaring, or absent from frontline action. Kroner was specifically worried that the book would perpetuate German stereotypes abroad that had subsided since the First World War. He offered the following clarification: \"People abroad will draw the following conclusions: if German doctors deal with their own fellow countrymen in this manner, what acts of inhumanity will they not perpetuate against helpless prisoners delivered up into their hands or against the populations of occupied territory?\"\nA fellow patient of Remarque's in the military hospital in Duisburg objected to the negative depictions of the nuns and patients and to the general portrayal of soldiers: \"There were soldiers to whom the protection of homeland, protection of house and homestead, protection of family were the highest objective, and to whom this will to protect their homeland gave the strength to endure any extremities.\"\nThese criticisms suggest that experiences of the war and the personal reactions of individual soldiers to their experiences may be more diverse than Remarque portrays them; however, it is beyond question that Remarque gives voice to a side of the war and its experience that was overlooked or suppressed at the time. This perspective is crucial to understanding the true effects of World War I. The evidence can be seen in the lingering depression that Remarque and many of his friends and acquaintances were suffering a decade later.\nThe book was also banned in other European countries on the grounds that it was considered anti-war propaganda; Austrian soldiers were forbidden from reading the book in 1929, and Czechoslovakia banned it from its military libraries. The Italian translation was also banned in 1933. When the Nazis were re-militarizing Germany, the book was banned as it was deemed counterproductive to German rearmament. In contrast, \"All Quiet on the Western Front\" was trumpeted by pacifists as an anti-war book.\nRemarque makes a point in the opening statement that the novel does not advocate any political position, but is merely an attempt to describe the experiences of the soldier. Historian Mitch Horowitz, who wrote the introduction for the 2025 digital publication of the novel, has noted that Remarque's apolitical approach is refreshing in today's highly factionalist era, and that Remarque \"joins the ranks of chroniclers of warfare from Plutarch to Stephen Crane \u2014 finding the story in the trenches and within the lives of combatants rather than in long-forgotten disputes that supposedly drove the conflict,\" adding, \"Remarque has been justly compared to Hemingway.\"\nMuch of the literary criticism came from Salomo Friedlaender, who wrote a book \"Hat Erich Maria Remarque wirklich gelebt?\" \"Did Erich Maria Remarque really live?\" (under the pen name Mynona), which was, in its turn, criticized in: \"Hat Mynona wirklich gelebt?\" \"Did Mynona really live?\" by Kurt Tucholsky. Friedlaender's criticism was mainly personal in nature\u2014he attacked Remarque as being egocentric and greedy. Remarque publicly stated that he wrote \"All Quiet on the Western Front\" for personal reasons, not for profit, as Friedlaender had charged.\n\"All Quiet on the Western Front\" was followed in 1931 by \"The Road Back\", which follows the surviving characters after the Treaty of Versailles, and the two are considered part of a trilogy alongside the narratively unrelated \"Three Comrades\", released in 1936 and set well into the post-war era.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2153", "revid": "108244", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2153", "title": "Academic elitism", "text": ""}
