{"id": "8504", "revid": "40325647", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8504", "title": "Dublin", "text": "Capital and largest city of Ireland\nDublin is the capital and largest city of Ireland. Situated on Dublin Bay at the mouth of the River Liffey, it is in the province of Leinster, and is bordered on the south by the Dublin Mountains, part of the Wicklow Mountains range. Dublin is the largest city by population on the island of Ireland; at the 2022 census, the city council area had a population of 592,713, while the city including suburbs had a population of 1,263,219, County Dublin had a population of 1,501,500. Various definitions of a metropolitan Greater Dublin Area exist.\nA settlement was established in the area by the Gaels during or before the 7th century, followed by the Vikings. As the Kingdom of Dublin grew, it became Ireland's principal settlement by the 12th century Anglo-Norman invasion of Ireland. Dublin expanded rapidly from the 17th century and was briefly the second largest in the British Empire and sixth largest in Western Europe after the Acts of Union in 1800. Following independence in 1922, Dublin became the capital of the Irish Free State, renamed Ireland in 1937. As of 2018[ [update]], Dublin was listed by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network (GaWC) as a global city, with a ranking of \"Alpha minus\", which placed it among the top thirty cities in the world.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Dublin\" comes from the Middle Irish (literally \"Blackpool\"), from \"black, dark\" and \"pool\". This evolved into the Early Modern Irish form , which was pronounced \"Du\u00edlinn\" in the local dialect. The name refers to a dark tidal pool on the site of the castle gardens at the rear of Dublin Castle, where the River Poddle entered the Liffey.\nThe Middle Irish pronunciation is preserved in the names for the city in other languages such as Old English , Old Norse , modern Icelandic and modern Manx as well as Welsh and Breton . Other localities in Ireland also bear the name \"Duibhlinn\", variously anglicised as Devlin, Divlin and Difflin. Variations on the name are also found in traditionally Gaelic-speaking areas of Scotland, such as (\"the black pool\"), which is part of Loch Linnhe.\nThe Viking settlement was preceded by a Christian ecclesiastical settlement known as \"Duibhlinn\", from which \"Dyflin\" took its name. Beginning in the 9th and 10th centuries, there were two settlements where the modern city stands. The Viking settlement of about 841, \"Dyflin\", and a Gaelic settlement, \u00c1th Cliath (\"ford of hurdles\") further up the river, at the present-day Father Mathew Bridge, also known as Dublin Bridge, at the bottom of Church Street.\n, meaning \"town of the hurdled ford\", is the common name for the city in Modern Irish, which is often contracted to or when spoken. is a place name referring to a fording point of the River Liffey near Father Mathew Bridge. \"\" was an early Christian monastery, believed to have been in the area of Aungier Street, currently occupied by Whitefriar Street Carmelite Church.\nHistory.\nThe area of Dublin Bay has been inhabited by humans since prehistoric times. Fish traps discovered from excavations during the construction of the Convention Centre Dublin indicate human habitation as far back as 6,000 years ago. Further traps were discovered closer to the old settlement of the city of Dublin on the south quays near St. James's Gate, which indicate mesolithic human activity.\nPtolemy's map of Ireland, of about 140 AD, provides possibly the earliest reference to a settlement near Dublin. Ptolemy, the Greco-Roman astronomer and cartographer, called it \"Eblana polis\" ().\nDublin celebrated its 'official' millennium in 1988, meaning the Irish government recognised 988 as the year in which the city was settled and that this first settlement would later become the city of Dublin.\nThe Viking settlement of about 841 was preceded by a Christian ecclesiastical settlement known as \"Duibhlinn\", from which \"Dyflin\" took its name. Evidence indicating that Anglo-Saxons occupied Dublin before the Vikings arrived in 841 has been found in an archaeological dig in Temple Bar.\nBeginning in the 9th and 10th centuries, there were two settlements which later became modern Dublin. The subsequent Scandinavian settlement centred on the River Poddle, a tributary of the Liffey in an area now known as Wood Quay. The Dubhlinn was a pool on the lowest stretch of the Poddle, where ships used to moor. This pool was finally fully infilled during the early 18th century, as the city grew. The Dubhlinn lay where the Castle Garden is now located, opposite the Chester Beatty Library within Dublin Castle. \"T\u00e1in B\u00f3 Cuailgne\" (\"The Cattle Raid of Cooley\") refers to \"Dublind rissa ratter \u00c1th Cliath\", meaning \"Dublin, which is called Ath Cliath\".\nMiddle Ages.\nIn 841, the Vikings established a fortified base in Dublin. The town grew into a substantial commercial centre under Olaf Guthfrithson in the mid-to-late 10th century and, despite a number of attacks by the native Irish, it remained largely under Viking control until the Norman invasion of Ireland was launched from Wales in 1169. The hinterland of Dublin in the Norse period was named in .24 It was upon the death of Muirchertach Mac Lochlainn in early 1166 that Ruaidr\u00ed Ua Conchobair, King of Connacht, proceeded to Dublin and was inaugurated \"King of Ireland\" without opposition.\nAccording to some historians, part of the city's early economic growth is attributed to a trade in slaves. Slavery in Ireland and Dublin reached its pinnacle in the 9th and 10th centuries. Prisoners from slave raids and kidnappings, which captured men, women and children, brought revenue to the Gaelic Irish Sea raiders, and to the Vikings who had initiated the practice. The victims came from Wales, England, Normandy and beyond.\nThe King of Leinster, Diarmait Mac Murchada, after his exile by Ruaidhr\u00ed, enlisted the help of Strongbow, the Earl of Pembroke, to conquer Dublin. Following Mac Murchada's death, Strongbow declared himself King of Leinster after gaining control of the city. In response to Strongbow's successful invasion, Henry II of England affirmed his ultimate sovereignty by mounting a larger invasion in 1171 and pronounced himself Lord of Ireland. Around this time, the \"county of the City of Dublin\" was established along with certain liberties adjacent to the city proper. This continued down to 1840 when the barony of Dublin City was separated from the barony of Dublin. Since 2001, both baronies have been redesignated as the \"City of Dublin\".\nDublin Castle, which became the centre of Anglo-Norman power in Ireland, was founded in 1204 as a major defensive work on the orders of King John of England. Following the appointment of the first Lord Mayor of Dublin in 1229, the city expanded and had a population of 8,000 by the end of the 13th century. Dublin prospered as a trade centre, despite an attempt by King Robert the Bruce of Scotland to capture the city in 1317. It remained a relatively small walled medieval town during the 14th century and was under constant threat from the surrounding native clans. In 1348, the Black Death, a lethal plague which had ravaged Europe, took hold in Dublin and killed thousands over the following decade.\nDublin was the heart of the area known as the Pale, a narrow strip of English settlement along the eastern coast, under the control of the English Crown. The Tudor conquest of Ireland in the 16th century spelt a new era for Dublin, with the city enjoying a renewed prominence as the centre of administrative rule in Ireland where English control and settlement had become much more extensive. Determined to make Dublin a Protestant city, Queen Elizabeth I established Trinity College in 1592 as a solely Protestant university and ordered that the Catholic St. Patrick's and Christ Church cathedrals be converted to the Protestant church. The earliest map of the city of Dublin is John Speed's Map of Dublin (1610).\nThe city had a population of 21,000 in 1640 before a plague from 1649 to 1651 wiped out almost half of the inhabitants. However, the city prospered again soon after as a result of the wool and linen trade with England and reached a population of over 50,000 in 1700. By 1698 the manufacture of wool employed 12,000 people.\nEarly modern.\nAs the city continued to prosper during the 18th century, Georgian Dublin became, for a short period, the second-largest city of the British Empire and the fifth largest city in Europe, with the population exceeding 130,000. While some medieval streets and layouts (including the areas around Temple Bar, Aungier Street, Capel Street and Thomas Street) were less affected by the wave of Georgian reconstruction, much of Dublin's architecture and layout dates from this period.\nDublin grew even more dramatically during the 18th century, with the construction of many new districts and buildings, such as Merrion Square, Parliament House and the Royal Exchange. The Wide Streets Commission was established in 1757 at the request of Dublin Corporation to govern architectural standards on the layout of streets, bridges and buildings. In 1759, the Guinness brewery was founded, and would eventually grow to become the largest brewery in the world and the largest employer in Dublin. During the 1700s, linen was not subject to the same trade restrictions with England as wool, and became the most important Irish export. Over 1.5 million yards of linen was exported from Ireland in 1710, rising to almost 19 million yards by 1779.\nLate modern and contemporary.\nDublin suffered a period of political and economic decline during the 19th century following the Acts of Union 1800, under which the seat of government was transferred to the Westminster Parliament in London. The city played no major role in the Industrial Revolution, but remained the centre of administration and a transport hub for most of the island. Ireland had no significant sources of coal, the fuel of the time, and Dublin was not a centre of ship manufacturing, the other main driver of industrial development in Britain and Ireland. Belfast developed faster than Dublin during this period on a mixture of international trade, factory-based linen cloth production and shipbuilding. By 1814, the population of Dublin was 175,319 as counted under the Population Act, making the population of Dublin higher than any town in England except London. The population had reached 233,159 inhabitants by the time of the 1841 census.\nThe Easter Rising of 1916, the Irish War of Independence, and the subsequent Irish Civil War resulted in a significant amount of physical destruction in central Dublin. The Government of the Irish Free State rebuilt the city centre and located the new parliament, the Oireachtas, in Leinster House. Since the beginning of Norman rule in the 12th century, the city has functioned as the capital in varying geopolitical entities: Lordship of Ireland (1171\u20131541), Kingdom of Ireland (1541\u20131800), as part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland (1801\u20131922), and the Irish Republic (1919\u20131922). Following the partition of Ireland in 1922, it became the capital of the Irish Free State (1922\u20131937) and now is the capital of Ireland. One of the memorials to commemorate that time is the Garden of Remembrance.\nDublin was also a victim of the Northern Irish Troubles, although during this 30-year conflict, violence mainly occurred within Northern Ireland. A Loyalist paramilitary group, the Ulster Volunteer Force, bombed the city during this time \u2013 notably in an atrocity known as the Dublin and Monaghan bombings in which 34 people died, mainly in central Dublin.\nLarge parts of Georgian Dublin were demolished or substantially redeveloped in the mid-20th century during a boom in office building. After this boom, the recessions of the 1970s and 1980s slowed down the pace of building. Cumulatively, this led to a large decline in the number of people living in the centre of the city, and by 1985 the city had approximately 150 acres of derelict land which had been earmarked for development and of office space.\nSince 1997, the landscape of Dublin has changed. The city was at the forefront of Ireland's economic expansion during the Celtic Tiger period, with private sector and state development of housing, transport and business. Following an economic decline during the Great Recession, Dublin has rebounded and as of 2017[ [update]] has close to full employment, but has a significant problem with housing supply in both the city and surrounds.\nGovernment.\nLocal.\nDublin City Council is a unicameral assembly of 63 members elected every five years from local electoral areas. It is presided over by the Lord Mayor, who is elected for a yearly term and resides in Dublin's Mansion House. Council meetings occur at Dublin City Hall, while most of its administrative activities are based in the Civic Offices on Wood Quay. The party or coalition of parties with the majority of seats assigns committee members, introduces policies, and proposes the Lord Mayor. The Council passes an annual budget for spending on areas such as housing, traffic management, refuse, drainage, and planning. The Dublin City Manager is responsible for implementing City Council decisions but also has considerable executive power. Neighbouring local authorities in the traditional County Dublin are South Dublin County Council, Fingal County Council and Dun Laoghaire-Rathdown County Council, and parts of the wider city lie in the functional areas of all three.\nNational.\nAs the capital city, Dublin is the seat of the national parliament of Ireland, the Oireachtas. It is composed of the President of Ireland, D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann as the house of representatives, and Seanad \u00c9ireann as the upper house. The President resides in \u00c1ras an Uachtar\u00e1in in Phoenix Park, while both houses of the Oireachtas meet in Leinster House, a former ducal residence on Kildare Street. It has been the home of the Irish parliament since the foundation of the Irish Free State in 1922. The old Irish Houses of Parliament of the Kingdom of Ireland, which dissolved in 1801, are located in College Green.\nGovernment Buildings house the Department of the Taoiseach, the Council Chamber, the Department of Finance and the Office of the Attorney General. It consists of a main building (completed 1911) with two wings (completed 1921). It was designed by Thomas Manley Dean and Sir Aston Webb as the Royal College of Science. The First D\u00e1il originally met in the Mansion House in 1919. The Irish Free State government took over the two wings of the building to serve as a temporary home for some ministries, while the central building became the College of Technology until 1989. Although both it and Leinster House were intended to be temporary locations, they became the permanent homes of parliament from then on.\nFor elections to D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann, there are five constituencies that are wholly or predominantly in the Dublin City area: Dublin Central (4 seats), Dublin Bay North (5 seats), Dublin North-West (3 seats), Dublin South-Central (4 seats) and Dublin Bay South (4 seats). Twenty TDs are elected in total. The constituency of Dublin West (4 seats) is partially in Dublin City, but predominantly in Fingal.\nAt the 2024 general election, the Dublin city area elected 5 Sinn F\u00e9in, 4 Fianna F\u00e1il, 4 Social Democrats, 3 Fine Gael, 2 Labour and 2 Independents.\nGeography.\nLandscape.\nDublin is situated at the mouth of the River Liffey and its urban area encompasses approximately in east-central Ireland. It is bordered by the Dublin Mountains, a low mountain range and sub range of the Wicklow Mountains, to the south and surrounded by flat farmland to the north and west.\nWatercourses.\nThe River Liffey divides the city in two, between the Northside and the Southside. The Liffey bends at Leixlip from a northeasterly route to a predominantly eastward direction, and this point also marks the transition to urban development from more agricultural land usage. The city itself was founded where the River Poddle met the Liffey, and the early Viking settlement was also facilitated by the small Steine or Steyne River, the larger Camac and the Bradogue, in particular.\nTwo secondary rivers further divide the city: the River Tolka, running southeast into Dublin Bay, and the River Dodder running northeast to near the mouth of the Liffey, and these and the Liffey have multiple tributaries. A number of lesser rivers and streams also flow to the sea within the suburban parts of the city.\nTwo canals\u00a0\u2013 the Grand Canal on the southside and the Royal Canal on the northside\u00a0\u2013 ring the inner city on their way from the west, both connecting with the River Shannon.\nClimate.\nSimilar to much of the rest of northwestern Europe, Dublin has a maritime climate (\"Cfb\") with mild-warm summers, cool winters, and a lack of temperature extremes. At Merrion Square, the coldest month is February, with an average minimum temperature of . The warmest month is July, with an average maximum temperature of . Due to the urban heat island effect, Dublin city has the warmest summertime nights in Ireland. The average minimum temperature at Merrion Square in July is . The lowest July temperature ever recorded at the station was on 3 July 1974.\nThe highest temperature officially recorded in Dublin is on 18 July 2022, at the Phoenix Park. A non-official record of was recorded at Phoenix Park in July 1876.\nDublin's sheltered location on the east coast makes it the driest place in Ireland, receiving only about half the rainfall of the west coast. Ringsend in the south of the city records the lowest rainfall in the country, with an average annual precipitation of . The average annual precipitation in the city centre is . At Merrion Square, the wettest year and driest year on record occurred within 5 years of each other. 1953 receiving just of rainfall, while 1958 recorded . The main precipitation in winter is rain. Snow showers occur between November and March. Hail is more common than snow. Strong Atlantic winds are most common in autumn. These winds can affect Dublin, but due to its easterly location, it is least affected compared to other parts of the country. In winter, easterly winds render the city colder and more prone to snow showers.\nDublin has long summer days and short winter days. Based on satellite observations, Met \u00c9ireann estimates that Dublin's coastal areas typically receive over 1,600 hours of sunshine per year, with the climate getting progressively duller inland. Dublin airport, located north of the city and about from the coast, records an average of 1,485 hours of sunshine per year. The station at Dublin airport has been maintaining climate records since November 1941. The sunniest year on record was 1,740 hours in 1959. The dullest year was 1987 with 1,240 hours of sunshine. The lowest amount of monthly sunshine on record was 16.4 hours in January 1996. The highest was 305.9 hours in July 1955.\nIn the 20th century, smog and air-pollution were an issue in the city, precipitating a ban on bituminous fuels across Dublin. The ban was implemented in 1990 to address black smoke concentrations, that had been linked to cardiovascular and respiratory deaths in residents. Since the ban, non-trauma death rates, respiratory death rates and cardiovascular death rates have declined \u2013 by an estimated 350 deaths annually.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCityscape.\nAreas.\nCity centre.\nThe historic city centre of Dublin is encircled by the Royal Canal and Grand Canal, bounded to the west by Heuston railway station and Phoenix Park, and to the east by the IFSC and the Docklands. O'Connell Street is the main thoroughfare of the inner city and many Dublin Bus routes, as well as the Green line of the Luas, have a stop at O'Connell Street. The main shopping streets of the inner city include Henry Street on the Northside, and Grafton Street on the Southside.\nIn some tourism and real-estate marketing contexts, inner Dublin is sometimes divided into a number of quarters. These include the Medieval Quarter (in the area of Dublin Castle, Christ Church and St Patrick's Cathedral and the old city walls), the Georgian Quarter (including the area around St Stephen's Green, Trinity College, and Merrion Square), the Docklands Quarter (around the Dublin Docklands and Silicon Docks), the Cultural Quarter (around Temple Bar), and Creative Quarter (between South William Street and George's Street).\nSuburbs.\nDublin has dozens of suburbs; northside suburbs include Blanchardstown, Finglas, Ballymun, Clontarf, Raheny, Malahide and Howth, while southside suburbs include Tallaght, Sandyford, Templeogue, Drimnagh, Rathmines, D\u00fan Laoghaire and Dalkey.\nStarting in the late 2010s, there was a significant amount of high density residential developments in the suburbs of Dublin, with mid to high-rise apartments being built in Sandyford, Ashtown, and Tallaght.\nCultural divide.\nA north\u2013south division once, to some extent, traditionally existed, with the River Liffey as the divider. The southside was, in recent times, generally seen as being more affluent and genteel than the northside. There have also been some social divisions evident between the coastal suburbs in the east of the city, and the newer developments further to the west.\nLandmarks.\nDublin has many landmarks and monuments dating back hundreds of years. One of the oldest is Dublin Castle, which was first founded as a major defensive work on the orders of England's King John in 1204, shortly after the Norman invasion of Ireland in 1169, when it was commanded that a castle be built with strong walls and good ditches for the defence of the city, the administration of justice, and the protection of the King's treasure. Largely complete by 1230, the castle was of typical Norman courtyard design, with a central square without a keep, bounded on all sides by tall defensive walls and protected at each corner by a circular tower. Sited to the south-east of Norman Dublin, the castle formed one corner of the outer perimeter of the city, using the River Poddle as a natural means of defence.\nOne of Dublin's most prominent landmarks is the Spire of Dublin, officially entitled the \"Monument of Light\". It is a conical spire made of stainless steel, completed in 2003 and located on O'Connell Street, where it meets Henry Street and North Earl Street. It replaced Nelson's Pillar and is intended to mark Dublin's place in the 21st century. The spire was designed by Ian Ritchie Architects, who sought an \"Elegant and dynamic simplicity bridging art and technology\". The base of the monument is lit and the top is illuminated to provide a beacon in the night sky across the city.\nThe Old Library of Trinity College Dublin, holding the Book of Kells, is one of the city's most visited sites. The Book of Kells is an illustrated manuscript created by Irish monks circa 800 AD. The Ha'penny Bridge, an iron footbridge over the River Liffey, is one of the most photographed sights in Dublin and is considered to be one of Dublin's most iconic landmarks.\nOther landmarks and monuments include Christ Church Cathedral and St Patrick's Cathedral, the Mansion House, the Molly Malone statue, the complex of buildings around Leinster House, including part of the National Museum of Ireland and the National Library of Ireland, The Custom House and \u00c1ras an Uachtar\u00e1in. Other sights include the Anna Livia monument. The Poolbeg Towers are also landmark features of Dublin, and visible from various spots around the city.\nParks.\nThere are 302 parks and 66 green spaces within the Dublin City Council area as of 2018, with the council managing over of parks. Public parks include the Phoenix Park, Herbert Park, St Stephen's Green, Saint Anne's Park and Bull Island. The Phoenix Park is about west of the city centre, north of the River Liffey. Its perimeter wall encloses , making it one of the largest walled city parks in Europe. It includes large areas of grassland and tree-lined avenues, and since the 17th century has been home to a herd of wild fallow deer. The residence of the President of Ireland (\u00c1ras an Uachtar\u00e1in), which was built in 1751, is located in the park. The park is also home to Dublin Zoo, Ashtown Castle, and the official residence of the United States Ambassador. Music concerts are also sometimes held in the park.\nSt Stephen's Green is adjacent to one of Dublin's main shopping streets, Grafton Street, and to a shopping centre named after it, while on its surrounding streets are the offices of a number of public bodies.\nSaint Anne's Park is a public park and recreational facility, shared between Raheny and Clontarf, both suburbs on the Northside. The park, the second largest municipal park in Dublin, is part of a former estate assembled by members of the Guinness family, beginning with Benjamin Lee Guinness in 1835. The largest municipal park is adjacent (North) Bull Island, also shared between Clontarf and Raheny, featuring a 5\u00a0km beach, Dollymount Strand.\nCity boundaries.\nFrom 1842, the boundaries of the city were comprehended by the baronies of Dublin City and the barony of Dublin. Over time, the city has absorbed area previously administered as part of County Dublin (now the three counties of D\u00fan Laoghaire\u2013Rathdown, Fingal and South Dublin), with a change in 1985 also returning areas to the county.\nEconomy.\n The Dublin region is the economic centre of Ireland, and was at the forefront of the country's economic expansion during the Celtic Tiger period. In 2009, Dublin was listed as the fourth richest city in the world by purchasing power and 10th richest by personal income. According to \"Mercer's 2011 Worldwide Cost of Living Survey\", Dublin was the 13th most expensive city in the European Union (down from 10th in 2010) and the 58th most expensive place to live in the world (down from 42nd in 2010). As of 2017[ [update]], approximately 874,400 people were employed in the Greater Dublin Area. Around 60% of people who are employed in Ireland's financial, ICT, and professional sectors are located in this area.\nA number of Dublin's traditional industries, such as food processing, textile manufacturing, brewing, and distilling have gradually declined, although Guinness has been brewed at the St. James's Gate Brewery since 1759. Economic improvements in the 1990s attracted a number of global pharmaceutical, information and communications technology companies to the city and Greater Dublin Area. Companies such as Microsoft, Google, Amazon, eBay, PayPal, Yahoo!, Facebook, X, Accenture, TikTok and Pfizer now have European headquarters or operational bases in the city with several located in enterprise clusters like the Digital Hub and Silicon Docks. The presence of these companies has driven economic expansion in the city and led to Dublin sometimes being referred to as the \"Tech Capital of Europe\".\nFinancial services have also become important to the city since the establishment of Dublin's International Financial Services Centre in 1987. More than 500 operations are approved to trade under the IFSC programme. The centre is host to half of the world's top 50 banks and to half of the top 20 insurance companies. Many international firms have established major headquarters in the city, such as Citibank. The Irish Stock Exchange (ISEQ), Internet Neutral Exchange (INEX) and Irish Enterprise Exchange (IEX) are also located in Dublin. Dublin has been positioned as one of the main cities vying to host Financial Services companies hoping to retain access to the Eurozone after Brexit. The Celtic Tiger also led to a temporary boom in construction, with large redevelopment projects in the Dublin Docklands and Spencer Dock. Completed projects include the Convention Centre, the 3Arena, and the Bord G\u00e1is Energy Theatre.\nIn the second quarter of 2018, Dublin touched its lowest unemployment rate in a decade, when it fell down to 5.7% as reported by the Dublin Economic Monitor. In November 2022, Dublin was ranked as one of the worst cities in the world for travel, health and cost of living. On 24 September 2022, thousands took to the streets in protest against the cost of living crisis.\nAs of 2024, the Gross Domestic Product of Dublin is \u20ac253.6 billion, meaning it has one of the biggest city economies in the European Union.\nTransport.\nRoad.\nThe road network in Ireland is primarily focused on Dublin. The M50 motorway, a semi-ring road which runs around the south, west and north of the city, connects important national primary routes to the rest of the country. In 2008, the West-Link toll bridge was replaced by the eFlow barrier-free tolling system, with a three-tiered charge system based on electronic tags and car pre-registration.\nThe first phase of a proposed eastern bypass for the city is the Dublin Port Tunnel, which officially opened in 2006 to mainly cater for heavy vehicles. The tunnel connects Dublin Port and the M1 motorway close to Dublin Airport. The city is also surrounded by an inner and outer orbital route. The inner orbital route runs approximately around the heart of the Georgian city and the outer orbital route runs primarily along the natural circle formed by Dublin's two canals, the Grand Canal and the Royal Canal, as well as the North and South Circular Roads.\nThe 2016 TomTom Traffic Index ranked Dublin the 15th most congested city in the world and the 7th most congested in Europe.\nBus.\nDublin is served by a network of nearly 200 bus routes which cover the city and suburbs. The majority of these are provided by Dublin Bus, with a modest number having been transferred to Go Ahead Ireland since 2018. A number of smaller companies also operate. Fares are generally calculated on a stage system based on distance travelled. There are several different levels of fares, which apply on most services. A \"Real Time Passenger Information\" system was introduced at Dublin Bus bus stops in 2012 in which signs relay display the projected time of the next buses' arrival based on its GPS position. The National Transport Authority is responsible for integration of bus and rail services in Dublin and has been involved in introducing a pre-paid smart card, called a TFI Leap Card, which can be used on all of Dublin's public transport services.\nThe BusConnects programme includes a number of proposed improvements to Dublin's bus network, including new spine and orbital routes. The spine routes are intended to increase the frequency of buses along major corridors, and the orbital routes aim to \"provide connections between suburbs and town centres, without having to travel into the City Centre\". In 2022, Dublin Bus began the process of electrifying its fleet with new battery-powered buses, with plans for 85% of Dublin buses to be zero-emission by 2032.\nCycling.\nThe 2011 census indicated that 5.9% of commuters in Dublin cycled. A 2013 report by Dublin City Council on traffic flows crossing the canals in and out of the city found that just under 10% of all traffic was made up of cyclists, representing an increase of 14.1% over 2012 and an 87.2% increase over 2006 levels. The increase was attributed to measures such as the Dublinbikes bike rental scheme, the provision of cycle lanes, public awareness campaigns to promote cycling and the introduction of the 30\u00a0km/h city centre speed limit.\nDublin City Council began installing cycle lanes and tracks throughout the city in the 1990s, and as of 2012[ [update]] the city had over of specific on- and off-road tracks for cyclists. In 2011, the city was ranked 9th of major world cities on the \"Copenhagenize Index of Bicycle-Friendly Cities\". The same index showed a fall to 15th in 2015, and Dublin was outside the top 20 in 2017.\nDublinbikes is a self-service bicycle rental scheme which has been in operation in Dublin since 2009. Sponsored by JCDecaux and Just Eat, the scheme consists of hundreds of unisex bicycles stationed at 44 terminals throughout the city centre. Users must make a subscription for either an annual Long Term Hire Card or purchase a three-day ticket. As of 2018[ [update]], Dublinbikes had over 66,000 long-term subscribers making over 2\u00a0million journeys per year.\nRail.\nHeuston and Connolly stations are the two main railway termini in Dublin. Operated by Iarnr\u00f3d \u00c9ireann, the Dublin Suburban Rail network consists of five railway lines serving the Greater Dublin Area and commuter towns such as Drogheda and Dundalk in County Louth, Gorey in County Wexford, and extending as far as Portlaoise in County Laois, and once a day to Newry. One of the five lines is the electrified Dublin Area Rapid Transit (DART) line, which runs primarily along the coast of Dublin, comprising 31 stations, from Malahide and Howth southwards as far as Bray and Greystones in County Wicklow. Commuter rail operates on the other four lines using Irish Rail diesel multiple units. In 2013, passengers for DART and Dublin Suburban lines were 16\u00a0million and 11.7\u00a0million, respectively (around 75% of all Irish Rail passengers).\nDublin once had an extensive system of trams but this was largely phased out by 1949. A new light rail system, often described as a tram system, the Luas, was launched in 2004, and is run by Transdev Ireland (under contract from Transport Infrastructure Ireland), carrying over 34\u00a0million passengers annually. The network consists of two interconnecting lines; the Red Line links the Docklands and city centre with the south-western suburbs of Tallaght and Saggart, while the Green Line connects northern inner city suburbs and the main city centre with suburbs to the south of the city including Sandyford and Brides Glen, mostly along the former route of the Harcourt Street railway line. Together these lines comprise a total 67 stops and of track. Construction of a 6\u00a0km extension to the Green Line, bringing it into the north of the city, commenced in June 2013 and was opened for passenger travel on 9 December 2017.\nA metro service is proposed under the name of Metrolink, and planned to run from Dublin's northside to Charlemont via Dublin Airport and St. Stephen's Green.\nRail and ferry.\nDublin Connolly is connected by bus to Dublin Port and ferries run by Irish Ferries and Stena Line to Holyhead for connecting trains on the North Wales Coast Line to Chester, Crewe and London Euston. Dublin Connolly to Dublin Port can be reached via Amiens Street, Dublin into Store Street or by Luas via Bus\u00e1ras where Dublin Bus operates route 53 to the Irish Ferries Terminal.\nAir.\nDublin Airport.\nDublin Airport (owned and operated by DAA) is located north of Dublin city, near Swords in the administrative county of Fingal. The headquarters of Ireland's flag carrier Aer Lingus and regional airline CityJet are located there, and those of low-cost carrier Ryanair nearby. The airport offers a short and medium-haul network, domestic services to regional airports in Ireland, and long-haul services to the United States, Canada, and the Middle East. Dublin Airport is the 11th busiest in the European Union, and by far the busiest airport on the island of Ireland.\nIn 2015 and 2016, transatlantic traffic grew, with 158 summer flights a week to North America, making it the sixth largest European hub for that route over the year. Transatlantic traffic was also the fastest-growing segment of the market for the airport in 2016, in which a 16% increase from 2015 brought the yearly number of passengers travelling between Dublin and North America to 2.9\u00a0million.\nFrom 2010 to 2016, Dublin Airport saw an increase of nearly 9.5\u00a0million passengers in its annual traffic, as the number of commercial aircraft movements has similarly followed a growth trend from 163,703 in 2013 to 191,233 in 2015.\nIn 2019, Dublin Airport was the 12th busiest airport in Europe, with almost 33 million passengers passing through the airport.\nOther air transport.\nDublin is also served by Weston Airport and other small facilities, by a range of helicopter operators, and the military and some State services use Casement Aerodrome nearby.\nEducation.\nDublin is the largest centre of education in Ireland, and is home to four universities and a number of other higher education institutions. It was the European Capital of Science in 2012.\nThe University of Dublin is the oldest university in Ireland, dating from the 16th century, and is located in the city centre. Its sole constituent college, Trinity College (TCD), was established by Royal Charter in 1592 under Elizabeth I. It was closed to Roman Catholics until 1793, and the Catholic hierarchy then banned Roman Catholics from attending until 1970. It is situated in the city centre, on College Green, and has over 18,000 students.\nThe National University of Ireland (NUI) has its seat in Dublin, which is also the location of the associated \"constituent university\" of University College Dublin (UCD), which has over 30,000 students. Founded in 1854, it is now the largest university in Ireland. UCD's main campus is at Belfield, about from the city centre, in the southeastern suburbs.\nAs of 2019, Dublin's principal, and Ireland's largest, institution for technological education and research, Dublin Institute of Technology (DIT), with origins in 1887, has merged with two major suburban third level institutions, Institute of Technology, Tallaght and Institute of Technology, Blanchardstown, to form Technological University Dublin, Ireland's second largest university by student population. The new university offers a wide range of courses in areas include engineering, architecture, the sciences, health, journalism, digital media, hospitality, business, art and design, music and the humanities programmes, and has three long-term campuses, at Grangegorman, Tallaght and Blanchardstown.\nDublin City University (DCU), formerly the National Institute for Higher Education (NIHE) Dublin, offers courses in business, engineering, science, communication courses, languages and primary education. It has around 16,000 students, and its main campus is located about from the city centre, in the northern suburbs. Aside from the main Glasnevin Campus, the Drumcondra campuses includes the former St. Patrick's College of Education, Drumcondra now also hosting students from the nearby Mater Dei Institute of Education and students from the Church of Ireland College of Education at the DCU Campus at All Hallows College.\nThe Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland (RCSI) conducts a medical school which is both a university (since 2019) and a recognised college of the NUI, and is situated at St. Stephen's Green in the city centre; there are also large medical schools within UCD and Trinity College. The National College of Art and Design (NCAD) provides education and research in art, design and media. The National College of Ireland (NCI) is also based in Dublin, as well as the Economic and Social Research Institute, a social science research institute, on Sir John Rogerson's Quay, and the Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies.\nThe Institute of International and European Affairs is also in Dublin. Dublin Business School (DBS) is Ireland's largest private third level institution with over 9,000 students located on Aungier Street, and Griffith College Dublin has its main facility in Portobello. There are also smaller specialised colleges, including The Gaiety School of Acting. The Irish public administration and management training centre has its base in Dublin, the Institute of Public Administration provides a range of undergraduate and post graduate awards via the National University of Ireland and in some instances, Queen's University Belfast.\nDublin is also home to the Royal Irish Academy, membership of which is considered Ireland's highest academic honour.\nThe suburban town of D\u00fan Laoghaire is home to the D\u00fan Laoghaire Institute of Art, Design and Technology (IADT), which supports training and research in art, design, business, psychology and media technology. Dublin joined the UNESCO Global Network of Learning Cities in 2019.\nDemographics.\nThe City of Dublin is the area administered by Dublin City Council. The traditional County Dublin includes the city and the administrative counties of D\u00fan Laoghaire\u2013Rathdown, Fingal and South Dublin. The Greater Dublin Area includes County Dublin and the adjoining counties, County Kildare, County Meath and County Wicklow.\nIn the 2022 census, the population of the City of Dublin was 592,713. The population of Dublin city and suburbs was 1,263,219. County Dublin had a population of 1,458,154. The population of the Greater Dublin Area was 2,082,605.\nOf the population of Dublin city and its suburbs, 62.9% (794,925) were born in Dublin, 26.6% (336,021) were born outside of Ireland, while the remaining 10.5% (132,273) were born in a county other than Dublin.\nAfter World War II, Italians were by far the largest immigrant group in both Dublin and Ireland, and became synonymous with the catering and restaurant landscape. Since the late 1990s, Dublin has had a significant level of net immigration, with the greatest numbers coming from the European Union, especially the United Kingdom, Poland and Lithuania. There is also immigration from outside Europe, including from Pakistan, Brazil, the Philippines, China, India and Nigeria. Dublin is home to a greater proportion of newer arrivals than any other part of Ireland. Sixty percent of Ireland's Asian population lives in Dublin.\nDublin attracts the largest proportion of non-Catholic migrants from other countries. Increased secularisation in Ireland has prompted a drop in regular Catholic church attendance in Dublin from over 90 percent in the mid-1970s, down to 14 percent in a 2011 survey, and less than 2% in some areas In the 2016 census, 68.2% of Dublin's population identified as Catholic, 12.7% as other stated religions, with 19.1% having no religion or no religion stated.\nIn the 2022 census, the population of County Dublin self-identified as 80.4% white (68.0% white Irish, 12.0% other white and 0.4% Irish traveller), 5.8% Asian, 3.0% mixed backgrounds, 2.2% Black and 8.5% not stated. In the same census, the ethnic makeup of Dublin city was 76.81% white (including 64.23% white Irish and 12.19% other white people), 12.98% not stated, 5.11% Asian, 3.50% other and 1.58% black.\nAs of December 2024, there were 1,467 families living in emergency accommodation in the Dublin region. This is a decrease of 57 on the November 2024 number, and an increase of 67 when compared with December 2023, when there were 1,400 families in emergency accommodation.\nCulture.\nThe arts.\nDublin has a significant literary history, and produced many literary figures, including Nobel laureates William Butler Yeats, George Bernard Shaw and Samuel Beckett. Other influential writers and playwrights include Oscar Wilde, Jonathan Swift and the creator of Dracula, Bram Stoker. It is also the location of key and notable works of James Joyce, including \"Ulysses\", which is set in Dublin and includes much topical detail. \"Dubliners\" is a collection of short stories by Joyce about incidents and typical characters of the city during the early 20th century. Other notable writers include J. M. Synge, Se\u00e1n O'Casey, Brendan Behan, Maeve Binchy, John Banville and Roddy Doyle. Ireland's biggest libraries and literary museums are found in Dublin, including the National Print Museum of Ireland and National Library of Ireland. In July 2010, Dublin was named as a UNESCO City of Literature, joining Edinburgh, Melbourne and Iowa City with the permanent title.\nHandel's oratorio Messiah was first performed at Neal's Music Hall, in Fishamble Street, on 13 April 1742.\nThere are several theatres within the city centre, and various well-known actors have emerged from the Dublin theatrical scene, including Noel Purcell, Michael Gambon, Brendan Gleeson, Stephen Rea, Colin Farrell, Colm Meaney and Gabriel Byrne. The best known theatres include the Gaiety, Abbey, Olympia, Gate, and Grand Canal. The Gaiety specialises in musical and operatic productions, and also opens its doors after the evening theatre production to host a variety of live music, dancing, and films. The Abbey was founded in 1904 by a group that included Yeats with the aim of promoting indigenous literary talent. It went on to provide a breakthrough for some of the city's most famous writers, such as Synge, Yeats himself and George Bernard Shaw. The Gate was founded in 1928 to promote European and American Avant Garde works. The Grand Canal Theatre is a newer 2,111 capacity theatre which opened in 2010 in the Grand Canal Dock area.\nApart from being the focus of the country's literature and theatre, Dublin is the focal point for much of Irish art and the Irish artistic scene. The Book of Kells, a world-famous manuscript produced by Celtic monks in AD 800 and an example of Insular art, is on display in Trinity College. The Chester Beatty Library houses a collection of manuscripts, miniature paintings, prints, drawings, rare books and decorative arts assembled by American mining millionaire (and honorary Irish citizen) Sir Alfred Chester Beatty (1875\u20131968). The collections date from 2700 BCE onwards and are drawn from Asia, the Middle East, North Africa and Europe.\nPublic art galleries are found across the city and are free to visit, including the Irish Museum of Modern Art, the National Gallery, the Hugh Lane Municipal Gallery, the Douglas Hyde Gallery, the Project Arts Centre and the exhibition space of the Royal Hibernian Academy. Private galleries in Dublin include Green on Red Gallery, Kerlin Gallery, Kevin Kavanagh Gallery and Mother's Tankstation.\nThree branches of the National Museum of Ireland are located in Dublin: Archaeology in Kildare Street, Decorative Arts and History in Collins Barracks and Natural History in Merrion Street. Dublin is home to the National College of Art and Design, which dates from 1746, and Dublin Institute of Design, founded in 1991. Dublinia is a living history attraction showcasing the Viking and Medieval history of the city.\nDublin has long had an 'underground' arts scene, with Temple Bar hosting artists in the 1980s, and spaces such as the Project Arts Centre acting as a hub for collectives and new exhibitions. \"The Guardian\" noted that Dublin's independent and underground arts flourished during the economic recession of c.\u20092010. Dublin also has many dramatic, musical and operatic companies, including Festival Productions, Lyric Opera Productions, the Pioneers' Musical &amp; Dramatic Society, Rathmines and Rathgar Musical Society, the Glasnevin Musical Society, Third Day Chorale, Second Age Theatre Company, Irish National Opera.\nDublin was shortlisted to be World Design Capital 2014. Taoiseach Enda Kenny was quoted to say that Dublin \"would be an ideal candidate to host the World Design Capital in 2014\".\nIn October 2021, Dublin was shortlisted for the European Commission's 2022 European Capital of Smart Tourism award along with Bordeaux, Copenhagen, Florence, Ljubljana, Palma de Mallorca and Valencia.\nEntertainment.\nDublin has a vibrant nightlife and is reputedly one of Europe's most youthful cities; in 2009 it was estimated that 50% of its citizens were younger than 25. There are many pubs across the city centre, with the area around St. Stephen's Green and Grafton Street, especially Harcourt Street, Camden Street, Wexford Street and Leeson Street, the location of many nightclubs and pubs.\nThe best known area for nightlife is Temple Bar, south of the River Liffey. The area has become popular among tourists, including stag and hen parties from the UK. It was developed as Dublin's cultural quarter and does retain this spirit as a centre for small arts productions, photographic and artists' studios, and in the form of street performers and small music venues; however, it has been criticised as overpriced, false and dirty by Lonely Planet. The areas around Leeson Street, Harcourt Street, South William Street and Camden/George's Street are popular nightlife spots for locals.\nMusic.\nLive music is played on streets and at venues throughout Dublin, and the city has produced several musicians and groups of international success, including the Dubliners, Thin Lizzy, the Boomtown Rats, U2, the Script, Sin\u00e9ad O'Connor, Boyzone, Kodaline, Fontaines D.C. and Westlife. Dublin has several mid-range venues that host live music throughout the week, including Whelans and Vicar Street. The 3Arena venue in the Dublin Docklands plays host to visiting global performers.\nShopping.\nDublin city centre is a popular shopping destination for both locals and tourists. The city has numerous shopping districts, particularly around Grafton Street and Henry Street. The city centre is also the location of large department stores, including Arnotts, Brown Thomas and (prior to its 2015 closure) Clerys.\nWhile the city has seen the loss of some traditional market sites, Moore Street remains one of the city's oldest trading districts. There has also been some growth in local farmers' markets and other markets. In 2007, Dublin Food Co-op relocated to a warehouse in The Liberties area, where it is home to market and community events. Suburban Dublin has several modern retail centres, including Dundrum Town Centre, Blanchardstown Centre, the Square in Tallaght, Liffey Valley Shopping Centre in Clondalkin, Omni Shopping Centre in Santry, Nutgrove Shopping Centre in Rathfarnham, Northside Shopping Centre in Coolock and Swords Pavilions in Swords.\nMedia.\nDublin is the centre of both media and communications in Ireland, with many newspapers, radio stations, television stations and telephone companies based there. RT\u00c9 is Ireland's national state broadcaster, and is based in Donnybrook. Fair City is RT\u00c9's soap opera, located in the fictional Dublin suburb of \"Carraigstown\".\nVirgin Media Television, eir Sport, MTV Ireland and Sky News are also based in the city. The headquarters of An Post and telecommunications companies such as Eir, as well as mobile operators Vodafone and 3 are all located there. Dublin is also the headquarters of national newspapers such as \"The Irish Times\" and \"Irish Independent\", as well as local newspapers such as \"The Evening Herald\".\nAs well as being home to RT\u00c9 Radio, Dublin also hosts the national radio networks Today FM and Newstalk, and local stations. Commercial radio stations based in the city include 4fm (94.9 MHz), Dublin's 98FM (98.1\u00a0MHz), Radio Nova 100FM (100.3\u00a0MHz), Q102 (102.2\u00a0MHz), SPIN 1038 (103.8\u00a0MHz), FM104 (104.4\u00a0MHz), Sunshine 106.8 (106.8\u00a0MHz). There are also numerous community and special interest stations, including Dublin City FM (103.2\u00a0MHz), Dublin South FM (93.9\u00a0MHz), Liffey Sound FM (96.4\u00a0MHz), Near FM (90.3\u00a0MHz), and Raidi\u00f3 Na Life (106.4\u00a0MHz).\nSport.\nGAA.\nCroke Park is the largest sport stadium in Ireland. The headquarters of the Gaelic Athletic Association, it has a capacity of 82,300. It is the third-largest stadium in Europe after Nou Camp in Barcelona and Wembley Stadium in London. It hosts the premier Gaelic football and hurling games, international rules football and irregularly other sporting and non-sporting events including concerts. Muhammad Ali fought there in 1972 and it played host to the opening and closing ceremonies of the 2003 Special Olympics. It also has conference and banqueting facilities. There is a GAA Museum there and tours of the stadium are offered, including a rooftop walk of the stadium. During the redevelopment of Lansdowne Road, Croke Park played host to the Irish Rugby Union Team and Republic of Ireland national football team as well as hosting the Heineken Cup rugby 2008\u201309 semi-final between Munster and Leinster, which set a world record attendance for a club rugby match. The Dublin GAA team plays most of their home league hurling games at Parnell Park.\nRugby Union.\nIRFU Stadium Lansdowne Road was laid out in 1874. This was the venue for home games of both the Irish Rugby Union Team and the Republic of Ireland national football team. A joint venture between the Irish Rugby Football Union, the FAI and the Government, saw it redeveloped into a new state-of-the-art 50,000 seat Aviva Stadium, which opened in May 2010. Lansdowne Road/Aviva Stadium hosted the Heineken Cup final in 1999, 2003, 2013, and 2023. Rugby union team Leinster Rugby play their competitive home games in the RDS Arena and the Aviva Stadium, while Donnybrook Stadium hosts their friendlies and A games, Ireland A and Women, Leinster Schools and Youths and the home club games of All Ireland League clubs Old Wesley and Bective Rangers. County Dublin is home for 13 of the senior rugby union clubs in Ireland including 5 of the 10 sides in the top division 1A.\nAssociation football.\nDublin is home to five League of Ireland association football clubs: Bohemian, Shamrock Rovers, Shelbourne, St Patrick's Athletic and University College Dublin. The first Irish side to reach the group stages of a European competition (2011\u201312 UEFA Europa League group stage) are Shamrock Rovers, who play at Tallaght Stadium in South Dublin. Bohemian F.C play at Dalymount Park, the oldest football stadium in the country, and home ground for the Ireland football team from 1904 to the 1970s. St Patrick's Athletic play at Richmond Park; University College Dublin at the UCD Bowl in D\u00fan Laoghaire\u2013Rathdown; and Shelbourne at Tolka Park. Tolka Park, Dalymount Park, UCD Bowl and Tallaght Stadium, along with the Carlisle Grounds in Bray, hosted all Group 3 games in the intermediary round of the 2011 UEFA Regions' Cup. The Aviva Stadium hosted the 2011 UEFA Europa League final and the 2024 UEFA Europa League final.\nCricket.\nDublin has two ODI cricket grounds in Castle Avenue (Clontarf Cricket Club) and Malahide Cricket Club Ground. College Park has Test status and played host to Ireland's first Test cricket match, a women's match against Pakistan in 2000. The men's Irish cricket team also played their first Test match against Pakistan at Malahide Cricket Club Ground during 2018. Leinster Lightning play their home inter-provincial matches in Dublin at College Park.\nOther.\nThe Dublin Marathon has been run since 1980 at the end of October. The Women's Mini Marathon has been run since 1983 on the first Monday in June, which is also a bank holiday in Ireland. It is said to be the largest all female event of its kind in the world. The Great Ireland Run takes place in Dublin's Phoenix Park in mid-April.\nTwo Dublin baseball clubs compete in the Irish Baseball League. The Dublin Spartans and the Dublin Bay Hurricanes are both based at The O'Malley Fields at Corkagh Park. The Portmarnock Red Rox, from outside the city, competes in the Baseball Ireland B League.\nThe Dublin area hosts greyhound racing at Shelbourne Park and horse racing at Leopardstown. The Dublin Horse Show takes place at the RDS, which hosted the Show Jumping World Championships in 1982. The national boxing arena is located in The National Stadium on the South Circular Road. The National Basketball Arena is located in Tallaght, is the home of the Irish basketball team, the venue for the basketball league finals, and has also hosted boxing and wrestling events. The National Aquatic Centre in Blanchardstown is Ireland's largest indoor water leisure facility. There are also Gaelic Handball, hockey and athletics stadia, most notably Morton Stadium in Santry, which held the athletics events of the 2003 Special Olympics.\nCuisine.\nAs of the 2024 Michelin Guide, seven Dublin restaurants shared ten Michelin stars \u2013 including Restaurant Patrick Guilbaud, Liath and Chapter One with two. Irish-born Kevin Thornton was awarded two Michelin stars in 2001 \u2013 though his restaurant, Thornton's, closed in 2016. The Dublin Institute of Technology commenced a bachelor's degree in culinary skills in 1999.\nHistorically, Irish coffee houses and cafes were associated with those working in media. Since the beginning of the 21st century, with the growth of apartment living in the city, Dublin's caf\u00e9s attracted younger patrons looking for an informal gathering place and an ad hoc office. Caf\u00e9s became more popular in the city, and Irish-owned coffee chains like Java Republic, Insomnia, and O'Brien's Sandwich Bars now compete internationally. In 2008, Irish barista Stephen Morrissey won the title of World Barista Champion.\nImmigrant groups, such as Chinese, Japanese and Italian \u00e9migr\u00e9s, have also opened restaurants around Dublin. A number of South-East Asians immigrated from places such as Hong Kong, Malaysia and Mainland China to Dublin during the 1960s and opened restaurants featuring their cuisines. Modern Irish adaptions of Chinese cuisine include the Spice bag, a takeaway dish consisting of mainly chicken, chips and vegetables. In 2020, it was voted 'Ireland's Favourite Takeaway Dish' in the Just Eat National Takeaway Awards.\nEnglish and Irish languages.\nDublin was traditionally a city of two languages, English and Irish, a situation found also in the area around it, the Pale. The Irish of County Dublin represented the easternmost extension of a broad central dialect area which stretched between Leinster and Connacht, but had its own local characteristics. It may also have been influenced by the east Ulster dialect of County Meath and County Louth to the north.\nIn the words of a 16th-century English administrator, William Gerard (1518\u20131581): \"All Englishe, and the most part with delight, even in Dublin, speak Irishe\". The Old English historian Richard Stanihurst (1547\u20131618) wrote as follows: \"When their posteritie became not altogither so warie in keeping, as their ancestors were valiant in conquering, the Irish language was free dennized in the English Pale: this canker tooke such deep root, as the bodie that before was whole and sound, was by little and little festered, and in manner wholly putrified\".\nEnglish authorities of the Cromwellian period accepted the fact that Irish was widely spoken in the city and its surrounds. In 1655 several local dignitaries were ordered to oversee a lecture in Irish to be given in Dublin. In March 1656 a converted Catholic priest, S\u00e9amas Corcy, was appointed to preach in Irish at Bride's parish every Sunday, and was also ordered to preach at Drogheda and Athy. In 1657 the English colonists in Dublin presented a petition to the Municipal Council complaining that in Dublin itself \"there is Irish commonly and usually spoken\".\nIn early 18th century Dublin, Irish was the language of a group of poets and scribes led by Se\u00e1n and Tadhg \u00d3 Neachtain. Scribal activity in Irish persisted in Dublin right through the 18th century. There were still native Irish speakers in County Dublin at the time of the 1851 census.\nThough the number of Irish speakers declined throughout Ireland in the 19th century, the end of the century saw a Gaelic revival, centred in Dublin and accompanied by renewed literary activity. This was the harbinger of a steady renewal of urban Irish, though with new characteristics of its own.\nCurrent era.\nThe native language of most Dubliners today is English, and several local dialects are subsumed under the label Dublin English. Dublin also has many thousands of habitual Irish speakers, with the 2016 census showing that daily speakers (outside the education system) numbered 14,903. They form part of an urban Irish-speaking cohort which is generally better-educated than monoglot English speakers.\nThe Dublin Irish-speaking cohort is supported by a number of Irish-medium schools. There are 12,950 students in the Dublin region attending 34 gaelscoileanna (Irish-language primary schools) and 10 gaelchol\u00e1ist\u00ed (Irish-language secondary schools).\nTwo Irish language radio stations, Raidi\u00f3 Na Life and RT\u00c9 Raidi\u00f3 na Gaeltachta, have studios in the city, and the online station Raidi\u00f3 R\u00ed-R\u00e1 broadcasts from studios in the city. A number of Irish language agencies are also located in the capital. offers language classes and is used as a meeting place for different groups. The closest Gaeltacht to Dublin is the County Meath Gaeltacht of R\u00e1th Cairn and Baile Ghib which is away.\nInternational relations.\nDublin city council has an International Relations Unit, established in 2007. It works on hosting of international delegations, staff exchanges, international promotion of the city, twinning and partnerships, work with multi-city organisations such as Eurocities, economic partnerships and advice to other Council units.\nTwin and partner cities.\nDublin is twinned with five places:\nThe city also has \"friendship\" or \"co-operation agreements\" with a number of other cities: Moscow (since 2009) and St Petersburg (since 2010) in Russia and Guadalajara in Mexico (since 2013), and has previously proposed an agreement with Rio de Janeiro also. Previous agreements have included those with Mexico City (2014\u22122018), Tbilisi in Georgia (2014\u22122017) and Wuhan in China (2016\u22122019).\nPortal project.\nAs of 2025, Dublin was one of several cities containing an interactive 'Portal' installation. This series of installations shows a video feed of locations including Dublin, Vilnius in Lithuania, Lublin in Poland, Philadelphia in the United States and Ipswich in United Kingdom.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8506", "revid": "17111301", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8506", "title": "DirectX", "text": "Collection of multimedia related APIs on Microsoft platforms\nMicrosoft DirectX is a collection of application programming interfaces (APIs) for handling tasks related to multimedia, especially game programming and video, on Microsoft platforms. Originally, the names of these APIs all began with \"Direct\", such as Direct3D, DirectDraw, DirectMusic, DirectPlay, DirectSound, and so forth. The name \"DirectX\" was coined as a shorthand term for all of these APIs (the \"X\" standing in for the particular API names) and soon became the name of the collection. When Microsoft later set out to develop a gaming console, the \"X\" was used as the basis of the name Xbox to indicate that the console was based on DirectX technology. The \"X\" initial has been carried forward in the naming of APIs designed for the Xbox such as XInput and the Cross-platform Audio Creation Tool (XACT), while the DirectX pattern has been continued for Windows APIs such as Direct2D and DirectWrite.\nDirect3D (the 3D graphics API within DirectX) is widely used in the development of video games for Microsoft Windows and the Xbox line of consoles. Direct3D is also used by other software applications for visualization and graphics tasks such as CAD/CAM engineering. As Direct3D is the most widely publicized component of DirectX, it is common to see the names \"DirectX\" and \"Direct3D\" used interchangeably.\nThe DirectX software development kit (SDK) consists of runtime libraries in redistributable binary form, along with accompanying documentation and headers for use in coding. Originally, the runtimes were only installed by games or explicitly by the user. Windows 95 did not launch with DirectX, but DirectX was included with Windows 95 OEM Service Release 2. Windows 98 and Windows NT 4.0 both shipped with DirectX, as has every version of Windows released since. The SDK is available as a free download. While the runtimes are proprietary, closed-source software, source code is provided for most of the SDK samples. Starting with the release of Windows 8 Developer Preview, DirectX SDK has been integrated into Windows SDK.\nDevelopment history.\nIn late 1994, Microsoft was ready to release Windows 95, its next operating system. An important factor in its value to consumers was the programs that would be able to run on it. Microsoft employee Alex St. John had been in discussions with various game developers asking how likely they would be to bring their MS-DOS games to Windows 95, and found the responses mostly negative, since programmers had found that the Windows environment did not provide the necessary features which were available under MS-DOS using BIOS routines or direct hardware access. There were also strong fears of compatibility; a notable case of this was from \"Disney's Animated Storybook: The Lion King\" which was based on the WinG programming interface. Due to numerous incompatible graphics drivers from new Compaq computers that were not tested with the WinG interface which came bundled with the game, it crashed so frequently on many desktop systems that parents had flooded Disney's call-in help lines.\nAnother Microsoft employee, Craig Eisler, had joined the Windows 95 multimedia team to work on game technology. Hearing from St. John that the technology Microsoft had was not resonating with developers, Eisler set out to build a new set of APIs and a driver model that would allow developers to access the native capabilities of graphics hardware, and gave graphics hardware companies the ability to innovate in ways that developers could use. Needing program management support, Eisler recruited Eric Engstrom, and together they were granted 11 patents for their DirectX work. The project was codenamed the Manhattan Project, like the World War II project of the same name, and the idea was to displace the Japanese-developed video game consoles with personal computers running Microsoft's operating system. It had initially used the radiation symbol as its logo but Microsoft asked the team to change the logo. Management did not agree to the project as they were already writing off Windows as a gaming platform, but the three committed towards this project's development. Their rebellious nature led Brad Silverberg, the senior vice president of Microsoft's office products, to name the trio the \"Beastie Boys\".\nMost of the work by the three was done among other assigned projects starting near the end of 1994. Within four months and with input from several hardware manufacturers, the team had developed the first set of application programming interfaces (APIs) which they presented at the 1995 Game Developers Conference. The SDK included libraries implementing DirectDraw for bit-mapped graphics, DirectSound for audio, and DirectPlay for communication between players over a network. Furthermore, an extended joystick API already present in Windows 95 was documented for the first time as DirectInput, while a description of how to implement the immediate start of the installation procedure of a software title after inserting its CD-ROM, a feature called AutoPlay, was also part of the SDK. The \"Direct\" part of the library was so named as these routines bypassed existing core Windows\u00a095 routines and accessed the computer hardware only via a hardware abstraction layer (HAL). Though the team had named it the \"Game SDK\" (software development kit), the name \"DirectX\" came from one journalist that had mocked the naming scheme of the various libraries. The team opted to continue to use that naming scheme and call the project DirectX.\nThe first version of DirectX was released in September 1995 as the Windows Game SDK. Its DirectDraw component was the Win32 replacement for the DCI and WinG APIs for Windows 3.1. DirectX allowed all versions of Microsoft Windows, starting with Windows 95, to incorporate high-performance multimedia. Eisler wrote about the frenzy to build DirectX 1 through 5 in his blog.\nTo get more developers on board DirectX, Microsoft approached id Software's John Carmack and offered to port \"Doom\" and \"Doom 2\" from MS-DOS to DirectX, free of charge, with id retaining all publishing rights to the game. Carmack agreed, and Microsoft's Gabe Newell led the porting project. The first game was released as \"Doom 95\" in August 1996, the first published DirectX game. Microsoft promoted the game heavily with Bill Gates appearing in ads for the title.\nDirectX 2.0 became a built-in component of Windows with the releases of Windows 95 OSR2 and Windows NT 4.0 in mid-1996. Since Windows 95 itself was still new and few games had been released for it, Microsoft engaged in heavy promotion of DirectX to developers who were generally distrustful of Microsoft's ability to build a gaming platform in Windows. Alex St. John, the evangelist for DirectX, staged an elaborate event at the 1996 Computer Game Developers Conference which game developer Jay Barnson described as a Roman theme, including real lions, togas, and something resembling an indoor carnival. It was at this event that Microsoft first introduced Direct3D, and demonstrated multiplayer \"MechWarrior\u00a02\" being played over the Internet.\nThe DirectX team faced the challenging task of testing each DirectX release against an array of computer hardware and software. A variety of different graphics cards, audio cards, motherboards, CPUs, input devices, games, and other multimedia applications were tested with each beta and final release. The DirectX team also built and distributed tests that allowed the hardware industry to confirm that new hardware designs and driver releases would be compatible with DirectX.\nPrior to DirectX Microsoft had added OpenGL to its Windows\u00a0NT platform. OpenGL had been designed as a cross-platform, window system independent software interface to graphics hardware by Silicon Graphics, Inc. to bring 3D graphics programming into the mainstream of application programming. It could also be used for 2D graphics and imaging, and was controlled by the Architectural Review Board (ARB), which included Microsoft. Direct3D was intended to be a Microsoft controlled alternative to OpenGL, focused initially on game use. As 3D gaming grew, game developers discovered that OpenGL could also be used effectively for game development. At that point, a \"battle\" began between supporters of the cross-platform OpenGL and the Windows-only Direct3D. Incidentally, OpenGL was supported at Microsoft by the DirectX team. If a developer chose to use the OpenGL 3D graphics API in computer games, the other APIs of DirectX besides Direct3D were often combined with OpenGL, since OpenGL does not include all of DirectX's functionality, such as sound or joystick support.\nIn a console-specific version, DirectX was used as a basis for Microsoft's Xbox, Xbox 360 and Xbox One console API. The API was developed jointly between Microsoft and Nvidia, which developed the custom graphics hardware used by the original Xbox. The Xbox API was similar to DirectX version 8.1, but is non-updateable like other console technologies. The Xbox was code named DirectXbox, but this was shortened to Xbox for its commercial name.\nIn 2002, Microsoft released DirectX 9 with support for the use of much longer shader programs than before with pixel and vertex shader version 2.0. Microsoft has continued to update the DirectX suite since then, introducing Shader Model 3.0 in DirectX 9.0c, released in August 2004.\nAs of April 2005, DirectShow was removed from DirectX and moved to the Microsoft Platform SDK instead.\nDirectX has been confirmed to be present in Microsoft's Windows Phone 8.\nReal-time raytracing was announced as DXR in 2018. Support for compiling HLSL to SPIR-V was also added in the DirectX Shader Compiler the same year.\nComponents.\nDirectX is composed of multiple APIs:\nMicrosoft has deprecated the following components:\nDirectX functionality is provided in the form of COM-style objects and interfaces. Additionally, while not DirectX components themselves, managed objects have been built on top of some parts of DirectX, such as Managed Direct3D and the XNA graphics library on top of Direct3D 9.\nMicrosoft distributes the debugging tool for DirectX called \"PIX\".\nVersions.\nDirectX 9.\nIntroduced by Microsoft in 2002, DirectX 9 was a significant release in the DirectX family. It brought many important features and enhancements to the graphics capabilities of Windows. At the time of its release, it supported Windows 98, Windows Me, Windows 2000, and Windows XP. As of August 2024 it remains supported by all subsequent versions of Windows for backward compatibility.\nOne of the key features introduced in DirectX 9 was Shader Model 2.0, which included Pixel Shader 2.0 and Vertex Shader 2.0. These allowed for more complex and realistic graphics rendering. It also brought much needed performance improvements through better hardware acceleration capabilities, and better utilization of GPU resources. It also introduced HLSL, which provided a more accessible way for developers to produce shaders.\nDirectX 9.0c was an update to the original, and has been continuously changed over the years affecting its compatibility with older operating systems. As of January 2007, Windows 2000 and Windows XP became the minimum required operating systems. This means support was officially dropped for Windows 98 and Windows Me. As of August 2024, DirectX 9.0c is still regularly updated.\nWindows XP SP2 and newer include DirectX 9.0c, but may require a newer DirectX runtime redistributable installation for DirectX 9.0c applications compiled with the February 2005 DirectX 9.0 SDK or newer.\nDirectX 9 had a significant impact on game development. Many games from the mid-2000s to early 2010s were developed using DirectX 9 and it became a standard target for developers. Even today, some games still use DirectX 9 as an option for older or less powerful hardware.\nDirectX 10.\nA major update to the DirectX API, DirectX 10 shipped with and was only available with Windows Vista (launched in late 2006) and later. Previous versions of Windows such as Windows XP are not able to run DirectX 10-exclusive applications. Instead, programs running on a Windows XP system with DirectX 10 hardware would simply use the DirectX 9.0c code path, which was the latest version available for Windows XP\nChanges for DirectX 10 were extensive. Many former parts of DirectX API were deprecated in the latest DirectX SDK and are preserved for compatibility only: DirectInput was deprecated in favor of XInput, DirectSound was deprecated in favor of the Cross-platform Audio Creation Tool system (XACT) and additionally lost support for hardware accelerated audio, since the Vista audio stack renders sound in software on the CPU. The DirectPlay DPLAY.DLL was also removed and was replaced with dplayx.dll; games that rely on this DLL must duplicate it and rename it to dplay.dll.\nIn order to achieve backwards compatibility, DirectX in Windows Vista contains several versions of Direct3D:\nDirect3D 10.1 is an incremental update of Direct3D 10.0 which shipped with, and required, Windows Vista Service Pack 1, which was released in February 2008. This release mainly sets a few more image quality standards for graphics vendors, while giving developers more control over image quality. It also adds support for cube map arrays, separate blend modes per-MRT, coverage mask export from a pixel shader, ability to run pixel shader per sample, access to multi-sampled depth buffers and requires that the video card supports Shader Model 4.1 or higher and 32-bit floating-point operations. Direct3D 10.1 still fully supports Direct3D 10 hardware, but in order to utilize all of the new features, updated hardware is required.\nDirectX 11.\nMicrosoft unveiled DirectX 11 at the Gamefest 08 event in Seattle. The Final Platform Update launched for Windows Vista on October 27, 2009, which was a week after the initial release of Windows 7, which launched with Direct3D 11 as a base standard.\nMajor scheduled features including GPGPU software support (DirectCompute), and Direct3D 11 with tessellation support and improved multi-threading support to assist video game developers in developing games that better utilize multi-core processors. Parts of the new API such as multi-threaded resource handling can be supported on Direct3D 9/10/10.1-class hardware. Hardware tessellation and Shader Model 5.0 require Direct3D 11 supporting hardware. Direct3D 11 is a strict superset of Direct3D 10.1 \u2014 all hardware and API features of version 10.1 are retained, and new features are added only when necessary for exposing new functionality. This helps to keep backwards compatibility with previous versions of DirectX.\nFour updates for DirectX 11 were released:\nDirectX 12.\nDirectX 12 was announced by Microsoft at GDC on March 20, 2014, and was officially launched alongside Windows 10 on July 29, 2015.\nThe primary feature highlight for the new release of DirectX was the introduction of advanced low-level programming APIs for Direct3D 12 which can reduce driver overhead. Developers are now able to implement their own command lists and buffers to the GPU, allowing for more efficient resource utilization through parallel computation. Lead developer Max McMullen stated that the main goal of Direct3D 12 is to achieve \"console-level efficiency on phone, tablet and PC\". The release of Direct3D 12 comes alongside other initiatives for low-overhead graphics APIs including AMD's Mantle for AMD graphics cards, Apple's Metal for iOS and macOS and Khronos Group's cross-platform Vulkan.\nMultiadapter support will feature in DirectX 12 allowing developers to utilize multiple GPUs on a system simultaneously; multi-GPU (mGPU) support was previously dependent on vendor implementations such as AMD CrossFireX or NVIDIA SLI.\nDirectX 12 is supported on all Fermi and later Nvidia GPUs, on AMD's GCN-based chips and on Intel's Haswell and later processors' graphics units.\nAt SIGGRAPH 2014, Intel released a demo showing a computer generated asteroid field, in which DirectX 12 was claimed to be 50\u201370% more efficient than DirectX 11 in rendering speed and CPU power consumption.\n\"Ashes of the Singularity\" was the first publicly available game to utilize DirectX 12. Testing by \"Ars Technica\" in August 2015 revealed slight performance regressions in DirectX 12 over DirectX 11 mode for the Nvidia GeForce 980 Ti, whereas the AMD Radeon R9 290x achieved consistent performance improvements of up to 70% under DirectX 12, and in some scenarios the AMD outperformed the more powerful Nvidia under DirectX 12. The performance discrepancies may be due to poor Nvidia driver optimizations for DirectX 12, or even hardware limitations of the card which was optimized for DirectX 11 serial execution; however, the exact cause remains unclear.\nThe performance improvements of DirectX 12 on the Xbox are not as substantial as on the PC.\nIn March 2018, DirectX Raytracing (DXR) was announced, capable of real-time ray-tracing on supported hardware, and the DXR API was added in the Windows 10 October 2018 update.\nIn 2019 Microsoft announced the arrival of DirectX 12 to Windows 7 but only as a plug-in for certain game titles.\nDirectX 12 Ultimate.\nMicrosoft revealed DirectX 12 Ultimate in March 2020. DirectX 12 Ultimate will unify to a common library on both Windows 10 computers and the Xbox Series X and other ninth-generation Xbox consoles. Among the new features in Ultimate includes DirectX Raytracing 1.1, Variable Rate Shading, which gives programmers control over the level of detail of shading depending on design choices, Mesh Shaders, and Sampler Feedback.\nVersion history.\nThe version number as reported by Microsoft's DxDiag tool (version 4.09.0000.0900 and higher) use the x.xx.xxxx.xxxx format for version numbers. However, the DirectX and Windows XP MSDN page claims that the registry always has been in the x.xx.xx.xxxx format. Therefore, when the above table lists a version as '4.09.00.0904' Microsoft's DxDiag tool may have it as '4.09.0000.0904'.\nCompatibility.\nVarious releases of Windows have included and supported various versions of DirectX, allowing newer versions of the operating system to continue running applications designed for earlier versions of DirectX until those versions can be gradually phased out in favor of newer APIs, drivers, and hardware.\nAPIs such as Direct3D and DirectSound need to interact with hardware, and they do this through a device driver. Hardware manufacturers have to write these drivers for a particular DirectX version's device driver interface (or DDI), and test each individual piece of hardware to make them DirectX compatible. Some hardware devices have only DirectX compatible drivers (in other words, one must install DirectX in order to use that hardware). Early versions of DirectX included an up-to-date library of all of the DirectX compatible drivers currently available. This practice was stopped however, in favor of the web-based Windows Update driver-update system, which allowed users to download only the drivers relevant to their hardware, rather than the entire library.\nPrior to DirectX 10, DirectX runtime was designed to be \"backward compatible\" with older drivers, meaning that newer versions of the APIs were designed to interoperate with older drivers written against a previous version's DDI. The application programmer had to query the available hardware capabilities using a complex system of \"cap bits\" each tied to a particular hardware feature. Direct3D 7 and earlier would work on any version of the DDI, Direct3D 8 requires a minimum DDI level of 6 and Direct3D 9 requires a minimum DDI level of 7.\nHowever, the Direct3D 10 runtime in Windows Vista cannot run on older hardware drivers due to the significantly updated DDI, which requires a unified feature set and abandons the use of \"cap bits\".\nDirect3D 10.1 introduces \"feature levels\" 10_0 and 10_1, which allow use of only the hardware features defined in the specified version of Direct3D API. Direct3D 11 adds level 11_0 and \"10 Level 9\" - a subset of the Direct3D 10 API designed to run on Direct3D 9 hardware, which has three feature levels (9_1, 9_2 and 9_3) grouped by common capabilities of \"low\", \"med\" and \"high-end\" video cards; the runtime directly uses Direct3D 9 DDI provided in all WDDM drivers. Feature level 11_1 has been introduced with Direct3D 11.1.\n.NET Framework.\nIn 2002, Microsoft released a version of DirectX compatible with the Microsoft .NET Framework, thus allowing programmers to take advantage of DirectX functionality from within .NET applications using compatible languages such as managed C++ or the use of the C# programming language. This API was known as \"Managed DirectX\" (or MDX for short), and claimed to operate at 98% of performance of the underlying native DirectX APIs. In December 2005, February 2006, April 2006, and August 2006, Microsoft released successive updates to this library, culminating in a beta version called Managed DirectX 2.0. While Managed DirectX 2.0 consolidated functionality that had previously been scattered over multiple assemblies into a single assembly, thus simplifying dependencies on it for software developers, development on this version has subsequently been discontinued, and it is no longer supported. The Managed DirectX 2.0 library expired on October 5, 2006.\nDuring the GDC 2006, Microsoft presented the XNA Framework, a new managed version of DirectX (similar but not identical to Managed DirectX) that is intended to assist development of games by making it easier to integrate DirectX, HLSL and other tools in one package. It also supports the execution of managed code on the Xbox 360. The XNA Game Studio Express RTM was made available on December 11, 2006, as a free download for Windows XP. Unlike the DirectX runtime, Managed DirectX, XNA Framework or the Xbox 360 APIs (XInput, XACT etc.) have not shipped as part of Windows. Developers are expected to redistribute the runtime components along with their games or applications.\nNo Microsoft product including the latest XNA releases provides DirectX 10 support for the .NET Framework.\nThe other approach for DirectX in managed languages is to use third-party libraries like:\nAlternatives.\nThere are alternatives to the DirectX family of APIs, with OpenGL, its successor Vulkan, Metal and Mantle having the most features comparable to Direct3D. Examples of other APIs include SDL, Allegro, OpenMAX, OpenML, OpenAL, OpenCL, FMOD, SFML etc. Many of these libraries are cross-platform or have open codebases. There are also alternative implementations that aim to provide the same API, such as the one in Wine. Furthermore, the developers of ReactOS are trying to reimplement DirectX under the name \"ReactX\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8507", "revid": "1614547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8507", "title": "Mogul (skiing)", "text": ""}
{"id": "8508", "revid": "41294464", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8508", "title": "Slalom skiing", "text": "Alpine skiing discipline\nSlalom is an alpine skiing and alpine snowboarding discipline, involving skiing between poles or gates. These are spaced more closely than those in giant slalom, super giant slalom and downhill, necessitating quicker and shorter turns. Internationally, the sport is contested at the FIS Alpine World Ski Championships, and at the Olympic Winter Games.\nHistory.\nThe term slalom comes from the Morgedal/Seljord dialect of the Norwegian word \"slal\u00e5m\": \"sla\", meaning \"slightly inclining hillside\", and \"l\u00e5m\", meaning \"track after skis\". The inventors of modern skiing classified their trails according to their difficulty: \nA Norwegian military downhill competition in 1767 included racing downhill among trees \"without falling or breaking skis\". Sondre Norheim and other skiers from Telemark practiced \"uvyrdsl\u00e5m\" or \"disrespectful/reckless downhill\" where they raced downhill in difficult and untested terrain (i.e., off piste). The 1866 \"ski race\" in Oslo was a combined cross-country, jumping and slalom competition. In the slalom participants were allowed use poles for braking and steering, and they were given points for style (appropriate skier posture). During the late 19th century Norwegian skiers participated in all branches (jumping, slalom, and cross-country) often with the same pair of skis. Slalom and variants of slalom were often referred to as hill races. Around 1900 hill races were abandoned in the Oslo championships at Huseby and Holmenkollen. Mathias Zdarsky's development of the Lilienfeld binding helped change hill races into a specialty of the Alps region.\nThe rules for the modern slalom were developed by Arnold Lunn in 1922 for the British National Ski Championships, and adopted for alpine skiing at the 1936 Winter Olympics. Under these rules gates were marked by pairs of flags rather than single ones, were arranged so that the racers had to use a variety of turn lengths to negotiate them, and scoring was on the basis of time alone, rather than on both time and style.\nCourse.\nA course is constructed by laying out a series of gates, formed by alternating pairs of red and blue poles. The skier must pass between the two poles forming the gate, with the tips of both skis and the skier's feet passing between the poles. A course has 55 to 75 gates for men and 40 to 60 for women. The vertical drop for a men's course is and measures slightly less for women. The gates are arranged in a variety of configurations to challenge the competitor.\nClearing the gates.\nTraditionally, bamboo poles were used for gates, the rigidity of which forced skiers to maneuver their entire body around each gate. In the early 1980s, rigid poles were replaced by hard plastic poles, hinged at the base. The hinged gates require, according to FIS rules, only that the skis and boots of the skier go around each gate.\nThe new gates allow a more direct path down a slalom course through the process of cross-blocking or shinning the gates. Cross-blocking is a technique in which the legs go around the gate with the upper body inclined toward, or even across, the gate; in this case the racer's outside pole and shinguards hit the gate, knocking it down and out of the way. Cross-blocking is done by pushing the gate down with the arms, hands, or shins. By 1989, most of the top technical skiers in the world had adopted the cross-block technique.\nIf both feet and ski tips have not crossed the gate line, a fault is committed. This could be due to a straddle or other factors.\nEquipment.\nWith the innovation of shaped skis around the turn of the 21st century, equipment used for slalom in international competition changed drastically. World Cup skiers commonly skied on slalom skis at a length of in the 1980s and 1990s but by the 2002 Olympic Winter Games in Salt Lake City, the majority of competitors were using skis measuring or less.\nThe downside of the shorter skis was that athletes found that recoveries were more difficult with a smaller platform underfoot. Out of concern for the safety of athletes, the FIS began to set minimum ski lengths for international slalom competition. The minimum was initially set at for men and for women, but was increased to for men and for women for the 2003\u20132004 season.\nThe equipment minimums and maximums imposed by the International Ski Federation (FIS) have created a backlash from skiers, suppliers, and fans. The main objection is that the federation is regressing the equipment, and hence the sport, by two decades. \nAmerican Bode Miller hastened the shift to the shorter, more radical sidecut skis when he achieved unexpected success after becoming the first Junior Olympic athlete to adopt the equipment in giant slalom and super-G in 1996. A few years later, the technology was adapted to slalom skis as well.\nMen's slalom World Cup podiums.\nIn the following table men's slalom World Cup podiums in the World Cup since first season in 1967.\nWomen's slalom World Cup podiums.\nIn the following table women's slalom World Cup podiums in the World Cup since first season in 1967.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8513", "revid": "41195652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8513", "title": "Database management system", "text": ""}
{"id": "8514", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8514", "title": "DBMS", "text": ""}
{"id": "8518", "revid": "29539620", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8518", "title": "Dachshund", "text": "Dog breed\nThe dachshund ( or ; German: 'badger dog'), also known as the wiener dog, or sausage dog, badger dog, doxen and doxie, is a short-legged, long-bodied, hound-type dog breed. The dog may be smooth-haired, wire-haired, or long-haired, with varied coloration.\nThe dachshund was bred to scent, chase, and flush out badgers and other burrow-dwelling animals. The miniature dachshund was bred to hunt small animals such as rabbits.\nThe dachshund was ranked 6th in registrations with the American Kennel Club in 2024.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"dachshund\" is of German origin, and means 'badger dog', from ('badger') and ('dog, hound'). The German word \"Dachshund\" is pronounced . The pronunciation varies in English: variations of the first and second syllables include , and , , . The first syllable may be incorrectly pronounced as by some English speakers. Although is a German word, in modern Germany, the dogs are more commonly known by the short name . Working dogs are less commonly known as .\nBecause of their long, narrow build, they are often nicknamed wiener or sausage dog.\nClassification.\nWhile classified in the hound group or scent hound group in the United States and Great Britain, the breed has its own group in the countries which belong to the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Cynologique Internationale (World Canine Federation). Many dachshunds, especially the wire-haired subtype, may exhibit behavior and appearance similar to the terrier group of dogs. An argument can be made for the scent (or hound) group classification because the breed was developed to use scent to trail and hunt animals, and probably descended from the Saint Hubert Hound like many modern scent hound breeds such as bloodhounds and Basset Hounds; but with the persistent personality and love for digging that probably developed from the terrier, it can also be argued that they could belong in the terrier, or \"earth dog\", group.\nCharacteristics.\nAppearance.\nA typical dachshund is long-bodied and muscular with short stubby legs. Its front paws are disproportionately large, being paddle-shaped and particularly suitable for digging. Its skin is loose enough not to tear while tunneling in tight burrows to chase prey. Its snout is long. Its ears are disproportionately big and droopy.\nCoat and color.\nThere are three dachshund coat varieties: smooth coat (short hair), long-haired, and wire-haired. Longhaired dachshunds have a silky coat and short featherings on legs and ears. Wire-haired dachshunds are the least common coat variety in the United States (although it is the most common in Germany) and the most recent coat to appear in breeding standards. While short-haired dachshunds have two types of coats, silky and smooth. Silky short hairs have a very shiny, glossy, and soft to the touch coat, while smooth short hairs have more of a coarse and prickly coat.\nDachshunds have a wide variety of colors and patterns, the most common one being red. Their base coloration can be single-colored (either red, cream, or brown), tan pointed (black and tan, chocolate and tan, blue and tan, or isabella and tan), and in wire-haired dogs, a color referred to as wild boar. Patterns such as dapple (merle), sable, brindle and piebald also can occur on any of the base colors. Dachshunds in the same litter may be born in different coat colors depending on the genetic makeup of the parents.\nThe Dachshund Club of America (DCA) and the American Kennel Club (AKC) consider Double Dapple to be out of standard and a disqualifying color in the show ring. Piebald is now a recognized color in the Dachshund Club of America (DCA) breed standard.\nDogs that are double-dappled have the merle pattern of a dapple, but with distinct white patches that occur when the dapple gene expresses itself twice in the same area of the coat. The DCA excluded the wording \"double-dapple\" from the standard in 2007 and now strictly uses the wording \"dapple\" as the double dapple gene is commonly responsible for blindness and deafness.\nSize.\nDachshunds come in three sizes: standard, miniature, and \"kaninchen\" (German for \"rabbit\"). Although the standard and miniature sizes are recognized almost universally, the rabbit size is not recognized by clubs in the United States and the United Kingdom. The rabbit size is recognized by the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Cynologique Internationale (World Canine Federation) (FCI), which contain kennel clubs from 83 countries all over the world. An increasingly common size for family pets falls between the miniature and the standard size; these are frequently referred to as \"tweenies,\" which is not an official classification.\nA full-grown standard dachshund typically weighs , while the miniature variety normally weighs less than . The kaninchen weighs . According to kennel club standards, the miniature (and kaninchen, where recognized) differs from the full-size only by size and weight, thus offspring from miniature parents must never weigh more than the miniature standard to be considered a miniature as well. While many kennel club size divisions use weight for classification, such as the American Kennel Club, other kennel club standards determine the difference between the miniature and standard by chest circumference; some kennel clubs, such as in Germany, even measure chest circumference in addition to height and weight.\nEye color.\nLight-colored dachshunds can sport amber, light brown, or green eyes; however, kennel club standards state that the darker the eye color, the better. Dapple and double dapple dachshunds can have multi-coloured \"wall\" eyes with fully blue, partially blue or patched irises owing to the effect of the dapple gene on eye pigmentation expression. \"Wall\" eye is permissible according to DCA standards but undesirable by AKC standards.\nTemperament.\nDachshunds can be stubborn and refuse commands, especially if chasing a small animal which they have a propensity for. As dachshunds were originally used as badger hunters they have a keen sense for chasing smaller animals. Dachshunds are often stubborn, making them a challenge to train.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Being the owner of dachshunds, to me a book on dog discipline becomes a volume of inspired humor. Every sentence is a riot. Some day, if I ever get a chance, I shall write a book, or warning, on the character and temperament of the dachshund and why he can't be trained and shouldn't be. I would rather train a striped zebra to balance an Indian club than induce a dachshund to heed my slightest command. When I address Fred I never have to raise either my voice or my hopes. He even disobeys me when I instruct him in something he wants to do.\u2014\u200a\nDachshunds can be aggressive to strangers and other dogs. Despite this, they are rated in the intelligence of dogs as an average working dog with a persistent ability to follow trained commands 50% of the time or more.\nThey can have a loud bark. Some bark quite a lot and may need training to stop, while others will not bark much at all. Dachshunds can be standoffish toward strangers. A Japanese study found the Miniature Dachshund to have higher rates of refusing to move whilst on a walk, barking at outside noises whilst inside, barking at strangers visiting their home, separation anxiety, inappropriate elimination (faecal and urinary incontinence), hesitancy to approach unknown humans and canines, and aggression towards family members, highlighting the breed's stubbornness and aggression.\nAccording to the American Kennel Club's breed standards, \"the dachshund is clever, lively and courageous to the point of rashness, persevering in above and below ground work, with all the senses well-developed. Any display of shyness is a serious fault.\" Their temperament and body language give the impression that they do not know or care about their relatively small size. Like many small hunting dogs, they will challenge a larger dog. Indulged dachshunds may become snappy or extremely obstinate.\nA 2008 University of Pennsylvania study of 6,000 dog owners who were interviewed indicated that dogs of smaller breeds were more likely to be \"genetically predisposed toward aggressive behaviour\". Dachshunds were rated the most aggressive, with 20% having bitten strangers, as well as high rates of attacks on other dogs and their owners. The study noted that attacks by small dogs were unlikely to cause serious injuries and because of this were probably under-reported.\nHealth.\nThe breed is prone to spinal problems, especially intervertebral disk disease (IVDD), due in part to an extremely long spinal column and short rib cage. The risk of injury may be worsened by obesity, jumping, rough handling, or intense exercise, which place greater strain on the vertebrae. About 20\u201325% of dachshunds will develop IVDD. Dachshunds with a number of calcified intervertebral discs at a young age have a higher risk of developing disc disease in later life. In addition, studies have shown that development of calcified discs is highly heritable in the breed. An appropriate screening programme for IVDD has been identified by Finnish researchers and a UK IVDD screening programme has been developed for breeders with the aim to reduce prevalence of spinal problems.\nTreatment consists of combinations of crate confinement and courses of anti-inflammatory medications (steroids and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs like carprofen and meloxicam), or chronic pain medications, like tramadol. Serious cases may require surgery to remove the troublesome disk contents. A dog may need the aid of a cart to get around if paralysis occurs.\nA minimally invasive procedure called \"percutaneous laser disk ablation\" has been developed at the Oklahoma State University Veterinary Hospital. As of 2003, the procedure was used in clinical trials only on dachshunds that had suffered previous back incidents.\nIn addition to back problems, the breed is prone to patellar luxation where the kneecap can become dislodged. Dachshunds may also be affected by osteogenesis imperfecta (brittle bone disease). The condition seems to be mainly limited to wire-haired Dachshunds, with 17% being carriers. A genetic test is available to allow breeders to avoid breeding carriers to carriers. In such pairings, each puppy will have a 25% chance of being affected.\nIn some double dapples, there are varying degrees of vision and hearing loss, including reduced or absent eyes. Not all double dapples have problems with their eyes and/or ears, which may include degrees of hearing loss, full deafness, malformed ears, congenital eye defects, reduced or absent eyes, partial or full blindness, or varying degrees of both vision and hearing problems; but heightened problems can occur owing to the genetic process in which two dapple genes cross, particularly in certain breeding lines. Dapple genes, which are dominant genes, are considered \"dilution\" genes, meaning whatever color the dog would have originally carried is lightened, or diluted, randomly; two dominant \"dilution\" genes can cancel each other out, or \"cross\", removing all color and producing a white recessive gene, essentially a white mutation. When occurring genetically within the eyes or ears, this white mutation can be detrimental to development, causing hearing or vision problems.\nOther dachshund health problems include hereditary epilepsy, granulomatous meningoencephalitis, dental issues, Cushing's syndrome, thyroid and autoimmune problems, various allergies and atopies, and various eye conditions including cataracts, glaucoma, progressive retinal atrophy, corneal ulcers, nonulcerative corneal disease, sudden acquired retinal degeneration, and cherry eye. Dachshunds are also 2.5 times more likely than other breeds of dogs to develop patent ductus arteriosus, a congenital heart defect. Dilute color dogs (Blue, Isabella, and Cream) are very susceptible to color dilution alopecia, a skin disorder that can result in hair loss and extreme sensitivity to sun. Since the occurrence and severity of these health problems is largely hereditary, breeders are working to eliminate these.\nFactors influencing the litter size of puppies and the proportion of stillborn puppies per litter were analyzed in normally sized German dachshunds. The records analyzed contained data on 42,855 litters. It was found that as the inbreeding coefficient increased, litter size decreased and the percentage of stillborn puppies increased, thus indicating inbreeding depression. It was also found that young and older dams had smaller litter sizes and more stillborn puppies than middle-aged dams.\nA study in Japan found the Miniature Dachshund to have lower rates of glaucoma than other breeds. With 2.4% of cases belonging to the breed but the breed making up 10.1% of visits to the veterinary hospital.\nDachshunds are predisposed to hypothyroidism.\nLife expectancy.\nA 2018 study in Japan of pet cemetery data put the Miniature Dachshund life expectancy at 13.9 years compared to 13.7 overall and 15.1 for crossbreeds. A 2024 study in the UK found a life expectancy of 13.2 years for the breed compared to an average of 12.7 for purebreeds and 12 for crossbreeds with the Miniature Dachshund found to have a life expectancy of 14 years. A 2024 Italian study found a life expectancy of 11.5 years for the breed compared to 10 years overall. A 2005 Swedish study of insurance data found 28% of Dachshund died by the age of 10, less than the overall rate of 35% of dogs dying by the age of 10.\nHistory.\nThe dachshund is a creation of German breeders and includes elements of German, French, and English hounds and terriers. Dachshunds have been kept by royal courts all over Europe, including that of Queen Victoria, who was particularly enamored of the breed.\nThe first verifiable references to the dachshund, originally named the \"Dachs Kriecher\" (\"badger crawler\") or \"Dachs Krieger\" (\"badger warrior\"), came from books written in the early 18th century. Prior to that, there exist references to \"badger dogs\" and \"hole dogs\", but these likely refer to purposes rather than to specific breeds. The original German dachshunds were larger than the modern full-size variety, weighing between , and originally came in straight-legged and crook-legged varieties (the modern dachshund is descended from the latter). Though the breed is famous for its use in exterminating badgers and badger-baiting, dachshunds were also commonly used for rabbit and fox hunting, for locating wounded deer, and in packs were known to hunt game as large as wild boar and as fierce as the wolverine.\nThere are huge differences of opinion as to when dachshunds were specifically bred for their purpose of hunting badger, as the American Kennel Club states the dachshund was bred in the 15th century, while the Dachshund Club of America states that the dogs were first described in the 18th and 19th centuries.\nDouble-dapple dachshunds, which are prone to eye disease, blindness, or hearing problems, are generally believed to have been introduced to the United States between 1879 and 1885.\nThe flap-down ears and famous curved tail of the dachshund have deliberately been bred into the dog. In the case of the ears, this is to keep grass seeds, dirt, and other matter from entering the ear canal. The curved tail is dual-purposed: to be seen more easily in long grass and, in the case of burrowing dachshunds, to help haul the dog out if it becomes stuck in a burrow.\nThe smooth-haired dachshund, the oldest style, may be a cross between the German Shorthaired Pointer, a Pinscher, and a Bracke (a type of bloodhound), or to have been produced by crossing a short Bruno Jura Hound with a pinscher. Others believe it was a cross from a miniature French pointer and a pinscher; others claim that it was developed from the St. Hubert Hound, also a bloodhound, in the 18th century, and still others believe that they were descended from Basset Hounds, based upon their scent abilities and general appearance.\nThe exact origins of the dachshund are therefore unknown. According to William Loeffler, from \" The American Book of the Dog (1891)\", in the chapter on dachshunds: \"The origin of the Dachshund is in doubt, our best authorities disagreeing as to the beginning of the breed.\" What can be agreed on, however, is that the smooth dachshund gave rise to both the long-haired and the wire-haired varieties.\nThere are two theories about how the standard long-haired dachshund came about. One theory is that smooth dachshunds would occasionally produce puppies which had slightly longer hair than their parents. By selectively breeding these animals, breeders eventually produced a dog which consistently produced long-haired offspring, and the long-haired dachshund was born. Another theory is that the standard long-haired dachshund was developed by breeding smooth dachshunds with various land and water spaniels. The long-haired dachshund may be a cross among any of the small dog breeds in the spaniel group, including the German Stoeberhund, and the smooth dachshund.\nThe wire-haired dachshund, the last to develop, was bred in the late 19th century. There is a possibility the wire-haired dachshund was a cross between the smooth dachshund and various hard-coated terriers and wire-haired pinschers, such as the Schnauzer, the Dandie Dinmont Terrier, the German Wirehaired Pointer, or perhaps the Scottish Terrier.\nSymbol of Germany.\nDachshunds have traditionally been viewed as a symbol of Germany. Political cartoonists commonly used the image of the dachshund to ridicule Germany. During World War I, the dachshund's popularity in the United States plummeted because of this association. As a result, they were often called \"liberty hounds\", just as \"liberty cabbage\" became a term for sauerkraut mostly in North America. The stigma of the association was revived to a lesser extent during World War II, though it was comparatively short-lived. Kaiser Wilhelm II and German field marshal Erwin Rommel were known for keeping dachshunds.\nOwing to the association of the breed with Germany, as well as its particular popularity among dog keepers in Munich at the time, the dachshund was chosen as the first official mascot for the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich, with the name Waldi.\nIn the German sitcom \"Hausmeister Krause\", the main protagonist, Dieter Krause, is portrayed as a typical German square and fuddy-duddy, who embodies many German stereotypes, and his obsession for dachshunds is one of them. The important role of dachshunds in the series even led to a new rise in popularity of dachshunds in Germany.\nSports.\nSome people train and enter their dachshunds to compete in dachshund races, such as the Wiener Nationals. Several races across the United States routinely draw several thousand attendees.\nDespite the popularity of these events, the Dachshund Club of America opposes \"wiener racing\", as many greyhound tracks use the events to draw large crowds to their facilities. The DCA is also worried about potential injuries to dogs, owing to their predisposition to back injuries. Another favorite sport is earthdog trials, in which dachshunds enter tunnels with dead ends and obstacles attempting to locate either an artificial bait or live but caged (and thus protected) rats.\n\"Dackel\" versus \"Teckel\".\nIn Germany, dachshunds are widely called \"Dackel\" (both singular and plural). Among hunters, they are mainly referred to as \"Teckel\". There are kennels which specialize in breeding hunting dachshunds, the so-called \"jagdliche Leistungszucht\" (\"hunting-related performance breeding\") or \"Gebrauchshundezucht\" (\"working dog breeding\"), as opposed to breeding family dogs. Therefore, it is sometimes incorrectly believed that \"Teckel\" is either a name for the hunting breed or a mark for passing the test for a trained hunting dog (called \"VGP\", \"Verband-Gebrauchspr\u00fcfung\") in Germany.\nPopularity.\nDachshunds are one of the most popular dogs in the United States, ranking 12th in the 2018 AKC registration statistics. They are popular with urban and apartment dwellers, ranking among the top 10 most popular breeds in 76 of 190 major US cities surveyed by the AKC.\nThere are organized local dachshund clubs in most major American cities, including New York, New Orleans, Portland, Los Angeles, and Chicago. As of 2024, the American Kennel Club found the Dachshund to be the 6th most popular dog breed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8519", "revid": "39151475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8519", "title": "Data structure", "text": "Particular way of storing and organizing data in a computer\nIn computer science, a data structure is a data organization and storage format that is usually chosen for efficient access to data. More precisely, a data structure is a collection of data values, the relationships among them, and the functions or operations that can be applied to the data, i.e., it is an algebraic structure about data.\nUsage.\nData structures serve as the basis for abstract data types (ADT). The ADT defines the logical form of the data type. The data structure implements the physical form of the data type.\nVarious types of data structures are suited to different kinds of applications, and some are highly defined to specific tasks. For example, relational databases commonly use B-tree indice for data retrieval, while compiler implementations usually use hash tables to look up identifiers.\nData structures provide a means to manage large amounts of data efficiently for uses such as large databases and internet indexing services. Usually, efficient data structures are key to designing efficient algorithms. Some formal design methods and programming languages emphasize data structures, rather than algorithms, as the key organizing factor in software design. Data structures can be used to organize the storage and retrieval of data stored in both main memory and secondary memory.\nImplementation.\nData structures can be implemented using a variety of programming languages and techniques, but they all share the common goal of efficiently organizing and storing data. Data structures are generally based on the ability of a computer to fetch and store data at any place in its memory, specified by a pointer\u2014a bit string, representing a memory address, that can be itself stored in memory and manipulated by the program. Thus, the array and record data structures are based on computing the addresses of data items with arithmetic operations, while the linked data structures are based on storing addresses of data items within the structure itself. This approach to data structuring has profound implications for the efficiency and scalability of algorithms. For instance, the contiguous memory allocation in arrays facilitates rapid access and modification operations, leading to optimized performance in sequential data processing scenarios. \nThe implementation of a data structure usually requires writing a set of procedures that create and manipulate instances of that structure. The efficiency of a data structure cannot be analyzed separately from those operations. This observation motivates the theoretical concept of an abstract data type, a data structure that is defined indirectly by the operations that may be performed on it, and the mathematical properties of those operations (including their space and time cost).\nExamples.\nThere are numerous types of data structures, generally built upon simpler primitive data types. Well known examples are:\nLanguage support.\nMost assembly languages and some low-level languages, such as BCPL (Basic Combined Programming Language), lack built-in support for data structures. On the other hand, many high-level programming languages and some higher-level assembly languages, such as MASM, have special syntax or other built-in support for certain data structures, such as records and arrays. For example, the C (a direct descendant of BCPL) and Pascal languages support structs and records, respectively, in addition to vectors (one-dimensional arrays) and multi-dimensional arrays.\nMost programming languages feature some sort of library mechanism that allows data structure implementations to be reused by different programs. Modern languages usually come with standard libraries that implement the most common data structures. Examples are the C++ Standard Template Library, the Java Collections Framework, and the Microsoft .NET Framework.\nModern languages also generally support modular programming, the separation between the interface of a library module and its implementation. Some provide opaque data types that allow clients to hide implementation details. Object-oriented programming languages, such as C++, Java, and Smalltalk, typically use classes for this purpose.\nMany known data structures have concurrent versions which allow multiple computing threads to access a single concrete instance of a data structure simultaneously.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8520", "revid": "36346239", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8520", "title": "Dmitri Shostakovich", "text": "Soviet composer and pianist (1906\u20131975)\nDmitri Dmitriyevich Shostakovich (25 September\u00a0[O.S. 12 September]\u00a01906\u00a0\u2013 9 August 1975) was a Soviet-era Russian composer and pianist who became internationally known after the premiere of his First Symphony in 1926 and thereafter was regarded as a major composer.\nShostakovich achieved early fame in the Soviet Union, but had a complex relationship with its government. His 1934 opera \"Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk\" was initially a success but later condemned by the Soviet government, putting his career at risk. In 1948, his work was denounced under the Zhdanov Doctrine, with professional consequences lasting several years. Even after his censure was rescinded in 1956, performances of his music were occasionally subject to state interventions, as with his Thirteenth Symphony (1962). Nevertheless, Shostakovich was a member of the Supreme Soviet of the RSFSR (1947) and the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union (from 1962 until his death), as well as chairman of the RSFSR Union of Composers (1960\u20131968). Over the course of his career, he earned several important awards, including the Order of Lenin, from the Soviet government.\nShostakovich combined various musical techniques in his works. His music is characterized by sharp contrasts, elements of the grotesque, and ambivalent tonality; he was also heavily influenced by neoclassicism and by the music of Gustav Mahler. His orchestral works include 15 symphonies and six concerti (two each for piano, violin, and cello). His chamber works include 15 string quartets, a piano quintet, and two piano trios. His solo piano works include two sonatas, an early set of 24 preludes, and a later set of 24 preludes and fugues. Stage works include three completed operas and three ballets. Shostakovich also wrote several song cycles and a substantial quantity of music for theatre and film.\nShostakovich's reputation has continued to grow after his death. Scholarly interest has increased significantly since the late 20th century, including considerable debate about the relationship between his music and his attitudes toward the Soviet government.\nBiography.\nYouth.\nBorn into a Russian family that lived on Podolskaya Street in Saint Petersburg, Russia, Shostakovich was the second of three children of Dmitri Boleslavovich Shostakovich and Sofiya Vasilievna Kokoulina. Shostakovich's immediate forebears came from Siberia, but his paternal grandfather, Boles\u0142aw Szostakowicz, was of Polish Catholic descent, tracing his family roots to the region of the town of Vileyka in today's Belarus. A Polish revolutionary in the January uprising of 1863\u201364, Szostakowicz was exiled to Narym in 1866 in the crackdown that followed Dmitry Karakozov's assassination attempt on Tsar Alexander II. When his term of exile ended, Szostakowicz decided to remain in Siberia. He eventually became a successful banker in Irkutsk and raised a large family. His son Dmitri Boleslavovich Shostakovich, the composer's father, was born in exile in Narym in 1875 and studied physics and mathematics at Saint Petersburg University, graduating in 1899. He then went to work as an engineer under Dmitri Mendeleev at the Bureau of Weights and Measures in Saint Petersburg. In 1903, he married another Siberian immigrant to the capital, Sofiya Vasilievna Kokoulina, one of six children born to a Siberian Russian.Their son, Dmitri Dmitriyevich Shostakovich, displayed musical talent after he began piano lessons with his mother at the age of 9. On several occasions, he displayed a remarkable ability to remember what his mother had played at the previous lesson, and would get \"caught in the act\" of playing the previous lesson's music while pretending to read different music placed in front of him. In 1918, he wrote a funeral march in memory of two leaders of the Kadet party murdered by Bolshevik sailors.\nIn 1919, at age 13, Shostakovich was admitted to the Petrograd Conservatory, then headed by Alexander Glazunov, who monitored his progress closely and promoted him. Shostakovich studied piano with Leonid Nikolayev and Elena Rozanova, composition with Maximilian Steinberg, and counterpoint and fugue with Nikolay Sokolov, who became his friend. He also attended Alexander Ossovsky's music history classes. In 1925, he enrolled in the conducting classes of Nikolai Malko, where he conducted the conservatory orchestra in a private performance of Beethoven's First Symphony. According to the recollections of the composer's classmate, Valerian Bogdanov-Berezhovsky:\nShostakovich stood at the podium, played with his hair and jacket cuffs, looked around at the hushed teenagers with instruments at the ready and raised the baton. ... He neither stopped the orchestra, nor made any remarks; he focused his entire attention on aspects of tempi and dynamics, which were very clearly displayed in his gestures. The contrasts between the \"Adagio molto\" of the introduction and \"Allegro con brio\" first theme were quite striking, as were those between the percussive accents of the chords (woodwinds, French horns, pizzicato strings) and the momentarily extended piano in the introduction following them. In the character given to the pattern of the first theme, I recall, there was both vigorous striving and lightness; in the bass part there was an emphasized pliancy of tenderly threaded articulation... Moments of these sorts... were discoveries of an improvised order, born from an intuitively refined understanding of the character of a piece and the elements of musical imagery embedded in it. And the players enjoyed it.\nOn 20 March 1925, Shostakovich's music was played in Moscow for the first time, in a program that also included works by his friend Vissarion Shebalin. To the composer's disappointment, the critics and public there received his music coolly. During his visit to Moscow, Mikhail Kvadri introduced him to Mikhail Tukhachevsky, who helped the composer find accommodation and work there, and sent a driver to take him to a concert in \"a very stylish automobile\".\nShostakovich's musical breakthrough was the First Symphony, written as his graduation piece at the age of 19. Initially Shostakovich aspired to perform it only privately with the conservatory orchestra, and prepared to conduct the scherzo himself. By late 1925, Malko had agreed to conduct its premiere with the Leningrad Philharmonic Orchestra after Steinberg and Shostakovich's friend Boleslav Yavorsky brought the symphony to his attention. On 12 May 1926, Malko led the premiere of the symphony; the audience received it enthusiastically, demanding an encore of the scherzo. Thereafter, Shostakovich regularly celebrated the date of his symphonic debut.\nEarly career.\nAfter graduation, Shostakovich embarked on a dual career as concert pianist and composer, but his dry keyboard style was often criticized. Shostakovich maintained a heavy performance schedule until 1930; after 1933 he performed only his own compositions. Along with Yuri Bryushkov, Grigory Ginzburg, Lev Oborin, and Josif Shvarts, he was among the Soviet contestants in the inaugural I International Chopin Piano Competition in Warsaw in 1927. Bogdanov-Berezhovsky later remembered:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The self-discipline with which the young Shostakovich prepared for the 1927 [Chopin] Competition was astonishing. For three weeks, he locked himself away at home, practicing for hours at a time, having postponed his composing, and given up trips to the theatre and visits with friends. Even more startling was the result of this seclusion. Of course, prior to this time, he had played superbly and occasioned Glazunov's now famous glowing reports. But during those days, his pianism, sharply idiosyncratic and rhythmically impulsive, multi-timbered yet graphically defined, emerged in its concentrated form.\nNatan Perelman, who heard Shostakovich play his Chopin programs before he went to Warsaw, said that his \"anti-sentimental\" playing, which eschewed rubato and extreme dynamic contrasts, was unlike anything he had ever heard. Arnold Alschwang called Shostakovich's playing \"profound and lacking any salon-like mannerisms.\"\nShostakovich was stricken with appendicitis on the opening day of the competition, but his condition improved by the time of his first performance on 27 January 1927. (He had his appendix removed on 25 April.) According to Shostakovich, his playing found favor with the audience. He persisted into the final round of the competition but ultimately earned only a diploma, no prize; Oborin was declared the winner. Shostakovich was upset about the result but for a time resolved to continue a career as performer. While recovering from his appendectomy in April 1927, Shostakovich said he was beginning to reassess those plans:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; When I was well, I practiced the piano every day. I wanted to carry on like that until autumn and then decide. If I saw that I had not improved, I would quit the whole business. To be a pianist who is worse than Szpinalski, Etkin, Ginzburg, and Bryushkov (it is commonly thought that I am worse than them) is not worth it.\nAfter the competition, Shostakovich and Oborin spent a week in Berlin. There he met the conductor Bruno Walter, who was so impressed by Shostakovich's First Symphony that he conducted its first performance outside Russia later that year. Leopold Stokowski led the American premiere the next year in Philadelphia and also made the work's first recording.\nIn 1927, Shostakovich wrote his Second Symphony (subtitled \"To October\"), a patriotic piece with a pro-Soviet choral finale. Owing to its modernism, it did not meet with the same enthusiasm as his First. This year also marked the beginning of Shostakovich's close friendship with musicologist and theatre critic Ivan Sollertinsky, whom he had first met in 1921 through their mutual friends Lev Arnshtam and Lydia Zhukova. Shostakovich later said that Sollertinsky \"taught [him] to understand and love such great masters as Brahms, Mahler, and Bruckner\" and that he instilled in him \"an interest in music ... from Bach to Offenbach.\"While writing the Second Symphony, Shostakovich also began work on his satirical opera \"The Nose\", based on the story by Nikolai Gogol. In June 1929, against the composer's wishes, the opera was given a concert performance; it was ferociously attacked by the Russian Association of Proletarian Musicians (RAPM). Its stage premiere on 18 January 1930 opened to generally poor reviews and widespread incomprehension among musicians. In the late 1920s and early 1930s, Shostakovich worked at TRAM, a proletarian youth theatre. Although he did little work in this post, it shielded him from ideological attack. Much of this period was spent writing his opera \"Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk\", which was first performed in 1934. It was initially immediately successful, on both popular and official levels. It was described as \"the result of the general success of Socialist construction, of the correct policy of the Party\", and as an opera that \"could have been written only by a Soviet composer brought up in the best tradition of Soviet culture\".\nShostakovich married his first wife, Nina Varzar, in 1932. Difficulties led to a divorce in 1935, but the couple soon remarried when Nina became pregnant with their first child, Galina.\nFirst denunciation.\nOn 17 January 1936 Joseph Stalin paid a rare visit to the opera for a performance of a new work, \"Quiet Flows the Don\", based on the novel by Mikhail Sholokhov, by the little-known composer Ivan Dzerzhinsky, who was called to Stalin's box at the end of the performance and told that his work had \"considerable ideological-political value\". On 26 January, Stalin revisited the opera, accompanied by Vyacheslav Molotov, Andrei Zhdanov and Anastas Mikoyan, to hear \"Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District\". He and his entourage left without speaking to anyone. Shostakovich had been forewarned by a friend that he should postpone a planned concert tour in Arkhangelsk to be present at that particular performance. Eyewitness accounts testify that Shostakovich was \"white as a sheet\" when he went to take his bow after the third act.\nThe next day Shostakovich left for Arkhangelsk, where he heard on 28 January that \"Pravda\" had published an editorial titled \"Muddle Instead of Music\", complaining that the opera was a \"deliberately dissonant, muddled stream of sounds ...[that] quacks, hoots, pants and gasps.\" Shostakovich continued his performance tour as scheduled, with no disruptions. From Arkhangelsk, he instructed Isaac Glikman to subscribe to a clipping service. The editorial was the signal for a nationwide campaign, during which even Soviet music critics who had praised the opera were forced to recant in print, saying they \"failed to detect the shortcomings of \"Lady Macbeth\" as pointed out by \"Pravda\"\". There was resistance from those who admired Shostakovich, including Sollertinsky, who turned up at a composers' meeting in Leningrad called to denounce the opera and praised it instead. Two other speakers supported him. When Shostakovich returned to Leningrad, he had a telephone call from the commander of the Leningrad Military District, who had been asked by Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky to make sure that he was alright. When the writer Isaac Babel was under arrest four years later, he told his interrogators that \"it was common ground for us to proclaim the genius of the slighted Shostakovich.\"\nOn 6 February Shostakovich was again attacked in \"Pravda\", this time for his light comic ballet \"The Limpid Stream\", which was denounced because \"it jangles and expresses nothing\" and did not give an accurate picture of peasant life on a collective farm. Fearful that he was about to be arrested, Shostakovich secured an appointment with the Chairman of the USSR State Committee on Culture, Platon Kerzhentsev, who reported to Stalin and Molotov that he had instructed the composer to \"reject formalist errors and in his art attain something that could be understood by the broad masses\", and that Shostakovich had admitted being in the wrong and had asked for a meeting with Stalin, which was not granted.\nThe \"Pravda\" campaign against Shostakovich caused his commissions and concert appearances, and performances of his music, to decline markedly. His monthly earnings dropped from an average of as much as 12,000 rubles to as little as 2,000.\n1936 marked the beginning of the Great Terror, in which many of Shostakovich's friends and relatives were imprisoned or killed. These included Tukhachevsky, executed 12 June 1937; his brother-in-law Vsevolod Frederiks, who was eventually released but died before he returned home; his close friend Nikolai Zhilyayev, a musicologist who had taught Tukhachevsky, was executed; his mother-in-law, the astronomer Sofiya Mikhaylovna Varzar, who was sent to a camp in Karaganda and later released; his friend the Marxist writer Galina Serebryakova, who spent 20 years in the gulag; his uncle Maxim Kostrykin (died); and his colleagues Boris Kornilov (executed) and Adrian Piotrovsky (executed).\nShostakovich's daughter Galina was born during this period in 1936; his son Maxim was born two years later.\nWithdrawal of the Fourth Symphony.\nThe publication of the \"Pravda\" editorials coincided with the composition of Shostakovich's Fourth Symphony. The work continued a shift in his style, influenced by the music of Mahler, and gave him problems as he attempted to reform his style. Despite the \"Pravda\" articles, he continued to compose the symphony and planned a premiere at the end of 1936. Rehearsals began that December, but according to Isaac Glikman, who had attended the rehearsals with the composer, the manager of the Leningrad Philharmonic persuaded Shostakovich to withdraw the symphony. Shostakovich did not repudiate the work and retained its designation as his Fourth Symphony. (A reduction for two pianos was performed and published in 1946, and the work was finally premiered in 1961.)\nIn the months between the withdrawal of the Fourth Symphony and the completion of the Fifth on 20 July 1937, the only concert work Shostakovich composed was the \"Four Romances on Texts by Pushkin\".\nFifth Symphony and return to favor.\nThe composer's response to his denunciation was the Fifth Symphony of 1937, which was musically more conservative than his recent works. Premiered on 21 November 1937 in Leningrad, it was a phenomenal success. The Fifth brought many to tears and welling emotions. Later, Shostakovich's purported memoir, \"Testimony\", stated: \"I'll never believe that a man who understood nothing could feel the Fifth Symphony. Of course they understood, they understood what was happening around them and they understood what the Fifth was about.\"\nThe success put Shostakovich in good standing once again. Music critics and the authorities alike, including those who had earlier accused him of formalism, claimed that he had learned from his mistakes and become a true Soviet artist. In a newspaper article published under Shostakovich's name, the Fifth was characterized as \"A Soviet artist's creative response to just criticism.\" The composer Dmitry Kabalevsky, who had been among those who disassociated themselves from Shostakovich when the \"Pravda\" article was published, praised the Fifth and congratulated Shostakovich for \"not having given in to the seductive temptations of his previous 'erroneous' ways.\"\nIt was also at this time that Shostakovich composed the first of his string quartets. In September 1937, he began to teach composition at the Leningrad Conservatory, which provided some financial security.\nSecond World War.\nIn 1939, before Soviet forces attempted to invade Finland, the Party Secretary of Leningrad Andrei Zhdanov commissioned a celebratory piece from Shostakovich, the \"Suite on Finnish Themes\", to be performed as the marching bands of the Red Army paraded through Helsinki. The Winter War was a bitter experience for the Red Army, the parade never happened, and Shostakovich never laid claim to the authorship of this work. It was not performed until 2001. After the outbreak of war between the Soviet Union and Germany in 1941, Shostakovich initially remained in Leningrad. He tried to enlist in the military but was turned away because of his poor eyesight. To compensate, he became a volunteer for the Leningrad Conservatory's firefighter brigade and delivered a radio broadcast to the Soviet people. \"\" The photograph for which he posed was published in newspapers throughout the country.\nShostakovich's most famous wartime contribution was his Seventh Symphony. The composer wrote the first three movements in Leningrad while it was under siege; he completed the work in Kuybyshev (now Samara), where he and his family had been evacuated. According to a radio address he made on 17 September 1941, he continued work on the symphony to show his fellow citizens that everyone had a \"soldier's duty\" to ensure life went on. In another article written on 8 October, he wrote that the Seventh was a \"symphony about our age, our people, our sacred war, and our victory.\" Shostakovich finished his Seventh Symphony on 27 December 1941. The symphony was premiered by the Bolshoi Theatre Orchestra in Kuibyshev on 29 March 1942 and soon performed in London (June 1942) and the United States (July 1942), where several conductors vied to conduct its first American performance. It was performed in Leningrad in August 1942, while the city was still under siege. The city's orchestra had only 14 musicians left, which led conductor Karl Eliasberg to reinforce it by recruiting anyone who could play an instrument.\nThe Shostakovich family moved to Moscow in spring 1943, by which time the Red Army was on the offensive. As a result, Soviet authorities and the international public were puzzled by the tragic tone of the Eighth Symphony, which in the Western press had briefly acquired the nickname \"Stalingrad Symphony\". The symphony was received tepidly in the Soviet Union and the West. Olin Downes expressed his disappointment in the piece, but Carlos Ch\u00e1vez, who had conducted the symphony's Mexican premiere, praised it highly.\nShostakovich had expressed as early as 1943 his intention to cap his wartime trilogy of symphonies with a grandiose Ninth. On 16 January 1945, he announced to his students that he had begun work on its first movement the day before. In April, his friend Isaac Glikman heard an extensive portion of the first movement, noting that it was \"majestic in scale, in pathos, in its breathtaking motion\". Shortly thereafter, Shostakovich ceased work on this version of the Ninth, which remained lost until musicologist Olga Digonskaya rediscovered it in December 2003. Shostakovich began to compose his actual, unrelated Ninth Symphony in late July 1945; he completed it on 30 August. It was shorter and lighter in texture than its predecessors. Gavriil Popov wrote that it was \"splendid in its joie de vivre, gaiety, brilliance, and pungency!\" By 1946 it was the subject of official criticism. Israel Nestyev asked whether it was the right time for \"a light and amusing interlude between Shostakovich's significant creations, a temporary rejection of great, serious problems for the sake of playful, filigree-trimmed trifles.\" The \"New York World-Telegram\" of 27 July 1946 was similarly dismissive: \"The Russian composer should not have expressed his feelings about the defeat of Nazism in such a childish manner\". Shostakovich continued to compose chamber music, notably his Second Piano Trio, dedicated to the memory of Sollertinsky, with a Jewish-inspired finale.\nIn 1947, Shostakovich was made a deputy to the Supreme Soviet of the RSFSR.\nSecond denunciation.\nIn 1948, Shostakovich, along with many other composers, was again denounced for formalism in the Zhdanov decree. Andrei Zhdanov, Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the RSFSR, accused the composers (including Sergei Prokofiev and Aram Khachaturian) of writing inappropriate and formalist music. This was part of an ongoing anti-formalism campaign intended to root out all Western compositional influence as well as any perceived \"non-Russian\" output. The conference resulted in the publication of the Central Committee's Decree \"On V. Muradeli's opera \"The Great Friendship\"\", which targeted all Soviet composers and demanded that they write only \"proletarian\" music, or music for the masses. The accused composers, including Shostakovich, were summoned to make public apologies in front of the committee. Most of Shostakovich's works were banned, and his family had privileges withdrawn. Yuri Lyubimov says that at this time \"he waited for his arrest at night out on the landing by the lift, so that at least his family wouldn't be disturbed.\"\nThe decree's consequences for composers were harsh. Shostakovich was among those dismissed from the Conservatory altogether. For him, the loss of money was perhaps the heaviest blow. Others still in the Conservatory experienced an atmosphere thick with suspicion. No one wanted his work to be understood as formalist, so many resorted to accusing their colleagues of writing or performing anti-proletarian music.\nDuring the next few years Shostakovich composed three categories of work: film music to pay the rent, official works aimed at securing official rehabilitation, and serious works \"for the desk drawer\". The last included the Violin Concerto No. 1 and the song cycle \"From Jewish Folk Poetry\". The cycle was written at a time when the postwar anti-Semitic campaign was already under way, with widespread arrests, including that of Dobrushin and Yiditsky, the compilers of the book from which Shostakovich took his texts.\nThe restrictions on Shostakovich's music and living arrangements were eased in 1949, when Stalin decided that the Soviets needed to send artistic representatives to the Cultural and Scientific Congress for World Peace in New York City, and that Shostakovich should be among them. For Shostakovich it was a humiliating experience, culminating in a New York press conference where he was expected to read a prepared speech. Nicolas Nabokov, who was present in the audience, witnessed Shostakovich starting to read \"in a nervous and shaky voice\" before he had to break off \"and the speech was continued in English by a suave radio baritone\". Fully aware that Shostakovich was not free to speak his mind, Nabokov publicly asked him whether he supported the then recent denunciation of Stravinsky's music in the Soviet Union. A great admirer of Stravinsky who had been influenced by his music, Shostakovich had no alternative but to answer in the affirmative. Nabokov did not hesitate to write that this demonstrated that Shostakovich was \"not a free man, but an obedient tool of his government.\" Shostakovich never forgave Nabokov for this public humiliation. That same year, he composed the cantata \"Song of the Forests\", which praised Stalin as the \"great gardener\".\nStalin's death in 1953 was the biggest step toward Shostakovich's rehabilitation as a creative artist, which was marked by his Tenth Symphony. It features a number of musical quotations and codes (notably the DSCH and Elmira motifs, Elmira Nazirova being a pianist and composer who had studied under Shostakovich in the year before his dismissal from the Moscow Conservatory), the meaning of which is still debated, while the savage second movement, according to \"Testimony\", is intended as a musical portrait of Stalin. The Tenth ranks alongside the Fifth and Seventh as one of Shostakovich's most popular works. 1953 also saw a stream of premieres of the \"desk drawer\" works.\nDuring the 1940s and 1950s Shostakovich had close relationships with two of his pupils, Galina Ustvolskaya and Elmira Nazirova. In the background to all this remained Shostakovich's first, open marriage to Nina Varzar until her death in 1954. He taught Ustvolskaya from 1939 to 1941 and then from 1947 to 1948. The nature of their relationship is far from clear: Mstislav Rostropovich described it as \"tender\". Ustvolskaya rejected a proposal of marriage from him after Nina's death. Shostakovich's daughter, Galina, recalled her father consulting her and Maxim about the possibility of Ustvolskaya becoming their stepmother. Ustvolskaya's friend Viktor Suslin said that she had been \"deeply disappointed by [Shostakovich's] conspicuous silence\" when her music faced criticism after her graduation from the Leningrad Conservatory. The relationship with Nazirova seems to have been one-sided, expressed largely in his letters to her, and can be dated to around 1953 to 1956. He married his second wife, Komsomol activist Margarita Kainova, in 1956; the couple proved ill-matched, and divorced five years later.\nIn 1954, Shostakovich wrote the Festive Overture, opus 96; it was used as the theme music for the 1980 Summer Olympics. (His \"Theme from the film \"Pirogov\", Opus 76a: Finale\" was played as the cauldron was lit at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens, Greece.)\nIn 1959, Shostakovich appeared on stage in Moscow at the end of a concert performance of his Fifth Symphony, congratulating Leonard Bernstein and the New York Philharmonic Orchestra for their performance (part of a concert tour of the Soviet Union). Later that year, Bernstein and the Philharmonic recorded the symphony in Boston for Columbia Records.\nJoining the Party.\n1960 marked another turning point in Shostakovich's life: he joined the Communist Party. The government wanted to appoint him Chairman of the RSFSR Union of Composers, but to hold that position he was required to obtain Party membership. It was understood that Nikita Khrushchev, the First Secretary of the Communist Party from 1953 to 1964, was looking for support from the intelligentsia's leading ranks in an effort to create a better relationship with the Soviet Union's artists. This event has variously been interpreted as a show of commitment, a mark of cowardice, the result of political pressure, and his free decision. On the one hand, the apparat was less repressive than it had been before Stalin's death. On the other, his son recalled that the event reduced Shostakovich to tears, and that he later told his wife Irina that he had been blackmailed. Lev Lebedinsky has said that the composer was suicidal. In 1960, he was appointed Chairman of the RSFSR Union of Composers; from 1962 until his death, he also served as a delegate in the Supreme Soviet of the USSR. By joining the party, Shostakovich also committed himself to finally writing the homage to Lenin that he had promised before. His Twelfth Symphony, which portrays the Bolshevik Revolution and was completed in 1961, was dedicated to Lenin and called \"The Year 1917\".\nShostakovich's musical response to these personal crises was the Eighth String Quartet, composed in only three days. He subtitled the piece \"To the victims of fascism and war\", ostensibly in memory of the Dresden fire bombing that took place in 1945. Yet like the Tenth Symphony, the quartet incorporates quotations from several of his past works and his musical monogram. Shostakovich confessed to his friend Isaac Glikman, \"I started thinking that if some day I die, nobody is likely to write a work in memory of me, so I had better write one myself.\" Several of Shostakovich's colleagues, including Natalya Vovsi-Mikhoels and the cellist Valentin Berlinsky, were also aware of the Eighth Quartet's biographical intent. Peter J. Rabinowitz has also pointed to covert references to Richard Strauss's \"Metamorphosen\" in it.\nIn 1962, Shostakovich married for the third time, to Irina Supinskaya. In a letter to Glikman he wrote: \"her only defect is that she is 27 years old. In all other respects she is splendid: clever, cheerful, straightforward and very likeable.\" According to Galina Vishnevskaya, who knew the Shostakoviches well, this marriage was a very happy one: \"It was with her that Dmitri Dmitriyevich finally came to know domestic peace... Surely, she prolonged his life by several years.\" In November, he conducted publicly for the only time in his life, leading a couple of his own works in Gorky; otherwise he declined to conduct, citing nerves and ill health.\nThat year saw Shostakovich again turn to the subject of anti-Semitism in his Thirteenth Symphony (subtitled \"Babi Yar\"). The symphony sets a number of poems by Yevgeny Yevtushenko, the first of which commemorates a massacre of Ukrainian Jews during the Second World War. Opinions are divided as to how great a risk this was: the poem had been published in Soviet media and was not banned, but it remained controversial. After the symphony's premiere, Yevtushenko was forced to add a stanza to his poem that said that Russians and Ukrainians had died alongside the Jews at Babi Yar.\nIn 1965, Shostakovich raised his voice in defence of poet Joseph Brodsky, who was sentenced to five years of exile and hard labor. Shostakovich co-signed protests with Yevtushenko, fellow Soviet artists Kornei Chukovsky, Anna Akhmatova, Samuil Marshak, and the French philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre. After the protests, the sentence was commuted, and Brodsky returned to Leningrad.\nLater life.\nIn 1964, Shostakovich composed the music for the Russian film \"Hamlet\", which was favorably reviewed by \"The New York Times\": \"But the lack of this aural stimulation\u2014of Shakespeare's eloquent words\u2014is recompensed in some measure by a splendid and stirring musical score by Dmitri Shostakovich. This has great dignity and depth, and at times an appropriate wildness or becoming levity\".\nIn later life Shostakovich suffered from chronic ill health, but he resisted giving up cigarettes and vodka. Beginning in 1958, he suffered from a debilitating condition that particularly affected his right hand, eventually forcing him to give up piano playing; in 1965, it was diagnosed as poliomyelitis, but consensus on his diagnosis is unclear. He also suffered heart attacks in 1966,1970, and 1971, as well as several falls in which he broke both his legs; in 1967 he wrote in a letter: \"Target achieved so far: 75% (right leg broken, left leg broken, right hand defective). All I need to do now is wreck the left hand and then 100% of my extremities will be out of order.\"\nA preoccupation with his own mortality permeates Shostakovich's later works, such as the later quartets and the Fourteenth Symphony of 1969 (a song cycle based on a number of poems on the theme of death). He dedicated the Fourteenth to his close friend Benjamin Britten, who conducted its Western premiere at the 1970 Aldeburgh Festival. The Fifteenth Symphony of 1971 is, by contrast, melodic and retrospective in nature, quoting Wagner, Rossini and the composer's own Fourth Symphony.\nDeath.\nBeginning in 1958, Shostakovich experienced a decline in his motor functions. He was diagnosed with a rare form of poliomyelitis, although according to his son, Maxim, he was informed that it was motor neurone disease. Nevertheless, Shostakovich insisted upon writing all his own correspondence and music, even when his right hand became virtually unusable. His last work was his Viola Sonata, which was first performed officially on 1 October 1975.\nShostakovich, a smoker since his youth, was forced to give up the habit after having his first heart attack in 1966. He was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1973. His death is variously attributed to lung cancer or heart failure.\nShostakovich died on 9 August 1975 at the Central Clinical Hospital in Moscow. A civic funeral was held; he was interred in Novodevichy Cemetery, Moscow.\nLegacy.\nShostakovich left behind several recordings of his own piano works; other noted interpreters of his music include Mstislav Rostropovich, Tatiana Nikolayeva, Maria Yudina, David Oistrakh, and members of the Beethoven Quartet.\nShostakovich's influence on later composers outside the former Soviet Union has been relatively slight. His influence can be seen in some Nordic composers, such as Lars-Erik Larsson.\nThe Shostakovich Peninsula on Alexander Island, Antarctica, is named for him.\nMusic.\nOverview.\nShostakovich's works are broadly tonal but with elements of atonality and chromaticism. In some of his later works (e.g., the Twelfth Quartet), he made use of tone rows. His output is dominated by his cycles of symphonies and string quartets, each totaling 15. The symphonies are distributed fairly evenly throughout his career, while the quartets are concentrated toward his later life. Among the most popular are the Fifth and Seventh Symphonies and the Eighth and Fifteenth Quartets. Other works include operas, concertos, chamber music, and a large quantity of theatre and film music.\nShostakovich's music shows the influence of many of the composers he most admired: Bach in his fugues and passacaglias; Beethoven in the late quartets; Mahler in the symphonies; and Berg in his use of musical codes and quotations. Among Russian composers he particularly admired Modest Mussorgsky, whose operas \"Boris Godunov\" and \"Khovanshchina\" he reorchestrated; Mussorgsky's influence is most prominent in the wintry scenes of \"Lady Macbeth\" and the Eleventh Symphony, as well as in satirical works such as \"Rayok\". Prokofiev's influence is most apparent in the earlier piano works, such as the first sonata and first concerto. The influence of Russian church and folk music is evident in his works for unaccompanied choir of the 1950s.\nShostakovich's relationship with Stravinsky was profoundly ambivalent; as he wrote to Glikman, \"Stravinsky the composer I worship. Stravinsky the thinker I despise.\" He was particularly enamoured of the \"Symphony of Psalms\", presenting a copy of his own piano version of it to Stravinsky when the latter visited the USSR in 1962. (The meeting of the two composers was not very successful; observers commented on Shostakovich's extreme nervousness and Stravinsky's \"cruelty\" to him.)\nMany commentators have noted the disjunction between the experimental works before the 1936 denunciation and the more conservative ones that followed; the composer told Flora Litvinova, \"without 'Party guidance'\u00a0... I would have displayed more brilliance, used more sarcasm, I could have revealed my ideas openly instead of having to resort to camouflage.\" Articles Shostakovich published in 1934 and 1935 cited Berg, Schoenberg, Krenek, Hindemith, \"and especially Stravinsky\" among his influences. Key works of the earlier period are the First Symphony, which combined the academicism of the conservatory with his progressive inclinations; \"The Nose\" (\"The most uncompromisingly modernist of all his stage-works\"); \"Lady Macbeth\", which precipitated the denunciation; and the Fourth Symphony, described in Grove's Dictionary as \"a colossal synthesis of Shostakovich's musical development to date\". The Fourth was also the first piece in which Mahler's influence came to the fore, prefiguring the route Shostakovich took to secure his rehabilitation, while he himself admitted that the preceding two were his least successful.\nAfter 1936, Shostakovich's music became more conservative. During this time he also composed more chamber music. While his chamber works were largely tonal, the late chamber works, which Grove's Dictionary calls a \"world of purgatorial numbness\", included tone rows, although he treated these thematically rather than serially. Vocal works are also a prominent feature of his late output.\nJewish themes.\nIn the 1940s, Shostakovich began to show an interest in Jewish themes. He was intrigued by Jewish music's \"ability to build a jolly melody on sad intonations\". Examples of works that included Jewish themes are the Fourth String Quartet (1949), the First Violin Concerto (1948), and the \"Four Monologues on Pushkin Poems\" (1952), as well as the Piano Trio in E minor (1944). He was further inspired to write with Jewish themes when he examined Moisei Beregovski's 1944 thesis on Jewish folk music.\nIn 1948, Shostakovich acquired a book of Jewish folk songs, from which he composed the song cycle \"From Jewish Folk Poetry\". He initially wrote eight songs meant to represent the hardships of being Jewish in the Soviet Union. To disguise this he added three more meant to demonstrate the great life Jews had under the Soviet regime. Despite his efforts to hide the real meaning in the work, the Union of Composers refused to approve his music in 1949 under the pressure of the anti-Semitism that gripped the country. \"From Jewish Folk Poetry\" could not be performed until after Stalin's death in March 1953, along with all the other works that were forbidden.\nSelf-quotations.\nThroughout his compositions Shostakovich demonstrated a controlled use of musical quotation. This stylistic choice had been common among earlier composers, but Shostakovich developed it into a defining characteristic of his music. Rather than quoting other composers, Shostakovich preferred to quote himself. Musicologists such as Sofia Moshevich, Ian McDonald, and Stephen Harris have connected his works through their quotations.\nOne example is the main theme of Katerina's aria, \"Seryozha, khoroshiy moy\", from the fourth act of \"Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District\". The aria's beauty comes as a breath of fresh air in the intense, overbearing tone of the scene, in which Katerina visits her lover Sergei in prison. The theme is made tragic when Sergei betrays her and finds a new lover upon blaming Katerina for his incarceration.\nMore than 25 years later, Shostakovich quoted this theme in his Eighth String Quartet. In the midst of this quartet's oppressive and somber themes, the cello introduces the Seryozha theme \"in the 'bright' key of F-sharp major\" about three minutes into the fourth movement. This theme emerges once again in his Fourteenth String Quartet. As in the Eighth Quartet, the cello introduces the theme, which here serves as a dedication to the cellist of the Beethoven String Quartet, Sergei Shirinsky.\nPosthumous publications.\nIn 2004, musicologist Olga Digonskaya discovered a trove of Shostakovich manuscripts at the Glinka State Central Museum of Musical Culture in Moscow. In a cardboard file were some \"300 pages of musical sketches, pieces and scores\" in Shostakovich's hand. A composer friend bribed Shostakovich's housemaid to regularly deliver the contents of Shostakovich's office waste bin to him, instead of taking it to the garbage. Some of those cast-offs eventually found their way into the Glinka. ... The Glinka archive \"contained a huge number of pieces and compositions which were completely unknown or could be traced quite indirectly,\" Digonskaya said.\nAmong these were Shostakovich's piano and vocal sketches for a prologue to an opera, \"Orango\" (1932). They were orchestrated by the British composer Gerard McBurney and premiered in December 2011 by the Los Angeles Philharmonic conducted by Esa-Pekka Salonen.\nReputation.\nAccording to McBurney, opinion is divided on whether Shostakovich's music is \"of visionary power and originality, as some maintain, or, as others think, derivative, trashy, empty and second-hand\". William Walton, his British contemporary, described him as \"the greatest composer of the 20th century\". Musicologist David Fanning concludes in \"Grove's Dictionary\" that \"Amid the conflicting pressures of official requirements, the mass suffering of his fellow countrymen, and his personal ideals of humanitarian and public service, he succeeded in forging a musical language of colossal emotional power.\"\nSome modern composers have been critical. Pierre Boulez dismissed Shostakovich's music as \"the second, or even third pressing of Mahler\". The Romanian composer and Webern disciple Philip Gershkovich called Shostakovich \"a\u00a0hack in a trance\". A related complaint is that Shostakovich's style is vulgar and strident: Stravinsky wrote of \"Lady Macbeth\": \"brutally hammering\u00a0... and monotonous\". English composer and musicologist Robin Holloway described his music as \"battleship-grey in melody and harmony, factory-functional in structure; in content all rhetoric and coercion\".\nShostakovich borrows extensively from the material and styles both of earlier composers and of popular music; the vulgarity of \"low\" music is a notable influence on this \"greatest of eclectics\". McBurney traces this to the avant-garde artistic circles of the early Soviet period in which Shostakovich moved early in his career, and argues that these borrowings were a deliberate technique to allow him to create \"patterns of contrast, repetition, exaggeration\" that gave his music large-scale structure.\nPersonality.\nShostakovich was in many ways an obsessive man: according to his daughter he was \"obsessed with cleanliness\". He synchronised the clocks in his apartment and regularly sent himself cards to test how well the postal service was working. Elizabeth Wilson's \"Shostakovich: A Life Remembered\" indexes 26 references to his nervousness. Mikhail Druskin remembers that even as a young man the composer was \"fragile and nervously agile\". Yuri Lyubimov comments, \"The fact that he was more vulnerable and receptive than other people was no doubt an important feature of his genius.\" In later life, Krzysztof Meyer recalled, \"his face was a bag of tics and grimaces.\"\nIn Shostakovich's lighter moods, sport was one of his main recreations, although he preferred spectating or officiating to participating (he was a qualified football referee). His favorite football club was Zenit Leningrad (now Zenit Saint Petersburg), which he would watch regularly. He also enjoyed card games, particularly patience.\nShostakovich was fond of satirical writers such as Gogol, Chekhov and Mikhail Zoshchenko. Zoshchenko's influence in particular is evident in his letters, which include wry parodies of Soviet officialese. Zoshchenko noted the contradictions in the composer's character: \"he is ... frail, fragile, withdrawn, an infinitely direct, pure child ... [but also] hard, acid, extremely intelligent, strong perhaps, despotic and not altogether good-natured (although cerebrally good-natured).\"\nShostakovich was diffident by nature: Flora Litvinova has said he was \"completely incapable of saying 'No' to anybody.\" This meant he was easily persuaded to sign official statements, including a denunciation in 1973 of the Soviet physicist and political activist Andrei Sakharov. Shostakovich's widow later told that his name was added to the denunciation without his permission. But he was willing to try to help constituents in his capacities as chairman of the Composers' Union and Deputy to the Supreme Soviet. Oleg Prokofiev said, \"he tried to help so many people that\u00a0... less and less attention was paid to his pleas.\" When asked if he believed in God, Shostakovich said \"No, and I am very sorry about it.\"\nOrthodoxy and revisionism.\n&lt;score sound=\"1\"&gt;\n\\override Score.TimeSignature #'stencil = ##f\n\\relative c' {\n \\clef treble\n \\time 4/4 d es c b\n&lt;/score&gt; Shostakovich represented himself in some works with the DSCH motif, consisting of D-E\u266d-C-B.Shostakovich's response to official criticism and whether he used music as a kind of covert dissidence is a matter of dispute. He outwardly conformed to government policies and positions, reading speeches and putting his name to articles expressing the government line. But it is evident he disliked many aspects of the regime, as confirmed by his family, his letters to Isaac Glikman, and the satirical cantata \"Rayok\", which ridiculed the \"anti-formalist\" campaign and was kept hidden until after his death. He was a close friend of Marshal of the Soviet Union Mikhail Tukhachevsky, who was executed in 1937 during the Great Purge.\nIt is also uncertain to what extent Shostakovich expressed his opposition to the state in his music. The revisionist view was put forth by Solomon Volkov in the 1979 book \"Testimony\", which claimed to be Shostakovich's memoirs dictated to Volkov. The book alleged that many of the composer's works contained coded anti-government messages, placing Shostakovich in a tradition of Russian artists outwitting censorship that goes back at least to Alexander Pushkin. He incorporated many quotations and motifs in his work, most notably his musical signature DSCH. His longtime musical collaborator Yevgeny Mravinsky said, \"Shostakovich very often explained his intentions with very specific images and connotations.\"\nThe revisionist perspective has subsequently been supported by his children, Maxim and Galina, although Maxim said in 1981 that Volkov's book was not his father's work. Volkov has further argued, both in \"Testimony\" and in \"Shostakovich and Stalin\", that Shostakovich adopted the role of the \"yurodivy\" or holy fool in his relations with the government.\nMaxim Shostakovich has also commented on \"Testimony\" and Volkov more favorably since 1991, when the Soviet regime fell. To Allan B. Ho and Dmitry Feofanov, he confirmed that his father had told him about \"meeting a young man from Leningrad who knows his music extremely well\" and that \"Volkov did meet with Shostakovich to work on his reminiscences\". Maxim has repeatedly said he is \"a supporter both of \"Testimony\" and of Volkov.\" Other prominent revisionists are Ian MacDonald, whose book \"The New Shostakovich\" put forward further revisionist interpretations of his music, and Elizabeth Wilson, whose \"Shostakovich: A Life Remembered\" provides testimony from many of the composer's acquaintances.\nMusicians and scholars including Laurel Fay and Richard Taruskin contested the authenticity and debate the significance of \"Testimony\", alleging that Volkov compiled it from a combination of recycled articles, gossip, and possibly some information directly from the composer. Fay documents these allegations in her 2002 article \"Volkov's \"Testimony\" reconsidered\", showing that the only pages of the original \"Testimony\" manuscript that Shostakovich had signed and verified are word-for-word reproductions of earlier interviews he gave, none of which are controversial. Ho and Feofanov have countered that at least two of the signed pages contain controversial material: for instance, \"on the first page of chapter 3, where [Shostakovich] notes that the plaque that reads 'In this house lived [Vsevolod] Meyerhold' should also say 'And in this house his wife was brutally murdered'.\"\nRecorded legacy.\nIn May 1958, during a visit to Paris, Shostakovich recorded his two piano concertos with Andr\u00e9 Cluytens, as well as some short piano works. These were issued on LP by EMI and later reissued on CD. Shostakovich recorded the two concertos in stereo in Moscow for Melodiya. Shostakovich also played the piano solos in recordings of the Cello Sonata, Op. 40 with cellist Daniil Shafran and also with Mstislav Rostropovich; the Violin Sonata, Op. 134, in a private recording made with violinist David Oistrakh; and the Piano Trio, Op. 67 with violinist David Oistrakh and cellist Milo\u0161 S\u00e1dlo. There is also a short newsreel of Shostakovich as soloist in a 1930s concert performance of the closing moments of his first piano concerto. A color film of Shostakovich supervising the Soviet revival of \"The Nose\" in 1974 was also made.\nAwards.\nSoviet Union\nAcademic titles\nOther awards\nIn 1962, he was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Scoring of a Musical Picture for \"Khovanshchina\" (1959).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n \n \n (2nd ed. \u2013 Kindle) Faber and Faber. 2010. .\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "8521", "revid": "13023844", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8521", "title": "Doom (1993 video game)", "text": "First-person shooter\nDoom is a 1993 first-person shooter game developed and published by id Software for MS-DOS. It is the first installment in the \"Doom\" franchise. The player assumes the role of a space marine, later unofficially referred to as Doomguy, fighting through hordes of undead humans and invading demons. The game begins on the moons of Mars and finishes in hell, with the player traversing each level to find its exit or defeat its final boss. It is an early example of 3D graphics in video games, and has enemies and objects as 2D images, a technique sometimes referred to as 2.5D graphics.\n\"Doom\" was the third major independent release by id Software, after \"Commander Keen\" (1990\u20131991) and \"Wolfenstein 3D\" (1992). In May 1992, id started developing a darker game focused on fighting demons with technology, using a new 3D game engine from the lead programmer, John Carmack. The designer Tom Hall initially wrote a science fiction plot, but he and most of the story were removed from the project, with the final game featuring an action-heavy design by John Romero and Sandy Petersen. Id published \"Doom\" as a set of three episodes under the shareware model, marketing the full game by releasing the first episode free. A retail version with an additional episode was published in 1995 by GT Interactive as \"The Ultimate Doom\".\n\"Doom\" was a critical and commercial success, earning a reputation as one of the best and most influential video games of all time. It sold an estimated 3.5 million copies by 1999, and up to 20 million people are estimated to have played it within two years of launch. It has been termed the \"father\" of first-person shooters and is regarded as one of the most important games in the genre. It has been cited by video game historians as shifting the direction and public perception of the medium as a whole, as well as sparking the rise of online games and communities. It led to an array of imitators and clones, as well as a robust modding scene and the birth of speedrunning as a community. Its high level of graphic violence led to controversy from a range of groups. \"Doom\" has been ported to a variety of platforms both officially and unofficially and has been followed by several games in the series, including \"Doom II\" (1994), \"Doom 64\" (1997), \"Doom 3\" (2004), \"Doom\" (2016), \"Doom Eternal\" (2020), and ' (2025), as well as the films \"Doom\" (2005) and ' (2019).\nGameplay.\n\"Doom\" is a first-person shooter presented with 3D graphics. While the environment is shown in a 3D perspective, the enemies and objects are instead 2D sprites rendered at fixed angles, a technique sometimes referred to as 2.5D graphics or billboarding. In the single-player campaign mode, the player controls an unnamed space marine\u2014later unofficially termed \"Doomguy\"\u2014through military bases on the moons of Mars and in hell. To finish a level, the player must traverse through labyrinthine areas to reach a marked exit room. Levels are grouped into named episodes, with the final level of each focusing on a boss fight.\nWhile traversing the levels, the player must fight a variety of enemies, including demons and possessed undead humans. Enemies often appear in large groups. The five difficulty levels adjust the number of enemies and amount of damage they do, with enemies moving and attacking faster than normal on the hardest difficulty setting. The monsters have simple behavior: they move toward their opponent if they see or hear them, and attack by biting, clawing, or using magic abilities such as fireballs.\nThe player must manage supplies of ammunition, health, and armor while traversing the levels. The player can find weapons and ammunition throughout the levels or can collect them from dead enemies, including a pistol, a shotgun, a chainsaw, a plasma rifle, and the BFG 9000. The player also encounters pits of toxic waste, ceilings that lower and crush objects, and locked doors requiring a collectable keycard or a remote switch. Power-ups include health or armor points, a mapping computer, partial invisibility, a radiation suit against toxic waste, invulnerability, or a super-strong melee berserker status. Cheat codes allow the player to unlock all weapons, walk through walls, or become invulnerable.\nTwo multiplayer modes are playable over a network: cooperative, in which two to four players team up to complete the main campaign, and deathmatch, in which two to four players compete to kill the other players' characters as many times as possible. Multiplayer was initially only playable over local networks, but a four-player online multiplayer mode was made available one year after launch through the DWANGO service.\nPlot.\n\"Doom\" is divided into three episodes, each containing eight main levels: \"Knee-Deep in the Dead\", \"The Shores of Hell\", and \"Inferno\". A fourth episode, \"Thy Flesh Consumed\", was added in an expanded version, \"The Ultimate Doom\", released two years after \"Doom\". The campaign contains very few plot elements, with a minimal story presented mostly through the instruction manual and text descriptions between episodes.\nIn the future, an unnamed marine is posted to a dead-end assignment on Mars after assaulting a superior officer who ordered his unit to fire on civilians. The Union Aerospace Corporation, which operates radioactive waste facilities there, allows the military to conduct secret teleportation experiments that turn deadly. A base on Phobos urgently requests military support, while Deimos disappears entirely, and the marine joins a combat force to secure Phobos. He secures the perimeter as ordered while the entire response team is wiped out. With no way off the moon, and armed with only a pistol, he enters the base intent on revenge.\nIn \"Knee-Deep in the Dead\", the marine fights demons and possessed humans in the military and waste facilities on Phobos. The episode ends with the marine defeating two powerful Barons of Hell guarding a teleporter to the Deimos base. After the battle, the marine passes through the teleporter and is knocked unconscious by a horde of enemies, awakening with only a pistol. In \"The Shores of Hell\", the marine fights through corrupted research facilities on Deimos, culminating in the defeat of a gigantic cyberdemon. From an overlook, he discovers that the moon is floating above hell and rappels down to the surface. In \"Inferno\", the marine battles through hell itself and destroys a cybernetic spider-demon that masterminded the invasion of the moons. When a portal to Earth opens, the marine steps through to discover that Earth has been invaded. \"Thy Flesh Consumed\" follows the marine's initial assault on the Earth invaders, setting the stage for \"Doom II\".\nDevelopment.\nConcept.\nId Software released \"Wolfenstein 3D\" in May 1992. Later called the \"grandfather of 3D shooters\", it established the genre's popularity and its reputation for fast action and technological advancement. When most of the studio began work on additional episodes for \"Wolfenstein\", id co-founder and lead programmer John Carmack instead began technical research on a new game. Following the release of \"Wolfenstein 3D: Spear of Destiny\" in September 1992, the team began to plan their next game. They were tired of \"Wolfenstein\" and wanted to create another 3D game using a new engine Carmack was developing. Co-founder and lead designer Tom Hall proposed a new game in the \"Commander Keen\" series, but the team decided that the \"Keen\" platforming gameplay was a poor fit for Carmack's fast-paced 3D engines. Additionally, the other co-founders, designer John Romero and lead artist Adrian Carmack (no relation to John Carmack) wanted to create something in a darker style than the \"Keen\" games.\nJohn Carmack conceived a game about using technology to fight demons, inspired by a \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" campaign the team played. This campaign would also influence the design of \"Quake\" (1996) and \"Daikatana\" (2000). More broadly the team intended to combine the styles of the \"Evil Dead II\" and \"Aliens\" films. The working title was \"Green and Pissed\", but Carmack renamed it \"Doom\" based on a line from the 1986 film \"The Color of Money\": \"'What you got in there?' / 'In here? Doom.'\"\nThe team agreed to pursue the \"Doom\" concept, and development began in November 1992. The initial development team was composed of five people: programmers John Carmack and Romero, artists Adrian Carmack and Kevin Cloud, and designer Hall. They moved operations to a dark office building, naming it \"Suite 666\" while drawing inspiration from the noises they heard from a neighboring dental practice. They also decided to cut ties with Apogee Software, their previous publisher, and self-publish \"Doom\", as they felt that they were outgrowing the publisher and could make more money by self-publishing.\nDesign.\nIn November, Hall delivered a design document that he called the \"Doom Bible\", detailing the project's plot, backstory, and design goals. His design was a science fiction horror concept wherein scientists on the Moon open a portal to an alien invasion. Over a series of levels, the player discovers that the aliens are demons while hell steadily infects the level design. John Carmack not only disliked the proposed story but dismissed the idea of having a story at all: \"Story in a game is like story in a porn movie; it's expected to be there, but it's not that important.\" Rather than a deep story, he wanted to focus on technological innovation, dropping the levels and episodes of \"Wolfenstein\" in favor of a fast, continuous world. Hall disliked the idea, but the rest of the team sided with Carmack. Hall spent the next few weeks reworking the \"Doom Bible\" to work with Carmack's technological ideas. However, the team then realized that Carmack's vision for a seamless world would be impossible given the hardware limitations, and Hall was forced to rework the design document once again.\nAt the start of 1993, id put out a press release, touting Hall's story about fighting off demons while \"knee-deep in the dead\". The press release proclaimed the new 3D engine features that John Carmack had created, as well as aspects including multiplayer, that had not yet even been designed. Early versions were built to match the \"Doom Bible\", and a \"pre-alpha\" version of the first level included Hall's introductory base scene. Initial versions also retained \"Wolfenstein\"'s arcade-style scoring, but this was later removed as it clashed with \"Doom\"'s intended tone. The studio also experimented with other game systems before removing them, such as lives, an inventory, a secondary shield, and a complex user interface.\nSoon, however, the \"Doom Bible\" as a whole was rejected. Romero wanted a game even \"more brutal and fast\" than \"Wolfenstein\", which did not leave room for the character-driven plot Hall had created. Additionally, the team believed it emphasized realism over entertaining gameplay, and they did not see the need for a design document at all. Some ideas were retained, but the story was dropped and most of the design was removed. By early 1993, Hall created levels that became part of an internal demo. Carmack and Romero, however, rejected the military architecture of Hall's level design. Romero especially believed that the boxy, flat level designs failed to innovate on \"Wolfenstein\", and failed to show off the engine's capabilities. He began to create his own, more abstract levels, which the rest of the team saw as a great improvement.\nHall was upset with the reception of his designs and how little impact he was having as the lead designer. He was also upset with how much he was having to fight with John Carmack to get what he saw as obvious gameplay improvements, such as flying enemies, and began to spend less time at work. The other developers, however, felt that Hall was not in sync with the team's vision and was becoming a problem. In July the other founders of id fired Hall, who went to work for Apogee. He was replaced by Sandy Petersen in September, ten weeks before the game was released. Petersen later recalled that John Carmack and Romero wanted to hire other artists instead, but Cloud and Adrian disagreed, saying that a designer was required to help build a cohesive gameplay experience. The team also added a third programmer, Dave Taylor.\nPetersen and Romero designed the rest of \"Doom\"'s levels, with different aims: the team believed that Petersen's designs were more technically interesting and varied, while Romero's were more aesthetically interesting. In late 1993, a month before release, John Carmack began to add multiplayer. After the multiplayer component was coded, the development team began playing four-player games, which Romero termed \"deathmatch\", and Cloud named the act of killing other players \"fragging\". According to Romero, the deathmatch mode was inspired by fighting games such as \"Street Fighter II\", \"Fatal Fury\", and \"Art of Fighting\".\nEngine.\n\"Doom\" was written largely in the C programming language, with a few elements in assembly language. The developers used NeXT computers running the NeXTSTEP operating system. The level and graphical data was stored in WAD files, short for \"Where's All the Data?\", separately from the engine. This allowed for any part of the design to be changed without needing to adjust the engine code. Carmack designed this system so that fans could easily modify the game; he had been impressed by the modifications made by fans of \"Wolfenstein 3D\" and wanted to support that by releasing a map editor with an easily swappable file structure.\nUnlike \"Wolfenstein\", which has flat levels with walls at right angles, the \"Doom\" engine allows for walls and floors at any angle or height but does not allow areas to be stacked vertically. The lighting system is based on adjusting the color palette of surfaces directly. Rather than calculating how light traveled from light sources to surfaces using ray tracing, the game calculates the \"light level\" of a small area based on the predetermined brightness of said area. It then modifies the color palette of that section's surface textures to mimic how dark it would look. This same system is used to cause far away surfaces to look darker than close ones.\nRomero came up with new ways to use Carmack's lighting engine, such as strobe lights. He programmed engine features such as switches and movable stairs and platforms. After Romero's complex level designs started to cause problems with the engine, Carmack began to use binary space partitioning to quickly select the reduced portion of a level that the player could see at a given time. Taylor, along with programming other features, added cheat codes to aid in development and left them in for players.\nArt direction.\nAdrian Carmack was the lead artist for \"Doom\", with Kevin Cloud as an additional artist. They designed the monsters to be \"nightmarish\", with graphics that were realistic and dark instead of staged or rendered. A mixed media approach was taken to create them. The artists sculpted models of some of the enemies and took pictures of them in stop motion from five to eight different angles so that they could be rotated realistically in-game. The images were then digitized and converted to 2D characters with a program written by John Carmack. Adrian Carmack made clay models for a few demons and had Gregor Punchatz build latex and metal sculptures of the others. The weapons were made from combined parts of children's toys. The developers photographed themselves as well, using Cloud's arm for the marine's arm holding a gun, and Adrian's snakeskin boots and wounded knee for textures. The cover art was created by Don Ivan Punchatz, Gregor Punchatz's father, who worked from a short description of the game rather than detailed references. Romero was the body model used for cover; he posed during a photoshoot to demonstrate to the intended model what the pose should look like, and Punchatz used his photo.\nAs with \"Wolfenstein 3D\", id hired composer Bobby Prince to create the music and sound effects. Romero directed Prince to make the music in techno and metal styles. Many tracks were directly inspired by songs by metal bands such as Alice in Chains and Pantera. Prince believed that ambient music would be more appropriate and produced numerous tracks in both styles in hope of convincing the team, and Romero incorporated both. Prince did not make music for specific levels, as they were composed before the levels were completed. Instead, Romero assigned each track to each level late in development. Prince created the sound effects based on short descriptions or concept art of a monster or weapon and adjusted them to match the completed animations. The monster sounds were created from animal noises, and Prince designed all the sounds to be distinct on the limited sound hardware of the time, even when many sounds were playing at once. He also designed the sound effects to play on different frequencies from those used for the MIDI music, so they would clearly cut through the music.\nRelease.\nId Software planned to self-publish \"Doom\" for DOS-based computers and set up a distribution system leading up to the release. Jay Wilbur, who had been hired as CEO and sole member of the business team, planned the marketing and distribution of \"Doom\". As id would make the most money from copies they sold directly to customers\u2014up to 85% of the planned US$ price\u2014he decided to leverage the shareware market as much as possible. He believed that the mainstream press was uninterested in the game and bought only a single ad in any gaming magazine. Instead, he gave software retailers the option to sell copies of the first \"Doom\" episode at any price, in hopes of motivating customers to buy the full game directly from id. In 2004, John Carmack estimated that the total cost of development was less than US$1 million.\nThe team planned to release \"Doom\" in the third quarter of 1993 but ultimately needed more time. By December 1993, the team was working non-stop, with several employees sleeping at the office. Taylor said that the work gave him such a rush that he would pass out from the intensity. Id only gave a single press preview, to \"Computer Gaming World\" in June, to a glowing response, but had also released development updates to the public continuously throughout development on the nascent internet. Id began receiving calls from people interested in the game or angry that it had missed its planned release date, as anticipation built over the year. At midnight on December 10, 1993, after working for 30 straight hours testing, the development team at id uploaded the first episode to the internet, letting interested players distribute it for them. The team was unable to connect to the FTP server at the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison where they planned to upload the game, since there were so many users already connected in anticipation of the release. The network administrator was forced to first increase the number of connections, and then kick off all users to make room. When the upload finished 30 minutes later, 10,000 people attempted to download the game at once, crashing the university's network.\nWithin hours of \"Doom\"'s release, university networks began banning \"Doom\" multiplayer games, as a rush of players overwhelmed their systems. The morning after release, John Carmack quickly released a patch in response to complaints of network congestion from administrators, who still needed to implement \"Doom\"-specific rules to keep their networks from crashing from the load.\nPorts.\nIn 1995, id created an expanded version of \"Doom\" for the retail market with a fourth episode of levels, which was published by GT Interactive as \"The Ultimate Doom\". \"Doom\" has also been ported to numerous different platforms, independent from id Software. The first port of \"Doom\" was an unofficial port to Linux, released by id programmer Dave Taylor in 1994; it was hosted by id but not supported or made official. Microsoft attempted to hire id to port \"Doom\" to Windows in 1995 to promote Windows as a gaming platform, and Microsoft CEO Bill Gates briefly considered buying the company. When id declined, Microsoft made its own licensed port, with a team led by Gabe Newell. One promotional video for Windows 95 had Gates digitally superimposed into the game.\nOther official ports of \"Doom\" were released for the 32X and Atari Jaguar in 1994, SNES and PlayStation in 1995, 3DO in 1996, Sega Saturn in 1997, Acorn Risc PC in 1998, Game Boy Advance in 2001, Xbox 360 in 2006, iOS in 2009, and Nintendo Switch, Xbox One, PlayStation 4, and Android in 2019, with the latter-most platforms (excluding Android) receiving a further expanded port alongside \"Doom II\" in 2024 along with ports for the PlayStation 5 and Xbox Series X/S, alongside the 2016 \"IDKFA\" arranged soundtrack by Andrew Hulshult. Some of these became bestsellers even many years after the initial release. The ports did not all have the same content, with some having fewer levels, such as the 32X port created by John Carmack, which was released with only two-thirds of the game's levels in order to meet the console's launch date, while the PlayStation port includes \"The Ultimate Doom\" and \"Doom II\".\nThe source code for \"Doom\" was released under a non-commercial license in 1997, and freely released under the GNU General Public License in 1999. Due to the release of its source code, \"Doom\" has been unofficially ported to numerous platforms. These ports include esoteric devices such as smart thermostats, pianos, and \"Doom\" itself, which led to variations of a long-running meme, \"Can it run \"Doom\"?\" and \"It runs \"Doom\"\".\nReception.\nSales.\nUpon its release in December 1993, \"Doom\" became an \"overnight phenomenon\". It was an immediate financial success for id, making a profit within a day after release. Although the company estimated that only 1% of shareware downloaders bought the full game, this was enough to generate initial daily revenue of US$, selling in one day what \"Wolfenstein\" had sold in one month. By May 1994, Wilbur said that the game had sold over 65,000 copies, and estimated that the shareware version had been distributed over 1\u00a0million times. In 1995, Wilbur estimated the first-year sales as 140,000, while in 2002 Petersen said it had sold around 200,000 copies in its first year.\nBy late 1995, \"Doom\" was estimated to be installed on more computers worldwide than Microsoft's new operating system, Windows 95. According to PC Data, by April 1998 \"Doom\"'s shareware edition had yielded 1.36 million units sold and US$ in revenue in the United States. This led PC Data to declare it the country's 4th-best-selling computer game since 1993. \"The Ultimate Doom\" sold over 780,000 units by September 1999, and all versions combined sold 3.5 million copies by the end of 1999. In addition to sales, an estimated six million people played the shareware version by 2002; other sources estimated in 2000 that 10\u201320 million people played \"Doom\" within 24 months of its launch.\nReviews.\n\"Doom\" was highly praised in contemporaneous reviews. In April 1994, a few months after release, \"PC Gamer UK\" named it the third-best computer game of all time, claiming \"\"Doom\" has already done more to establish the PC's arcade clout than any other title in gaming history,\" and \"PC Gamer US\" named it the best computer game of all time that August. It won the Best Action Adventure award at \"Cybermania '94\". \"GamesRadar UK\" named \"Doom\" Game of the Year in 1993 shortly after release, and \"Computer Gaming World\" and \"PC Gamer UK\" did the same the year after.\nReviewers heavily praised the single-player gameplay: \"Electronic Entertainment\" called it \"a skull-banging, palm-sweating, blood-pounding game\", while \"The Age\" said it was \"a technically superb and thrilling 3D adventure\". \"White Wolf\"'s reviewer found it addictive, claiming to miss sleep and appointments to continue playing. \"PC Zone\" called it the best arcade game ever, and it and \"Computer Gaming World\" praised the variety of monsters and weapons. \"Computer Gaming World\" concluded that it was \"a virtuoso performance\". Other reviewers, while also praising the gameplay, commented on the lack of complexity: \"Computer and Video Games\" found it captivating and praised the variety and complexity of the level design but called the overall gameplay repetitive, while \"Dragon\" similarly praised the fast gameplay and level design but said that overall it lacked depth. \"Edge\" praised the graphics and levels but criticized the straightforward shooting gameplay. The review concluded: \"If only you could talk to these creatures, then perhaps you could try and make friends with them, form alliances... Now, that would be interesting.\" The review attracted mockery and \"if only you could talk to these creatures\" became a running joke in video game culture. The multiplayer gameplay garnered praise: \"Computer Gaming World\" called it \"the most intense gaming experience available\", and \"Dragon\" called it \"the biggest adrenaline rush available on computers\". \"PC Zone\" named it as the best multiplayer game available, in addition to the best arcade game.\nThe 3D graphics and art style earned glowing reviews as well; \"Computer Gaming World\" called the graphics remarkable, while \"Edge\" said that it \"made serious advances in what people will expect of 3D graphics in future\", surpassing not only prior games but games that had yet to be released. \"Compute!\" and \"Electronic Games\" similarly called the graphics excellent and unlike any other game's. \"PC Zone\", \"Dragon\", \"Computer Gaming World\", and \"Electronic Entertainment\" all lauded the atmosphere and art direction, saying that the level design, lighting effects, and sound effects combined to create a \"claustrophobic\" and \"nightmarish experience\". \"Computer Gaming World\" also praised the music, as did \"The Mercury News\", which called it as \"ominous as the scenario\".\nOther versions.\n\"The Ultimate Doom\" received mixed reviews upon its release in 1995, as in the review from \"PC Zone\", which gave it a score of 90/100 for new players but 20/100 for anyone who had the original game. The reviewer viewed it as solely a level pack due to the lack of new features and compared it negatively to the hundreds of free fan-made levels available on the internet. \"Joystick\" disliked the limited amount of additional content and recommended it only to major fans or those who had not played it. \"Fusion\" reviewed the edition positively, praising the difficulty of the new levels, as did \"GameSpot\", which reviewed it from the perspective of introducing the game to new players.\nThe first ports of \"Doom\" received comparable reviews to the original PC version. \"VideoGames\", \"GamePro\", and \"Computer and Video Games\" all gave the Jaguar version high scores, comparing it favorably with the PC version. \"GamePro\" and \"Computer and Video Games\" also rated the 32X version highly, though they noted that the graphics were worse and the game shorter than the PC or Jaguar versions. The 1995 ports received mixed reviews. The PlayStation version was rated highly by \"HobbyConsolas\", \"GamePro\", and \"Maximum\", which praised the inclusion of \"Doom II\" and extra levels, and favorably compared it to other PlayStation shooter games. The SNES version, however, was noted for weaker graphics and unresponsive controls, though reviewers such as \"Computer and Video Games\", \"GamePro\", and \"Next Generation\" were split on awarding high or middling scores due to these faults. Later 1990s ports received worse reviews; the 3DO port was panned by \"GamePro\" and \"Maximum\" for having worse graphics, a smaller screen size, and less intelligent enemies than any previous version, and the Sega Saturn port also met with low reviews for poor graphics and low quality from \"Mean Machines\" and \"Sega Saturn Magazine\".\nLegacy.\n\"Doom\" has been termed \"inarguably the most important\" first-person shooter, as well as the \"father\" of the genre. Although not the first in the genre, it was the game with the greatest impact. Dan Pinchbeck in \"Doom: Scarydarkfast\" (2013) noted the direct influence of \"Doom\"'s design choices on those of first-person and third-person shooter games two decades later, as influenced by the games released in the intervening years.\n\"Doom\", and to a lesser extent \"Wolfenstein 3D\", has been characterized as \"mark[ing] a turning point\" in the perception of video games in popular culture, with \"Doom\" and first-person shooters in general becoming the predominant perception of video games in media. Historians such as Tristan Donovan in \"\" (2010) have termed it as causing a \"paradigm shift\", prompting the rise in popularity of 3D games, first-person shooters, licensed technology between developers, and support for game modifications. It helped spark the rise of both online multiplayer games and player-driven content generation, and popularized the business model of online distribution. In their book \"Dungeons &amp; Dreamers: A Story of how Computer Games Created a Global Community\" in 2014, Brad King and John Borland claimed that \"Doom\" was one of the first widespread instances of an \"online collective virtual reality\", and did more than any other game to create a modern world of \"networked games and gamers\". \"PC Gamer\" proclaimed \"Doom\" the most influential game of all time in 2004, and in 2023 said its development was one of the most well-documented in the history of video games.\nIt has also been used in scholarly research since its release, including for machine learning, video game aesthetics and design, and the effects of video games on aggression, memory, and attention. In 2007 \"Doom\" was listed among the ten \"game canon\" video games selected for preservation by the Library of Congress, and in 2015 The Strong National Museum of Play inducted \"Doom\" to its World Video Game Hall of Fame as part of its initial set of games.\n\"Doom\" has continued to be included highly in lists of the best video games ever since its release. In 1995, \"Next Generation\" said it was \"the most talked about PC game ever\". The PC version was ranked the 3rd best video game by \"Flux\" in 1995, and in 1996 was ranked fifth best and third most innovative by \"Computer Gaming World\". In 2000, \"Doom\" was ranked as the second-best game ever by \"GameSpot\". The following year, it was voted the number one game of all time in a poll among over 100 game developers and journalists conducted by \"GameSpy\", and was ranked the sixth best game by \"Game Informer\". GameTrailers ranked it the most \"breakthrough PC game\" in 2009 and \"Game Informer\" again ranked it the sixth-best game that same year. \"Doom\" has also been ranked among the best games of all time by \"GamesMaster\", \"Hyper\", \"The Independent\", \"Entertainment Weekly\", \"GamesTM\", \"Jeuxvideo.com\", \"Gamereactor\", \"Time\", \"Polygon\", and \"The Times\", among others, as recently as 2023.\nClones.\nThe success of \"Doom\" led to dozens of new first-person shooter games. In 1998, \"PC Gamer\" declared it \"probably the most imitated game of all time\". These games were often referred to as \"\"Doom\" clones\", with \"first-person shooter\" only overtaking it as the name of the genre after a few years. As the \"first-person shooter\" genre label had not yet solidified at the time, \"Doom\" was described as a \"first person perspective adventure\" and \"atmospheric 3-D action game\".\n\"Doom\" clones ranged from close imitators to more innovative takes on the genre. Id Software licensed the \"Doom\" engine to several other companies, which resulted in several games similar to \"Doom\", including \"Heretic\" (1994), ' (1995), and ' (1996). A \"Doom\"-based game called \"Chex Quest\" was released in 1996 by Ralston Foods as a promotion to increase cereal sales. Other games were inspired by \"Doom\", if not rumored to be built by reverse engineering the game's engine, including LucasArts's \"\" (1995). Several other games termed \"Doom\" clones, such as \"PowerSlave\" (1996) and \"Duke Nukem 3D\" (1996), used the 1995 Build engine, a 2.5D engine inspired by \"Doom\" created by Ken Silverman with some consultation with John Carmack.\nSequel and franchise.\nAfter completing \"Doom\", id Software began working on a sequel using the same engine, \"Doom II\", which was released to retail on October 10, 1994, ten months after the first game. GT Interactive had approached id before the release of \"Doom\" with plans to release a retail version of \"Doom\" and \"Doom II\". Id chose to create the sequel as a set of episodes rather than a new game, allowing John Carmack and the other programmers to begin work on id's next game, \"Quake\". \"Doom II\" was the United States' highest-selling software product of 1994 and sold more than 1.2 million copies within a year.\n\"Doom II\" was followed by an expansion pack from id, \"Master Levels for Doom II\" (1995), consisting of 21 commissioned levels and over 3000 user-created levels for \"Doom\" and \"Doom II\". Two sets of \"Doom II\" levels by different amateur map-making teams were released together by id as the standalone game \"Final Doom\" (1996). \"Doom\" and \"Doom II\" were both included, along with previous id games, in the \"id Anthology\" compilation (1996). The \"Doom\" franchise has continued since the 1990s in several iterations and forms. The video game series includes \"Doom 3\" (2004), \"Doom\" (2016), and \"Doom Eternal\" (2020), along with other spin-off video games. It additionally includes multiple novels, a comic book, board games, and two films: \"Doom\" (2005) and \"\" (2019).\nControversies.\n\"Doom\" was notorious for its high levels of graphic violence and satanic imagery, which generated controversy from a broad range of groups. \"Doom\" for the 32X was one of the first video games to be given a Mature 17+ rating from the Entertainment Software Rating Board due to its violent gore and nature, while \"Doom II\" was the first. In Germany, shortly after its publication, \"Doom\" was classified as \"harmful to minors\" by the Federal Department for Media Harmful to Young Persons and could not be sold to children or displayed where they could see it, which was only rescinded in 2011.\n\"Doom\" again sparked controversy in the United States when it was found that Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold, who committed the Columbine High School massacre on April 20, 1999, were avid players. While planning for the massacre, Harris said in his journal that the killing would be \"like playing \"Doom\"\". A rumor spread afterward that Harris had designed a custom \"Doom\" level that looked like the high school, populated with representations of Harris's classmates and teachers, which he used to practice for the shooting. Although Harris did design several custom \"Doom\" levels, which later became known as the \"Harris levels\", none were based on the school. \"Doom\" was dubbed a \"mass murder simulator\" by critic and Killology Research Group founder David Grossman.\nIn the earliest release versions, the level E1M4: Command Control contains a swastika-shaped structure, which was put in as a homage to \"Wolfenstein 3D\". The swastika was removed in later versions, out of respect for a military veteran's request, according to Romero.\nCommunity.\n\"Doom\"'s popularity and innovations attracted a community that has persisted for decades since. The deathmatch mode was an important factor in its popularity. \"Doom\" was the first game to coin the term \"deathmatch\" and introduced multiplayer shooting battles to a wide audience. This led to a widespread community of players who had never experienced fast-paced multiplayer combat before.\nAnother popular aspect of \"Doom\" was the versatility of its WAD files, enabling user-generated levels and other game modifications. John Carmack and Romero had strongly advocated for mod support, overriding other id employees who were concerned about commercial and legal implications. Although WAD files exposed the game data, id provided no instructions for how they worked. Still, players were able to modify leaked alpha versions of the game, allowing them to release level editors within weeks of the game's release.\nOn January 26, 1994, university student Brendon Wyber led a group to create the first full level editor, the Doom Editor Utility, leading to the first custom level by Jeff Bird in March. It was followed by \"countless\" others, including many based on other franchises like \"Aliens\" and \"Star Wars\" total conversion mods, as well as DeHackEd, a patch editor first released in 1994 by Greg Lewis that allowed editing of the game engine. Soon after the first mods appeared, id CEO Wilbur posted legal terms to the company's website, allowing mod authors to charge money without any fees to id, while also absolving the company of responsibility or support.\n\"Doom\" mods were widely popular, earning favorable comparisons to the official level additions seen in \"The Ultimate Doom\". Thousands of user-created levels were released in the first few years after the release; over 3000 such levels for \"Doom\" and \"Doom II\" were included in the official retail release \"Master Levels for Doom II\" (1995). WizardWorks released multiple collections of mods of \"Doom\" and \"Doom II\" under the name \"D!Zone\". At least one mod creator, Tim Willits, was later hired at id Software. Mods have continued to be produced, with the community Cacowards awarding the best of each year. In 2016, Romero created two new \"Doom\" levels: E1M4b (\"Phobos Mission Control\") and E1M8b (\"Tech Gone Bad\"). In 2018, for the 25th anniversary of \"Doom\", Romero announced \"Sigil\", an unofficial fifth episode containing nine levels. It was released on May 22, 2019, for \u20ac with a soundtrack by Buckethead, and then released again for free on May 31 with a soundtrack by James Paddock. A physical release was later produced. A sixth episode, \"Sigil II\", was released on the game's 30th anniversary, December 10, 2023, again for \u20ac for a digital copy with a soundtrack by Valient Thorr, as well as physical editions on floppy disk.\nIn addition to WAD files, \"Doom\" includes a feature that allowed players to record and play back gameplay using files called demos, or game replays. Although the concept of speedrunning a video game existed before \"Doom\", its release coincided with a wave of popularity for speedrunning, amplified by the online communities built on the nascent Internet. Demos were lightweight files that could be shared more easily than video files on internet bulletin board systems at the time. As a result, \"Doom\" is credited with creating the video game speedrunning community. The speedrunning community for \"Doom\" has continued for decades. As recently as 2019, community members have broken records originally set in 1998. \"Doom\" has been termed as having \"one of the longest-running speedrunning communities\" as well as being \"the quintessential speedrunning game\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8522", "revid": "50514054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8522", "title": "Denver", "text": "Capital of State of Colorado, United States\nDenver ( ) is the capital and most populous city of the U.S. state of Colorado. Officially a consolidated city and county, it is located in the South Platte River valley on the western edge of the High Plains, and is just east of the Front Range of the Rocky Mountains. Denver is the 19th-most populous city in the United States and the fifth-most populous state capital, with a population of 715,522 at the 2020 census. The Denver metropolitan area, with over 3.05 million residents, is the 19th-largest metropolitan area in the country and functions as the economic and cultural center of the broader Front Range Urban Corridor.\nDenver's downtown district lies about east of the foothills of the Rocky Mountains. Named after James W. Denver, the governor of the Kansas Territory at the time, Denver was founded at the confluence of Cherry Creek and the South Platte River in 1858 during the Gold Rush era. Nicknamed the \"Mile High City\" because its official elevation is exactly one mile () above sea level, Denver grew beyond its prospecting origins to become the principal commercial and transportation hub for a broad region spanning the Great Plains and Rocky Mountain West. The 105th meridian west of Greenwich, the longitudinal reference for the Mountain Time Zone, passes directly through Denver Union Station.\nAs the most populous metropolitan area in a radius, Denver is a major cultural hub with a variety of museums and cultural institutions, including the Denver Performing Arts Complex and Denver Art Museum. Denver has professional sports teams in five leagues and hosts the headquarters of eight \"Fortune\" 500 firms.\nHistory.\nThe greater Denver area was inhabited by several Indigenous peoples such as Apaches, Utes, Cheyennes, Comanches, and Arapahoes. By the terms of the 1851 Treaty of Fort Laramie between the United States and various tribes including the Cheyenne and Arapaho, the United States unilaterally defined and recognized Cheyenne and Arapaho territory as ranging from the North Platte River in present-day Wyoming and Nebraska southward to the Arkansas River in present-day Colorado and Kansas. This definition specifically encompasses the land of modern Metropolitan Denver. But the discovery in November 1858 of gold in the Rocky Mountains in Colorado (then part of the western Kansas Territory) brought on a gold rush and a consequent flood of white immigration across Cheyenne and Arapaho lands. Colorado territorial officials pressured federal authorities to redefine and reduce the extent of Indian treaty lands.\nIn the summer of 1858, during the Pike's Peak Gold Rush, a group of gold prospectors from Lawrence, Kansas, established Montana City as a mining town on the banks of the South Platte River in what was then western Kansas Territory, on traditional lands of Cheyenne and Arapaho. This was the first historical settlement in what later became the city of Denver. But the site faded quickly, and by the summer of 1859 it was abandoned in favor of Auraria (named after the gold-mining town of Auraria, Georgia) and St. Charles City.\nOn November 22, 1858, General William Larimer and Captain Jonathan Cox, both land speculators from eastern Kansas Territory, placed cottonwood logs to stake a claim on the bluff overlooking the confluence of the South Platte River and Cherry Creek, across the creek from the existing mining settlement of Auraria, and on the site of the existing townsite of St. Charles. Larimer named the townsite Denver City to curry favor with Kansas Territorial Governor James W. Denver. Larimer hoped the town's name would help it be selected as the county seat of Arapahoe County, but unbeknownst to him, Governor Denver had already resigned from office. The location was accessible to existing trails and was across the South Platte River from the site of seasonal encampments of the Cheyenne and Arapaho. The site of these first towns is now occupied by Confluence Park near downtown Denver. Edward W. Wynkoop came to Colorado in 1859 and became one of the city's founders. Wynkoop Street in Denver is named after him.\nLarimer, along with associates in the St. Charles City Land Company, sold parcels in the town to merchants and miners, with the intention of creating a major city that would cater to new immigrants. Denver City was a frontier town, with an economy based on servicing local miners with gambling, saloons, livestock, and goods trading. In the early years, land parcels were often traded for grubstakes or gambled away by miners in Auraria. In May 1859, Denver City residents donated 53 lots to the Leavenworth &amp; Pike's Peak Express in order to secure the region's first overland wagon route. Offering daily service for \"passengers, mail, freight, and gold\", the Express reached Denver on a trail that trimmed westward travel time from twelve days to six. The Denver City, Kansas Territory, post office opened on February 11, 1860\nOn February 18, 1861, six chiefs of the Southern Cheyenne and four of the Arapaho signed the Treaty of Fort Wise with the United States at Bent's New Fort at Big Timbers near what is now Lamar, Colorado. They ceded more than 90 percent of the lands designated for them by the Fort Laramie Treaty, including the area of modern Denver. Some Cheyennes opposed to the treaty, saying that it had been signed by a small minority of the chiefs without the consent or approval of the rest of the tribe, that the signatories had not understood what they signed, and that they had been bribed to sign by a large distribution of gifts. The territorial government of Colorado, however, claimed the treaty was a \"solemn obligation\" and considered that those Indians who refused to abide by it were hostile and planning a war.\nOn February 28, 1861, the Colorado Territory was created, Arapahoe County was formed on November 1, 1861, and Denver City was incorporated on November 7, 1861. Denver City served as the Arapahoe County Seat from 1861 until consolidation in 1902. With its newfound importance, Denver City shortened its name to Denver in 1866. On December 9, 1867, Denver became the territorial capital. On August 1, 1876, Colorado was admitted to the Union. Denver was made the permanent state capital in a 1881 Colorado state capital referendum. \nThis disagreement on the validity of Treaty of Fort Wise escalated to bring about the Colorado War of 1864 and 1865, during which the brutal Sand Creek massacre against Cheyenne and Arapaho peoples occurred. The aftermath of the war was the dissolution of the reservation in Eastern Colorado, the signing of Medicine Lodge Treaty which stipulated that the Cheyenne and Arapaho peoples would be relocated outside of their traditional territory. This treaty term was achieved, even though the treaty was not legally ratified by the tribal members, as per the treaty's own terms. Thus, by the end of 1860s, this effectively and completely cleared the Denver area of its indigenous inhabitants.\nAlthough by the close of the 1860s Denver residents could look with pride at their success establishing a vibrant supply and service center, the decision to route the nation's first transcontinental railroad through Cheyenne City, rather than Denver, threatened the prosperity of the young town. The transcontinental railroad passed a daunting away, but citizens mobilized to build a railroad to connect Denver to it. Spearheaded by visionary leaders, including Territorial Governor John Evans, David Moffat, and Walter Cheesman, fundraising began. Within three days, $300,000 had been raised, and citizens were optimistic. Fundraising stalled before enough was raised, forcing these visionary leaders to take control of the debt-ridden railroad. Despite challenges, on June 24, 1870, citizens cheered as the Denver Pacific completed the link to the transcontinental railroad, ushering in a new age of prosperity for Denver.\nFinally linked to the rest of the nation by rail, Denver prospered as a service and supply center. The young city grew during these years, attracting millionaires with their mansions, as well as a mixture of crime and poverty of a rapidly growing city. Denver citizens were proud when the rich chose Denver and were thrilled when Horace Tabor, the Leadville mining millionaire, built a business block at 16th and Larimer, as well as the elegant Tabor Grand Opera House. Luxurious hotels, including the much-loved Brown Palace Hotel, soon followed, as well as splendid homes for millionaires, such as the Croke, Patterson, Campbell Mansion at 11th and Pennsylvania and the now-demolished Moffat Mansion at 8th and Grant. Intent on transforming Denver into one of the world's great cities, leaders wooed industry and attracted laborers to work in these factories.\nSoon, in addition to the elite and a large middle class, Denver had a growing population of immigrant German, Italian, and Chinese laborers, soon followed by African Americans from the Deep South and Hispanic workers. The influx of the new residents strained available housing. In addition, the Silver Crash of 1893 unsettled political, social, and economic balances. Competition among the different ethnic groups was often expressed as bigotry, and social tensions gave rise to the Red Scare. Americans were suspicious of immigrants, who were sometimes allied with socialist and labor union causes. After World War I, a revival of the Ku Klux Klan attracted white, native-born Americans who were anxious about the many changes in society. Unlike the earlier organization that was active in the rural South, KKK chapters developed in urban areas of the Midwest and West, including Denver, and into Idaho and Oregon. Corruption and crime also developed in Denver.\nBetween 1880 and 1895, the city underwent a huge rise in corruption, as crime bosses, such as Soapy Smith, worked side by side with elected officials and the police to control elections, gambling, and bunco gangs. The city also suffered a depression in 1893 after the crash of silver prices. In 1887, the precursor to the international charity United Way was formed in Denver by local religious leaders, who raised funds and coordinated various charities to help Denver's poor. By 1890, Denver had grown to be the second-largest city west of Omaha, Nebraska. In 1900, whites represented 96.8% of Denver's population. The African American and Hispanic populations increased with migrations of the 20th century. Many African Americans first came as workers on the railroad, which had a terminus in Denver, and began to settle there.\nBetween the 1880s and 1930s, Denver's floriculture industry developed and thrived. This period became known locally as the Carnation Gold Rush.\nA bill proposing a state constitutional amendment to allow home rule for Denver and other municipalities was introduced in the legislature in 1901 and passed. The measure called for a statewide referendum, which voters approved in 1902. On December 1 that year, Governor James Orman proclaimed the amendment part of the state's fundamental law. The City and County of Denver came into being on that date and was separated from Arapahoe and Adams counties.\nFrom 1953 to 1989, the Rocky Flats Plant, a DOE nuclear weapon facility that was about 15 miles from Denver, produced fissile plutonium \"pits\" for nuclear warheads. A major fire at the facility in 1957, as well as leakage from nuclear waste stored at the site between 1958 and 1968, resulted in the contamination of some parts of Denver, to varying degrees, with plutonium-239, a harmful radioactive substance with a half-life of 24,200 years. A 1981 study by the Jefferson County health director, Carl Johnson, linked the contamination to an increase in birth defects and cancer incidence in central Denver and nearer Rocky Flats. Later studies confirmed many of his findings. Plutonium contamination was still present outside the former plant site as of \u00a02010[ [update]]. It presents risks to building the envisioned Jefferson Parkway, which would complete Denver's automotive beltway.\nIn 1970, Denver was selected to host the 1976 Winter Olympics to coincide with Colorado's centennial celebration, but in November 1972, Colorado voters struck down ballot initiatives allocating public funds to pay for the high costs of the games. They were moved to Innsbruck, Austria. The notoriety of being the only city ever to decline to host an Olympiad after being selected has made subsequent bids difficult. The movement against hosting the games was based largely on environmental issues and was led by State Representative Richard Lamm. He was subsequently elected to three terms (1975\u201387) as Colorado governor. Denver explored a potential bid for the 2022 Winter Olympics, but no bid was submitted.\nIn 2010, Denver adopted a comprehensive update of its zoning code, which was developed to guide development as envisioned in adopted plans such as Blueprint Denver, Transit Oriented Development Strategic Plan, Greenprint Denver, and the Strategic Transportation Plan.\nDenver has hosted the Democratic National Convention twice, in 1908 and 2008. It promoted the city on the national, political, and socioeconomic stage. On August 10\u201315, 1993, Denver hosted the Catholic Church's 6th World Youth Day, which was attended by an estimated 500,000, making it the largest gathering in Colorado history.\nIn 2015, a new commuter railway system commenced operations in the Denver metropolitan area with a network operation of 25 kV 60\u00a0Hz.\nDenver has been known historically as the \"Queen City of the Plains\" and the \"Queen City of the West\", because of its important role in the agricultural industry of the High Plains region in eastern Colorado and along the foothills of the Colorado Front Range.\nGeography.\nDenver is in the center of the Front Range Urban Corridor, between the Rocky Mountains to the west and the High Plains to the east. Its topography consists of plains in the city center with hilly areas to the north, west, and south. It is the only state capital in the United States that is a consolidated city-county. At the 2020 United States census, the City and County of Denver had an area of , including of water. The City and County of Denver is surrounded by three other counties: Adams County to the north and east, Arapahoe County to the south and east, and Jefferson County to the west.\nDenver's nickname is the \"Mile-High City\", as its official elevation is above sea level, defined by the elevation of the spot of a benchmark on the steps of the State Capitol building. The elevation of the entire city ranges from .\nNeighborhoods.\nThe City and County of Denver has 78 official neighborhoods used for planning and administration. The system of neighborhood boundaries and names dates to 1970 when city planners divided the city into 73 groups of one to four census tracts, called \"statistical neighborhoods,\" most of which are unchanged since then.\nUnlike some other cities, such as Chicago, Denver does not have official larger area designations. Colloquially, names such as Northside and Westside are still in use, but not well-known. Community planners have recently been using a set of 19 larger areas, all of which are groups of statistical neighborhoods, as part of the Area Planning process.\nDenver also has a number of colloquial neighborhood names and boundaries reflecting how people in an area, or others such as community groups and real estate developers, have defined areas. Well-known non-administrative neighborhoods include the historic and trendy LoDo (short for \"Lower Downtown\"), part of the city's Union Station neighborhood; Uptown, straddling North Capitol Hill and City Park West; Curtis Park and RiNo (\"River North\"), both part of the Five Points neighborhood; Alamo Placita, the northern part of the Speer neighborhood; Park Hill, a partially successful example of intentional racial integration (South Park Hill is less than 1% Black); and Golden Triangle, in the Civic Center.\nOne of Denver's newer neighborhoods was built on the site of Stapleton International Airport, named after former Denver mayor Benjamin F. Stapleton, a member of the Ku Klux Klan. In 2020, the neighborhood's community association voted to change the name from Stapleton to Central Park (see more in Politics section below). The Central Park neighborhood itself has 12 \"neighborhoods\" within its boundaries.\nClimate.\nDenver features a cool semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"BSk\", Trewartha: \"BSao\") with generally low humidity and around 3,100 hours of sunshine per year, although humid microclimates can be found nearby depending on exact location. These humid microclimates have the temperature of a hot-summer humid continental climate (Koppen: \"Dfa\") or a humid subtropical climate (Koppen: \"Cfa\") when using the isotherm. It has four distinct seasons and receives most of its precipitation from April through August. Due to its inland location on the High Plains, at the foot of the Rocky Mountains, the region can be subject to sudden changes in weather.\nJuly is the warmest month, with an average high temperature of . Summers range from warm to hot with occasional, sometimes severe, afternoon thunderstorms and high temperatures reaching on 38 days annually, and occasionally . December, the coldest month of the year, has an average daily high temperature of . Winters consist of periods of snow and very low temperatures alternating with periods of milder weather due to the warming effect of Chinook winds. In winter, daytime highs occasionally exceed , but they also often fail to reach during periods of cold weather. Occasionally, daytime highs can even fail to rise above due to arctic air masses. On the coldest nights of the year, lows can fall to or below, with the city experiencing a low of on December 22, 2022, with a wind chill of . Snowfall is common throughout the late fall, winter and early spring, averaging for 1981\u20132010; but in the 2021 winter season, Denver began the month of December without any snowfall for the first time in history. The average window for measurable (\u2265) snow is October 17 through April 27; however, measurable snowfall has occurred as early as September 4 and as late as June 3. Extremes in temperature range from on January 9, 1875, up to as recently as June 28, 2018. Due to the city's high elevation and aridity, diurnal temperature variation is large throughout the year.\nTornadoes are rare west of the I-25 corridor; one notable exception was an F3 tornado that struck south of downtown on June 15, 1988. On the other hand, the suburbs east of Denver and the city's east-northeastern extension (Denver International Airport) can see a few tornadoes, often weak landspout tornadoes, each spring and summer, especially during June, with the enhancement of the Denver Convergence Vorticity Zone (DCVZ). The DCVZ, also known as the Denver Cyclone, is a variable vortex of storm-forming air flow usually found north and east of downtown, and which often includes the airport. Heavy weather from the DCVZ can disrupt airport operations. In a study looking at hail events in areas with a population of at least 50,000, Denver was found to be ranked 10th most prone to hail storms in the continental United States. In fact, Denver has had three of the top 10 costliest hailstorms in U.S. history, on July 11, 1990; July 20, 2009; and May 8, 2017.\nBased on 30-year averages obtained from NOAA's National Climatic Data Center for the months of December, January and February, Weather Channel ranked Denver the 18th-coldest major U.S. city as of 2014[ [update]].\nDenver's official weather station is at Denver International Airport, roughly from downtown. A 2019 analysis showed the average temperature at Denver International Airport, , was significantly cooler than downtown, . Many of the suburbs also have warmer temperatures and there is controversy regarding the location of the official temperature readings.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2020 census, the population of the City and County of Denver was 715,522, making it the 19th most populous U.S. city. The Denver\u2013Aurora\u2013Lakewood, CO Metropolitan Statistical Area had an estimated 2013 population of 2,697,476 and ranked as the 21st most populous U.S. metropolitan statistical area, and the larger Denver\u2013Aurora\u2013Boulder Combined Statistical Area had an estimated 2013 population of 3,277,309 and ranked as the 18th most populous U.S. metropolitan area. Denver is the most populous city within a radius centered in the city and of magnitude. Denverites is a term used for residents of Denver.\nAccording to the 2020 census, the City and County of Denver contained 715,522 people and 301,501 households. The population density was including the airport. There were 338.341 housing units at an average density of . However, the average density throughout most Denver neighborhoods tends to be higher. Without the 80249 zip code (47.3 sq mi, 8,407 residents) near the airport, the average density increases to around 5,470 per square mile. \n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census, the racial composition of Denver was as follows:\nApproximately 70.3% of the population (over five years old) spoke only English at home. An additional 23.5% of the population spoke Spanish at home. In terms of ancestry, 31.8% were Hispanic or Latino, 14.6% of the population were of German ancestry, 9.7% were of Irish ancestry, 8.9% were of English ancestry, and 4.0% were of Italian ancestry.\nThere were 250,906 households, of which 23.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 34.7% were married couples living together, 10.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 50.1% were non-families. 39.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.27, and the average family size was 3.14.\nAge distribution was 22.0% under the age of 18, 10.7% from 18 to 24, 36.1% from 25 to 44, 20.0% from 45 to 64, and 11.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 33 years. Overall there were 102.1 males for every 100 females. Due to a skewed sex ratio wherein single men outnumber single women, some protologists had nicknamed the city as \"Menver\".\nThe median household income was $45,438, and the median family income was $48,195. Males had a median income of $36,232 versus $33,768 for females. The per capita income for the city was $24,101. 19.1% of the population and 14.6% of families were below the poverty line. Out of the total population, 25.3% of those under the age of 18 and 13.7% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line.\nDenver has one of the largest populations of Mexican-Americans in the entire United States. Approximately one third of the city is Hispanic, with the overwhelming majority of them being of Mexican descent. Many of them speak Spanish at home.\nEnglish, German, Irish, Swedish, Italian, Polish, Chinese, Japanese, Greek, and Russian immigrants immigrated to Denver by the 1920s.\nLanguages.\nAs of 2010[ [update]], 72.28% (386,815) of Denver residents aged five and older spoke only English at home, while 21.42% (114,635) spoke Spanish, 0.85% (4,550) Vietnamese, 0.57% (3,073) African languages, 0.53% (2,845) Russian, 0.50% (2,681) Chinese, 0.47% (2,527) French, and 0.46% (2,465) German. In total, 27.72% (148,335) of Denver's population aged five and older spoke a language other than English.\nLongevity.\nAccording to a report in the Journal of the American Medical Association, residents of Denver had a 2014 life expectancy of 80.02 years.\nEconomy.\nThe Denver MSA had a gross metropolitan product of $311.9 billion in 2023, making it the 18th largest metro economy in the United States. Additionally, the 12-County Denver\u2013Aurora, CO Combined Statistical Area had a GDP of $377.7 billion in 2023 while the broader Front Range had a GDP of $474.6 billion. Denver's economy is based partially on its geographic position and its connection to some of the country's major transportation systems. Because Denver is the largest city within , it has become a natural location for storage and distribution of goods and services to the Mountain States, Southwest states, as well as all western states. Another benefit for distribution is that Denver is nearly equidistant from large cities of the Midwest, such as Chicago and St. Louis and some large cities of the West Coast, such as Los Angeles and San Francisco.\nOver the years, the city has been home to other large corporations in the central United States, making Denver a key trade point for the country. Several well-known companies originated in or have relocated to Denver. William Ainsworth opened the Denver Instrument Company in 1895 to make analytical balances for gold assayers. Its factory is now in Arvada. Aimco is headquartered in Denver. Samsonite began in Denver in 1910 as Shwayder Trunk Manufacturing Company, but Samsonite closed its NE Denver factory in 2001, and moved its headquarters to Massachusetts after a change of ownership in 2006. Qwest Corporation, founded in Denver in 1911 as Mountain States Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company, is now a part of Lumen Technologies (previously CenturyLink).\nOn October 31, 1937, Continental Airlines, now United Airlines, moved its headquarters to Stapleton Airport in Denver, Colorado (before United Airlines later moved to its current home in Chicago). Robert F. Six arranged to have the headquarters moved to Denver from El Paso, Texas because Six believed that the airline should have its headquarters in a large city with a potential base of customers. Continental later moved to Houston from Denver, but merged with United Airlines in 2013. Throughout that time, the company held a large employee base in the Denver area, which is home to the United Airlines Flight Training Center in the Central Park neighborhood. MediaNews Group purchased the \"Denver Post\" in 1987; the company is based in Denver. The Gates Corporation, the world's largest producer of automotive belts and hoses, was established in S. Denver in 1919. Russell Stover Candies made its first chocolate candy in Denver in 1923, but moved to Kansas City in 1969. The original Frontier Airlines began operations at Denver's old Stapleton International Airport in 1950; Frontier was reincarnated at DIA in 1994.\nScott's Liquid Gold, Inc., has been making furniture polish in Denver since 1954. Village Inn restaurants began as a single pancake house in Denver in 1958. Big O Tires, LLC, of Centennial opened its first franchise in 1962 in Denver. The Shane Company sold its first diamond jewelry in 1971 in Denver. In 1973 Re/Max made Denver its headquarters. Johns Manville Corp., a manufacturer of insulation and roofing products, relocated its headquarters to Denver from New York in 1972. CH2M Hill, an engineering and construction firm, relocated from Oregon to the Denver Technological Center in 1980. The Ball Corporation sold its glass business in Indiana in the 1990s and moved to suburban Broomfield; Ball has several operations in greater Denver.\nMolson Coors Brewing Company established its U.S. headquarters in Denver in 2005, but announced its departure in 2019. Its subsidiary and regional wholesale distributor, Coors Distributing Company, is in NW Denver. The Newmont Mining Corporation, the second-largest gold producer in North America and one of the largest in the world, is headquartered in Denver. MapQuest, an online site for maps, directions and business listings, is headquartered in Denver's LoDo district.\nLarge Denver-area employers that have headquarters elsewhere include Lockheed Martin Corp., United Airlines, Kroger Co. and Xcel Energy, Inc.\nGeography also allows Denver to have a considerable government presence, with many federal agencies based or having offices in the Denver area. Along with federal agencies come many companies based on US defense and space projects, and more jobs are brought to the city by virtue of its being the capital of the state of Colorado. The Denver area is home to the former nuclear weapons plant Rocky Flats, the Denver Federal Center, Byron G. Rogers Federal Building and United States Courthouse, the Denver Mint, and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory.\nIn 2005, a $310.7 million expansion of the Colorado Convention Center was completed, doubling its size. The hope was the center's expansion would elevate the city to one of the top 10 cities in the nation for holding a convention.\nDenver's position near the mineral-rich Rocky Mountains encouraged mining and energy companies to spring up in the area. In the early days of the city, gold and silver booms and busts played a large role in the city's economic success. In the 1970s and early 1980s, the energy crisis in America and resulting high oil prices created an energy boom in Denver captured in the soap opera \"Dynasty\". Denver was built up considerably during this time with the construction of many new downtown skyscrapers. When the price of oil dropped from $34 a barrel in 1981 to $9 a barrel in 1986, the Denver economy also dropped, leaving almost 15,000 oil industry workers in the area unemployed (including former mayor and governor John Hickenlooper, a former geologist), and the nation's highest office vacancy rate (30%). The industry has recovered and the region has 700 employed petroleum engineers. Advances in hydraulic fracturing have made the DJ Basin of Colorado into an accessible and lucrative oil play. Energy and mining are still important in Denver's economy today, with companies such as Ovintiv, Halliburton, Smith International, Rio Tinto Group, Newmont Mining, and Chevron Corporation, headquartered or having significant operations. Denver is in 149th place in terms of the cost of doing business in the United States.\nDenver's west-central geographic location in the Mountain Time Zone (UTC\u22127) also benefits the telecommunications industry by allowing communication with both North American coasts, South America, Europe, and Asia on the same business day. Denver's location on the 105th meridian at over in elevation also enables it to be the largest city in the U.S. to offer a \"one-bounce\" real-time satellite uplink to six continents in the same business day. Qwest Communications now part of CenturyLink, Dish Network Corporation, Starz, DIRECTV, and Comcast are a few of the many telecommunications companies with operations in the Denver area. These and other high-tech companies had a boom in Denver in the mid to late 1990s. After a rise in unemployment in the Great Recession, Denver's unemployment rate recovered and had one of the lowest unemployment rates in the nation at 2.6% in November 2016. As of December 2016, the unemployment rate for the Denver\u2013Aurora\u2013Broomfield MSA is 2.6%. The Downtown region has seen increased real estate investment with the construction of several new skyscrapers from 2010 onward and major development around Denver Union Station.\nDenver has also enjoyed success as a pioneer in the fast-casual restaurant industry, with many popular national chain restaurants founded and based in Denver. Quiznos and Smashburger were founded and headquartered in Denver. Qdoba Mexican Grill, Noodles &amp; Company, and Good Times Burgers &amp; Frozen Custard originated in Denver, but have moved their headquarters to the suburbs of Wheat Ridge, Broomfield, and Golden, respectively. Chipotle Mexican Grill was founded in Denver, but moved its headquarters to Newport Beach, California in 2018.\nIn 2015, Denver ranked No. 1 on \"Forbes\"' list of the Best Places for Business and Careers.\nIn 2024, Denver based Ibotta's initial public offering (IPO) was the largest tech IPO in Colorado's history.\nTop employers.\nAs of the city's 2023 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, Denver's top employers are:\nCulture.\nApollo Hall opened soon after the city's founding in 1859 and staged many plays for eager settlers. In the 1880s Horace Tabor built Denver's first opera house. After the start of the 20th century, city leaders embarked on a city beautification program that created many of the city's parks, parkways, museums, and the Municipal Auditorium, which was home to the 1908 Democratic National Convention and is now known as the Ellie Caulkins Opera House. Denver and the metropolitan areas around it continued to support culture.\nIn July 1982, Denver hosted the World Theatre Festival at the Denver Center for Performing Arts, which comprised a program of 114 performances of 18 plays, by theatre companies from 13 countries, across 25 days.\nIn 1988, voters in the Denver Metropolitan Area approved the Scientific and Cultural Facilities Tax (commonly known as SCFD), a 0.1% (1 cent per $10) sales tax that contributes money to various cultural and scientific facilities and organizations throughout the Metro area. The tax was renewed by voters in 1994 and 2004 and allowed the SCFD to operate until 2018. Ballot issue 4B in 2016 won approval 62.8 percent to 37.2 percent, by Denver metro area voters, to extend the SCFD sales tax until 2030.\nDenver is home to a wide array of museums. Many are nationally recognized, including a new wing for the Denver Art Museum by architect Daniel Libeskind, the nation's second-largest Performing Arts Center after Lincoln Center in New York City, and bustling neighborhoods such as LoDo, filled with art galleries, restaurants, bars and clubs. That is part of the reason Denver was, in 2006, recognized for the third year in a row as the best city for singles. Its neighborhoods also continue their influx of diverse people and businesses while the city's cultural institutions grow and prosper. The city acquired the estate of abstract expressionist painter Clyfford Still in 2004 and built a museum to exhibit his works near the Denver Art Museum. The Denver Museum of Nature and Science holds an aquamarine specimen valued at over $1 million, as well as specimens of the state mineral, rhodochrosite. Every September the Denver Mart, at 451 E. 58th Avenue, hosts a gem and mineral show. The state history museum, History Colorado Center, opened in April 2012. It features hands-on and interactive exhibits, artifacts and programs about Colorado history. It was named in 2013 by \"True West Magazine\" as one of the top-ten \"must see\" history museums in the country. History Colorado's Byers-Evans House Museum and the Molly Brown House are nearby.\nDenver has numerous art districts, including Denver's Art District on Santa Fe and the River North Art District (RiNo).\nWhile Denver may not be as recognized for historical musical prominence as some other American cities, it has an active pop, jazz, jam, folk, metal, and classical music scene, which has nurtured several artists and genres to regional, national, and even international attention. Of particular note is Denver's importance in the folk scene of the 1960s and 1970s. Well-known folk artists such as Bob Dylan, Judy Collins and John Denver lived in Denver at various points during this time and performed at local clubs. Three members of the widely popular group Earth, Wind, and Fire are also from Denver. More recent Denver-based artists include India Arie, Nathaniel Rateliff &amp; the Night Sweats, The Lumineers, Air Dubai, The Fray, Flobots, Cephalic Carnage, Axe Murder Boyz, Deuce Mob, Havok, Bloodstrike, Primitive Man, and Five Iron Frenzy. Denver is also home to the Denver Record Collectors Expo, a biannual music collectors event.\nBecause of its proximity to the mountains and generally sunny weather, Denver has gained a reputation as being a very active, outdoor-oriented city. Many Denver residents spend the weekends in the mountains; skiing in the winter and hiking, climbing, kayaking, and camping in the summer.\nDenver and surrounding cities are home to a large number of local and national breweries. Many of the region's restaurants have on-site breweries, and some larger brewers offer tours, including Coors and New Belgium Brewing Company. The city also welcomes visitors from around the world when it hosts the annual Great American Beer Festival each fall.\nDenver used to be a major trading center for beef and livestock when ranchers would drive (or later transport) cattle to the Denver Union Stockyards for sale. As a celebration of that history, for more than a century Denver has hosted the annual National Western Stock Show, attracting as many as 10,000 animals and 700,000 attendees. The show is held every January at the National Western Complex northeast of downtown.\nDenver has one of the country's largest populations of Mexican Americans and hosts four large Mexican-American celebrations: Cinco de Mayo (with over 500,000 attendees), in May; El Grito de la Independencia, in September; the annual Lowrider show, and the Dia De Los Muertos art shows/events in North Denver's Highland neighborhood, and the Lincoln Park neighborhood in the original section of West Denver.\nDenver is known for its dedication to New Mexican cuisine and the Chile. It is best known for its green and red chile sauce, Colorado burrito, Southwest (Denver) omelette, breakfast burrito, empanadas, chiles rellenos, and tamales. Denver is also known for other types of food such as Rocky Mountain oysters, rainbow trout, and the Denver sandwich.\nThe Dragon Boat Festival in July, Moon Festival in September and Chinese New Year are annual events in Denver for the Chinese and Asian-American communities. Chinese hot pot (huo guo) and Korean BBQ restaurants have been growing in popularity. The Denver area has two Chinese newspapers, the \"Chinese American Post\" and the \"Colorado Chinese News\". A Korean Newspaper, the \"Colorado Times News\" is also based in Denver.\nDenver has long been a place tolerant of the LGBTQ (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer) community. Many gay bars can be found on Colfax Avenue and on South Broadway. Every June, Denver hosts the annual Denver PrideFest in Civic Center Park, the largest LGBTQ Pride festival in the Rocky Mountain region.\nDenver is the setting for \"The Bill Engvall Show\", Tim Allen's \"Last Man Standing,\" and of MTV's \"The Real World\". It was also the setting for the prime time drama \"Dynasty\" from 1981 to 1989 (although the show was mostly filmed in Los Angeles). From 1998 to 2002 the city's Alameda East Veterinary Hospital was home to the Animal Planet series \"Emergency Vets\", which spun off three documentary specials and the current Animal Planet series \"E-Vet Interns\". The city is also the setting for the Disney Channel sitcom \"Good Luck Charlie\".\nSports.\nDenver is home to a variety of sports teams and is one of 12 U.S. cities with teams from four major league sports (the Denver metro area is the smallest metropolitan area in the country to have a team in all four major sports leagues). Including MLS soccer, it is also one of 10 U.S. cities to have five major sports teams.\nThe Denver Broncos of the National Football League have drawn crowds of over 70,000 since their origins in the early 1960s, and continue to draw fans today to their current home Empower Field at Mile High. The Broncos have sold out every home game (except for strike-replacement games) since 1970. The Broncos have advanced to eight Super Bowls and won back-to-back titles in 1997 and 1998, and won again in 2015.\nThe Colorado Rockies were created as an expansion franchise in 1993 and Coors Field opened in 1995. The Rockies advanced to the playoffs that year but were eliminated in the first round. In 2007, they advanced to the playoffs as a wild-card entrant, won the NL Championship Series, and brought the World Series to Denver for the first time but were swept in four games by the Boston Red Sox.\nDenver has been home to two National Hockey League teams. The Colorado Rockies played from 1976 to 1982, but later moved to the New York metropolitan area to become the New Jersey Devils. The Colorado Avalanche joined in 1995, after relocating from Quebec City. While in Denver, they have won three Stanley Cups in 1996, 2001, and 2022. The Denver Nuggets joined the American Basketball Association in 1967 and the National Basketball Association in 1976. The Nuggets won their first NBA championship in 2023. The Avalanche and Nuggets have both played at Ball Arena (formerly known as Pepsi Center) since 1999. The Major League Soccer team Colorado Rapids play in Dick's Sporting Goods Park, an 18,000-seat soccer-specific stadium opened for the 2007 MLS season in the Denver suburb of Commerce City. The Rapids won the MLS Cup in 2010.\nDenver has several additional professional teams. In 2006, Denver established a Major League Lacrosse team, the Denver Outlaws. They play in Empower Field at Mile High. In 2006, the Denver Outlaws won the Western Conference Championship and then won their first championship in 2014 eight years later. They also won in 2016 and 2018 and would fold in 2020 with the MLL-PLL merger. The Colorado Mammoth of the National Lacrosse League play at Ball Arena. They won championships in 2006 and 2022.\nIn 2018, the Denver Bandits were established as the first professional football team for women in Colorado and will be a part of the initial season for the Women's National Football Conference (WNFC) in 2019. Denver was awarded a National Women's Soccer League team called Denver Summit FC in 2025.\nDenver submitted the winning bid to host the 1976 Winter Olympics but subsequently withdrew, giving it the distinction of being the first city to back out after having won its bid to host the Olympics. Denver and Colorado Springs hosted the 1962 World Ice Hockey Championships.\nParks and recreation.\nAs of 2006[ [update]], Denver had over 200 parks, from small pocket parks all over the city to the giant City Park. Denver also has 29 recreation centers providing places and programming for resident's recreation and relaxation.\nMany of Denver's parks were acquired from state lands in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. This coincided with the City Beautiful movement, and Denver mayor Robert Speer (1904\u201312 and 1916\u201318) set out to expand and beautify the city's parks. Reinhard Schuetze was the city's first landscape architect, and he brought his German-educated landscaping genius to Washington Park, Cheesman Park, and City Park among others. Speer used Schuetze as well as other landscape architects such as Frederick Law Olmsted Jr. and Saco Rienk DeBoer to design not only parks such as Civic Center Park, but many city parkways and tree-lawns. Cheesman Park neighbor the Denver Botanic Gardens displays the beauty and versatility of micro-climates within the semi-arid Denver Basin. All of these parks were fed with South Platte River water diverted through the city ditch.\nIn addition to the parks within Denver, the city acquired land for mountain parks starting in the 1911s. Over the years, Denver has acquired, built and maintained approximately of mountain parks, including Red Rocks Park, which is known for its scenery and musical history revolving around the unique Red Rocks Amphitheatre. Denver also owns the mountain on which the Winter Park Resort ski area operates in Grand County, west of Denver. City parks are important places for Denverites and visitors, inciting controversy with every change. Denver continues to grow its park system with the development of many new parks along the Platte River through the city, and with Central Park and Bluff Lake Nature Center in the Central Park neighborhood redevelopment. All of these parks are important gathering places for residents and allow what was once a dry plain to be lush, active, and green. Denver is also home to a large network of public community gardens, most of which are managed by Denver Urban Gardens, a non-profit organization.\nSince 1974, Denver and the surrounding jurisdictions have rehabilitated the urban South Platte River and its tributaries for recreational use by hikers and cyclists. The main stem of the South Platte River Greenway runs along the South Platte into Adams County in the north. The Greenway project is recognized as one of the best urban reclamation projects in the U.S., winning, for example, the Silver Medal Rudy Bruner Award for Urban Excellence in 2001.\nAs of 2022[ [update]], Park Score by the Trust for Public Land, a national land conservation organization, reported Denver as having the 18th best park system among the 50 most populous U.S. cities. The report noted that 89% of Denverites live within a 10-minute walk of a park.\nGovernment.\nDenver is a consolidated city-county with a mayor elected on a nonpartisan ballot, a 13-member city council, and an auditor. The Denver City Council is elected from 11 districts with two at-large council members and is responsible for passing and changing all laws, resolutions, and ordinances, usually after a public hearing. The city council can also call for misconduct investigations of Denver's departmental officials. All elected officials have four-year terms, with a maximum of three terms. The current mayor is Mike Johnston.\nDenver has a strong mayor/weak city council government. The mayor can approve or veto any ordinances or resolutions approved by the council, makes sure all contracts with the city are kept and performed, signs all bonds and contracts, is responsible for the city budget, and can appoint people to various city departments, organizations, and commissions. The council can override the mayor's veto with a nine votes. The city budget must be approved and can be changed by a simple majority vote of the council. The auditor checks all expenditures and may refuse to allow specific ones, usually for financial reasons.\nThe Denver Department of Safety oversees three branches: the Denver Police Department, Denver Fire Department, and Denver Sheriff Department. The Denver County Court is an integrated Colorado County Court and Municipal Court and is managed by Denver instead of the state.\nPolitics.\nWhile Denver elections are nonpartisan, Democrats have long dominated the city's politics; most citywide officials are known to be registered with the Democratic Party. The mayor's office has been occupied by a Democrat since the 1963 municipal election. All the city's seats in the state legislature are held by Democrats.\nIn statewide elections, the city also tends to favor Democrats, though Republicans were occasionally competitive until the turn of the millennium. The last Republican to win Denver in a gubernatorial election was John A. Love in 1970 by a narrow majority. Bill Owens in 2002 remains the last Republican governor to receive at least 40% of Denver's vote. The last Republican Senator to carry Denver was William L. Armstrong during his 1984 landslide. The last statewide Republican officeholder to carry Denver was Secretary of State Victoria Buckley in 1994 by 1.2% margin; she was, at the time, the highest ranking African-American Republican woman in the United States.\nIn federal elections, Denver is a Democratic stronghold. It has supported a Democrat for president in every election since 1984. Despite then-president Ronald Reagan's landslide that year both nationally and in Colorado, Democrat Walter Mondale won Denver by a margin of 2.32%, and since then the party has increased its margin in almost every election. At the federal level, Denver is the heart of Colorado congressional district, which includes all of Denver and parts of Arapahoe County. It is the most Democratic district in the Mountain West and has been in Democratic hands for all but two terms since 1933. It is currently represented by Democrat Diana DeGette. A portion of southeast Denver, roughly half of the Indian Creek neighborhood and a small part of the Virginia Village neighborhood, is in Colorado congressional district, represented by Democrat Jason Crow.\nBenjamin F. Stapleton was the mayor of Denver for two periods, from 1923 to 1931 and from 1935 to 1947. He was responsible for many civic improvements, notably during his second term, when he had access to funds and manpower from the New Deal. During this time, the park system was considerably expanded and the Civic Center completed. His signature project was the construction of Denver Municipal Airport, which began in 1929 amid heavy criticism. It was later renamed Stapleton International Airport in his honor. Today, the airport has been replaced by a neighborhood initially named Stapleton. In 2020, during the George Floyd protests, because of Stapleton's demonstrated racism and prominent membership in the Ku Klux Klan, neighborhood residents changed the name to Central Park.\nDuring the 1960s and 1970s, Denver was one of the centers of the Chicano Movement. The boxer-turned-activist Rodolfo \"Corky\" Gonzales formed an organization called the Crusade for Justice, which battled police brutality, fought for bilingual education, and, most notably, hosted the First National Chicano Youth Liberation Conference in March 1969.\nIn recent years, Denver has taken a stance on helping people who are or become homeless, particularly under the administrations of mayors John Hickenlooper and Wellington Webb. At a rate of 19 homeless per 10,000 residents in 2011 as compared to 50 or more per 10,000 residents for the four metro areas with the highest rate of homelessness, Denver's homeless population and rate of homeless are both considerably lower than many other major cities. But residents of the city streets suffer Denver winters \u2013 which, although mild and dry much of the time, can have brief periods of extremely cold temperatures and snow.\nIn 2005, Denver became the first major U.S. city to vote to make the private possession of less than an ounce of marijuana legal for adults 21 and older. The city voted 53.5 percent in favor of the marijuana legalization measure, which, as then-mayor John Hickenlooper pointed out, was without effect, because the city cannot usurp state law, which at that time treated marijuana possession in much the same way as a speeding ticket, with fines of up to $100 and no jail time. Denver passed an initiative in the fourth quarter of 2007 requiring the mayor to appoint an 11-member review panel to monitor the city's compliance with the 2005 ordinance. In May 2019, Denver became the first U.S. city to decriminalize psilocybin mushrooms after an initiative passed with 50.6% of the vote. The measure prohibits Denver from using any resources to prosecute adults over 21 for personal use of psilocybin mushrooms, though such use remains illegal under federal law, and was legalized in the state in 2022.\nDenver hosted the 2008 Democratic National Convention, which was the centennial of the city's first hosting of the landmark 1908 convention. It also hosted the G7 summit between June 20 and 22 in 1997 and the 2000 National Convention of the Green Party. In 1972, 1981, and 2008, Denver also hosted the Libertarian Party of the United States National Convention. The 1972 Convention was notable for nominating Tonie Nathan for vice president, the first woman, as well as the first Jew, to receive an electoral vote in a United States presidential election.\nOn October 3, 2012, the University of Denver hosted the first of the three 2012 presidential debates.\nIn July 2019, Mayor Hancock said that Denver will not assist U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents with immigration raids.\nTaxes.\nThe City and County of Denver levies an occupational privilege tax (OPT or head tax) on employers and employees.\nEducation.\nDenver Public Schools (DPS) is the public school system in all of Denver. It educates approximately 92,000 students in 92 elementary schools, 44 K-8 schools, 34 middle schools, 18 high schools, and 19 charter schools. The first school of what is now DPS was a log cabin that opened in 1859, which later became East High School. East High School, along with the other three directional high schools (West, North, and South), made up the first four high schools in Denver. The district boundaries are coextensive with the city limits. The Cherry Creek School District serves some areas with Denver postal addresses that are outside the city limits.\nDenver's many colleges and universities range in age and study programs. Three major public schools constitute the Auraria Campus: the University of Colorado Denver, Metropolitan State University of Denver, and Community College of Denver. The private University of Denver was the first institution of higher learning in the city and was founded in 1864. Other prominent Denver higher education institutions include Johnson &amp; Wales University, Catholic (Jesuit) Regis University, and the city has Roman Catholic and Jewish institutions, as well as a health sciences school. In addition to those schools within the city, there are a number of schools throughout the surrounding metro area.\nMedia.\nThe Denver metropolitan area is served by a variety of media outlets in print, radio, television, and the Internet.\nTelevision stations.\nDenver is the 16th-largest market in the country for television, according to the 2009\u20132010 rankings from Nielsen Media Research.\nRadio stations.\nDenver is also served by over 40\u00a0AM and FM radio stations, covering a wide variety of formats and styles. Denver\u2013Boulder radio is the No. 19 market in the United States, according to the Spring 2011 Arbitron ranking (up from No. 20 in Fall 2009). For a list of Denver radio stations, see List of radio stations in Colorado.\nPrint.\nAfter continued rivalry between Denver's two main newspapers, \"The Denver Post\" and the \"Rocky Mountain News\", the papers merged operations in 2001 under a joint operating agreement that formed the Denver Newspaper Agency. This arrangement lasted until February 2009 when the E. W. Scripps Company, the owner of the \"Rocky Mountain News\", closed the paper. There are also several alternative or localized newspapers published in Denver, including the \"Westword\", \"Law Week Colorado\", \"Out Front Colorado,\" and the \"Intermountain Jewish News\". Denver is home to multiple regional magazines such as \"5280\", which takes its name from the city's mile-high elevation (). The \"Colorado Times News\" is a Korean-language publication based in Denver.\nTransportation.\nCity streets.\nMost of Denver has a straightforward street grid oriented to the four cardinal directions. Blocks are usually identified in hundreds from the median streets, identified as \"00\", which are Broadway (the east\u2013west median, running north\u2013south) and Ellsworth Avenue (the north\u2013south median, running east\u2013west). Colfax Avenue, a major east\u2013west artery through Denver, is 15 blocks (1500) north of the median. Avenues north of Ellsworth are numbered (with the exception of Colfax Avenue and several others, such as Martin Luther King, Jr. Blvd and Montview Blvd.), while avenues south of Ellsworth are named.\nThere is also an older downtown grid system that was designed to be parallel to the confluence of the South Platte River and Cherry Creek. Most of the streets downtown and in LoDo run northeast\u2013southwest and northwest\u2013southeast. This system has an unplanned benefit for snow removal; if the streets were in a normal N\u2013S/E\u2013W grid, only the N\u2013S streets would receive sunlight. With the grid oriented to the diagonal directions, the NW\u2013SE streets receive sunlight to melt snow in the morning and the NE\u2013SW streets receive it in the afternoon. This idea was from Henry Brown the founder of the Brown Palace Hotel. There is now a plaque across the street from the Brown Palace Hotel that honors this idea. The NW\u2013SE streets are numbered, while the NE\u2013SW streets are named. The named streets start at the intersection of Colfax Avenue and Broadway with the block-long Cheyenne Place. The numbered streets start underneath the Colfax and I-25 viaducts. There are 27 named and 44 numbered streets on this grid. There are also a few vestiges of the old grid system in the normal grid, such as Park Avenue, Morrison Road, and Speer Boulevard. Larimer Street, named after William Larimer Jr., the founder of Denver, which is in the heart of LoDo, is the oldest street in Denver.\nAll roads in the downtown grid system are streets (e.g., 16th Street, Stout Street), except for the five NE\u2013SW roads nearest the intersection of Colfax Avenue and Broadway: Cheyenne Place, Cleveland Place, Court Place, Tremont Place and Glenarm Place. Roads outside that system that travel east\u2013west are designated \"avenues\" and those that travel north\u2013south are designated \"streets\" (e.g., Colfax Avenue, Lincoln Street). Boulevards are higher capacity streets and travel any direction (more commonly north and south). Smaller roads are sometimes referred to as places, drives (though not all drives are smaller capacity roads; some are major thoroughfares), or courts. Most streets outside the area between Broadway and Colorado Boulevard are organized alphabetically from the city's center.\nEast of Colorado Boulevard, the naming convention of streets takes on a predictable pattern of going through the alphabet by using each letter twice (i.e. AA, BB, CC, DD, through YY \u2013 there is no Z). The first street is almost always named after a plant or fruit, the second street is almost always named after a foreign place or location. For example, Jersey Street / Jasmine Street, Quebec Street / Quince Street, and Syracuse Street / Spruce Street. Inexplicably, the letter Y only has one street (Yosemite), and there is no Z. This double-alphabet naming convention continues in some form into Aurora, Colorado.\nSome Denver streets have bicycle lanes, leaving a patchwork of disjointed routes throughout the city. There are over of paved, off-road, bike paths in Denver parks and along bodies of water, like Cherry Creek and the South Platte. This allows for a significant portion of Denver's population to be bicycle commuters and has led to Denver being known as a bicycle-friendly city. Some residents strongly oppose bike lanes, which has caused some plans to be watered down or nixed. The review process for one bike line on Broadway will last over a year before city council members will make a decision. In addition to the many bike paths, Denver launched B-Cycle\u00a0\u2013 a citywide bicycle sharing program\u00a0\u2013 in late April 2010. The B-Cycle network was the largest in the United States at the time of its launch, boasting 400 bicycles.\nThe Denver Boot, a car-disabling device, was first used in Denver.\nCycling.\nThe League of American Bicyclists rated Colorado as the sixth most bicycle-friendly state in the nation for 2024. This is due in large part to Front Range cities like Boulder, Fort Collins and Denver placing an emphasis on legislation, programs and infrastructure developments that promote cycling as a mode of transportation. Walk Score has rated Denver as the fourth most bicycle-friendly large city in the United States. According to data from the 2011 American Community Survey, Denver ranks 6th among US cities with populations over 400,000 in terms of the percentage of workers who commute by bicycle at 2.2% of commuters.\nB-Cycle\u00a0\u2013 Denver's citywide bicycle sharing program\u00a0\u2013 was the largest in the United States at the time of its launch in 2010, boasting 400 bicycles. B-Cycle ridership peaked in 2014, then steadily declined. The program announced it would cease operations at the end of January 2020. The city announced plans to seek one or more new contractors to run a bike-share program starting mid-2020.\nElectric rental scooters.\nIn 2018, electric scooter services began to place scooters in Denver. Hundreds of unsanctioned LimeBike and Bird electric scooters appeared on Denver streets in May, causing an uproar. In June, the city ordered the companies to remove them and acted quickly to create an official program, including a requirement that scooters be left at RTD stops and out of the public right-of-way. Lime and Bird scooters then reappeared in late July, with limited compliance. Uber's Jump e-bikes arrived in late August, followed by Lyft's nationwide electric scooter launch in early September. Lyft says that it will, each night, take the scooters to the warehouse for safety checks, maintenance and charging. Additionally, Spin and Razor each were permitted to add 350 scooters.\nWalkability.\n2017 rankings by Walk Score placed Denver twenty-sixth among 108 U.S. cities with a population of 200,000 or greater. City leaders have acknowledged the concerns of walkability advocates that Denver has serious gaps in its sidewalk network. The 2019 \"Denver Moves: Pedestrians\" plan outlines a need for approximate $1.3 billion in sidewalk funding, plus $400 million for trails. In 2022, Denver voters passed Initiative 307, dubbed \"Denver Deserves Sidewalks\", to complete sidewalk construction and repair by shifting responsibility for sidewalk maintenance from property owners to the city and imposing a new fee on property owners based on the length of a property's sidewalk frontage, although the measure may be revised in the course of implementation.\nModal characteristics.\nIn 2015, 9.6 percent of Denver households lacked a car, and in 2016, this was virtually unchanged (9.4 percent). The national average was 8.7 percent in 2016. Denver averaged 1.62 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8.\nFreeways and highways.\nDenver is primarily served by the interstate freeways I-25 and I-70. The problematic intersection of the two interstates is referred to locally as \"the mousetrap\" because, when viewed from the air, the junction (and subsequent vehicles) resemble mice in a large trap.\nDenver also has a nearly complete beltway known as \"the 470's\". These are SH 470 (also known as C-470), a freeway in the southwest Metro area, and two toll highways, E-470 (from southeast to northeast) and Northwest Parkway (from terminus of E-470 to US 36). SH 470 was intended to be I-470 and built with federal highway funds, but the funding was redirected to complete conversion of downtown Denver's 16th Street to a pedestrian mall. As a result, construction was delayed until 1980 after state and local legislation was passed. I-470 was also once called \"The Silver Stake Highway\", from Gov. Lamm's declared intention to drive a silver stake through it and kill it.\nA highway expansion and transit project for the southern I-25 corridor, dubbed T-REX (Transportation Expansion Project), was completed on November 17, 2006. The project installed wider and additional highway lanes, and improved highway access and drainage. The project also includes a light rail line that traverses from downtown to the south end of the metro area at Lincoln Avenue. The project spanned almost along the highway with an additional line traveling parallel to part of I-225, stopping just short of Parker Road.\nMetro Denver highway conditions can be accessed on the Colorado Department of Transportation COtrip website.\nMass transportation.\nMass transportation throughout the Denver metropolitan area is managed and coordinated by the Regional Transportation District (RTD). RTD operates more than 1,000 buses serving over 10,000 bus stops in 38 municipal jurisdictions in eight counties around the Denver and Boulder metropolitan areas. Additionally, RTD operates ten rail lines, the A, B, D, E, G, H, L, N, R, and W, with a total of of track, serving 77 stations, 35 of which are located within the City of Denver proper. The D, E, H, L, R, and W Lines are light rail while the A, B, G, and N Lines are commuter rail.\nFasTracks is a commuter rail, light rail, and bus expansion project approved by voters in 2004, which will serve neighboring suburbs and communities. The W Line, or West line, opened in April 2013 serving Golden/Federal Center. The commuter rail A Line from Denver Union Station to Denver International Airport opened in April 2016 with ridership exceeding RTD's early expectations. The light rail R Line through Aurora opened in February 2017. The G Line to the suburb of Arvada (originally planned to open in the Fall of 2016) opened on April 26, 2019. The N Line to Commerce City and Thornton opened on September 21, 2020.\nAn express bus service, known as the Flatiron Flyer, serves to connect Boulder and Denver. The service, billed as bus rapid transit, has been accused of bus rapid transit creep for failing to meet the majority of BRT requirements, including level boarding and all-door entry. A commuter rail connection to Boulder and its suburb of Longmont, also part of the FasTracks ballot initiative and an extension of the B Line, is planned to be finished by RTD, but no construction funds have yet been identified prior to 2040. RTD is currently considering an interim commuter service which would run rush-hour trains from Longmont to Denver.\nThe Colorado Department of Transportation runs Bustang, a bus system that offers weekday and weekend service connecting Denver with many locations across the state, including Grand Junction, Colorado Springs, Fort Collins, and Gunnison.\nGreyhound Lines, the intercity bus operator, has a major hub in Denver, with routes to New York City, Portland, Reno, Las Vegas, and their headquarters, Dallas. Subsidiary Autobuses Americanos provides service to El Paso. Allied bus operators Express Arrow, and Burlington Trailways provide service to Billings, Omaha, Indianapolis, and Alamosa.\nAmtrak, the national passenger rail system, provides service to Denver, operating its \"California Zephyr\" daily in both directions between Chicago and Emeryville, California, across the bay from San Francisco. Amtrak Thruway service operated by private bus companies links the Denver station with Rocky Mountain points. In 2017 the Colorado legislature reinvigorated studies of passenger rail service along the Front Range, potentially connecting Denver to Fort Collins and Pueblo, or further to Amtrak connections in Cheyenne, Wyoming and Trinidad. Front Range Passenger Rail is a current proposal (as of 2023) to link the cities from Pueblo in the south, north to Fort Collins and possibly to Cheyenne, Wyoming.\nAt Albuquerque, New Mexico, Denver Thruway connections are made daily with the Amtrak \"Southwest Chief\". Additionally, the Ski Train operated on the former Denver &amp; Rio Grande Western Railroad, which took passengers between Denver and the Winter Park Ski Resort, but it is no longer in service. The Ski Train made its final run to Winter Park on March 29, 2009. The service was revived on a trial basis in 2016 with a great amount of local fanfare. Further development of a mountain corridor rail option, though publicly popular, has been met with resistance from politicians, namely the director of Colorado Department of Transportation. The Ski Train did return to service under Amtrak with the name \"Winter Park Express\" in 2017 and greatly expanded service for the 2024-2025 ski season, doubling capacity and increasing service to run Thursday-Monday during the winter ski seasons. The Colorado Department of Transportation plans to eventually expand service to Steamboat Springs and Craig as part of the Mountain Rail project.\nDenver's early years as a major train hub of the west are still very visible today. Trains stop in Denver at historic Union Station, where travelers can access RTD's 16th Street Free MallRide or use light rail to tour the city. Union Station will also serve as the main juncture for rail travel in the metro area, at the completion of FasTracks. The city also plans to invest billions to bringing frequent public transit within one-fourth of a mile of most of its residents.\nDenver public transportation statistics.\nThe average amount of time people spend commuting on public transit in Denver and Boulder, Colorado\u2014for example, to and from work, on a weekday\u2014is 77 minutes; 31% of public transit riders ride for more than two hours every day. The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is 14 minutes, while 25% of riders wait for over 20 minutes, on average, every day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is , while 31% travel over in a single direction.\nAirports.\nDenver International Airport (IATA: DEN, ICAO: KDEN), commonly known as DIA, serves as the primary airport for the Front Range Urban Corridor surrounding Denver. DIA is east-northeast of the Colorado State Capitol and opened in 1995. DIA is the 3rd busiest airport in the world with 58.8 million passengers in 2021; it had the 5th highest number of passengers in the U.S., 61 million, in the pre-pandemic year 2019. It is the largest airport by land area in the United States. DIA serves as a major hub for United Airlines, is the headquarters and primary hub for Frontier Airlines, and is a major focus city and the fastest-growing market for Southwest Airlines.\nIn 2017, Denver International Airport was rated by Skytrax as the 28th-best airport in the world, falling to second place in the United States behind Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky International Airport. Skytrax also named DIA as the second-best regional airport in North America for 2017, and the fourth-best regional airport in the world.\nThree general aviation airports serve the Denver area. Rocky Mountain Metropolitan Airport (KBJC) is north-northwest, Centennial Airport (KAPA) is south-southeast, and Colorado Air and Space Port (KCFO), formerly Front Range Airport, is east of the state capitol. Centennial Airport also offers limited commercial airline service, on two cargo airlines.\nIn the past, Denver has been home to several other airports that are no longer operational. Stapleton International Airport was closed in 1995 when it was replaced by DIA. Lowry Air Force Base was a military flight training facility that ceased flight operations in 1966, with the base finally closing in 1994. Both Stapleton and Lowry have since been redeveloped into primarily residential neighborhoods. Buckley Space Force Base is the only military facility in the Denver area.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nDenver's relationship with Brest, France, began in 1948, making it the second-oldest sister city in the United States. In 1947, Amanda Knecht, a teacher at East High School, visited World War II\u2013ravaged Brest. When she returned, she shared her experiences in the city with her students, and her class raised $32,000 to help rebuild the children's wing of Brest's hospital. The gift led to the development of the sister city program with Brest. There were serious efforts in the early 2000s, in both Denver and Sochi, Russian Federation, to establish sister-city ties, but the negotiations did not come to fruition.\nSince then, Denver has established relationships with additional sister cities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8524", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8524", "title": "Deuterium", "text": "Isotope of hydrogen with one neutron\nDeuterium (hydrogen-2, symbol 2H or D, also known as heavy hydrogen) is one of two stable isotopes of hydrogen; the other is protium, or hydrogen-1, 1H. The deuterium nucleus (deuteron) contains one proton and one neutron, whereas the far more common 1H has no neutrons. \nThe name \"deuterium\" comes from Greek \"\", meaning \"second\". American chemist Harold Urey discovered deuterium in 1931. Urey and others produced samples of heavy water in which the 2H had been highly concentrated. The discovery of deuterium won Urey a Nobel Prize in 1934.\nNearly all deuterium found in nature was synthesized in the Big Bang 13.8\u00a0billion years ago, forming the primordial ratio of 2H to 1H (~26\u00a0deuterium nuclei per 106 hydrogen nuclei). Deuterium is subsequently produced by the slow stellar proton\u2013proton chain, but rapidly destroyed by exothermic fusion reactions. The deuterium\u2013deuterium reaction has the second-lowest energy threshold, and is the most astrophysically accessible, occurring in both stars and brown dwarfs.\nThe gas giant planets display the primordial ratio of deuterium. Comets show an elevated ratio similar to Earth's oceans (156 deuterium nuclei per 106 hydrogen nuclei). This reinforces theories that much of Earth's ocean water is of cometary origin. The deuterium ratio of comet 67P/Churyumov\u2013Gerasimenko, as measured by the \"Rosetta\" space probe, is about three times that of Earth water. This figure is the highest yet measured in a comet, thus deuterium ratios continue to be an active topic of research in both astronomy and climatology.\nDeuterium is used in most nuclear weapons, many fusion power experiments, and as the most effective neutron moderator, primarily in heavy water nuclear reactors. It is also used as an isotopic label, in biogeochemistry, NMR spectroscopy, and deuterated drugs.\nDifferences from common hydrogen (protium).\nChemical symbol.\nDeuterium is often represented by the chemical symbol D. Since it is an isotope of hydrogen with mass number 2, it is also represented by 2H. IUPAC allows both D and 2H, though 2H is preferred. A distinct chemical symbol is used for convenience because of the isotope's common use in various scientific processes. Also, its large mass difference with protium (1H) confers non-negligible chemical differences with 1H compounds. Deuterium has a mass of , about twice the mean hydrogen atomic weight of , or twice protium's mass of . The isotope weight ratios within other elements are largely insignificant in this regard.\nSpectroscopy.\nIn quantum mechanics, the energy levels of electrons in atoms depend on the reduced mass of the system of electron and nucleus. For a hydrogen atom, the role of reduced mass is most simply seen in the Bohr model of the atom, where the reduced mass appears in a simple calculation of the Rydberg constant and Rydberg equation, but the reduced mass also appears in the Schr\u00f6dinger equation, and the Dirac equation for calculating atomic energy levels.\nThe reduced mass of the system in these equations is close to the mass of a single electron, but differs from it by a small amount about equal to the ratio of mass of the electron to the nucleus. For 1H, this amount is about , or 1.000545, and for 2H it is even smaller: , or 1.000272. The energies of electronic spectra lines for 2H and 1H therefore differ by the ratio of these two numbers, which is 1.000272. The wavelengths of all deuterium spectroscopic lines are shorter than the corresponding lines of light hydrogen, by 0.0272%. In astronomical observation, this corresponds to a blue Doppler shift of 0.0272% of the speed of light, or 81.6\u00a0km/s.\nThe differences are much more pronounced in vibrational spectroscopy such as infrared spectroscopy and Raman spectroscopy, and in rotational spectra such as microwave spectroscopy because the reduced mass of the deuterium is markedly higher than that of protium. In nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, deuterium has a very different NMR frequency (e.g. 61\u00a0MHz when protium is at 400\u00a0MHz) and is much less sensitive. Deuterated solvents are usually used in protium NMR to prevent the solvent from overlapping with the signal, though deuterium NMR on its own right is also possible.\nBig Bang nucleosynthesis.\nSynthesis during the formation of the universe is the only significant way naturally occurring deuterium has been created; it is destroyed in stellar fusion. Deuterium is thought to have played an important role in setting the number and ratios of the elements that were formed in the Big Bang.24.2 Combining thermodynamics and the changes brought about by cosmic expansion, one can calculate the fraction of protons and neutrons based on the temperature at the point that the universe cooled enough to allow formation of nuclei. This calculation indicates seven protons for every neutron at the beginning of nucleogenesis, a ratio that would remain stable even after nucleogenesis was over. This fraction was in favor of protons initially, primarily because the lower mass of the proton favored their production. As the Universe expanded, it cooled. Free neutrons and protons are less stable than helium nuclei, and the protons and neutrons had a strong energetic reason to form helium-4. However, forming helium-4 requires the intermediate step of forming deuterium.\nThrough much of the few minutes after the Big Bang during which nucleosynthesis could have occurred, the temperature was high enough that the mean energy per particle was greater than the binding energy of weakly bound deuterium; therefore, any deuterium that was formed was immediately destroyed. This situation is known as the deuterium bottleneck. The bottleneck delayed formation of any helium-4 until the Universe became cool enough to form deuterium (at about a temperature equivalent to 100\u00a0keV). At this point, there was a sudden burst of element formation (first deuterium, which immediately fused into helium). However, very soon thereafter, at twenty minutes after the Big Bang, the Universe became too cool for any further nuclear fusion or nucleosynthesis. At this point, the elemental abundances were nearly fixed, with the only change as some of the radioactive products of Big Bang nucleosynthesis (such as tritium) decay. The deuterium bottleneck in the formation of helium, together with the lack of stable ways for helium to combine with hydrogen or with itself (no stable nucleus has a mass number of 5 or 8) meant that an insignificant amount of carbon, or any elements heavier than carbon, formed in the Big Bang. These elements thus required formation in stars. At the same time, the failure of much nucleogenesis during the Big Bang ensured that there would be plenty of hydrogen in the later universe available to form long-lived stars, such as the Sun.\nAbundance.\nDeuterium occurs in trace amounts naturally as deuterium gas (2H2 or D2), but most deuterium in the Universe is bonded with 1H to form a gas called hydrogen deuteride (HD or 1H2H). Similarly, natural water contains deuterated molecules, almost all as semiheavy water HDO with only one deuterium.\nThe existence of deuterium on Earth, elsewhere in the Solar System (as confirmed by planetary probes), and in the spectra of stars, is also an important datum in cosmology. Gamma radiation from ordinary nuclear fusion dissociates deuterium into protons and neutrons, and there is no known natural process other than Big Bang nucleosynthesis that might have produced deuterium at anything close to its observed natural abundance. Deuterium is produced by the rare cluster decay, and occasional absorption of naturally occurring neutrons by light hydrogen, but these are trivial sources. There is thought to be little deuterium in the interior of the Sun and other stars, as at these temperatures the nuclear fusion reactions that consume deuterium happen much faster than the proton\u2013proton reaction that creates deuterium. However, deuterium persists in the outer solar atmosphere at roughly the same concentration as in Jupiter, and this has probably been unchanged since the origin of the Solar System. The natural abundance of 2H seems to be a very similar fraction of hydrogen, wherever hydrogen is found, unless there are obvious processes at work that concentrate it.\nThe existence of deuterium at a low but constant primordial fraction in all hydrogen is another one of the arguments in favor of the Big Bang over the Steady State theory of the Universe. The observed ratios of hydrogen to helium to deuterium in the universe are difficult to explain except with a Big Bang model. It is estimated that the abundances of deuterium have not evolved significantly since their production about 13.8 billion years ago. Measurements of Milky Way galactic deuterium from ultraviolet spectral analysis show a ratio of as much as 23 atoms of deuterium per million hydrogen atoms in undisturbed gas clouds, which is only 15% below the WMAP estimated primordial ratio of about 27 atoms per million from the Big Bang. This has been interpreted to mean that less deuterium has been destroyed in star formation in the Milky Way galaxy than expected, or perhaps deuterium has been replenished by a large in-fall of primordial hydrogen from outside the galaxy. In space a few hundred light years from the Sun, deuterium abundance is only 15 atoms per million, but this value is presumably influenced by differential adsorption of deuterium onto carbon dust grains in interstellar space.\nThe abundance of deuterium in Jupiter's atmosphere has been directly measured by the \"Galileo\" space probe as 26 atoms per million hydrogen atoms. ISO-SWS observations find 22 atoms per million hydrogen atoms in Jupiter, and this abundance is thought to represent close to the primordial Solar System ratio. This is about 17% of the terrestrial ratio of 156 deuterium atoms per million hydrogen atoms.\nComets such as Comet Hale\u2013Bopp and Halley's Comet have been measured to contain more deuterium (about 200 atoms per million hydrogens), ratios which are enriched with respect to the presumed protosolar nebula ratio, probably due to heating, and which are similar to the ratios found in Earth seawater. The recent measurement of deuterium amounts of 161 atoms per million hydrogen in Comet 103P/Hartley (a former Kuiper belt object), a ratio almost exactly that in Earth's oceans (155.76 \u00b1 0.1, but in fact from 153 to 156 ppm), emphasizes the theory that Earth's surface water may be largely from comets. Most recently the 2H1HR of 67P/Churyumov\u2013Gerasimenko as measured by \"Rosetta\" is about three times that of Earth water. This has caused renewed interest in suggestions that Earth's water may be partly of asteroidal origin.\nDeuterium has also been observed to be concentrated over the mean solar abundance in other terrestrial planets, in particular Mars and Venus.\nProduction.\nDeuterium is produced for industrial, scientific and military purposes, by starting with ordinary water\u2014a small fraction of which is naturally occurring heavy water\u2014and then separating out the heavy water by the Girdler sulfide process, distillation, or other methods.\nIn theory, deuterium for heavy water could be created in a nuclear reactor, but separation from ordinary water is the cheapest bulk production process.\nThe world's leading supplier of deuterium was Atomic Energy of Canada Limited until 1997, when the last heavy water plant was shut down. Canada uses heavy water as a neutron moderator for the operation of the CANDU reactor design.\nAnother major producer of heavy water is India. All but one of India's atomic energy plants are pressurized heavy water plants, which use natural (i.e., not enriched) uranium. India has eight heavy water plants, of which seven are in operation. Six plants, of which five are in operation, are based on D\u2013H exchange in ammonia gas. The other two plants extract deuterium from natural water in a process that uses hydrogen sulfide gas at high pressure.\nWhile India is self-sufficient in heavy water for its own use, India also exports reactor-grade heavy water.\nProperties.\nData for molecular deuterium.\nFormula: or 21H2\nData at about 18 K for 2H2 (triple point):\nPhysical properties.\nCompared to hydrogen in its natural composition on Earth, pure deuterium (2H2) has a higher melting point (18.72\u00a0K vs. 13.99\u00a0K), a higher boiling point (23.64 vs. 20.27\u00a0K), a higher critical temperature (38.3 vs. 32.94\u00a0K) and a higher critical pressure (1.6496 vs. 1.2858\u00a0MPa).\nThe physical properties of deuterium compounds can exhibit significant kinetic isotope effects and other physical and chemical property differences from the protium analogs. 2H2O, for example, is more viscous than normal . There are differences in bond energy and length for compounds of heavy hydrogen isotopes compared to protium, which are larger than the isotopic differences in any other element. Bonds involving deuterium and tritium are somewhat stronger than the corresponding bonds in protium, and these differences are enough to cause significant changes in biological reactions. Pharmaceutical firms are interested in the fact that 2H is harder to remove from carbon than 1H.\nDeuterium can replace 1H in water molecules to form heavy water (2H2O), which is about 10.6% denser than normal water (so that ice made from it sinks in normal water). Heavy water is slightly toxic in eukaryotic animals, with 25% substitution of the body water causing cell division problems and sterility, and 50% substitution causing death by cytotoxic syndrome (bone marrow failure and gastrointestinal lining failure). Prokaryotic organisms, however, can survive and grow in pure heavy water, though they develop slowly. Despite this toxicity, consumption of heavy water under normal circumstances does not pose a health threat to humans. It is estimated that a person might drink of heavy water without serious consequences. Small doses of heavy water (a few grams in humans, containing an amount of deuterium comparable to that normally present in the body) are routinely used as harmless metabolic tracers in humans and animals.\nQuantum properties.\nThe deuteron has spin +1 (\"triplet state\") and is thus a boson. The NMR frequency of deuterium is significantly different from normal hydrogen. Infrared spectroscopy also easily differentiates many deuterated compounds, due to the large difference in IR absorption frequency seen in the vibration of a chemical bond containing deuterium, versus light hydrogen. The two stable isotopes of hydrogen can also be distinguished by using mass spectrometry.\nThe triplet deuteron nucleon is barely bound at \"E\"B =, and none of the higher energy states are bound. The singlet deuteron is a virtual state, with a negative binding energy of . There is no such stable particle, but this virtual particle transiently exists during neutron\u2013proton inelastic scattering, accounting for the unusually large neutron scattering cross-section of the proton.\nNuclear properties (deuteron).\nDeuteron mass and radius.\nThe deuterium nucleus is called a deuteron. It has a mass of \u200d (\u200d).\nThe charge radius of a deuteron is .\nLike the proton radius, measurements using muonic deuterium produce a smaller result: .\nSpin and energy.\nDeuterium is one of only five stable nuclides with an odd number of protons and an odd number of neutrons. (2H, 6Li, 10B, 14N, 180mTa; the long-lived radionuclides 40K, 50V, 138La, 176Lu also occur naturally.) Most odd\u2013odd nuclei are unstable to beta decay, because the decay products are even\u2013even, and thus more strongly bound, due to nuclear pairing effects. Deuterium, however, benefits from having its proton and neutron coupled to a spin-1 state, which gives a stronger nuclear attraction; the corresponding spin-1 state does not exist in the two-neutron or two-proton system, due to the Pauli exclusion principle which would require one or the other identical particle with the same spin to have some other different quantum number, such as orbital angular momentum. But orbital angular momentum of either particle gives a lower binding energy for the system, mainly due to increasing distance of the particles in the steep gradient of the nuclear force. In both cases, this causes the diproton and dineutron to be unstable.\nThe proton and neutron in deuterium can be dissociated through neutral current interactions with neutrinos. The cross section for this interaction is comparatively large, and deuterium was successfully used as a neutrino target in the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory experiment.\nDiatomic deuterium (2H2) has ortho and para nuclear spin isomers like diatomic hydrogen, but with differences in the number and population of spin states and rotational levels, which occur because the deuteron is a boson with nuclear spin equal to one.\nIsospin singlet state of the deuteron.\nDue to the similarity in mass and nuclear properties between the proton and neutron, they are sometimes considered as two symmetric types of the same object, a nucleon. While only the proton has electric charge, this is often negligible due to the weakness of the electromagnetic interaction relative to the strong nuclear interaction. The symmetry relating the proton and neutron is known as isospin and denoted \"I\" (or sometimes \"T\").\nIsospin is an SU(2) symmetry, like ordinary spin, so is completely analogous to it. The proton and neutron, each of which have isospin-1/2, form an isospin doublet (analogous to a spin doublet), with a \"down\" state (\u2193) being a neutron and an \"up\" state (\u2191) being a proton. A pair of nucleons can either be in an antisymmetric state of isospin called singlet, or in a symmetric state called triplet. In terms of the \"down\" state and \"up\" state, the singlet is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, which can also be written &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nThis is a nucleus with one proton and one neutron, i.e. a deuterium nucleus. The triplet is\n formula_1\nand thus consists of three types of nuclei, which are supposed to be symmetric: a deuterium nucleus (actually a highly excited state of it), a nucleus with two protons, and a nucleus with two neutrons. These states are not stable.\nApproximated wavefunction of the deuteron.\nThe deuteron wavefunction must be antisymmetric if the isospin representation is used (since a proton and a neutron are not identical particles, the wavefunction need not be antisymmetric in general). Apart from their isospin, the two nucleons also have spin and spatial distributions of their wavefunction. The latter is symmetric if the deuteron is symmetric under parity (i.e. has an \"even\" or \"positive\" parity), and antisymmetric if the deuteron is antisymmetric under parity (i.e. has an \"odd\" or \"negative\" parity). The parity is fully determined by the total orbital angular momentum of the two nucleons: if it is even then the parity is even (positive), and if it is odd then the parity is odd (negative).\nThe deuteron, being an isospin singlet, is antisymmetric under nucleons exchange due to isospin, and therefore must be symmetric under the double exchange of their spin and location. Therefore, it can be in either of the following two different states:\nIn the first case the deuteron is a spin triplet, so that its total spin \"s\" is 1. It also has an even parity and therefore even orbital angular momentum \"l\". The lower its orbital angular momentum, the lower its energy. Therefore, the lowest possible energy state has \"s\" \n 1, \"l\" \n 0.\nIn the second case the deuteron is a spin singlet, so that its total spin \"s\" is 0. It also has an odd parity and therefore odd orbital angular momentum \"l\". Therefore, the lowest possible energy state has \"s\" \n 0, \"l\" \n 1.\nSince \"s\" \n 1 gives a stronger nuclear attraction, the deuterium ground state is in the \"s\" \n 1, \"l\" \n 0 state.\nThe same considerations lead to the possible states of an isospin triplet having \"s\" \n 0, \"l\" \n even or \"s\" \n 1, \"l\" \n odd. Thus, the state of lowest energy has \"s\" \n 1, \"l\" \n 1, higher than that of the isospin singlet.\nThe analysis just given is in fact only approximate, both because isospin is not an exact symmetry, and more importantly because the strong nuclear interaction between the two nucleons is related to angular momentum in spin\u2013orbit interaction that mixes different \"s\" and \"l\" states. That is, \"s\" and \"l\" are not constant in time (they do not commute with the Hamiltonian), and over time a state such as \"s\" \n 1, \"l\" \n 0 may become a state of \"s\" \n 1, \"l\" \n 2. Parity is still constant in time, so these do not mix with odd \"l\" states (such as \"s\" \n 0, \"l\" \n 1). Therefore, the quantum state of the deuterium is a superposition (a linear combination) of the \"s\" \n 1, \"l\" \n 0 state and the \"s\" \n 1, \"l\" \n 2 state, even though the first component is much bigger. Since the total angular momentum \"j\" is also a good quantum number (it is a constant in time), both components must have the same \"j\", and therefore \"j\" \n 1. This is the total spin of the deuterium nucleus.\nTo summarize, the deuterium nucleus is antisymmetric in terms of isospin, and has spin 1 and even (+1) parity. The relative angular momentum of its nucleons \"l\" is not well defined, and the deuteron is a superposition of mostly \"l\" \n 0 with some \"l\" \n 2.\nMagnetic and electric multipoles.\nIn order to find theoretically the deuterium magnetic dipole moment \"\u03bc\", one uses the formula for a nuclear magnetic moment\n formula_2\nwith\n formula_3\n\"g\"(\"l\") and \"g\"(\"s\") are \"g\"-factors of the nucleons.\nSince the proton and neutron have different values for \"g\"(\"l\") and \"g\"(\"s\"), one must separate their contributions. Each gets half of the deuterium orbital angular momentum formula_4 and spin formula_5. One arrives at\n formula_6\nwhere subscripts p and n stand for the proton and neutron, and \"g\"(l)n \n 0.\nBy using the same identities as here and using the value g(l)p \n 1, one gets the following result, in units of the nuclear magneton \"\u03bc\"N\n formula_7\nFor the \"s\" \n 1, \"l\" \n 0 state (\"j\" \n 1), we obtain\n formula_8\nFor the \"s\" \n 1, \"l\" \n 2 state (\"j\" \n 1), we obtain\n formula_9\nThe measured value of the deuterium magnetic dipole moment, is , which is 97.5% of the value obtained by simply adding moments of the proton and neutron. This suggests that the state of the deuterium is indeed to a good approximation \"s\" \n 1, \"l\" \n 0 state, which occurs with both nucleons spinning in the same direction, but their magnetic moments subtracting because of the neutron's negative moment.\nBut the slightly lower experimental number than that which results from simple addition of proton and (negative) neutron moments shows that deuterium is actually a linear combination of mostly \"s\" \n 1, \"l\" \n 0 state with a slight admixture of \"s\" \n 1, \"l\" \n 2 state.\nThe electric dipole is zero as usual.\nThe measured electric quadrupole of the deuterium is . While the order of magnitude is reasonable, since the deuteron radius is of order of 1 femtometer (see below) and its electric charge is e, the above model does not suffice for its computation. More specifically, the electric quadrupole does not get a contribution from the \"l\" = 0 state (which is the dominant one) and does get a contribution from a term mixing the \"l\" = 0 and the \"l\" = 2 states, because the electric quadrupole operator does not commute with angular momentum.\nThe latter contribution is dominant in the absence of a pure \"l\" \n 0 contribution, but cannot be calculated without knowing the exact spatial form of the nucleons wavefunction inside the deuterium.\nHigher magnetic and electric multipole moments cannot be calculated by the above model, for similar reasons.\nApplications.\nNuclear reactors.\nDeuterium is used in heavy water moderated fission reactors, usually as liquid 2H2O, to slow neutrons without the high neutron absorption of ordinary hydrogen. This is a common commercial use for larger amounts of deuterium.\nIn research reactors, liquid 2H2 is used in cold sources to moderate neutrons to very low energies and wavelengths appropriate for scattering experiments.\nExperimentally, deuterium is the most common nuclide used in fusion reactor designs, especially in combination with tritium, because of the large reaction rate (or nuclear cross section) and high energy yield of the deuterium\u2013tritium (DT) reaction. There is an even higher-yield 2H\u20133He fusion reaction, though the breakeven point of 2H\u20133He is higher than that of most other fusion reactions; together with the scarcity of 3He, this makes it implausible as a practical power source, at least until DT and deuterium\u2013deuterium (DD) fusion have been performed on a commercial scale. Commercial nuclear fusion is not yet an accomplished technology.\nNMR spectroscopy.\nDeuterium is most commonly used in hydrogen nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (proton NMR) in the following way. NMR ordinarily requires compounds of interest to be analyzed as dissolved in solution. Because of deuterium's nuclear spin properties which differ from the light hydrogen usually present in organic molecules, NMR spectra of hydrogen/protium are highly differentiable from that of deuterium, and in practice deuterium is not \"seen\" by an NMR instrument tuned for 1H. Deuterated solvents (including heavy water, but also compounds like deuterated chloroform, CDCl3 or C2HCl3, are therefore routinely used in NMR spectroscopy, in order to allow only the light-hydrogen spectra of the compound of interest to be measured, without solvent-signal interference.\nNuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy can also be used to obtain information about the deuteron's environment in isotopically labelled samples (deuterium NMR). For example, the configuration of hydrocarbon chains in lipid bilayers can be quantified using solid state deuterium NMR with deuterium-labelled lipid molecules.\nDeuterium NMR spectra are especially informative in the solid state because of its relatively small quadrupole moment in comparison with those of bigger quadrupolar nuclei such as chlorine-35, for example.\nMass spectrometry.\nDeuterated (i.e. where all or some hydrogen atoms are replaced with deuterium) compounds are often used as internal standards in mass spectrometry. Like other isotopically labeled species, such standards improve accuracy, while often at a much lower cost than other isotopically labeled standards. Deuterated molecules are usually prepared via hydrogen isotope exchange reactions.\nTracing.\nIn chemistry, biochemistry and environmental sciences, deuterium is used as a non-radioactive, stable isotopic tracer, for example, in the doubly labeled water test. In chemical reactions and metabolic pathways, deuterium behaves somewhat similarly to ordinary hydrogen (with a few chemical differences, as noted). It can be distinguished from normal hydrogen most easily by its mass, using mass spectrometry or infrared spectrometry. Deuterium can be detected by femtosecond infrared spectroscopy, since the mass difference drastically affects the frequency of molecular vibrations; 2H\u2013carbon bond vibrations are found in spectral regions free of other signals.\nMeasurements of small variations in the natural abundances of deuterium, along with those of the stable heavy oxygen isotopes 17O and 18O, are of importance in hydrology, to trace the geographic origin of Earth's waters. The heavy isotopes of hydrogen and oxygen in rainwater (meteoric water) are enriched as a function of the temperature of the region where the precipitation falls (and thus enrichment is related to latitude). The relative enrichment of the heavy isotopes in rainwater (as referenced to mean ocean water), when plotted against temperature falls predictably along a line called the global meteoric water line (GMWL). This plot allows samples of precipitation-originated water to be identified along with general information about the climate in which it originated. Evaporative and other processes in bodies of water, and also ground water processes, also differentially alter the ratios of heavy hydrogen and oxygen isotopes in fresh and salt waters, in characteristic and often regionally distinctive ways. The ratio of concentration of 2H to 1H is usually indicated with a delta as \u03b42H and the geographic patterns of these values are plotted in maps termed as isoscapes. Stable isotopes are incorporated into plants and animals and an analysis of the ratios in a migrant bird or insect can help suggest a rough guide to their origins.\nContrast properties.\nNeutron scattering techniques particularly profit from availability of deuterated samples: The 1H and 2H cross sections are very distinct and different in sign, which allows contrast variation in such experiments. Further, a nuisance problem of normal hydrogen is its large incoherent neutron cross section, which is nil for 2H. The substitution of deuterium for normal hydrogen thus reduces scattering noise.\nHydrogen is an important and major component in all materials of organic chemistry and life science, but it barely interacts with X-rays. As hydrogen atoms (including deuterium) interact strongly with neutrons; neutron scattering techniques, together with a modern deuteration facility, fills a niche in many studies of macromolecules in biology and many other areas.\nNuclear weapons.\nSee below. Most stars, including the Sun, generate energy over most of their lives by fusing hydrogen into heavier elements; yet such fusion of light hydrogen (protium) has never been successful in the conditions attainable on Earth. Thus, all artificial fusion, including the hydrogen fusion in hydrogen bombs, requires heavy hydrogen (deuterium, tritium, or both).\nDrugs.\nA deuterated drug is a small molecule medicinal product in which one or more of the hydrogen atoms in the drug molecule have been replaced by deuterium. Because of the kinetic isotope effect, deuterium-containing drugs may have significantly lower rates of metabolism, and hence a longer half-life. In 2017, deutetrabenazine became the first deuterated drug to receive FDA approval.\nReinforced essential nutrients.\nDeuterium can be used to reinforce specific oxidation-vulnerable C\u2013H bonds within essential or conditionally essential nutrients, such as certain amino acids, or polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), making them more resistant to oxidative damage. Deuterated polyunsaturated fatty acids, such as linoleic acid, slow down the chain reaction of lipid peroxidation that damage living cells. Deuterated ethyl ester of linoleic acid (RT001), developed by Retrotope, is in a compassionate use trial in infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy and has successfully completed a Phase I/II trial in Friedreich's ataxia.\nThermostabilization.\nLive vaccines, such as oral polio vaccine, can be stabilized by deuterium, either alone or in combination with other stabilizers such as MgCl2.\nSlowing circadian oscillations.\nDeuterium has been shown to lengthen the period of oscillation of the circadian clock when dosed in rats, hamsters, and \"Gonyaulax\" dinoflagellates. In rats, chronic intake of 25% 2H2O disrupts circadian rhythm by lengthening the circadian period of suprachiasmatic nucleus-dependent rhythms in the brain's hypothalamus. Experiments in hamsters also support the theory that deuterium acts directly on the suprachiasmatic nucleus to lengthen the free-running circadian period.\nHistory.\nBefore the search.\nThe earliest mention of some matter with the properties of deuterium was a passing mention in Ernest Rutherford's 1919 Bakerian lecture.\nIn this theory, the deuterium nucleus with mass two and charge one would contain two protons and one nuclear electron. \nAlso in 1919, Otto Stern and Max Volmer reported on diffusion experiments with water which they claimed disproved the existence of isotopes of hydrogen; their conclusions were assumed to be correct throughout the 1920s.\nDeuterium detected.\nIt was first detected spectroscopically in late 1931 by Harold Urey, a chemist at Columbia University. Urey's collaborator, Ferdinand Brickwedde, distilled five liters of cryogenically produced liquid hydrogen to of liquid, using the low-temperature physics laboratory that had recently been established at the National Bureau of Standards (now National Institute of Standards and Technology) in Washington, DC. The technique had previously been used to isolate heavy isotopes of neon. The cryogenic boiloff technique concentrated the fraction of the mass-2 isotope of hydrogen to a degree that made its spectroscopic identification unambiguous.\nNaming of the isotope and Nobel Prize.\nUrey created the names \"protium\", \"deuterium\", and \"tritium\" in an article published in 1934. The name is based in part on advice from Gilbert N. Lewis who had proposed the name \"deutium\". The name comes from Greek \"deuteros\" 'second', and the nucleus was to be called a \"deuteron\" or \"deuton\". Isotopes and new elements were traditionally given the name that their discoverer decided. Some British scientists, such as Ernest Rutherford, wanted to call the isotope \"diplogen\", from Greek \"diploos\" 'double', and the nucleus to be called \"diplon\".\nThe amount inferred for normal abundance of deuterium was so small (only about 1 atom in 6400 hydrogen atoms in seawater [156 parts per million]) that it had not noticeably affected previous measurements of (average) hydrogen atomic mass. This explained why it hadn't been suspected before. Urey was able to concentrate water to show partial enrichment of deuterium. Lewis, Urey's graduate advisor at Berkeley, had prepared and characterized the first samples of pure heavy water in 1933. The discovery of deuterium, coming before the discovery of the neutron in 1932, was an experimental shock to theory; but when the neutron was reported, making deuterium's existence more explicable, Urey was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry only three years after the isotope's isolation. Lewis was deeply disappointed by the Nobel Committee's decision in 1934 and several high-ranking administrators at Berkeley believed this disappointment played a central role in his suicide a decade later.\n\"Heavy water\" experiments in World War II.\nShortly before the war, Hans von Halban and Lew Kowarski moved their research on neutron moderation from France to Britain, smuggling the entire global supply of heavy water (which had been made in Norway) across in twenty-six steel drums.\nDuring World War II, Nazi Germany was known to be conducting experiments using heavy water as moderator for a nuclear reactor design. Such experiments were a source of concern because they might allow them to produce plutonium for an atomic bomb. Ultimately it led to the Allied operation called the \"Norwegian heavy water sabotage\", the purpose of which was to destroy the Vemork deuterium production/enrichment facility in Norway. At the time this was considered important to the potential progress of the war.\nAfter World War II ended, the Allies discovered that Germany was not putting as much serious effort into the program as had been previously thought. The Germans had completed only a small, partly built experimental reactor (which had been hidden away) and had been unable to sustain a chain reaction. By the end of the war, the Germans did not even have a fifth of the amount of heavy water needed to run the reactor, partially due to the Norwegian heavy water sabotage operation. However, even if the Germans had succeeded in getting a reactor operational (as the U.S. did with Chicago Pile-1 in late 1942), they would still have been at least several years away from the development of an atomic bomb. The engineering process, even with maximal effort and funding, required about two and a half years (from first critical reactor to bomb) in both the U.S. and U.S.S.R., for example.\nIn thermonuclear weapons.\nThe 62-ton Ivy Mike device built by the United States and exploded on 1 November 1952, was the first fully successful hydrogen bomb (thermonuclear bomb). In this context, it was the first bomb in which most of the energy released came from nuclear reaction stages that followed the primary nuclear fission stage of the atomic bomb. The Ivy Mike bomb was a factory-like building, rather than a deliverable weapon. At its center, a very large cylindrical, insulated vacuum flask or cryostat, held cryogenic liquid deuterium in a volume of about 1000 liters (160 kilograms in mass, if this volume had been completely filled). Then, a conventional atomic bomb (the \"primary\") at one end of the bomb was used to create the conditions of extreme temperature and pressure that were needed to set off the thermonuclear reaction.\nWithin a few years, so-called \"dry\" hydrogen bombs were developed that did not need cryogenic hydrogen. Released information suggests that all thermonuclear weapons built since then contain chemical compounds of deuterium and lithium in their secondary stages. The material that contains the deuterium is mostly lithium deuteride, with the lithium consisting of the isotope lithium-6. When the lithium-6 is bombarded with fast neutrons from the atomic bomb, tritium (hydrogen-3) is produced, and then the deuterium and the tritium quickly engage in thermonuclear fusion, releasing abundant energy, helium-4, and even more free neutrons. \"Pure\" fusion weapons such as the Tsar Bomba are believed to be obsolete. In most modern (\"boosted\") thermonuclear weapons, fusion directly provides only a small fraction of the total energy. Fission of a natural uranium-238 tamper by fast neutrons produced from D\u2013T fusion accounts for a much larger (i.e. boosted) energy release than the fusion reaction itself.\nModern research.\nIn August 2018, scientists announced the transformation of gaseous deuterium into a liquid metallic form. This may help researchers better understand gas giant planets, such as Jupiter, Saturn and some exoplanets, since such planets are thought to contain a lot of liquid metallic hydrogen, which may be responsible for their observed powerful magnetic fields.\nAntideuterium.\nAn antideuteron is the antimatter counterpart of the deuteron, consisting of an antiproton and an antineutron. The antideuteron was first produced in 1965 at the Proton Synchrotron at CERN and the Alternating Gradient Synchrotron at Brookhaven National Laboratory. A complete atom, with a positron orbiting the nucleus, would be called \"antideuterium\", but as of 2019[ [update]] antideuterium has not yet been created. The proposed symbol for antideuterium is D, that is, D with an overbar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8525", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8525", "title": "Digital signal processing", "text": "Mathematical signal manipulation by computers\nDigital signal processing (DSP) is the use of digital processing, such as by computers or more specialized digital signal processors, to perform a wide variety of signal processing operations. The digital signals processed in this manner are a sequence of numbers that represent samples of a continuous variable in a domain such as time, space, or frequency. In digital electronics, a digital signal is represented as a pulse train, which is typically generated by the switching of a transistor.\nDigital signal processing and analog signal processing are subfields of signal processing. DSP applications include audio and speech processing, sonar, radar and other sensor array processing, spectral density estimation, statistical signal processing, digital image processing, data compression, video coding, audio coding, image compression, signal processing for telecommunications, control systems, biomedical engineering, and seismology, among others.\nDSP can involve linear or nonlinear operations. Nonlinear signal processing is closely related to nonlinear system identification and can be implemented in the time, frequency, and spatio-temporal domains.\nThe application of digital computation to signal processing allows for many advantages over analog processing in many applications, such as error detection and correction in transmission as well as data compression. Digital signal processing is also fundamental to digital technology, such as digital telecommunication and wireless communications. DSP is applicable to both streaming data and static (stored) data.\nSignal sampling.\nTo digitally analyze and manipulate an analog signal, it must be digitized with an analog-to-digital converter (ADC). Sampling is usually carried out in two stages, discretization and quantization. Discretization means that the signal is divided into equal intervals of time, and each interval is represented by a single measurement of amplitude. Quantization means each amplitude measurement is approximated by a value from a finite set. Rounding real numbers to integers is an example.\nThe Nyquist\u2013Shannon sampling theorem states that a signal can be exactly reconstructed from its samples if the sampling frequency is greater than twice the highest frequency component in the signal. In practice, the sampling frequency is often significantly higher than this. It is common to use an anti-aliasing filter to limit the signal bandwidth to comply with the sampling theorem, however careful selection of this filter is required because the reconstructed signal will be the filtered signal plus residual aliasing from imperfect stop band rejection instead of the original (unfiltered) signal.\nTheoretical DSP analyses and derivations are typically performed on discrete-time signal models with no amplitude inaccuracies (quantization error), created by the abstract process of sampling. Numerical methods require a quantized signal, such as those produced by an ADC. The processed result might be a frequency spectrum or a set of statistics. But often it is another quantized signal that is converted back to analog form by a digital-to-analog converter (DAC).\nDomains.\nDSP engineers usually study digital signals in one of the following domains: time domain (one-dimensional signals), spatial domain (multidimensional signals), frequency domain, and wavelet domains. They choose the domain in which to process a signal by making an informed assumption (or by trying different possibilities) as to which domain best represents the essential characteristics of the signal and the processing to be applied to it. A sequence of samples from a measuring device produces a temporal or spatial domain representation, whereas a discrete Fourier transform produces the frequency domain representation.\nTime and space domains.\nTime domain refers to the analysis of signals with respect to time. Similarly, space domain refers to the analysis of signals with respect to position, e.g., pixel location for the case of image processing.\nThe most common processing approach in the time or space domain is enhancement of the input signal through a method called filtering. Digital filtering generally consists of some linear transformation of a number of surrounding samples around the current sample of the input or output signal. The surrounding samples may be identified with respect to time or space. The output of a linear digital filter to any given input may be calculated by convolving the input signal with an impulse response.\nFrequency domain.\nSignals are converted from time or space domain to the frequency domain, usually through use of the Fourier transform. The Fourier transform converts the time or space information to a magnitude and phase component of each frequency. With some applications, how the phase varies with frequency can be a significant consideration. Where phase is unimportant, often the Fourier transform is converted to the power spectrum, which is the magnitude of each frequency component squared.\nThe most common purpose for analysis of signals in the frequency domain is analysis of signal properties. The engineer can study the spectrum to determine which frequencies are present in the input signal and which are missing. Frequency domain analysis is also called \"spectrum-\" or \"spectral analysis\".\nFiltering, particularly in non-realtime work, can also be achieved in the frequency domain, applying the filter and then converting back to the time domain. This can be an efficient implementation and can give essentially any filter response, including excellent approximations to brickwall filters.\nThere are some commonly used frequency domain transformations. For example, the cepstrum converts a signal to the frequency domain through Fourier transform, takes the logarithm, then applies another Fourier transform. This emphasizes the harmonic structure of the original spectrum.\nZ-plane analysis.\nDigital filters come in both infinite impulse response (IIR) and finite impulse response (FIR) types. Whereas FIR filters are always stable, IIR filters have feedback loops that may become unstable and oscillate. The Z-transform provides a tool for analyzing stability issues of digital IIR filters. It is analogous to the Laplace transform, which is used to design and analyze analog IIR filters.\nAutoregression analysis.\nA signal is represented as linear combination of its previous samples. Coefficients of the combination are called autoregression coefficients. This method has higher frequency resolution and can process shorter signals compared to the Fourier transform. Prony's method can be used to estimate phases, amplitudes, initial phases and decays of the components of signal. Components are assumed to be complex decaying exponents.\nTime-frequency analysis.\nA time-frequency representation of a signal can capture both temporal evolution and frequency structure of the signal. Temporal and frequency resolution are limited by the uncertainty principle and the tradeoff is adjusted by the width of the analysis window. Linear techniques such as Short-time Fourier transform, wavelet transform, filter bank, non-linear (e.g., Wigner\u2013Ville transform) and autoregressive methods (e.g. segmented Prony method) are used for representation of signal on the time-frequency plane. Non-linear and segmented Prony methods can provide higher resolution, but may produce undesirable artifacts. Time-frequency analysis is usually used for analysis of non-stationary signals. For example, methods of fundamental frequency estimation, such as RAPT and PEFAC are based on windowed spectral analysis.\nWavelet.\nIn numerical analysis and functional analysis, a discrete wavelet transform is any wavelet transform for which the wavelets are discretely sampled. As with other wavelet transforms, a key advantage it has over Fourier transforms is temporal resolution: it captures both frequency \"and\" location information. The accuracy of the joint time-frequency resolution is limited by the uncertainty principle of time-frequency.\nEmpirical mode decomposition.\nEmpirical mode decomposition is based on decomposition of the signal into intrinsic mode functions (IMFs). IMFs are quasi-harmonical oscillations that are extracted from the signal.\nImplementation.\nDSP algorithms may be run on general-purpose computers and digital signal processors. DSP algorithms are also implemented on purpose-built hardware such as application-specific integrated circuit (ASICs). Additional technologies for digital signal processing include more powerful general-purpose microprocessors, graphics processing units, field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), digital signal controllers (mostly for industrial applications such as motor control), and stream processors.\nFor systems that do not have a real-time computing requirement and the signal data (either input or output) exists in data files, processing may be done economically with a general-purpose computer. This is essentially no different from any other data processing, except DSP mathematical techniques (such as the DCT and FFT) are used, and the sampled data is usually assumed to be uniformly sampled in time or space. An example of such an application is processing digital photographs with software such as Photoshop.\nWhen the application requirement is real-time, DSP is often implemented using specialized or dedicated processors or microprocessors, sometimes using multiple processors or multiple processing cores. These may process data using fixed-point arithmetic or floating point. For more demanding applications, FPGAs may be used. For the most demanding applications or high-volume products, ASICs might be designed specifically for the application.\nParallel implementations of DSP algorithms, utilizing multi-core CPU and many-core GPU architectures, are developed to improve the performances in terms of latency of these algorithms.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Native processing is done by the computer's CPU rather than by DSP or outboard processing, which is done by additional third-party DSP chips located on extension cards or external hardware boxes or racks. Many digital audio workstations such as Logic Pro, Cubase, Digital Performer and Pro Tools LE use native processing. Others, such as Pro Tools HD, Universal Audio's UAD-1 and TC Electronic's Powercore use DSP processing.\nApplications.\nGeneral application areas for DSP include\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSpecific examples include speech coding and transmission in digital mobile phones, room correction of sound in hi-fi and sound reinforcement applications, analysis and control of industrial processes, medical imaging such as CAT scans and MRI, audio crossovers and equalization, digital synthesizers, and audio effects units. DSP has been used in hearing aid technology since 1996, which allows for automatic directional microphones, complex digital noise reduction, and improved adjustment of the frequency response.\nTechniques.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRelated fields.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8526", "revid": "7523687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8526", "title": "Dark matter problem", "text": ""}
{"id": "8527", "revid": "46271501", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8527", "title": "Discordianism", "text": "Belief system based around the Greek goddess Eris\nDiscordianism is a belief system based around Eris, the Greek goddess of strife and discord, and variously defined as a religion, new religious movement, virtual religion, or act of social commentary; though prior to 2005, some sources categorized it as a parody religion. It was founded after the 1963 publication of its holy book, \"Principia Discordia\", written by Greg Hill with Kerry Wendell Thornley, the two working under the pseudonyms Malaclypse the Younger and Omar Khayyam Ravenhurst.\nDavid Chidester considers Discordianism to be the first virtual religion and the first to take up the challenge of establishing its religious authenticity. When the Yahoo search engine categorized Discordianism as a parody religion, in May 2001 Discordians started an email campaign to get the religion reclassified. It is difficult to estimate the number of Discordians because they are not required to hold Discordianism as their only belief system.\nAccording to Arthur Versluis, Discordianism \"both shaped and reflects the counterculture of the 1960s and 1970s\".\nFounding and structure.\nThe foundational document of Discordianism is \"Principia Discordia\", fourth edition (1970), written by Malaclypse the Younger, an alias of Gregory Hill. \"Principia Discordia\" often hints that Discordianism was founded as a dialectic antithesis to more popular religions based on order, although the rhetoric throughout the book describes chaos as a much more underlying impulse of the universe. This may have been done with the intention of merely \"balancing out\" the creative forces of order and disorder, but the focus is on the more disorderly aspects of the world \u2014 at times the forces of order are even vilified. Disharmony is particularly emphasized, along with its relation to harmony.\nOrganizations.\nDiscordian Society.\nThe most general group, presumably including all Discordians (and potentially others), is the Discordian Society, whose definition is \"The Discordian Society has no definition\". Its members include many adherents of Neopaganism and Thelema.\nPOEE.\nThe sect of Discordianism founded by Malaclypse the Younger and Omar Khayyam Ravenhurst is known as the Paratheo-Anametamystikhood of Eris Esoteric (POEE), a non-profit irreligious disorganisation. \"Principia Discordia\" contains some details about the structure of POEE. In particular:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEpiskopos.\nEpiskoposes are the overseers of sects of Discordianism which they have created. They speak to Eris through the use of their pineal gland. It is said in \"Principia Discordia\" that Eris says different things to each listener. She may even say radically different things to each Episkopos, but all of what she says is equally her word (even if it contradicts another iteration of her word).\nPopes.\nAccording to \"Principia Discordia\", \"every single man, woman, and child on this Earth\" is a pope. Included in \"Principia Discordia\" is an official Pope card that may be reproduced and distributed freely to anyone and everyone.\nSaints.\nThere are five classes of saints within Discordianism, who are those who best act as exemplars and are closer to perfection. Only the first of these classes, \"Saint Second Class\", contains real human beings (deceased and alive), with higher classes reserved for fictional beings who, by virtue of being fictional, are better able to reach the Discordian view of perfection.\nAn example of a second-class saint is Emperor Norton, a citizen in 19th-century San Francisco, who despite suffering delusions was beloved by much of the city. He is honoured as a saint within Discordianism for living his life according to truth as he saw it and a disregard for reality as others would perceive it.\nOther.\nSince the first edition, various approaches to a Discordian organization chart \u2013 called in the work is \"disorganization\" and later \"disorganizational matrix\" \u2013 have differed from volume to volume, but have included especially the House of the Apostles of Eris, which is inclusive of the founders as the Apostles, of the Golden Apple Corps and Holders of the Sacred Chao, of the priesthood and saints, of the episkoposes, and even of \"heretical\" or \"protestant\" internal opponents of some of these, but not inclusive of the popes, legionnaires, disciples, and various other parties. A variety of other notional organizations were renamed and shuffled around and often enough replaced, as part of POEE (which did not appear in the first edition). But the House of the Apostles of Eris continued to be credited as the sanctioning body of the later editions, and remained the top division of the POEE \"Eristocracy\".\nAnother recurrent organizational name is the Legion of Dynamic Discord, inclusive of legionnaires, disciples, and evangelists. LODD was also introduced in the first edition and survived throughout later versions (as an element of POEE's House of the Rising Podge for the Disciples), as well as in works less centrally associated with Discordianism, such \"The Zenarchist's Cookbook\" which integrates some elements of Thornley's Zenarchy material and is dedicated (in an obfuscatory introduction) to the LODD.\nMythology.\nEris and Aneris and their brother Spirituality.\nIn Discordian mythology, Aneris is described as the sister of Eris a.k.a. Discordia. Whereas Eris/Discordia is the goddess of disorder and being, Aneris/Harmonia is the goddess of order and non-being.\n\"DOGMA III \u2013 HISTORY 32, 'COSMOGONY'\" in \"Principia Discordia\", states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the beginning there was VOID, who had two daughters; one (the smaller) was that of BEING, named ERIS, and one (the larger) was of NON-BEING, named ANERIS.\nThe sterile Aneris becomes jealous of Eris (who was born pregnant), and starts making existent things non-existent. This explains why life begins, and later ends in death:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And to this day, things appear and disappear in this very manner.\nHowever, the Void decrees that Aneris may not absorb her brother Spirituality, that he can only be absorbed back into the Void itself. Cusack points out that this is \"distilled into a teaching about the ultimate fate of humans: 'so it shall be that non-existence shall take us back from existence and that nameless spirituality shall return to the Void, like a tired child home from a very wild circus.'\"\nHand of Eris.\nThe \"five-fingered hand of Eris\" (shown at right) is one of several symbols used in Discordianism. It was adapted as an astronomical/astrological symbol for the dwarf planet Eris. Initially, the planetary symbol, designed by Discordian Denis Moskowitz, was rotated 90 degrees and had a cross-bar added so that it resembled two lunate epsilons (\u0404) back-to-back (), with epsilon being the Greek initial of \"Eris\". The cross-bar was later dropped, but the vertical orientation retained. The Hand of Eris has appeared in a public-outreach publication by NASA, though planetary symbols play only a minor role in modern astronomy.\nThe symbol was accepted by Unicode in 2016 as (\u2bf0).\nOriginal Snub.\nThe \"Original Snub\" is the Discordian name for the events leading up to the judgement of Paris, although more focus is put on the actions of Eris. Zeus believes that Eris is a troublemaker, so he does not invite her to Peleus and Thetis's wedding. Having been snubbed, Eris creates a golden apple with the word (, 'for the prettiest') inscribed in it. This, the Apple of Discord, is a notable symbol in Discordianism and is included in the Sacred Chao. It is traditionally described as being made of gold.\nCurse of Greyface.\nOne of the most important parts of Discordianism, the Curse of Greyface features prominently on several pages of the \"Principia Discordia\". According to \"Principia Discordia\", Greyface was a man who lived in the year 1166 BC and taught that life is serious and play is sin. The curse is the psychological and spiritual imbalance that results from these beliefs, both individually and within groups, nations, and civilizations.\nIn addition to the generic advice of cultivating the natural love of chaos and playing with her, the \"Principia Discordia\" provides \"The Turkey Curse Revealed by the Apostle Dr. Van Van Mojo\" to counteract the Curse of Greyface. The Turkey Curse is designed to counteract destructive order. It derives its name from the fact that the incantation resembles the sounds of a turkey.\nTheology.\nThree core principles.\nThe \"Principia Discordia\" holds three core principles: the Aneristic and Eristic principles representing order and disorder, and the notion that both are mere illusions.\nThe Pentabarf.\nThe Pentabarf are five rules of Discordianism, described by David G. Robertson as \"the Discordian take on the Ten Commandments\". As venerators of Eris, Discordian views vary from one person to the next as neither order or disorder, nor chaos are requisites of falling into the Discordian category. The fifth rule is representative of that.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nSri Syadasti.\nThe third \"apostle of Eris &amp; who they be's\" name, commonly called just Sri Syadasti, is Sanskrit, and means: All affirmations are true in some sense, false in some sense, meaningless in some sense, true and false in some sense, true and meaningless in some sense, false and meaningless in some sense, and true and false and meaningless in some sense.\nThe Sacred Chao.\nA unique symbol created in Discordianism, the Sacred Chao is said to have been devised by the Apostle Hung Mung in ancient China. It is a modified version of the Yin-Yang, a common symbol in Taoism. The Sacred Chao is not the Yin-Yang of the Taoists. On one side of the Sacred Chao is a pentagon and on the other depicts the golden Apple of Discord. The Sacred Chao symbolizes absolutely everything anyone would need to ever know about anything, and more. It even symbolizes everything not worth knowing, depicted by the internal empty space surrounding.\nDiscordians pronounce \"chao\" as \"cow\", thus making the terms \"Sacred Chao\", \"Holy Chao\", and \"Wholly Chao\", into puns and inside jokes.\nOperation Mindfuck.\nOperation Mindfuck is an important practice in the Discordian religion, in which \"all national calamities, assassinations, or conspiracies\" are publicly attributed to the Bavarian Illuminati, an 18th-century secret society, in an attempt to \"sow the culture with paranoia\". The concept was developed by Kerry Thornley and Robert Anton Wilson in 1968 and given its name by Wilson and Robert Shea in \"The Illuminatus! Trilogy\".\nOperation Mindfuck uses many of the recurring themes of Discordianism, including \"hidden knowledge, secret societies, chaos magic, ancient cults, mysterious rituals and conspiracy theories\". Stuart Rathbone described it as \"a deliberate campaign of revolutionary disinformation\" and notes that \"many of these topics have had a lasting impact on anarchism, the pseudo-sciences and even mainstream culture.\"\nWritings.\nDiscordian works include a number of books, including \"Principia Discordia\", drafted in 1963 and first published in 1965 (which includes portions of \"The Honest Book of Truth\"); and \"The Illuminatus! Trilogy\", which had its first volume published in 1975.\n\"Principia Discordia\" editions.\nThe first edition was printed using Jim Garrison's Xerox printer in 1963. The second edition was published under the title \"Principia Discordia or How The West Was Lost\" in a limited edition of five copies (and released into the public domain) in 1965.\nIn 1978, a copy of the work from Kerry Thornley, under the title \"The Principia Discordia or How the West Was Lost\", was placed in the HSCA JFK collections as document 010857. Adam Gorightly said he had been given Greg Hill's copy of the first edition. This appeared in its entirety in \"Historia Discordia\", a book on Discordian history released in spring of 2014.\nRelated works.\nThe Discordian movement encompasses a diverse array of works, both real and fictitious, that explore themes of chaos, satire, and alternative spirituality. These include \"Zen Without Zen Masters\" by Camden Benares, which presents koans and stories of a Discordian nature, and \"Zenarchy\" by Kerry Thornley, which proposes a non-combative approach to anarchy infused with Zen philosophy. \"Natural Law, or Don't Put a Rubber on Your Willy\" by Robert Anton Wilson delves into themes of personal freedom and self-awareness, expanding upon Wilson's essay originally published in 1985. In addition, there are compilations such as \"Apocrypha Discordia\" and \"Historia Discordia\", which gather diverse materials from the Discordian tradition, including writings by both original and contemporary Discordians.\nSeveral works also explore the lives of key figures within Discordianism, such as \"The Prankster and the Conspiracy\" by Adam Gorightly, which focuses on Kerry Thornley's interactions with countercultural figures like Lee Harvey Oswald. \"Chasing Eris\" by Brenton Clutterbuck provides an in-depth examination of Discordianism's impact on various aspects of culture and society, offering interviews and insights into the movement's global reach and influence.\nReligious studies.\nAcademic interest in Discordianism has grown over the years, with scholars examining its role in the broader context of new religious movements (NRMs) and its reflection of the social and cultural upheavals of the 20th century. The religion\u2019s ability to blur the lines between parody and serious belief has made it a unique subject of study in the field of religious studies and has contributed to ongoing discussions about the nature of religion in the modern world.\nThe first academic study of Discordianism was David Chidester's 2005 book \"Authentic Fakes\", who wrote that \"If it were possible to trace a genealogy of virtual religions on the Internet, it would probably begin with Discordianism.\" According to J. Christian Greer, this study was published just at the time Discordianism had transformed itself from a parody religion to a new religious movement.\nThe entry for Discordianism in Rabinovitch and Lewis's \"Encyclopedia of Modern Witchcraft and Neo-Paganism\" (2002) defines Discordianism as \"somewhere between parody, social commentary, and religion\". However, David G. Robertson writes that \"Although Hill and Thornley started Discordianism as a joke, then, they came in time to believe, if not entirely trust, in Eris.\" Robertson discusses Discordian theology in the 2012 book \"Handbook of New Religions and Cultural Production\", writing that despite Discordian claims that its \"catmas\" are soft, optional beliefs:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nevertheless, the \"Principia Discordia\" contains a complex and subtle religious system, although this is often obscured by its chaotic structure. The theology of the \"Principia\" is perhaps best summarized in the symbol\u00a0... The \"Sacred Chao\"\u00a0... Taken as a whole, however, the Sacred Chao symbolizes the Discordian idea that both order and chaos are man-made concepts, and that to believe that either is more \"true\" than the other is illusion. The Sacred Chao represents 'pure chaos', the metaphysical grounding of all that is, and a level beyond any distinction-making.\nRobertson writes in the 2016 book \"Fiction, Invention and Hyper-reality\" that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0Discordians have also constructed a complex and unique cosmology and theology, and Discordianism has over time come to be considered as having genuine religious significance for many of its adherents. Thus Discordianism can no longer be considered a purely parodic religion.\nInfluence.\nDiscordianism has exerted a notable influence on several facets of counterculture, particularly during the 1960s and 1970s. One of the religion's key contributions lies in its challenge to established norms through the use of humor, satire, and paradox. This approach mirrored the broader countercultural movements that sought to upend conventional thinking and embrace new forms of expression.\nDiscordianism\u2019s foundational text, the \"Principia Discordia\", became a cornerstone for other works that blend satire with serious philosophical inquiry. A prime example is Robert Anton Wilson and Robert Shea\u2019s \"The Illuminatus! Trilogy\" (1975), which played a significant role in spreading Discordian ideas. The trilogy\u2019s mix of conspiracy theory, satire, and occultism deeply resonated with the countercultural mindset and has been credited with influencing later works in both literature and popular culture.\nMoreover, Discordianism has impacted the development of NRMs by promoting a model of religious practice that is decentralized, playful, and often ironic. This model has informed other NRMs that prioritize personal spiritual experiences over rigid dogma. In particular, Discordianism's embrace of paradox and chaos has inspired movements that reject traditional religious hierarchies in favor of more fluid and adaptable structures.\nIn popular culture.\nThe Discordian phrase \"Hail Eris! All Hail Discordia!\" can be heard in the background on many rock albums.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8528", "revid": "20805561", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8528", "title": "Disjunction introduction", "text": "Inference introducing a disjunction in logical proofs\nDisjunction introduction or addition (also called or introduction) is a rule of inference of propositional logic and almost every other deduction system. The rule makes it possible to introduce disjunctions to logical proofs. It is the inference that if \"P\" is true, then \"P or Q\" must be true.\nAn example in English:\nSocrates is a man.\nTherefore, Socrates is a man or pigs are flying in formation over the English Channel.\nThe rule can be expressed as:\nformula_1\nwhere the rule is that whenever instances of \"formula_2\" appear on lines of a proof, \"formula_3\" can be placed on a subsequent line. \nMore generally it's also a simple valid argument form, this means that if the premise is true, then the conclusion is also true as any rule of inference should be, and an immediate inference, as it has a single proposition in its premises. \nDisjunction introduction is not a rule in some paraconsistent logics because in combination with other rules of logic, it leads to explosion (i.e. everything becomes provable) and paraconsistent logic tries to avoid explosion and to be able to reason with contradictions. One of the solutions is to introduce disjunction with over rules. See .\nFormal notation.\nThe \"disjunction introduction\" rule may be written in sequent notation:\n formula_4\nwhere formula_5 is a metalogical symbol meaning that formula_3 is a syntactic consequence of formula_2 in some logical system;\nand expressed as a truth-functional tautology or theorem of propositional logic:\nformula_8\nwhere formula_2 and formula_10 are propositions expressed in some formal system.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8529", "revid": "47680711", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8529", "title": "Disjunction elimination", "text": "Rule of inference of propositional logic\nIn propositional logic, disjunction elimination (sometimes named proof by cases, case analysis, or or elimination) is the valid argument form and rule of inference that allows one to eliminate a disjunctive statement from a logical proof. It is the inference that if a statement formula_1 implies a statement formula_2 and a statement formula_3 also implies formula_2, then if either formula_1 or formula_3 is true, then formula_2 has to be true. The reasoning is simple: since at least one of the statements P and R is true, and since either of them would be sufficient to entail Q, Q is certainly true.\nAn example in English:\n1. If I'm inside, I have my wallet on me.\n2. If I'm outside, I have my wallet on me.\n3. It is true that either I'm inside or I'm outside.\nTherefore, I have my wallet on me.\nIt is the rule can be stated as:\nformula_8\nwhere the rule is that whenever instances of \"formula_9\", and \"formula_10\" and \"formula_11\" appear on lines of a proof, \"formula_2\" can be placed on a subsequent line.\nFormal notation.\nThe \"disjunction elimination\" rule may be written in sequent notation:\n formula_13\nwhere formula_14 is a metalogical symbol meaning that formula_2 is a syntactic consequence of formula_9, and formula_10 and formula_11 in some logical system;\nand expressed as a truth-functional tautology or theorem of propositional logic:\nformula_19\nwhere formula_1, formula_2, and formula_3 are propositions expressed in some formal system.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8530", "revid": "44555953", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8530", "title": "Dead Sea", "text": "Salt lake in the Levant\nThe Dead Sea (; or ; ), also known by other names, is a landlocked salt lake bordered by Jordan to the east, the Israeli-occupied West Bank to the west and Israel to the southwest. It lies in the endorheic basin of the Jordan Rift Valley, and its main tributary is the Jordan River.\nAs of 2025, the lake's surface is below sea level, making its shores the lowest land-based elevation on Earth. It is deep, the deepest hypersaline lake in the world. With a salinity of 342 g/kg, or 34.2% (in 2011), it is one of the world's saltiest bodies of water, 9.6 times as salty as the ocean\u2014and has a density of 1.24\u00a0kg/litre, which makes swimming similar to floating. This salinity makes for a harsh environment in which plants and animals cannot flourish, hence its name. The Dead Sea's main, northern basin is long and wide at its widest point.\nThe Dead Sea has attracted visitors from around the Mediterranean basin for thousands of years. It was one of the world's first health resorts, and it has been the supplier of a wide variety of products, from asphalt for Egyptian mummification to potash for fertilisers. Today, tourists visit the sea on its Israeli, Jordanian and West Bank coastlines.\nThe Dead Sea is receding at a swift rate; its surface area today is , having been in 1930. Multiple canal and pipeline proposals, such as the scrapped Red Sea\u2013Dead Sea Water Conveyance project, have been made to reduce its recession.\nNames.\nThe English name \"Dead Sea\" is a calque of the Arabic name, itself a calque of earlier Greek and Latin names, in reference to the scarcity of aquatic life caused by the lake's extreme salinity.\nHistorical English names include the Salt Sea, Lake of Sodom from the biblical account of its destruction and Lake Asphaltites from Greek and Latin.\nThe name \"Dead Sea\" occasionally appears in Hebrew literature as (), 'Sea of Death'. However, the most common name for the lake in both biblical and modern Hebrew\u2014and also its oldest known name\u2014is the 'Sea of Salt' (). Other Hebrew names for the lake also mentioned in the Bible are the Sea of Arabah () and the Eastern Sea (). In the Talmud, it is called 'Sea of Salt' or 'Sea of Sodom'.\nThe Arabic name is (), or usually without the article . It is also known in Arabic as the 'Sea of Lot' (, or , , or ) from the nephew of Abraham whose wife was said to have turned into a pillar of salt during the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. Less often, it has been known in Arabic as the Sea of Zoara () from a formerly important city along its shores.\nBecause of the large volume of ancient trade in the lake's naturally occurring free-floating bitumen, its usual names in ancient Greek and Roman geography were some form of Asphalt Lake (; or ; ) or Asphalt Sea (, ).\nIt was also known as the 'Dead Sea' (; ). Another ancient name is the \"Jewish Sea,\" (), a term used by the second-century Roman historian Tacitus.\nGeography.\nThe Dead Sea is a salt lake bordered by Jordan to the east and Palestine's Israeli-occupied West Bank and Israel to the west. It is an endorheic lake, meaning there are no outlet streams.\nThe Dead Sea lies in the Jordan Rift Valley, a geographic feature formed by the Dead Sea Transform (DST). This left lateral-moving transform fault lies along the tectonic plate boundary between the African Plate and the Arabian Plate. It runs between the East Anatolian Fault zone in Turkey and the northern end of the Red Sea Rift offshore of the southern tip of Sinai.\nWater feeds into the Dead Sea from various sources, many small or intermittent, including:\nThe water of Wadi Hassa is now completely consumed in Jordan. The Jordan River, which passes through the Sea of Galilee, has been substantially diverted. It currently only contributes about one-sixth of the inflow to the Dead Sea, less than direct rainfall.\nThere are also small perennial springs under and around the Dead Sea, forming pools and quicksand pits along the edges.\nThe Wadi Mujib valley, 420 m below the sea level in the southern part of the Jordan valley, is a biosphere reserve, with an area of .\nRainfall is scarcely per year in the northern part of the Dead Sea and barely in the southern part. The Dead Sea zone's aridity is due to the rainshadow effect of the Judaean Mountains. The highlands east of the Dead Sea receive more rainfall than the Dead Sea itself.\nTo the west of the Dead Sea, the Judaean mountains rise less steeply and are much lower than the mountains to the east. Along the southwestern side of the lake is a tall halite mineral formation called Mount Sodom.\nGeology.\nFormation theories.\nThere are two contending hypotheses about the origin of the low elevation of the Dead Sea. The older hypothesis is that the Dead Sea lies in a true rift zone, an extension of the Red Sea Rift, or even of the Great Rift Valley of eastern Africa. A more recent hypothesis is that the Dead Sea basin is a consequence of a \"step-over\" discontinuity along the Dead Sea Transform, creating an extension of the crust with consequent subsidence.\nSedom Lagoon.\nDuring the late Pliocene-early Pleistocene, what is now the valley of the Jordan River, Dead Sea, and the northern Wadi Arabah was repeatedly inundated by waters from the Mediterranean Sea. The waters formed in a narrow, crooked bay that is called by geologists the Sedom Lagoon, which was connected to the sea through what is now the Jezreel Valley. The floods of the valley came and went depending on long-scale changes in the tectonic and climatic conditions.\nThe Sedom Lagoon extended at its maximum from the Sea of Galilee in the north to somewhere around south of the current southern end of the Dead Sea, and the subsequent lakes never surpassed this expanse. The Hula Depression was never part of any of these water bodies due to its higher elevation and the high threshold of the Korazim block separating it from the Sea of Galilee basin.\nSalt deposits.\nThe Sedom Lagoon deposited evaporites mainly consisting of rock salt, which eventually reached a thickness of on the old basin floor in the area of today's Mount Sedom.\nLake formation.\nAccording to Kafri, during the late Neogene, i.e. in the Pliocene (ended c. 2.5 million years ago), the eustatic sea level was at 50\u2013100 metres above the current sea level, thus flooding the northern valleys connecting the Mediterranean Sea with the Jordan Rift Valley, which led to the creation of a crooked-shaped lagoon. This high eustatic sea level situation subsequently came to an end, and the ocean could no longer flood the area. Thus, the long lagoon became a landlocked lake, which \u2013 due to the high evaporation rate \u2013 retreated toward the lower, southern part of the rift valley. However, Mordechai Stein considers the formation process as not yet clarified, speaking of a late Pliocene-early Pleistocene process in which tectonics might also have played a part in blocking water ingression from the Mediterranean to its former bay or lagoon.\nThe first prehistoric lake to follow the Sedom Lagoon is named Lake Amora (which possibly appeared in the early Pleistocene; its sediments developed into the Amora (Samra) Formation, dated to over 200\u201380 kyr BP), followed by Lake Lisan (c. 70\u201314 kyr) and finally by the Dead Sea.\nLake salinity.\nThe water levels and salinity of the successive lakes (Amora, Lisan, Dead Sea) have either risen or fallen as an effect of the tectonic dropping of the valley bottom, and due to climate variation. As the climate became more arid, Lake Lisan finally shrank and became saltier, leaving the Dead Sea as its last remainder.\nFrom 70,000 to 12,000 years ago, Lake Lisan's level was higher than its current level, possibly due to lower evaporation than in the present. Its level fluctuated dramatically, rising to its highest level around 26,000 years ago, indicating a very wet climate in the Near East. Around 10,000 years ago, the lake's level dropped dramatically, probably even lower than today. During the last several thousand years, the lake has fluctuated approximately , with some significant drops and rises. Current theories as to the cause of this dramatic drop in levels rule out volcanic activity; therefore, it may have been a seismic event.\nSalt mounts formation.\nIn prehistoric times, great amounts of sediment collected on the floor of Lake Amora. The sediment was heavier than the salt deposits and squeezed the salt deposits upwards into what are now the Lisan Peninsula and Mount Sodom (on the southwest side of the lake). Geologists explain the effect in terms of a bucket of mud into which a large flat stone is placed, forcing the mud to creep up the sides of the bucket. When the floor of the Dead Sea dropped further due to tectonic forces, the salt mounts of Lisan and Mount Sodom stayed in place as high cliffs (see salt dome).\nClimate.\nThe Dead Sea has a hot desert climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification BWh), with year-round sunny skies and dry air. It has less than mean annual rainfall and a summer average temperature between . Winter average temperatures range between . The region has weaker ultraviolet radiation, particularly the UVB (erythrogenic rays). Given the higher atmospheric pressure, the air has a slightly higher oxygen content (3.3% in summer to 4.8% in winter) as compared to oxygen concentration at sea level. Barometric pressures at the Dead Sea were measured between 1061 and 1065 hPa and clinically compared with health effects at higher altitude. (This barometric measure is about 5% higher than sea level standard atmospheric pressure of 1013.25 hPa, which is the global ocean mean or ATM.) The Dead Sea affects temperatures nearby because of the moderating effect a large body of water has on climate. During the winter, sea temperatures tend to be higher than land temperatures, and vice versa during the summer months. This is the result of the water's mass and specific heat capacity. On average, there are 192 days above annually.\nChemistry.\nWith 34.2% salinity (in 2011), it is one of the world's saltiest bodies of water, though Lake Vanda in Antarctica (35%), Lake Assal in Djibouti (34.8%), Lagoon Garabogazk\u00f6l in the Caspian Sea (up to 35%) and some hypersaline ponds and lakes of the McMurdo Dry Valleys in Antarctica (such as Don Juan Pond (44%)) have reported higher salinities.\nIn the 19th century and the early 20th century, the surface layers of the Dead Sea were less salty than today, which resulted in an average density in the range of 1.15\u20131.17 g/cm3 instead of the present value of around 1.25 g/cm3. A sample tested by Bernays in the 19th century had a salinity of 19%. By the year 1926, the salinity had increased (although it was also suspected that the salinity varies seasonally and depends on the distance from the mouth of the Jordan).\nUntil the winter of 1978\u201379, when a major mixing event took place, the Dead Sea was composed of two stratified layers of water that differed in temperature, density, age, and salinity. The topmost or so of the Dead Sea had an average salinity of about 30%, and a temperature that swung between . Underneath a zone of transition, the lowest level of the Dead Sea had waters of a consistent temperature, salinity of over 34%, and complete saturation of sodium chloride (NaCl). Since the water near the bottom is saturated with NaCl, that salt precipitates out of solution onto the sea floor.\nBeginning in the 1960s, water inflow to the Dead Sea from the Jordan River was reduced as a result of large-scale irrigation and generally low rainfall. By 1975, the upper water layer was saltier than the lower layer. Nevertheless, the upper layer remained suspended above the lower layer because its waters were warmer and thus less dense. When the upper layer cooled so its density was greater than the lower layer, the waters mixed (1978\u201379). For the first time in centuries, the lake was a homogeneous body of water. Since then, stratification has begun to redevelop.\nThe mineral content of the Dead Sea is very different from that of ocean water. The exact composition of the Dead Sea water varies mainly with season, depth and temperature. In the early 1980s, the concentration of ionic species (in g/kg) of Dead Sea surface water was Cl\u2212 (181.4), Br\u2212 (4.2), SO42\u2212 (0.4), HCO3\u2212 (0.2), Ca2+ (14.1), Na+ (32.5), K+ (6.2) and Mg2+ (35.2). The total salinity was 276 g/kg. These results show that the composition of the salt, as anhydrous chlorides on a weight percentage basis, was calcium chloride (CaCl2) 14.4%, potassium chloride (KCl) 4.4%, magnesium chloride (MgCl2) 50.8% and sodium chloride (NaCl) 30.4%. In comparison, the salt in the water of most oceans and seas is approximately 85% sodium chloride. The concentration of sulfate ions (SO42\u2212) is very low, and the concentration of bromide ions (Br\u2212) is the highest of all waters on Earth.\nThe salt concentration of the Dead Sea fluctuates around 31.5%. This is unusually high and results in a nominal density of 1.24\u00a0kg/L. Anyone can easily float in the Dead Sea because of natural buoyancy. In this respect the Dead Sea is similar to the Great Salt Lake in Utah in the United States.\nAn unusual feature of the Dead Sea is its discharge of asphalt. From deep seeps, the Dead Sea constantly spits up small pebbles and blocks of the black substance. Asphalt-coated figurines and bitumen-coated Neolithic skulls from archaeological sites have been found. Egyptian mummification processes used asphalt imported from the Dead Sea region.\nPutative therapies.\nThe Dead Sea area has become a location for health research and potential treatment for several reasons. The mineral content of the water, the low content of pollens and other allergens in the atmosphere, the reduced ultraviolet component of solar radiation, and the higher atmospheric pressure at this great depth each may have specific health effects. For example, persons experiencing reduced respiratory function from diseases such as cystic fibrosis seem to benefit from the increased atmospheric pressure.\nThe region's climate and low elevation have made it a popular center for assessment of putative therapies:\nThere is evidence that the unique attenuation and spectrum of UV rays near the Dead Sea contribute to effective photoclimatherapy for psoriasis, in part because the reduced exposure to solar radiation allows for longer periods of sunbathing.\nRhinosinusitis patients receiving Dead Sea saline nasal irrigation exhibited improved symptom relief compared to standard hypertonic saline spray in one study.\nDead Sea mud pack therapy has been suggested to temporarily relieve pain in patients with osteoarthritis of the knees. According to researchers of the Ben Gurion University of the Negev, treatment with mineral-rich mud compresses can be used to augment conventional medical therapy.\nLife forms.\nThe sea is called \"dead\" because its high salinity prevents macroscopic aquatic organisms, such as fish and aquatic plants, from living in it, though minuscule quantities of bacteria and microbial fungi are present.\nIn times of flood, the salt content of the Dead Sea can drop from its usual 35% to 30% or lower. It temporarily comes to life in the wake of rainy winters. In 1980, after one such rainy winter, the normally dark blue Dead Sea turned red. Researchers from Hebrew University of Jerusalem found it to be teeming with an alga called \"Dunaliella\". \"Dunaliella\" in turn nourished carotenoid-containing (red-pigmented) halobacteria, whose presence caused the color change. Since 1980, the basin has been dry and the algae and the bacteria have not returned in measurable numbers.\nIn 2011 a group of scientists from Be'er Sheva, Israel and Germany discovered fissures in the floor of the Dead Sea by scuba diving and observing the surface. These fissures allow fresh and brackish water to enter. They sampled biofilms surrounding the fissures and discovered numerous species of bacteria and archaea.\nHuman settlement.\nThere are several small communities near the Dead Sea. These include Ein Gedi, Neve Zohar and the Israeli settlements in the Megilot Regional Council: Kalya, Mitzpe Shalem and Avnat. There is a nature preserve at Ein Gedi, and several Dead Sea hotels are located on the southwest end at Ein Bokek near Neve Zohar. Highway 90 runs north\u2013south on the Israeli side for a total distance of from Metula on the Lebanese border in the north to its southern terminus at the Egyptian border near the Red Sea port of Eilat.\nPotash City is a small community on the Jordanian side of the Dead Sea, and others including Suweima. Highway 65 runs north\u2013south on the Jordanian side from near Jordan's northern tip down past the Dead Sea to the port of Aqaba.\nHuman history.\nBiblical period.\nDwelling in caves near the Dead Sea is recorded in the Hebrew Bible as having taken place before the Israelites came to Canaan, and extensively at the time of King David.\nJust northwest of the Dead Sea is Jericho. Somewhere, perhaps on the southeastern shore, would be the cities mentioned in the Book of Genesis which were said to have been destroyed in the time of Abraham: Sodom and Gomorrah (Genesis 18) and the three other \"Cities of the Plain\", Admah, Zeboim and Zoar (Deuteronomy 29:23). Zoar escaped destruction when Abraham's nephew Lot escaped to Zoar from Sodom (Genesis 19:21\u201322). Before the destruction, the Dead Sea was a valley full of natural tar pits, which was called the vale of Siddim. King David was said to have hidden from Saul at Ein Gedi nearby.\nIn Ezekiel 47:8\u20139 there is a specific prophecy that the sea will \"be healed and made fresh\", becoming a normal lake capable of supporting marine life. A similar prophecy is stated in Zechariah 14:8, which says that \"living waters will go out from Jerusalem, half of them to the eastern sea [likely the Dead Sea] and half to the western sea [the Mediterranean].\"\nDuring the First Temple period, the kingdom of Judah ruled the western shore of the Dead Sea, while Moab controlled the eastern shore. To the south were the Edomites. Judah established several fortresses along its side of the sea. Development in this area was likely driven by new economic opportunities arising from the Dead Sea's natural resources, including salt, bitumen, as well as cash crops. Both Ein Gedi and Jericho on Judah's side were vital centers for cultivating the highly prized Judean date palms during this time. Ein Gedi thrived as a major economic hub in the final century of Judah, before its destruction on the eve of the Babylonian captivity. \nHellenistic and Roman period.\nGreek and Jewish writers report that the Nabateans had monopolistic control over the Dead Sea.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nArchaeological evidence shows multiple anchorages existing on both sides of the sea, including in Ein Gedi, Khirbet Mazin (where the ruins of a Hasmonean-era dry dock are located), Numeira and near Masada. Josephus identified the Dead Sea in geographic proximity to the ancient Biblical city of Sodom. However, he referred to the lake by its Greek name, Asphaltites.\nHerod the Great, king of Judaea, built or rebuilt several fortresses and palaces along the western shore of the Dead Sea, with Masada being the most famous. Another historically important fortress was Machaerus (\u05de\u05db\u05d5\u05d5\u05e8), on the eastern bank, where, according to Josephus, John the Baptist was imprisoned by Herod Antipas and died.\nDuring the Hellenistic and Roman periods, some Essenes, an ascetic Jewish sect, settled along the western shore of the Dead Sea. Roman historian Pliny the Elder identifies their location with the words, \"on the west side of the Dead Sea, away from the coast... [above] the town of Engeda\" (\"Natural History\", Bk 5.73). Based on this, It is widely accepted, though still debated, that the Jewish community at Qumran was part of the Essene sect, and that the \"Dead Sea Scrolls\" discovered in nearby caves during the 20th century were their library.\nThe Dead Sea region was active during the First Jewish\u2013Roman War (66\u201373 CE). Early in the conflict, a group of Sicarii, a radical Jewish sect, seized control of the fortress of Masada and killed the Roman garrison stationed there. After their leader was killed in Jerusalem, the Sicarii fled to Masada and took refuge in the fortress. In 68 CE, Roman commander Vespasian, tasked with suppressing the Jewish revolt, arrived at the Dead Sea and tested its buoyancy by throwing bound, non-swimmer captives into the water. Archaeological evidence suggests that around this time, the Qumran community was destroyed. The Sicarii at Masada continued to resist the Romans after the destruction of the Second Temple in 70 CE, holding out until 73/74 CE, when a siege by the Roman Legio X Fretensis resulted in the deaths of 960 inhabitants by suicide, according to Josephus. The Roman camps surrounding Masada were constructed by Jewish slaves who received water from nearby towns, which were supplied with drinking water from the Ein Feshcha springs and other nearby sweetwater sources.\nThe town of Ein Gedi, mentioned many times in the Mishna, produced persimmon for the temple's fragrance and for export, using a secret recipe. \"Sodomite salt\" was an essential mineral for the temple's holy incense, but was said to be dangerous for home use and could cause blindness. \nByzantine period.\nThe sixth-century mosaic known as the Madaba Map indicates that trade across the Dead Sea was very prevalent during the Byzantine period. \nConnected with the Judean wilderness to its northwest and west, the Dead Sea was a place of escape and refuge. The remoteness of the region attracted Greek Orthodox monks since the Byzantine era. Their monasteries, such as Saint George in Wadi Kelt and Mar Saba in the Judaean Desert, are places of pilgrimage.\nThe Jewish village of Ein Gedi, which had been continuously inhabited since the 5th century BCE, was destroyed in the 7th century by a devastating fire.\nMedieval period.\nFrom the seventh century onwards, the Dead Sea area entered a period of decline and its population decreased. The cultivation of sugarcane near the northern and southern shores of the lake began to develop during the Crusader period and reached its peak under the Mamluks.\nModern times.\nIn the 19th century the River Jordan and the Dead Sea were explored by boat primarily by Christopher Costigan in 1835, Thomas Howard Molyneux in 1847, William Francis Lynch in 1848, and John MacGregor in 1869. The full text of W. F. Lynch's 1849 book \"\" is available online. Charles Leonard Irby and James Mangles travelled along the shores of the Dead Sea already in 1817\u201318, but didn't navigate on its waters.\nExplorers and scientists arrived in the area to analyze the minerals and research the unique climate.\nAfter the find of the \"Moabite Stone\" in 1868 on the plateau east of the Dead Sea, Moses Wilhelm Shapira and his partner Salim al-Khouri forged and sold a whole range of presumed \"Moabite\" antiquities, and in 1883 Shapira presented what is now known as the \"Shapira Strips\", a supposedly ancient scroll written on leather strips which he claimed had been found near the Dead Sea. The strips were declared to be forgeries and Shapira took his own life in disgrace.\nThe 1922 census of Palestine lists 100 people (68 Muslims and 32 Christians) with \"Dead Sea &amp; Jordan\" as their main locality. The 1931 census shows a sharp increase with 535 people (264 Muslims, 230 Jews, 21 Christians, 17 Druze, and three with no religion) listing \"Dead Sea\" as their main village/town. The 1938 nor 1945 village statistics does not give a number for the general Dead Sea area.\nIn the late 1940s and early 1950s, hundreds of Jewish religious documents dated between 150 BCE and 70 CE were found in caves near the ancient settlement of Qumran, about inland from the northwestern shore of the Dead Sea (presently in the West Bank). They became known and famous as the Dead Sea Scrolls.\nThe world's lowest roads, Highway 90, run along the Israeli and West Bank shores of the Dead Sea, along with Highway 65 on the Jordanian side, at below sea level.\nTourism and leisure.\nBritish Mandate period.\nA golf course named for Sodom and Gomorrah was built by the British at Kalia on the northern shore.\nIsrael.\nThe first major Israeli hotels were built in nearby Arad, and since the 1960s at the Ein Bokek resort complex.\nIsrael has 15 hotels along the Dead Sea shore, generating total revenues of $291 million in 2012. Most Israeli hotels and resorts on the Dead Sea are on a stretch of the southern shore.\nJordan.\nOn the Jordanian side, nine international franchises have opened seaside resort hotels near the King Hussein Bin Talal Convention Center, along with resort apartments, on the eastern shore of the Dead Sea. The 9 hotels have boosted the Jordanian side's capacity to 2,800 rooms.\nOn 22 November 2015, the Dead Sea panorama road was included along with 40 archaeological locations in Jordan, to become live on Google Street View.\nPalestine (West Bank).\nThe portion of Dead Sea coast which Palestinians could possibly eventually manage is about long. The World Bank estimates that such Dead Sea tourism industry could generate $290 million of revenues per year and 2,900 jobs. However, Palestinians have been unable to obtain construction permits for tourism-related investments on the Dead Sea. According to the World Bank, officials in the Palestinian Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities state that the only way to apply for such permits is through the Joint Committees established under the Oslo Agreement, but the relevant committee has not met with any degree of regularity since 2000.\nChemical industry.\nBritish Mandate period.\nIn the early part of the 20th century, the Dead Sea began to attract interest from chemists who deduced the sea was a natural deposit of potash (potassium chloride) and bromine. A concession was granted by the British Mandatory government to the newly formed Palestine Potash Company in 1929. Its founder, Siberian Jewish engineer and pioneer of Lake Baikal exploitation, Moses Novomeysky, had worked for the charter for over ten years having first visited the area in 1911. The first plant, on the north shore of the Dead Sea at Kalya, commenced production in 1931 and produced potash by solar evaporation of the brine. Employing Arabs and Jews, it was an island of peace in turbulent times. In 1934 a second plant was built on the southwest shore, in the Mount Sodom area, south of the 'Lashon' region of the Dead Sea. Palestine Potash Company supplied half of Britain's potash during World War II. Both plants were destroyed by the Jordanians in the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War.\nIsrael.\nThe Dead Sea Works was founded in 1952 as a state-owned enterprise based on the remnants of the Palestine Potash Company. In 1995, the company was privatized and it is now owned by Israel Chemicals. From the Dead Sea brine, Israel produces (2001) 1.77 million tons potash, 206,000 tons elemental bromine, 44,900 tons caustic soda, 25,000 tons magnesium metal, and sodium chloride. Israeli companies generate around US$3 billion annually from the sale of Dead Sea minerals (primarily potash and bromine), and from other products that are derived from Dead Sea Minerals.\nJordan.\nOn the Jordanian side of the Dead Sea, Arab Potash (APC), formed in 1956, produces 2.0 million tons of potash annually, as well as sodium chloride and bromine. The plant is located at Safi, South Aghwar Department, in the Karak Governorate.\nJordanian Dead Sea mineral industries generate about $1.2 billion in sales (equivalent to 4 percent of Jordan's GDP).\nWest Bank.\nThe Palestinian Dead Sea Coast is about long. The Palestinian economy is unable to benefit from Dead Sea chemicals due to restricted access, permit issues and the uncertainties of the investment climate. The World Bank estimates that a Palestinian Dead Sea chemicals industry could generate $918M incremental value added per year, \"almost equivalent to the contribution of the entire manufacturing sector of Palestinian territories today\".\nExtraction.\nBoth companies, Dead Sea Works Ltd. and Arab Potash, use extensive salt evaporation pans that have essentially diked the entire southern end of the Dead Sea for the purpose of producing carnallite, potassium magnesium chloride, which is then processed further to produce potassium chloride. The ponds are separated by a central dike that runs roughly north\u2013south along the international border. The power plant on the Israeli side allows production of magnesium metal (by a subsidiary, Dead Sea Magnesium Ltd.).\nDue to the popularity of the sea's therapeutic and healing properties, several companies have also shown interest in the manufacturing and supplying of Dead Sea salts as raw materials for body and skin care products.\nRecession and environmental concerns.\nReceding shoreline.\nSince 1930, when its surface was and its level was below sea level, the Dead Sea has been monitored continuously. The Dead Sea has been rapidly shrinking since the 1960s because of diversion of incoming water from the Jordan River to the north as part of the National Water Carrier scheme, completed in 1964. The southern end is fed by a canal maintained by the Dead Sea Works, a company that converts the sea's raw materials. From a water surface of below sea level in 1970 it fell below sea level in 2006, reaching a drop rate of per year. By 2025 it reached a height of below sea level, a drop of more than per year. As the water level decreases, the characteristics of the Sea and surrounding region may substantially change.\nAs of 2021[ [update]], the surface of the Sea has shrunk by about 33 percent since the 1960s, which is partly attributed to the much-reduced flow of the Jordan River since the construction of the National Water Carrier project, and the amount of water from the rains reaching the Dead Sea has diminished even further since flash floods started pouring into the sinkholes left by its shrinkage. The EcoPeace Middle East, a joint Israeli-Palestinian-Jordanian environmental group, has estimated that the annual flow into the Dead Sea from the Jordan is as of 2021[ [update]] less than of water, compared with former flows of between and .\nSources: Israel Oceanographic and Limnological Research, \"Haaretz\", Jordan Valley Authority.\nSinkholes and their impact.\nThe Dead Sea level drop has been followed by a groundwater level drop, causing brines that used to occupy underground layers near the shoreline to be flushed out by freshwater. This is believed to be the cause of the recent appearance of large sinkholes along the western shore\u2014incoming freshwater dissolves salt layers, rapidly creating subsurface cavities that subsequently collapse to form these sinkholes. As of 2021[ [update]] Ein Gedi, on the western coast, has been subject to a large number of sinkholes appearing in the area, attributed to the decline in the water level of the Dead Sea.\nAs a result of the sinkholes, most beach resorts along the west shore of the northern basin had to be shut down, with just three remaining near the basin's northwest tip (see List of beaches in Palestine: Dead Sea).\nLink to the Red Sea.\nIn May 2009 at the World Economic Forum, Jordan introduced plans for a \"Jordan National Red Sea Development Project\" (JRSP). This is a plan to convey seawater from the Red Sea near Aqaba to the Dead Sea. Water would be desalinated along the route to provide fresh water to Jordan, with the brine discharge sent to the Dead Sea for replenishment. Israel has expressed its support and will likely benefit from some of the water delivery to its Negev region.\nAt a regional conference in July 2009, officials expressed concern about the declining water levels. Some suggested industrial activities around the Dead Sea might need to be reduced. Others advised environmental measures to restore conditions such as increasing the volume of flow from the Jordan River to replenish the Dead Sea. Currently, only sewage and effluent from fish ponds run in the river's channel. Experts also stressed the need for strict conservation efforts. They said agriculture should not be expanded, sustainable support capabilities should be incorporated into the area and pollution sources should be reduced.\nIn October 2009, the Jordanians accelerated plans to extract around of water per year from the Red Sea, desalinate it for use as fresh water and send the waste water to the Dead Sea by tunnel, despite concerns about inadequate time to assess the potential environmental impact. According to Jordan's minister for water, General Maysoun Zu'bi, this project could be considered as the first phase of the Red Sea\u2013Dead Sea Water Conveyance.\nIn December 2013, Israel, Jordan and the Palestinian Authority signed an agreement for laying a water pipeline to link the Red Sea with the Dead Sea. The pipeline would be long and is estimated to take up to five years to complete. In January 2015 it was reported that the level of water was dropping by a year.\nOn 27 November 2016, the Jordanian government shortlisted five consortia to implement the project. Jordan's ministry of Water and Irrigation said that the $100 million first phase of the project would begin construction in the first quarter of 2018, and would be completed by 2021. The project was officially abandoned in June 2021, having never broken ground.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8531", "revid": "42411993", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8531", "title": "Dragon", "text": "Legendary large magical creature\nA dragon is a magical legendary creature that appears in the folklore of multiple cultures worldwide. Beliefs about dragons vary considerably through regions, but dragons in Western cultures since the High Middle Ages have often been depicted as winged, horned, and capable of breathing fire. Dragons in Eastern cultures are usually depicted as wingless, four-legged, serpentine creatures with above-average intelligence. Commonalities between dragons' traits are often a hybridization of reptilian, mammalian, and avian features.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nThe word \"dragon\" entered the English language in the early 13th century from Old French , which, in turn, comes from Latin (genitive ), meaning \"huge serpent, dragon\", from , (genitive , ) \"serpent\". The Greek and Latin term referred to any great serpent, not necessarily mythological. The Greek word is most likely derived from the Greek verb () meaning \"I see\", the aorist form of which is (). This is thought to have referred to something with a \"deadly glance\", or unusually bright or \"sharp\" eyes, or because a snake's eyes appear to be always open; each eye actually sees through a big transparent scale in its eyelids, which are permanently shut. The Greek word probably derives from an Indo-European base meaning \"to see\"; the Sanskrit root () also means \"to see\".\nOverview.\nDraconic creatures appear in virtually all cultures around the globe, and the earliest attested reports of draconic creatures resemble giant snakes. Draconic creatures are first described in the mythologies of the ancient Near East and appear in ancient Mesopotamian art and literature. Stories about storm gods slaying giant serpents occur throughout nearly all Near Eastern and Indo-European mythologies. Famous prototypical draconic creatures include the \"mu\u0161\u1e2bu\u0161\u0161u\" of ancient Mesopotamia; Apep in Egyptian mythology; V\u1e5btra in the \"Rigveda\"; the Leviathan in the Hebrew Bible; Grand'Goule in the Poitou region in France; Python, Ladon, wyvern and the Lernaean Hydra in Greek mythology; Kulshedra in Albanian mythology; Unhcegila in Lakota mythology; Quetzalcoatl in Aztec culture; J\u00f6rmungandr, N\u00ed\u00f0h\u00f6ggr, and Fafnir in Norse mythology; the dragon from \"Beowulf\"; and a\u017ei and az in ancient Persian mythology, closely related to another mythological figure, called A\u017ei Dahaka or Zahhak. Nonetheless, scholars dispute where the idea of a dragon originates from, and a wide variety of hypotheses have been proposed.\nIn his book \"An Instinct for Dragons\" (2000), anthropologist David E. Jones suggests a hypothesis that humans, like monkeys, have inherited instinctive reactions to snakes, large cats, and birds of prey. He cites a study which found that approximately 39 people in a hundred are afraid of snakes and notes that fear of snakes is especially prominent in children, even in areas where snakes are rare. The earliest attested dragons all resemble snakes or have snakelike attributes. Jones therefore concludes that dragons appear in nearly all cultures because humans have an innate fear of snakes and other animals that were major predators of humans' primate ancestors. Dragons are usually said to reside in \"dark caves, deep pools, wild mountain reaches, sea bottoms, haunted forests\", all places which would have been fraught with danger for early human ancestors.\nIn her book \"The First Fossil Hunters: Dinosaurs, Mammoths, and Myth in Greek and Roman Times\" (2000), Adrienne Mayor argues that some stories of dragons may have been inspired by ancient discoveries of fossils belonging to dinosaurs and other prehistoric animals. She argues that the dragon lore of northern India may have been inspired by \"observations of oversized, extraordinary bones in the fossilbeds of the Siwalik Hills below the Himalayas\" and that ancient Greek artistic depictions of the Monster of Troy may have been influenced by fossils of \"Samotherium\", an extinct species of giraffe whose fossils are common in the Mediterranean region. In China, a region where fossils of large prehistoric animals are common, these remains are frequently identified as \"dragon bones\" and are commonly used in traditional Chinese medicine. Mayor, however, is careful to point out that not all stories of dragons and giants are inspired by fossils and notes that Scandinavia has many stories of dragons and sea monsters, but has long \"been considered barren of large fossils.\" In one of her later books, she states that, \"Many dragon images around the world were based on folk knowledge or exaggerations of living reptiles, such as Komodo dragons, Gila monsters, iguanas, alligators, or, in California, alligator lizards, though this still fails to account for the Scandinavian legends, as no such animals (historical or otherwise) have ever been found in this region.\"\nRobert Blust in \"The Origin of Dragons\" (2000) argues that, like many other creations of traditional cultures, dragons are largely explicable as products of a convergence of rational pre-scientific speculation about the world of real events. In this case, the event is the natural mechanism governing rainfall and drought, with particular attention paid to the phenomenon of the rainbow.\nEgypt.\nIn Egyptian mythology, Apep or Apophis is a giant serpentine creature who resides in the Duat, the Egyptian underworld. The Bremner-Rhind papyrus, written around 310 BC, preserves an account of a much older Egyptian tradition that the setting of the sun is caused by Ra descending to the Duat to battle Apep. In some accounts, Apep is as long as the height of eight men with a head made of flint. Thunderstorms and earthquakes were thought to be caused by Apep's roar and solar eclipses were thought to be the result of Apep attacking Ra during the daytime. In some myths, Apep is slain by the god Set. Nehebkau is another giant serpent who guards the Duat and aided Ra in his battle against Apep. Nehebkau was so massive in some stories that the entire earth was believed to rest atop his coils. Denwen is a giant serpent mentioned in the Pyramid Texts whose body was made of fire and who ignited a conflagration that nearly destroyed all the gods of the Egyptian pantheon. He was ultimately defeated by the Pharaoh, a victory which affirmed the Pharaoh's divine right to rule.\nThe ouroboros was a well-known Egyptian symbol of a serpent swallowing its own tail. The precursor to the ouroboros was the \"Many-Faced\", a serpent with five heads, who, according to the Amduat, the oldest surviving Book of the Afterlife, was said to coil around the corpse of the sun god Ra protectively. The earliest surviving depiction of a \"true\" ouroboros comes from the gilded shrines in the tomb of Tutankhamun. In the early centuries AD, the ouroboros was adopted as a symbol by Gnostic Christians and chapter 136 of the \"Pistis Sophia\", an early Gnostic text, describes \"a great dragon whose tail is in its mouth\". In medieval alchemy, the ouroboros became a typical western dragon with wings, legs, and a tail. A famous image of the dragon gnawing on its tail from the eleventh-century Codex Marcianus was copied in numerous works on alchemy.\nWest Asia.\nMesopotamia.\nAncient people across the Near East believed in creatures similar to what modern people call \"dragons\". These ancient people were unaware of the existence of dinosaurs or similar creatures in the distant past. References to dragons of both benevolent and malevolent characters occur throughout ancient Mesopotamian literature. In Sumerian poetry, great kings are often compared to the \"u\u0161umgal\", a gigantic, serpentine monster. A draconic creature with the foreparts of a lion and the hind-legs, tail, and wings of a bird appears in Mesopotamian artwork from the Akkadian Period (c.\u20092334 \u2013 2154 BC) until the Neo-Babylonian Period (626 BC\u2013539 BC). The dragon is usually shown with its mouth open. It may have been known as the \"(\u016bmu) n\u0101'iru\", which means \"roaring weather beast\", and may have been associated with the god Ishkur (Hadad). A slightly different lion-dragon with two horns and the tail of a scorpion appears in art from the Neo-Assyrian Period (911 BC\u2013609 BC). A relief probably commissioned by Sennacherib shows the gods Ashur, Sin, and Adad standing on its back.\nAnother draconic creature with horns, the body and neck of a snake, the forelegs of a lion, and the hind-legs of a bird appears in Mesopotamian art from the Akkadian Period until the Hellenistic Period (323 BC\u201331 BC). This creature, known in Akkadian as the \"mu\u0161\u1e2bu\u0161\u0161u\", meaning \"furious serpent\", was used as a symbol for particular deities and also as a general protective emblem. It seems to have originally been the attendant of the Underworld god Ninazu, but later became the attendant to the Hurrian storm-god Tishpak, as well as, later, Ninazu's son Ningishzida, the Babylonian national god Marduk, the scribal god Nabu, and the Assyrian national god Ashur.\nScholars disagree regarding the appearance of Tiamat, the Babylonian goddess personifying primeval chaos, slain by Marduk in the Babylonian creation epic \"En\u00fbma Eli\u0161\". She was traditionally regarded by scholars as having had the form of a giant serpent, but several scholars have pointed out that this shape \"cannot be imputed to Tiamat with certainty\" and she seems to have at least sometimes been regarded as anthropomorphic. Nonetheless, in some texts, she seems to be described with horns, a tail, and a hide that no weapon can penetrate, all features which suggest she was conceived as some form of dragoness.\nLevant.\nIn the mythologies of the Ugarit region, specifically the Baal Cycle from the Ugaritic texts, the sea-dragon L\u014dtanu is described as \"the twisting serpent / the powerful one with seven heads.\" In \"KTU\" 1.5 I 2\u20133, L\u014dtanu is slain by the storm-god Baal, but, in \"KTU\" 1.3 III 41\u201342, he is instead slain by the virgin warrior goddess Anat.\nIn the Hebrew Bible, in the Book of Psalms, Psalm 74, Psalm 74:13\u201314, the sea-dragon Leviathan, is slain by Yahweh, god of the kingdoms of Israel and Judah, as part of the creation of the world. Isaiah describes Leviathan as a (), which is translated as \"sea monster\", \"serpent\", or \"dragon\". In Isaiah 27:1, Yahweh's destruction of Leviathan is foretold as part of his impending overhaul of the universal order:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOriginal Hebrew text\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:English\nJob 41:1\u201334 contains a detailed description of Leviathan, who is described as being so powerful that only Yahweh can overcome it. Job 41:19\u201321 states that Leviathan exhales fire and smoke, making its identification as a mythical dragon clearly apparent. In some parts of the Old Testament, Leviathan is historicized as a symbol for the nations that stand against Yahweh. Rahab, a synonym for \"Leviathan\", is used in several Biblical passages in reference to Egypt. Isaiah 30:7 declares: \"For Egypt's help is worthless and empty, therefore I have called her 'the silenced Rahab'.\" Similarly, Psalm 87:3 reads: \"I reckon Rahab and Babylon as those that know me...\" In Ezekiel 29:3\u20135 and Ezekiel 32:2\u20138, the pharaoh of Egypt is described as a \"dragon\" (\"tann\u00een\"). In the deuterocanonical story of Bel and the Dragon from the Book of Daniel, the prophet Daniel sees a dragon being worshipped by the Babylonians. Daniel makes \"cakes of pitch, fat, and hair\"; the dragon eats them and bursts open.\nIran.\nAzhi Dahaka (Avestan Great Snake) is a dragon or demonic figure in the texts and mythology of Zoroastrian Persia, where he is one of the subordinates of Angra Mainyu. Alternate names include Azi Dahak, Dahaka, and Dahak. A\u017ei (nominative a\u017ei\u0161) is the Avestan word for \"serpent\" or \"dragon. The Avestan term A\u017ei Dah\u0101ka and the Middle Persian azdah\u0101g are the sources of the Middle Persian Manichaean demon of greed \"Az\", Old Armenian mythological figure Azhdahak, Modern Persian 'a\u017edeh\u00e2/a\u017edah\u00e2', Tajik Persian 'azhdah\u00e2', Urdu 'azhdah\u0101' (\u0627\u0698\u062f\u0647\u0627).\nThe name also migrated to Eastern Europe, assumed the form \"azhdaja\" and the meaning \"dragon\", \"dragoness\" or \"water snake\" in the Balkanic and Slavic languages.\nDespite the negative aspect of A\u017ei Dah\u0101ka in mythology, dragons have been used on some banners of war throughout the history of Iranian peoples.\nThe Azhdarchid group of pterosaurs are named from a Persian word for \"dragon\" that ultimately comes from A\u017ei Dah\u0101ka.\nIn Persian Sufi literature, Rumi writes in his \"Masnavi\" that the dragon symbolizes the sensual soul (\"nafs\"), greed and lust, that need to be mortified in a spiritual battle.\nIn Ferdowsi's \"Shahnameh,\" the Iranian hero Rostam must slay an 80-meter-long dragon (which renders itself invisible to human sight) with the aid of his legendary horse, Rakhsh. As Rostam is sleeping, the dragon approaches; Rakhsh attempts to wake Rostam, but fails to alert him to the danger until Rostam sees the dragon. Rakhsh bites the dragon, while Rostam decapitates it. This is the third trial of Rostam's Seven Labors.\nRostam is also credited with the slaughter of other dragons in the \"Shahnameh\" and in other Iranian oral traditions, notably in the myth of \"Babr-e-Bayan\". In this tale, Rostam is still an adolescent and kills a dragon in the \"Orient\" (either India or China, depending on the source) by forcing it to swallow either ox hides filled with quicklime and stones or poisoned blades. The dragon swallows these foreign objects and its stomach bursts, after which Rostam flays the dragon and fashions a coat from its hide called the \"babr-e bay\u0101n\". In some variants of the story, Rostam then remains unconscious for two days and nights, but is guarded by his steed Rakhsh. On reviving, he washes himself in a spring. In the Mandean tradition of the story, Rostam hides in a box, is swallowed by the dragon, and kills it from inside its belly. The king of China then gives Rostam his daughter in marriage as a reward.\nEast Asia.\nChina.\nThe word \"dragon\" has come to be applied to the legendary creature in Chinese mythology, \"loong\" (traditional \u9f8d, simplified \u9f99, Japanese simplified \u7adc, Pinyin \"l\u00f3ng\"), which is associated with good fortune, and many East Asian deities and demigods have dragons as their personal mounts or companions. Dragons were also identified with the Emperor of China, who, during later Chinese imperial history, was the only one permitted to have dragons on his house, clothing, or personal articles.\nArchaeologist Zh\u014du Chong-Fa believes that the Chinese word for dragon is an onomatopoeia of the sound of thunder or \"l\u00f9hng\" in Cantonese.\nThe Chinese dragon () is the highest-ranking creature in the Chinese animal hierarchy. Its origins are vague, but its \"ancestors can be found on Neolithic pottery as well as Bronze Age ritual vessels.\" A number of popular stories deal with the rearing of dragons. The \"Zuo zhuan\", which was probably written during the Warring States period, describes a man named Dongfu, a descendant of Yangshu'an, who loved dragons and, because he could understand a dragon's will, he was able to tame them and raise them well. He served Emperor Shun, who gave him the family name Huanlong, meaning \"dragon-raiser\". In another story, Kong Jia, the fourteenth emperor of the Xia dynasty, was given a male and a female dragon as a reward for his obedience to the god of heaven, but could not train them, so he hired a dragon-trainer named Liulei, who had learned how to train dragons from Huanlong. One day, the female dragon died unexpectedly, so Liulei secretly chopped her up, cooked her meat, and served it to the king, who loved it so much that he demanded Liulei to serve him the same meal again. Since Liulei had no means of procuring more dragon meat, he fled the palace.\nOne of the most famous dragon stories is about the Lord Ye Gao, who loved dragons obsessively, even though he had never seen one. He decorated his whole house with dragon motifs and, seeing this display of admiration, a real dragon came and visited Ye Gao, but the lord was so terrified at the sight of the creature that he ran away. In Chinese legend, the culture hero Fu Hsi is said to have been crossing the Lo River, when he saw the \"lung ma\", a Chinese horse-dragon with seven dots on its face, six on its back, eight on its left flank, and nine on its right flank. He was so moved by this apparition that, when he arrived home, he drew a picture of it, including the dots. He later used these dots as letters and invented Chinese writing, which he used to write his book \"I Ching\". In another Chinese legend, the physician Ma Shih Huang is said to have healed a sick dragon. Another legend reports that a man once came to the healer Lo Ch\u00ean-jen, telling him that he was a dragon and that he needed to be healed. After Lo Ch\u00ean-jen healed the man, a dragon appeared to him and carried him to heaven.\nIn the \"Shanhaijing\", a classic mythography probably compiled mostly during the Han dynasty, various deities and demigods are associated with dragons. One of the most famous Chinese dragons is Ying Long (\"responding dragon\"), who helped the Huangdi, the Yellow Emperor, defeat the tyrant Chiyou. The dragon Zhulong (\"torch dragon\") is a god \"who composed the universe with his body.\" In the \"Shanhaijing\", many mythic heroes are said to have been conceived after their mothers copulated with divine dragons, including Huangdi, Shennong, Emperor Yao, and Emperor Shun. The god Zhurong and the emperor Qi are both described as being carried by two dragons, as are Huangdi, Zhuanxu, Yuqiang, and Roshou in various other texts. According to the \"Huainanzi\", an evil black dragon once caused a destructive deluge, which was ended by the mother goddess N\u00fcwa by slaying the dragon.\nA large number of ethnic myths about dragons are told throughout China. The \"Houhanshu\", compiled in the fifth century BC by Fan Ye, reports a story belonging to the Ailaoyi people, which holds that a woman named Shayi who lived in the region around Mount Lao became pregnant with ten sons after being touched by a tree trunk floating in the water while fishing. She gave birth to the sons and the tree trunk turned into a dragon, who asked to see his sons. The woman showed them to him, but all of them ran away except for the youngest, who the dragon licked on the back and named Jiu Long, meaning \"sitting back\". The sons later elected him king and the descendants of the ten sons became the Ailaoyi people, who tattooed dragons on their backs in honor of their ancestor. The Miao people of southwest China have a story that a divine dragon created the first humans by breathing on monkeys that came to play in his cave. The Han people have many stories about Short-Tailed Old Li, a black dragon who was born to a poor family in Shandong. When his mother saw him for the first time, she fainted and, when his father came home from the field and saw him, he hit him with a spade and cut off part of his tail. Li burst through the ceiling and flew away to the Black Dragon River in northeast China, where he became the god of that river. On the anniversary of his mother's death on the Chinese lunar calendar, Old Li returns home, causing it to rain. He is still worshipped as a rain god.\nIn China, a dragon is thought to have power over rain. Dragons and their associations with rain are the source of the Chinese customs of dragon dancing and dragon boat racing. Dragons are closely associated with rain and drought is thought to be caused by a dragon's laziness. Prayers invoking dragons to bring rain are common in Chinese texts. The \"Luxuriant Dew of the Spring and Autumn Annals\", attributed to the Han dynasty scholar Dong Zhongshu, prescribes making clay figurines of dragons during a time of drought and having young men and boys pace and dance among the figurines in order to encourage the dragons to bring rain. Texts from the Qing dynasty advise hurling the bone of a tiger or dirty objects into the pool where the dragon lives; since dragons cannot stand tigers or dirt, the dragon of the pool will cause heavy rain to drive the object out. Rainmaking rituals invoking dragons are still very common in many Chinese villages, where each village has its own god said to bring rain and many of these gods are dragons. The Chinese dragon kings are thought of as the inspiration for the Hindu myth of the naga. According to these stories, every body of water is ruled by a dragon king, each with a different power, rank, and ability, so people began establishing temples across the countryside dedicated to these figures.\nMany traditional Chinese customs revolve around dragons. During various holidays, including the Spring Festival and Lantern Festival, villagers will construct an approximately sixteen-foot-long dragon from grass, cloth, bamboo strips, and paper, which they will parade through the city as part of a dragon dance. The original purpose of this ritual was to bring good weather and a strong harvest, but now it is done mostly only for entertainment. During the Duanwu festival, several villages, or even a whole province, will hold a dragon boat race, in which people race across a body of water in boats carved to look like dragons, while a large audience watches on the banks. The custom is traditionally said to have originated after the poet Qu Yuan committed suicide by drowning himself in the Miluo River and people raced out in boats hoping to save him. But most historians agree that the custom actually originated much earlier as a ritual to avert ill fortune. Starting during the Han dynasty and continuing until the Qing dynasty, the Chinese emperor gradually became closely identified with dragons, and emperors themselves claimed to be the incarnations of a divine dragon. Eventually, dragons were only allowed to appear on clothing, houses, and articles of everyday use belonging to the emperor and any commoner who possessed everyday items bearing the image of the dragon was ordered to be executed. After the last Chinese emperor was overthrown in 1911, this situation changed and now many ordinary Chinese people identify themselves as descendants of dragons.\nThe impression of dragons in a large number of Asian countries has been influenced by Chinese culture, such as Korea, Vietnam, Japan, and so on. Chinese tradition has always used the dragon totem as the national emblem, and the \"Yellow Dragon flag\" of the Qing dynasty has influenced the impression that China is a dragon in many European countries.\nKorea.\nThe Korean dragon is in many ways similar in appearance to other East Asian dragons such as the Chinese and Japanese dragons. It differs from the Chinese dragon in that it developed a longer beard. Very occasionally, a dragon may be depicted as carrying an orb known as the Yeouiju (), the Korean name for the mythical Cintamani, in its claws or its mouth. It was said that whoever could wield the Yeouiju was blessed with the abilities of omnipotence and creation at will, and that only four-toed dragons (who had thumbs with which to hold the orbs) were both wise and powerful enough to wield these orbs, as opposed to the lesser, three-toed dragons. As with China, the number nine is significant and auspicious in Korea, and dragons were said to have 81 (9\u00d79) scales on their backs, representing yang essence. Dragons in Korean mythology are primarily benevolent beings related to water and agriculture, often considered bringers of rain and clouds. Hence, many Korean dragons are said to have resided in rivers, lakes, oceans, or even deep mountain ponds. And human journeys to undersea realms, and especially the undersea palace of the Dragon King (), are common in Korean folklore.\nIn Korean myths, some kings who founded kingdoms were described as descendants of dragons because the dragon was a symbol of the monarch. Lady Aryeong, who was the first queen of Silla, is said to have been born from a cockatrice, while the grandmother of Taejo of Goryeo, founder of Goryeo, was reportedly the daughter of the dragon king of the West Sea. And King Munmu of Silla who, on his deathbed, wished to become a dragon of the East Sea in order to protect the kingdom. Dragon patterns were used exclusively by the royal family. The royal robe was also called the dragon robe (). In the Joseon period, the royal insignia, featuring embroidered dragons, were attached to the robe's shoulders, the chest, and back. The King wore five-taloned dragon insignia while the Crown Prince wore four-taloned dragon insignia.\nKorean folk mythology states that most dragons were originally imugis (), or lesser dragons, which were said to resemble gigantic serpents. There are a few different versions of Korean folklore that describe both what imugis are and how they aspire to become full-fledged dragons. Koreans thought that an Imugi could become a true dragon, \"yong\" or \"mireu\", if it caught a Yeouiju which had fallen from heaven. Another explanation states they are hornless creatures resembling dragons who have been cursed and thus were unable to become dragons. By other accounts, an Imugi is a \"proto-dragon\" which must survive one thousand years in order to become a fully-fledged dragon. In either case, they are said to be large, benevolent, python-like creatures that live in water or caves, and their sighting is associated with good luck.\nJapan.\nJapanese dragon myths amalgamate native legends with imported stories about dragons from China. Like some other dragons, most Japanese dragons are water deities associated with rainfall and bodies of water, and are typically depicted as large, wingless, serpentine creatures with clawed feet. Gould writes (1896:248), the Japanese dragon is \"invariably figured as possessing three claws\". A story about the \"samurai\" Minamoto no Mitsunaka tells that, while he was hunting in his own territory of Settsu, he dreamt under a tree and had a dream in which a beautiful woman appeared to him and begged him to save her land from a giant serpent which was defiling it. Mitsunaka agreed to help and the maiden gave him a magnificent horse. When he woke up, the seahorse was standing before him. He rode it to the Sumiyoshi temple, where he prayed for eight days. Then he confronted the serpent and slew it with an arrow.\nIt was believed that dragons could be appeased or exorcised with metal. Nitta Yoshisada is said to have hurled a famous sword into the sea at Sagami to appease the dragon-god of the sea and Ki no Tsurayuki threw a metal mirror into the sea at Sumiyoshi for the same purpose. Japanese Buddhism has also adapted dragons by subjecting them to Buddhist law; the Japanese Buddhist deities Benten and Kwannon are often shown sitting or standing on the back of a dragon. Several Japanese \"sennin\" (\"immortals\") have taken dragons as their mounts. B\u00f4m\u00f4 is said to have hurled his staff into a puddle of water, causing a dragon to come forth and let him ride it to heaven. The \"rakan\" Handaka is said to have been able to conjure a dragon out of a bowl, which he is often shown playing with on \"kagamibuta\". The \"shachihoko\" is a creature with the head of a dragon, a bushy tail, fishlike scales, and sometimes with fire emerging from its armpits. The \"fun\" has the head of a dragon, feathered wings, and the tail and claws of a bird. A white dragon was believed to reside in a pool in Yamashiro Province and, every fifty years, it would turn into a bird called the Ogonch\u00f4, which had a call like the \"howling of a wild dog\". This event was believed to herald terrible famine. In the Japanese village of Okumura, near Edo, during times of drought, the villagers would make a dragon effigy out of straw, magnolia leaves, and bamboo and parade it through the village to attract rainfall.\nVietnam.\nThe Vietnamese dragon () was a mythical creature that was often used as a deity symbol and was associated with royalty. Similar to other cultures, dragons in Vietnamese culture represent yang and godly beings associated with creation and life. In the creation myth of the Vietnamese people, they are descended from the dragon lord L\u1ea1c Long Qu\u00e2n and the fairy \u00c2u C\u01a1, who bore 100 eggs. When they separated, L\u1ea1c Long Qu\u00e2n brought 50 children to the sea while \u00c2u C\u01a1 brought the rest up the mountains. To this day, Vietnamese people often describe themselves as \"Children of the dragon, grandchildren of the fairy\" (\"Con r\u1ed3ng ch\u00e1u ti\u00ean\").\nSouth Asia.\nIndia.\nIn the \"Rigveda\", the oldest of the four Vedas, Indra, the Vedic god of storms, battles V\u1e5btra, a giant serpent who represents drought. Indra kills V\u1e5btra using his \"vajra\" (thunderbolt) and clears the path for rain, which is described in the form of cattle: \"You won the cows, hero, you won the Soma,/You freed the seven streams to flow\" (\"Rigveda\" 1.32.12). In another Rigvedic legend, the three-headed serpent Vi\u015bvar\u016bpa, the son of Tva\u1e63\u1e6d\u1e5b, guards a wealth of cows and horses. Indra delivers Vi\u015bvar\u016bpa to a god named Trita \u0100ptya, who fights and kills him and sets his cattle free. Indra cuts off Vi\u015bvar\u016bpa's heads and drives the cattle home for Trita. This same story is alluded to in the Younger Avesta, in which the hero Thra\u0113taona, the son of \u0100thbya, slays the three-headed dragon A\u017ei Dah\u0101ka and takes his two beautiful wives as spoils. Thra\u0113taona's name (meaning \"third grandson of the waters\") indicates that A\u017ei Dah\u0101ka, like V\u1e5btra, was seen as a blocker of waters and cause of drought.\nBhutan.\nThe Druk (), also known as 'Thunder Dragon', is one of the national symbols of Bhutan. In the Dzongkha language, Bhutan is known as \"Druk Yul\" \"Land of Druk\", and Bhutanese leaders are called Druk Gyalpo, \"Thunder Dragon Kings\". The druk was adopted as an emblem by the Drukpa Lineage, which originated in Tibet and later spread to Bhutan.\nEurope.\nProto-Indo-European.\nThe tale of a hero slaying a giant serpent occurs in almost all Indo-European mythology. In most stories, the hero is some kind of thunder-god. In nearly every iteration of the story, the serpent is either multi-headed or \"multiple\" in some other way. Furthermore, in nearly every story, the serpent is always somehow associated with water. Bruce Lincoln has proposed that a Proto-Indo-European dragon-slaying myth can be reconstructed as follows: First, the sky gods give cattle to a man named \"*Tritos\" (\"the third\"), who is so named because he is the third man on earth, but a three-headed serpent named steals them. \"*Tritos\" pursues the serpent and is accompanied by \"*Han\u00e9r\", whose name means \"man\". Together, the two heroes slay the serpent and rescue the cattle.\nAncient Greece.\nThe ancient Greek word usually translated as \"dragon\" ( \"dr\u00e1k\u014dn\", genitive \"dr\u00e1kontos\") could also mean \"snake\", but it usually refers to a kind of giant serpent that either possesses supernatural characteristics or is otherwise controlled by some supernatural power. The first mention of a \"dragon\" in ancient Greek literature occurs in the \"Iliad\", in which Agamemnon is described as having a blue dragon motif on his sword belt and an emblem of a three-headed dragon on his breast plate. In lines 820\u2013880 of the \"Theogony\", a Greek poem written in the seventh century BC by the Boeotian poet Hesiod, the Greek god Zeus battles the monster Typhon, who has one hundred serpent heads that breathe fire and make many frightening animal noises. Zeus scorches all of Typhon's heads with his lightning bolts and then hurls Typhon into Tartarus. In other Greek sources, Typhon is often depicted as a winged, fire-breathing serpent-like dragon. In the \"Homeric Hymn to Apollo\", the god Apollo uses his poisoned arrows to slay the serpent Python, who has been causing death and pestilence in the area around Delphi. Apollo then sets up his shrine there.\nThe Roman poet Virgil in his poem \"Culex\", lines 163\u2013201 http://, describing a shepherd having a fight with a big constricting snake, calls it \"serpens\" and also \"draco\", showing that in his time the two words were probably interchangeable.\nHesiod also mentions that the hero Heracles slew the Lernaean Hydra, a multiple-headed serpent which dwelt in the swamps of Lerna. The name \"Hydra\" means \"water snake\" in Greek. According to the \"Bibliotheka\" of Pseudo-Apollodorus, the slaying of the Hydra was the second of the Twelve Labors of Heracles. Accounts disagree on which weapon Heracles used to slay the Hydra, but, by the end of the sixth century BC, it was agreed that the clubbed or severed heads needed to be cauterized to prevent them from growing back. Heracles was aided in this task by his nephew Iolaus. During the battle, a giant crab crawled out of the marsh and pinched Heracles's foot, but he crushed it under his heel. Hera placed the crab in the sky as the constellation Cancer. One of the Hydra's heads was immortal, so Heracles buried it under a heavy rock after cutting it off. For his Eleventh Labor, Heracles must procure a golden apple from the tree in the Garden of the Hesperides, which is guarded by an enormous serpent that never sleeps, which Pseudo-Apollodorus calls \"Ladon\". In earlier depictions, Ladon is often shown with many heads. In Pseudo-Apollodorus's account, Ladon is immortal, but Sophocles and Euripides both describe Heracles as killing him, although neither of them specifies how. Some suggest that the golden apple was not claimed through battle with Ladon at all but through Heracles charming the Hesperides. The mythographer Herodorus is the first to state that Heracles slew him using his famous club. Apollonius of Rhodes, in his epic poem, the \"Argonautica\", describes Ladon as having been shot full of poisoned arrows dipped in the blood of the Hydra.\nIn Pindar's \"Fourth Pythian Ode\", Ae\u00ebtes of Colchis tells the hero Jason that the Golden Fleece he is seeking is in a copse guarded by a dragon, \"which surpassed in breadth and length a fifty-oared ship\". Jason slays the dragon and makes off with the Golden Fleece together with his co-conspirator, Ae\u00ebtes's daughter, Medea. The earliest artistic representation of this story is an Attic red-figure \"kylix\" dated to c. 480\u2013470 BC, showing a bedraggled Jason being disgorged from the dragon's open mouth as the Golden Fleece hangs in a tree behind him and Athena, the goddess of wisdom, stands watching. A fragment from Pherecydes of Athens states that Jason killed the dragon, but fragments from the \"Naupactica\" and from Herodorus state that he merely stole the Fleece and escaped. In Euripides's \"Medea\", Medea boasts that she killed the Colchian dragon herself. In the final scene of the play, Medea also flies away on a chariot pulled by two dragons. In the most famous retelling of the story from Apollonius of Rhodes's \"Argonautica\", Medea drugs the dragon to sleep, allowing Jason to steal the Fleece. Greek vase paintings show her feeding the dragon the sleeping drug in a liquid form from a \"phial\u0113\", or shallow cup.\nIn the founding myth of Thebes, Cadmus, a Phoenician prince, was instructed by Apollo to follow a heifer and found a city wherever it laid down. Cadmus and his men followed the heifer and, when it laid down, Cadmus ordered his men to find a spring so he could sacrifice the heifer to Athena. His men found a spring, but it was guarded by a dragon, which had been placed there by the god Ares, and the dragon killed them. Cadmus killed the dragon in revenge, either by smashing its head with a rock or using his sword. Following the advice of Athena, Cadmus tore out the dragon's teeth and planted them in the earth. An army of giant warriors (known as \"spartoi\", which means \"sown men\") grew from the teeth like plants. Cadmus hurled stones into their midst, causing them to kill each other until only five were left. To make restitution for having killed Ares's dragon, Cadmus was forced to serve Ares as a slave for eight years. At the end of this period, Cadmus married Harmonia, the daughter of Ares and Aphrodite. Cadmus and Harmonia moved to Illyria, where they ruled as king and queen, before eventually being transformed into dragons themselves.\nIn the fifth century BC, the Greek historian Herodotus reported in Book IV of his \"Histories\" that western Libya was inhabited by monstrous serpents and, in Book III, he states that Arabia was home to many small, winged serpents, which came in a variety of colors and enjoyed the trees that produced frankincense. Herodotus remarks that the serpent's wings were like those of bats and that, unlike vipers, which are found in every land, winged serpents are only found in Arabia. The second-century BC Greek astronomer Hipparchus (c. 190 BC \u2013 c.\u2009120 BC) listed the constellation Draco (\"the dragon\") as one of forty-six constellations. Hipparchus described the constellation as containing fifteen stars, but the later astronomer Ptolemy (c. 100 \u2013 c.\u2009170 AD) increased this number to thirty-one in his \"Almagest\".\nIn the New Testament, Revelation 12:3, written by John of Patmos, describes a vision of a Great Red Dragon with seven heads, ten horns, seven crowns, and a massive tail, an image which is clearly inspired by the vision of the four beasts from the sea in the Book of Daniel and the Leviathan described in various Old Testament passages. The Great Red Dragon knocks \"a third of the sun\u00a0... a third of the moon, and a third of the stars\" out of the sky and pursues the Woman of the Apocalypse. Revelation 12:7\u20139 declares: \"And war broke out in Heaven. Michael and his angels fought against Dragon. Dragon and his angels fought back, but they were defeated, and there was no longer any place for them in Heaven. Dragon the Great was thrown down, that ancient serpent who is called Devil and Satan, the one deceiving the whole inhabited World \u2013 he was thrown down to earth and his angels were thrown down with him.\" Then a voice booms down from Heaven heralding the defeat of \"the Accuser\" (\"ho Kantegor\").\nIn 217 AD, Flavius Philostratus discussed dragons (\u03b4\u03c1\u03ac\u03ba\u03c9\u03bd, dr\u00e1k\u014dn) in India in \"The Life of Apollonius of Tyana\" (II,17 and III,6\u20138). The Loeb Classical Library translation (by F.C. Conybeare) mentions (III,7) that, \"In most respects the tusks resemble the largest swine's, but they are slighter in build and twisted, and have a point as unabraded as sharks' teeth.\" According to a collection of books by Claudius Aelianus called \"On Animals\", Ethiopia was inhabited by a species of dragon that hunted elephants and could grow to a length of 180 feet (55 m) with a lifespan rivaling that of the most enduring of animals. In the 4th century, Basil of Caesarea, on chapter IX of his Address to Young Men on Greek Literature, mentions mythological dragons as guarding treasures and riches.\nGermanic.\nIn the Old Norse poem \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\" in the \"Poetic Edda\", the dragon N\u00ed\u00f0h\u00f6ggr is described as gnawing on the roots of Yggdrasil, the world tree. In Norse mythology, J\u00f6rmungandr is a giant serpent that encircles the entire realm of Mi\u00f0gar\u00f0 in the sea around it. According to the \"Gylfaginning\" from the \"Prose Edda\", written by the thirteenth-century Icelandic mythographer Snorri Sturluson, Thor, the Norse god of thunder, once went out on a boat with the giant Hymnir to the outer sea and fished for J\u00f6rmungandr using an ox-head as bait. Thor caught the serpent and, after pulling its head out of the water, smashed it with his hammer, Mj\u00f6lnir. Snorri states that the blow was not fatal: \"and men say that he struck its head off on the sea bed. But I think the truth to tell you is that the Mi\u00f0gar\u00f0 Serpent still lives and lies in the surrounding sea.\"\nTowards the end of the Old English epic poem \"Beowulf\", a slave steals a cup from the hoard of a sleeping dragon, causing the dragon to wake up and go on a rampage of destruction across the countryside. Beowulf insists on confronting the dragon alone, even though he is of advanced age, but Wiglaf, the youngest of the twelve warriors Beowulf has brought with him, insists on accompanying his king into the battle. Beowulf's sword shatters during the fight and he is mortally wounded, but Wiglaf comes to his rescue and helps him slay the dragon. Beowulf dies and tells Wiglaf that the dragon's treasure must be buried rather than shared with the cowardly warriors who did not come to the aid of their king.\nIn the Old Norse \"V\u00f6lsunga saga\", the hero Sigurd catches the dragon Fafnir by digging a pit between the cave where he lives and the spring where he drinks his water and kills him by stabbing him in the underside. At the advice of Odin, Sigurd drains Fafnir's blood and drinks it, which gives him the ability to understand the language of the birds, who he hears talking about how his mentor Regin is plotting to betray him so that he can keep all of Fafnir's treasure for himself. The motif of a hero trying to sneak past a sleeping dragon and steal some of its treasure is common throughout many Old Norse sagas. The fourteenth-century \"Fl\u00f3res saga konungs ok sona hans\" describes a hero who is actively concerned not to wake a sleeping dragon while sneaking past it. In the \"Yngvars saga v\u00ed\u00f0f\u00f6rla\", the protagonist attempts to steal treasure from several sleeping dragons, but accidentally wakes them up.\nPost-classical.\nThe modern, western image of a dragon developed in western Europe during the Middle Ages through the combination of the snakelike dragons of classical Graeco-Roman literature, references to Near Eastern dragons preserved in the Bible, and western European folk traditions. The period between the eleventh and thirteenth centuries represents the height of European interest in dragons as living creatures. The twelfth-century Welsh monk, Geoffrey of Monmouth, recounts a famous legend in his \"Historia Regum Britanniae\" in which the child prophet Merlin witnesses the Romano-Celtic warlord Vortigern attempt to build a tower on Snowdon to keep safe from the Anglo-Saxons, but the tower keeps being swallowed into the ground. Merlin informs Vortigern that, underneath the foundation he has built, is a pool with two dragons sleeping in it. Vortigern orders for the pool to be drained, exposing a red dragon and a white dragon, who immediately begin fighting. Merlin delivers a prophecy that the white dragon will triumph over the red, symbolizing England's conquest of Wales, but declares that the red dragon will eventually return and defeat the white one. This story remained popular throughout the fifteenth century.\nDragons are generally depicted as living in rivers or having an underground lair or cave. They are envisioned as greedy and gluttonous, with voracious appetites. They are often identified with Satan, due to the references to Satan as a \"dragon\" in the Book of Revelation. The thirteenth-century \"Golden Legend\", written in Latin, records the story of Saint Margaret of Antioch, a virgin martyr who, after being tortured for her faith in the Diocletianic Persecution and thrown back into her cell, is said to have been confronted by a monstrous dragon, but she made the sign of the cross and the dragon vanished. In some versions of the story, she is actually swallowed by the dragon alive and, after making the sign of the cross in the dragon's stomach, emerges unharmed.\nThe legend of Saint George and the Dragon may be referenced as early as the sixth century AD, but the earliest artistic representations of it come from the eleventh century and the first full account of it comes from an eleventh-century Georgian text. The most famous version of the story from the \"Golden Legend\" holds that a dragon kept pillaging the sheep of the town of Silene in Libya. After it ate a young shepherd, the people were forced to placate it by leaving two sheep as sacrificial offerings every morning beside the lake where the dragon lived. Eventually, the dragon ate all of the sheep and the people were forced to start offering it their own children. One day, the king's own daughter came up in the lottery and, despite the king's pleas for her life, she was dressed as a bride and chained to a rock beside the lake to be eaten. Then, Saint George arrived and saw the princess. When the dragon arrived to eat her, he stabbed it with his lance and subdued it by making the sign of the cross and tying the princess's girdle around its neck. Saint George and the princess led the now-docile dragon into the town and George promised to kill it if the townspeople would convert to Christianity. All the townspeople converted and Saint George killed the dragon with his sword. In some versions, Saint George marries the princess, but, in others, he continues wandering.\nDragons are well known in myths and legends of Spain, in no small part because St. George (Catalan Sant Jordi) is the patron saint of Catalonia. Like most mythical reptiles, the Catalan dragon (Catalan drac) is an enormous serpent-like creature with four legs and a pair of wings, or rarely, a two-legged creature with a pair of wings, called a wyvern. As in many other parts of the world, the dragon's face may be like that of some other animal, such as a lion or a bull. As is common elsewhere, Catalan dragons are fire-breathers, and the dragon-fire is all-consuming. Catalan dragons also can emit a fetid odor, which can rot away anything it touches.\nGargoyles are carved stone figures sometimes resembling dragons that originally served as waterspouts on buildings. Precursors to the medieval gargoyle can be found on ancient Greek and Egyptian temples, but, over the course of the Middle Ages, many fantastic stories were invented to explain them. One medieval French legend holds that, in ancient times, a fearsome dragon known as \"La Gargouille\" had been causing floods and sinking ships on the river Seine, so the people of the town of Rouen would offer the dragon a human sacrifice once each year to appease its hunger. Then, around 600 AD, a priest named Romanus promised that, if the people would build a church, he would rid them of the dragon. Romanus slew the dragon and its severed head was mounted on the walls of the city as the first gargoyle.\nDragons are prominent in medieval heraldry. Uther Pendragon was famously said to have had two gold dragons crowned with red standing back-to-back on his royal coat of arms. Originally, heraldic dragons could have any number of legs, but, by the late Middle Ages, due to the widespread proliferation of bestiaries, heraldry began to distinguish between a \"dragon\" (which could only have exactly four legs) and a \"wyvern\" (which could only have exactly two). In myths, wyverns are associated with viciousness, envy, and pestilence, but, in heraldry, they are used as symbols for overthrowing the tyranny of Satan and his demonic forces. Late medieval heraldry also distinguished a draconic creature known as a \"cockatrice\". A cockatrice is supposedly born when a serpent hatches an egg that has been laid on a dunghill by a rooster and it is so venomous that its breath and its gaze are both lethal to any living creature, except for a weasel, which is the cockatrice's mortal enemy. A basilisk is a serpent with the head of a dragon at the end of its tail that is born when a toad hatches an egg that has been laid in a midden by a nine-year-old cockatrice. Like the cockatrice, its glare is said to be deadly.\nPost-classical Eastern.\nIn Albanian mythology and folklore, \"stihi\", \"ljubi\", \"bolla, bollar, errshaja, and kulshedra\" are mythological figures described as serpentine dragons. It is believed that \"bolla\", a water and chthonic demonic serpent, undergoes metamorphosis passing through four distinct phases if it lives many years without being seen by a human. The \"bollar\" and \"errshaja\" are the intermediate stages, while the \"kulshedra\" is the ultimate phase, described as a huge multi-headed fire-spitting female serpent which causes drought, storms, flooding, earthquakes, and other natural disasters against mankind. She is usually fought and defeated by a drangue, a semi-human winged divine hero and protector of humans. Heavy thunderstorms are thought to be the result of their battles.\nIn Slavic mythology, the words \"zmey\", \"\"zmiy\",\" or \"zmaj\" are used to describe dragons. These words are masculine forms of the Slavic word for \"snake\", which are normally feminine (like Russian \"zmeya\"). In Romania, there is a similar figure, derived from the Slavic dragon and named \"zmeu\". Exclusively in Polish and Belarusian folklore, as well as in the other Slavic folklores, a dragon is also called (variously) \"\u0441\u043c\u043e\u043a\", \"\u0446\u043c\u043e\u043a\", or \"smok\". In South Slavic folklores, the same thing is also called \"lamya\" (\u043b\u0430\u043c\u044f, \u043b\u0430\u043cj\u0430, lamja). Although quite similar to other European dragons, Slavic dragons have their peculiarities.\nIn Russian and Ukrainian folklore, Zmey Gorynych is a dragon with three heads, each one bearing twin goatlike horns. He is said to have breathed fire and smelled of sulfur. It was believed that eclipses were caused by Gorynych temporarily swallowing the sun. According to one legend, Gorynych's uncle was the evil sorcerer Nemal Chelovek, who abducted the daughter of the tsar and imprisoned her in his castle in the Ural Mountains. Many knights tried to free her, but all of them were killed by Gorynych's fire. Then a palace guard in Moscow named Ivan Tsarevich overheard two crows talking about the princess. He went to the tsar, who gave him a magic sword, and snuck into the castle. When Chelovek attacked Ivan in the form of a giant, the sword flew from Ivan's hand unbidden and killed him. Then the sword cut off all three of Gorynych's heads at once. Ivan brought the princess back to the tsar, who declared Ivan a nobleman and allowed him to marry the princess.\nA popular Polish folk tale is the legend of the Wawel Dragon, which is first recorded in the \"Chronica Polonorum\" of Wincenty Kad\u0142ubek, written between 1190 and 1208. According to Kad\u0142ubek, the dragon appeared during the reign of King Krakus and demanded to be fed a fixed number of cattle every week. If the villagers failed to provide enough cattle, the dragon would eat the same number of villagers as the number of cattle they had failed to provide. Krakus ordered his sons to slay the dragon. Since they could not slay it by hand, they tricked the dragon into eating calfskins filled with burning sulfur. Once the dragon was dead, the younger brother attacked and murdered his older brother and returned home to claim all the glory for himself, telling his father that his brother had died fighting the dragon. The younger brother became king after his father died, but his secret was eventually revealed and he was banished. In the fifteenth century, Jan D\u0142ugosz rewrote the story so that King Krakus himself was the one who slew the dragon. Another version of the story told by Marcin Bielski instead has the clever shoemaker Skuba come up with the idea for slaying the dragon. Bielski's version is now the most popular.\nModern depictions.\nDragons and dragon motifs are featured in many works of modern literature, particularly within the fantasy genre. As early as the eighteenth century, critical thinkers such as Denis Diderot were already asserting that too much literature had been published on dragons: \"There are already in books all too many fabulous stories of dragons\". In Lewis Carroll's classic children's novel \"Through the Looking-Glass\" (1871), one of the inset poems describes the Jabberwock, a kind of dragon. Carroll's illustrator John Tenniel, a famous political cartoonist, humorously showed the Jabberwock with the waistcoat, buck teeth, and myopic eyes of a Victorian university lecturer, such as Carroll himself. In works of comedic children's fantasy, dragons often fulfill the role of a magic fairy tale helper. In such works, rather than being frightening as they are traditionally portrayed, dragons are instead represented as harmless, benevolent, and inferior to humans. They are sometimes shown living in contact with humans, or in isolated communities of only dragons. Though popular in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, \"such comic and idyllic stories\" began to grow increasingly rare after the 1960s, due to demand for more serious children's literature.\nOne of the most iconic modern dragons is Smaug from J. R. R. Tolkien's classic novel, \"The Hobbit\". Dragons also appear in the best-selling \"Harry Potter\" series of children's novels by J. K. Rowling. Other prominent works depicting dragons include Anne McCaffrey's \"Dragonriders of Pern\", Ursula K. Le Guin's \"Earthsea Cycle\", George R. R. Martin's series \"A Song of Ice and Fire\", and Christopher Paolini's \"The Inheritance Cycle\". Sandra Martina Schwab writes, \"With a few exceptions, including McCaffrey's Pern novels and the 2002 film \"Reign of Fire\", dragons seem to fit more into the medievalized setting of fantasy literature than into the more technological world of science fiction. Indeed, they have been called the emblem of fantasy. The hero's fight against the dragon emphasizes and celebrates his masculinity, whereas revisionist fantasies of dragons and dragon-slaying often undermine traditional gender roles. In children's literature (such as Cressida Cowell's \"How to Train Your Dragon\" series) the friendly dragon may become a powerful ally in battling the child's fears.\" The popular role-playing game system \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" (D&amp;D) makes heavy use of dragons.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8533", "revid": "49983687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8533", "title": "Depeche Mode", "text": "English electronic band\nDepeche Mode () is an English electronic band formed in Basildon, Essex in 1980. Originally formed with the line-up of Dave Gahan, Martin Gore, Andy Fletcher and Vince Clarke, the band has consisted of Gahan and Gore since 2022.\nWith Clarke as their primary songwriter, Depeche Mode released their debut album \"Speak &amp; Spell\" in 1981 amid the British new wave scene. Clarke left the band at the end of 1981, going on to form the groups Yazoo and later Erasure. The remaining trio recorded their second album, \"A Broken Frame\" (1982), with Martin Gore as chief songwriter. The band then recruited Alan Wilder, establishing a line-up that continued until 1995, beginning with the albums \"Construction Time Again\" (1983) and \"Some Great Reward\" (1984). The albums \"Black Celebration\" (1986) and \"Music for the Masses\" (1987) cemented them as a dominant force within the electronic and alternative music scenes, and their June 1988 concert at the Pasadena Rose Bowl drew a crowd of over 60,000 people.\nIn 1990, Depeche Mode released their seventh album, \"Violator\", which reached number seven on the \"Billboard\" 200 and was certified triple platinum by the RIAA. The following album \"Songs of Faith and Devotion\" (1993) was also a success, though the band's internal struggles during recording and touring resulted in Wilder's departure in 1995. The band returned to the line-up of Gahan, Gore, and Fletcher, and released the album \"Ultra\" in 1997. The band continued touring and recorded five more albums as a trio\u2014\"Exciter\" (2001), \"Playing the Angel\" (2005), \"Sounds of the Universe\" (2009), \"Delta Machine\" (2013) and \"Spirit\" (2017)\u2014until Fletcher's death in 2022. Gahan and Gore have since continued as a duo. Their latest album, \"Memento Mori\", was released in 2023.\nDepeche Mode have had 54 songs in the UK singles chart, 17 Top 10 albums in the UK chart, and have sold more than 100 million records worldwide. \"Q\" included the band in its list of the \"50 Bands That Changed the World!\" Depeche Mode also rank No. 98 on VH1's \"100 Greatest Artists of All Time.\" In 2016, \"Billboard\" named Depeche Mode the 10th Greatest of All Time Top Dance Club Artists. They were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2020.\nHistory.\nFormation (1977\u20131980).\nDepeche Mode's origins date to 1977, when schoolmates Vince Clarke and Andy Fletcher formed a band called No Romance in China with Clarke on vocals and guitar and Fletcher on bass. Fletcher would later recall, \"Why am I in the band? It was accidental right from the beginning. I was actually forced to be in the band. I played the guitar and I had a bass; it was a question of them roping me in.\" In 1979, Clarke played guitar in an Ultravox-influenced band, the Plan, with friends Robert Marlow and Paul Langwith. In 1978\u20131979, Martin Gore played guitar in an acoustic duo, Norman and the Worms, with school friend Phil Burdett on vocals. In 1980, Clarke and Fletcher formed a band called Composition of Sound, with Clarke on vocals/guitar and Fletcher on bass; the pair were soon joined by Gore as a third instrumentalist. Dave Gahan joined the ensemble later in 1980 after Clarke heard him perform at a local Scout hut jam session, singing a rendition of David Bowie's \"'Heroes'\".\nWith the advent of affordable synthesisers and the increasing popularity of electronic music, the group began pursuing a synth-pop direction. The first live concert of Composition of Sound as a four-piece was on 14 June 1980 at Nicholas School, Basildon, England, UK. There is a plaque commemorating the gig at the James Hornsby School in Basildon, where Gore and Fletcher were pupils. Gahan's and Gore's favourite artists included Siouxsie and the Banshees, Sparks, Cabaret Voltaire, Talking Heads and Iggy Pop. Gahan's onstage persona was influenced by Dave Vanian, frontman of the Damned. Gahan has also later credited David Bowie, James Brown, Elvis Presley and Prince as influences on his performance style.\nComposition of Sound would become embarrassed about their band name and started thinking of changing it. There were several potential variants, including the name \"Musical Moments\" that was suggested by Vince Clarke as both a band name and the name of their first album. Starting at their concert on 24 September 1980 at Bridge House, the band changed their name to Depeche Mode, chosen by Dave Gahan. When explaining the choice for the new name, which was taken from a mistranslation of the name of French fashion magazine \"D\u00e9p\u00eache Mode\", Gore said, \"It means 'hurried fashion' or 'fashion dispatch'. I like the sound of that.\" The more accurate translation of the magazine's name (and therefore the band's name) is \"Fashion News\" or \"Fashion Update\".\n\"Speak &amp; Spell\" and Clarke's departure (1980\u20131981).\nThe band made their recording debut in late 1980 for the \"Some Bizzare Album\" (released in 1981) with the song \"Photographic\", later re-recorded for their debut album \"Speak &amp; Spell\".\nThe band made a demo tape but, instead of mailing the tape to record labels, they would go in and personally deliver it. They would demand the labels play it; according to Dave Gahan, \"most of them would tell us to fuck off. They'd say 'leave the tape with us' and we'd say 'it's our only one'. Then we'd say goodbye and go somewhere else.\"\nAccording to Gahan, prior to securing their record contract, they were receiving offers from all the major labels. Phonogram offered them \"money you could never have imagined and all sorts of crazy things like clothes allowances\".\nWhile playing a live gig at the Bridge House in Canning Town, the band was approached by Daniel Miller, an electronic producer and founder of Mute Records, who was interested in their recording a single for his burgeoning label. The result of this verbal contract was their first single, \"Dreaming of Me\", recorded in December 1980 and released in February 1981. It reached number 57 in the UK charts. Encouraged by this, the band recorded their second single, \"New Life\", which climbed to number 11 in the UK charts and got them an appearance on \"Top of the Pops\". The band went to London by train, carrying their synthesisers all the way to the BBC studios.\nThe band's next single was \"Just Can't Get Enough\". The synth-pop single became the band's first UK top ten hit. The video is the only one to feature Vince Clarke. Depeche Mode's debut album, \"Speak &amp; Spell\", was released in October 1981 and peaked at number ten on the UK album charts. Critical reviews were mixed; \"Melody Maker\" described it as a \"great album \u2026 one they had to make to conquer fresh audiences and please the fans who just can't get enough\", while \"Rolling Stone\" was more critical, calling the album \"PG-rated fluff\".\nClarke began to voice his discomfort at the direction the band was taking, saying \"there was never enough time to do anything. Not with all the interviews and photo sessions\". Clarke also said he was sick of touring, which Gahan said years later was \"bullshit to be quite honest\". Gahan went on to say he \"suddenly lost interest in it and he started getting letters from fans asking what kind of socks he wore.\" In November 1981, Clarke publicly announced that he was leaving Depeche Mode.\nSoon afterwards, Clarke joined up with blues singer Alison Moyet to form Yazoo (or Yaz in the United States). Initial talk of Clarke's continuing to write material for Depeche Mode ultimately amounted to nothing. According to third-party sources, Clarke offered the remaining members of Depeche Mode the track \"Only You\", but they declined. Clarke denied in an interview that such an offer ever took place, saying \"I don't know where that came from. That's not true.\" The song went on to become a UK top three hit for Yazoo. Gore, who had written \"Tora! Tora! Tora!\" and the instrumental \"Big Muff\" for \"Speak &amp; Spell\", became the band's main composer and lyricist.\n\"A Broken Frame\" and Wilder joining (1981\u20131982).\nIn late 1981, the band placed an anonymous ad in \"Melody Maker\" looking for another musician: \"Name band, synthesise, must be under twenty-one.\" Alan Wilder, a classically trained keyboardist from West London, responded and, after two auditions and despite being 22 years old, was hired in early 1982, initially on a trial basis as a touring member. Wilder would later be called the \"Musical Director\" of the band, responsible for the band's sound until his departure in 1995. As producer Flood would say, \"[Alan] is sort of the craftsman, Martin's the idea man and [Dave] is the attitude.\"\nIn January 1982, the band released \"See You\", their first single without Clarke, which managed to beat all three Clarke-penned singles in the UK charts, reaching number six. The following tour saw the band playing their first shows in North America. Two more singles, \"The Meaning of Love\" and \"Leave in Silence\", were released ahead of the band's second studio album. Daniel Miller informed Wilder that he wasn't needed for the recording of the album, as the core trio wanted to prove they could succeed without Vince Clarke. \"A Broken Frame\" was released that September, and the following month the band began their 1982 tour.\n\"Construction Time Again\" (1983).\nA non-album single, \"Get the Balance Right!\", was released in January 1983, the first Depeche Mode track to be recorded with Wilder, now an official member of the band. For their third album, \"Construction Time Again\", Depeche Mode worked with producer Gareth Jones, at John Foxx's Garden Studios and at Hansa Studios in West Berlin (where much of David Bowie's seminal Berlin Trilogy featuring Brian Eno had been produced). The album saw a dramatic shift in the group's sound, due in part to Wilder's introduction of the Synclavier and E-mu Emulator samplers. By sampling the noises of everyday objects, the band created an eclectic, industrial-influenced sound, with similarities to groups such as the Art of Noise and Einst\u00fcrzende Neubauten (the latter becoming Mute labelmates in 1983).\n\"Everything Counts\" rose to number six in the UK, also reaching the top 30 in Ireland, South Africa, Switzerland, Sweden and West Germany. Wilder contributed two songs to the album, \"The Landscape Is Changing\" and \"Two Minute Warning\". In September 1983, to promote \"Construction Time Again\", the band launched a European concert tour.\n\"Some Great Reward\" (1984).\nIn their early years, Depeche Mode had really attained success only in Europe and Australia. This changed in March 1984, when they released the single \"People Are People\". The song became a hit, reaching No. 2 in Ireland and Poland, No. 4 in the UK and Switzerland, and No. 1 in West Germany \u2013 the first time a DM single topped a country's singles chart \u2013 where it was used as the theme to West German TV's coverage of the 1984 Olympics. Beyond this European success, the song also reached No. 13 on the US charts in mid-1985, the first appearance of a DM single on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, and was a Top 20 hit in Canada. \"People Are People\" became an anthem for the LGBT community, regularly played at gay establishments and gay pride festivals in the late 1980s. Sire, the band's North American record label, released a compilation of the same name which included tracks from \"A Broken Frame\" and \"Construction Time Again\" as well as several B-sides.\nOn the American tour, the band was, according to Gore, \"shocked by the way the fans were turning up in droves at the concerts\". He said that although the concerts were selling well, Depeche Mode struggled to sell records.\nIn September 1984, \"Some Great Reward\" was released. \"Melody Maker\" claimed that the album made one \"sit up and take notice of what is happening here, right under your nose.\" In contrast to the political and environmental subjects addressed on the previous album, the songs on \"Some Great Reward\" were mostly concerned with more personal themes such as sexual politics (\"Master and Servant\"), adulterous relationships (\"Lie to Me\"), and arbitrary divine justice (\"Blasphemous Rumours\"). Also included was the first Martin Gore ballad, \"Somebody\"\u2014such songs would become a feature of all following albums. \"Somebody\" was released as a double A-side with \"Blasphemous Rumours\", and was the first single with Gore on lead vocal. \"Some Great Reward\" became the first Depeche Mode album to enter the US album charts, and made the Top 10 in several European countries.\n\"The World We Live In and Live in Hamburg\" was the band's first video release, almost an entire concert from their 1984 Some Great Reward Tour.\n\"Black Celebration\" (1985\u20131986).\nIn July 1985, the band played their first-ever concerts behind the Iron Curtain, in Budapest and Warsaw. In October 1985, Mute released a compilation, \"The Singles 81\u219285\" (\"Catching Up with Depeche Mode\" in the US), which included the two new non-album hit singles \"Shake the Disease\" and \"It's Called a Heart\", with the US version also including their B-sides (\"Fly on the Windscreen\", the B-side of \"It's Called a Heart\", would also be included on the next studio album \"Black Celebration\").\nIn the United States, the band's music appealed primarily to an alternative audience who were disenchanted with the predominance of \"soft rock and 'disco hell'\" on the radio. This view of the band was in sharp contrast to how the band was perceived in Europe, despite the increasingly dark and serious tone in their songs. In Germany, France, and other European countries, Depeche Mode were considered teen idols and regularly featured in European teen magazines, becoming one of the most famous synth-pop bands in the mid-'80s.\nDepeche Mode's musical style shifted slightly again in 1986 with the release of their fifteenth single, \"Stripped\", and its accompanying album \"Black Celebration\". Retaining their often imaginative sampling and beginning to move away from the \"industrial pop\" sound that had characterised their previous two LPs, the band introduced an ominous, highly atmospheric and textured sound. Gore's lyrics also took on a darker tone and became more pessimistic.\nThe music video for \"A Question of Time\" was the first to be directed by Anton Corbijn, beginning a working relationship that continues to the present. Corbijn has directed 22 of the band's videos. He has also filmed some of their live performances and designed stage sets, as well as most covers for albums and singles starting from \"Violator\".\n\"Music for the Masses\" (1987\u20131989).\nFor 1987's \"Music for the Masses\", the band's sound and working methods continued to develop. It was the first time they worked with a producer not related to Mute Records. Dave Bascombe was called to assist with the recording sessions; although, according to Alan Wilder, Bascombe's role ended up being more that of engineer. In making the album, the band largely eschewed sampling in favour of synthesiser experimentation. While chart performance of the singles \"Strangelove\", \"Never Let Me Down Again\" and \"Behind the Wheel\" proved to be disappointing in the UK, they performed well in countries such as Canada, Brazil, West Germany, South Africa, Sweden and Switzerland, often reaching the top 10. \"Record Mirror\" described \"Music for the Masses\" as \"the most accomplished and sexy Mode album to date\". The album also reached No. 35 on the US \"Billboard\" 200 chart.\nThe Music for the Masses Tour began 22 October 1987. On 7 March 1988, with no previous announcement that they would be the headlining act, Depeche Mode played in the Werner-Seelenbinder-Halle, East Berlin, becoming one of the few Western groups to perform in East Germany. They also performed concerts in Budapest and Prague in 1988. \nThe world tour ended on 18 June 1988 with a concert at the Pasadena Rose Bowl. Paid attendance of 60,453 was the highest in eight years for the venue. Its massive success marked a breakthrough for the band in the United States.. The event was documented in \"101\", a concert film by D. A. Pennebaker and its accompanying soundtrack album. The film is notable for its portrayal of fan interaction. Alan Wilder came up with the title, noting that it was the 101st and final performance of the tour. On 7 September 1988, Depeche Mode performed \"Strangelove\" at the 1988 MTV Video Music Awards at the Universal Amphitheatre in Los Angeles.\n\"Violator\" (1989\u20131990).\nIn mid-1989, the band began recording in Milan with producer Flood and engineer Fran\u00e7ois Kevorkian. The initial result of this session was the single \"Personal Jesus\". Prior to its release, a marketing campaign was launched with advertisements placed in the personals columns of UK regional newspapers with the words \"Your own personal Jesus.\" Later, the ads included a phone number one could dial to hear the song. The resulting furore helped propel the single to number 13 on the UK charts, becoming one of their biggest sellers to date. In the United States, it was their first gold single and their first Top 40 hit since \"People Are People\", eventually becoming the biggest-selling 12-inch single in Warner Records' history up to that point.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I think in a way we've been at the forefront of new music; sort of chipping away at the standard rock format stations.\"\n Martin Gore, stated to \"NME\" \u2013 July 1990.\nReleased in February 1990, \"Enjoy the Silence\" reached number six in the UK (the first Top 10 hit in that country since \"Master And Servant\"). A few months later it reached number eight in the US and earned the band a second gold record, and it won Best British Single at the 1991 Brit Awards. To promote their new album, \"Violator\", the band held an in-store autograph signing at Wherehouse Entertainment in Los Angeles. The event attracted approximately 20,000 fans and turned into a near riot. Some attendees were injured while being pressed against the store's glass by the crowd. As an apology to those injured, the band released a limited edition cassette tape to fans in Los Angeles, distributed through radio station KROQ (the sponsor of the Wherehouse event).\n\"Violator\" was the first Depeche Mode album to enter the Top 10 of the \"Billboard\" 200, reaching Number 7 and staying 74 weeks in the chart. It was certified triple platinum in America. Two more singles from the album\u2014\"Policy of Truth\" and \"World in My Eyes\"\u2014were hits in the UK, with the former also charting in the US.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"I remember going to see them in Giants Stadium, and they broke the merchandising record; of Bon Jovi, U2\u2014all these bands\u2014Depeche Mode were the biggest!\"\n Flood, on the Giants Stadium concert.\nThe World Violation Tour saw the band play several stadium shows in the US. 42,000 tickets were sold within four hours for a show at Giants Stadium, and 48,000 tickets were sold within half-an-hour of going on sale for a show at Dodger Stadium. An estimated 1.2 million fans saw this tour worldwide.\n\"Songs of Faith and Devotion\" and Wilder's departure (1991\u20131995).\nIn 1991, Depeche Mode contribution \"Death's Door\" was released on the soundtrack album for the film \"Until the End of the World\". Film director Wim Wenders had challenged musical artists to write music the way they imagined they would in the year 2000, the setting of the movie.\nThe members of Depeche Mode regrouped in Madrid in February 1992. Gahan had become interested in the new grunge scene sweeping the US and was influenced by the likes of Jane's Addiction, Soundgarden, Alice in Chains and Nirvana.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"There's so many sounds that are created from the voice that you wouldn't know were taken from the voice, like rhythm sounds. The number of times I've been sitting in the studio and said, 'I wish I could get a bass that would just go [mimics wet, thick hip-hop bass-drum sound].' Then I think, 'Why can't I just go [repeats noise] into a mic and sample it?' It's \"obvious\"; you spend all day trying to get a synthesiser to try and create this sound but you can just go [repeats noise] and you've got it. Then you can send it through some other device after that, and you've got something that sounds absolutely nothing like a voice, but the source was a voice. ... It is a very interesting process.\"\nAlan Wilder on the genesis of some of the sounds on \"Songs of Faith and Devotion\", stated to \"Pulse! magazine\" \u2013 May 1993.\nIn 1993, \"Songs of Faith and Devotion\", again with Flood producing, saw them experimenting with arrangements based as much on heavily distorted electric guitars and live drums (played by Alan Wilder, whose debut as a studio drummer had come on the \"Violator\" track \"Clean\") as on synthesisers. Live strings, uilleann pipes and female gospel vocals were other new additions to the band's sound. The album debuted at number one in both the UK and the US, only the sixth British act to achieve such a distinction to date. The first single from the album was the grunge-influenced \"I Feel You\". The gospel influences are most noticeable on the album's third single, \"Condemnation\". Interviews given by the band during this period tended to be conducted separately, unlike earlier albums, where the band was interviewed as a group.\nThe Devotional Tour followed, documented by a concert film of the same name. The film was directed by Anton Corbijn, and in 1995 earned the band their first Grammy nomination. The band's second live album, \"Songs of Faith and Devotion Live\", was released in December 1993. The tour continued into 1994 with the Exotic Tour, which began in February 1994 in South Africa, and ended in April in Mexico. The final leg of the tour, consisting of more North American dates, followed shortly thereafter and ran until July. As a whole, the Devotional Tour is to date the longest and most geographically diverse Depeche Mode tour, spanning fourteen months and 159 individual performances.\n\"Q\" magazine described the 1993 Devotional Tour as \"The Most Debauched Rock 'n' Roll Tour Ever\". According to \"The Independent\", the \"smack-blasted\" Gahan \"required cortisone shots just to perform, borderline alcoholic Gore suffered two stress-induced seizures, and Andrew Fletcher's deepening depression resulted, in the summer of 1994, in a full nervous breakdown.\" During the performance in New Orleans, Louisiana, Gahan suffered a heart attack brought on by drug use and had to be ushered out of the Lakefront Arena in an ambulance. In Denver, Colorado, local police arrested Gore and fined him $50 for disturbing the peace when he held a loud party in his hotel room. Fletcher declined to participate in the second half of the Exotic Tour due to mental instability; he was replaced on stage by Daryl Bamonte, who had worked with the band as a personal assistant since the beginning of their career in 1980.\nIn June 1995, Alan Wilder announced that he was leaving Depeche Mode, explaining:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Since joining in 1982, I have continually striven to give total energy, enthusiasm and commitment to the furthering of the group's success, and in spite of a consistent imbalance in the distribution of the workload, willingly offered this. Unfortunately, within the group, this level of input never received the respect and acknowledgement that it warrants.\u2014\u200a\nWilder continued to work on his personal project Recoil, releasing a fourth album (\"Unsound Methods\") in 1997.\n\"Ultra\" (1995\u20131998).\nDespite Gahan's increasingly severe personal problems, Gore tried repeatedly during 1995 and 1996 to get the band recording again. However, Gahan would rarely turn up to scheduled sessions, and when he did, it would take weeks to get any vocals recorded; one six-week session at Electric Lady in New York produced just one usable vocal (for \"Sister of Night\"), and even that was pieced together from multiple takes. Gore was forced to contemplate breaking the band up and considered releasing the songs he had written as a solo album. In mid-1996, after his near-fatal overdose in which his heart stopped beating for two minutes, Gahan entered a court-ordered drug rehabilitation program to battle his addiction to cocaine and heroin. With Gahan out of rehab in 1996, Depeche Mode held recording sessions with producer Tim Simenon.\nPreceded by two singles, \"Barrel of a Gun\" and \"It's No Good\", the album \"Ultra\" was released in April 1997. The album debuted at No. 1 in the UK as well as Germany, and No. 5 in the US. The band did not tour in support of the album, with Fletcher quoted as saying: \"We're not fit enough. Dave's only eight months into his sobriety, and our bodies are telling us to spend time with our families.\" As part of the promotion for the release of the album, they did perform two short concerts in London and Los Angeles, promoted as \"Ultra Parties\". \"Ultra\" spawned two further singles, \"Home\" and \"Useless\".\nA second singles compilation, \"The Singles 86&gt;98\", was released in 1998, preceded by the new single \"Only When I Lose Myself\". In April 1998, Depeche Mode held a press conference at the Hyatt Hotel in Cologne to announce the Singles Tour. The tour was the first to feature two backing musicians in place of Wilder\u2014Austrian drummer Christian Eigner and British keyboardist Peter Gordeno.\n\"Exciter\" (1999\u20132004).\nIn 2001, Depeche Mode released \"Exciter\", produced by Mark Bell (of techno group LFO). Bell introduced a minimalist, digital sound to much of the album, influenced by IDM and glitch. \"Dream On\", \"I Feel Loved\", \"Freelove\" and \"Goodnight Lovers\" were released as singles in 2001 and 2002. Critical response to the album was mixed, with reasonably positive reviews from some magazines (\"NME\", \"Rolling Stone\" and \"LA Weekly\"), while others (including \"Q\" magazine, \"PopMatters\" and \"Pitchfork\") derided it as sounding underproduced, dull and lacking in luster.\nIn March 2001, Depeche Mode held a press conference at the Valentino Hotel in Hamburg to announce the Exciter Tour. The tour featured 84 performances for over 1.5 million fans in 24 countries. The concerts held in Paris at the Palais Omnisports de Paris-Bercy were filmed and later released in May 2002 as a live DVD entitled \"One Night in Paris\".\nIn October 2002 the band won the first-ever \"Q\" magazine \"Innovation Award\".\nIn 2003, Gahan released his first solo album, \"Paper Monsters\", and toured to promote the record. Also released in 2003 was Gore's second solo album \"Counterfeit\u00b2\". Fletcher founded his own record label, Toast Hawaii, specialising in promoting electronic music.\nA new remix compilation album, \"Remixes 81\u201304\", was released in 2004, featuring new and unreleased promo mixes of the band's singles from 1981 to 2004. A new version of \"Enjoy the Silence\", remixed by Mike Shinoda of Linkin Park, \"Enjoy the Silence 04\", was released as a single and reached No. 7 on the UK charts.\n\"Playing the Angel\" (2005\u20132007).\nIn October 2005, Depeche Mode released their 11th studio album \"Playing the Angel\". Produced by Ben Hillier, the album peaked at No. 1 in 18 countries and featured the hit single \"Precious\". This is their first album to feature lyrics written by Gahan and, consequently, the first album since 1984's \"Some Great Reward\" featuring songs not written by Gore. \"Suffer Well\" was the first ever post-Clarke Depeche Mode single not to be written by Gore (lyrics by Gahan, music by Philpott/Eigner). The final single from the album was \"John the Revelator\", an up-tempo electronic track with a running religious theme, accompanied by \"Lilian\", a lush track that was a hit in many clubs all over the world.\nTo promote \"Playing the Angel\", the band launched Touring the Angel, a concert tour of Europe and North America that began in November 2005 and ran for nine months. During the last two legs of the tour Depeche Mode headlined a number of festivals including the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival and the O2 Wireless Festival. In total, the band played to more than 2.8 million people across 31 countries and the tour was one of the highest grossing and critically acclaimed tours of 2005/2006. Speaking about the tour, Gahan praised it as \"probably the most enjoyable, rewarding live shows we've ever done. The new material was just waiting to be played live. It took on a life of its own. With the energy of the crowds, it just came to life.\" Two shows at Milan's Fila Forum were filmed and edited into a concert film, released on DVD as \"\".\nA \"best-of\" compilation was released in November 2006, entitled \"The Best of Depeche Mode Volume 1\" featuring a new single \"Martyr\", an outtake from the \"Playing the Angel\" sessions. Later that month Depeche Mode received the MTV Europe Music Award in the Best Group category.\nIn December 2006, iTunes released \"The Complete Depeche Mode\" as its fourth ever digital box-set.\nIn August 2007, during promotion for Gahan's second solo album, \"Hourglass\", it was announced that Depeche Mode were heading back in studio in early 2008 to work on a new album.\n\"Sounds of the Universe\" (2008\u20132011).\nIn May 2008, Depeche Mode returned to the studio with producer Ben Hillier to work on some songs that Martin Gore had demoed at his home studio in Santa Barbara, California. Later that year it was announced that they were splitting from their long-term US label, Warner Music, and signing with EMI Music worldwide. The album was created in four sessions, two in New York and two in Santa Barbara. A total of 22 songs were recorded, with the standard album being 13 songs in length while many of the others were released in subsequent deluxe editions.\nIn 2009, Depeche Mode allowed their likeness to be used in Valve's \"Left 4 Dead 2\". The character Rochelle wears a pink T-shirt with an image from the \"Touring the Angels\" tour on the front.\nOn 15 January 2009, the official Depeche Mode website announced that the band's twelfth studio album would be called \"Sounds of the Universe\". The album was released on 14 April 2009, also made available through an iTunes Pass, where the buyer received individual tracks in the weeks leading up to the official release date. Fletcher said the idea for their iTunes Pass was a combination of the band's and iTunes': \"I think the digital and record companies are starting to get their act together. They were very lazy in the first 10 years when downloads came in. Now they're collaborating more and coming up with interesting ideas for fans to buy products.\" The album went to number one in 21 countries. Critical response was generally positive and it was nominated for a Grammy in the Best Alternative Album category. \"Wrong\" was the first single from the album, released digitally in February 2009. Subsequent singles were \"Peace\" and the double A-side \"Fragile Tension / Hole to Feed\". In addition, \"Perfect\" was released as a promotional-only (non-commercial) single in the United States.\nOn 23 April 2009, Depeche Mode performed for the television program \"Jimmy Kimmel Live!\" at the famed corner of Hollywood Boulevard and Vine Street, drawing more than 12,000 fans, which was the largest audience the program had seen since its 2003 premiere, with a performance by Coldplay.\nIn May 2009, the band embarked on a concert tour in support of the album, called Tour of the Universe; it had been announced at a press conference in October 2008 at the Olympiastadion in Berlin. There was a warm up show in Luxembourg and it officially started on 10 May 2009 in Tel Aviv. The first leg of the tour was disrupted when Dave Gahan was struck down with gastroenteritis. During treatment, doctors found and removed a low-grade tumour from the singer's bladder. Gahan's illness caused 16 concerts to be cancelled, but several of the shows were rescheduled for 2010. The band headlined the Lollapalooza festival during the North American leg of the tour. The tour also took the band back to South America for the first time since 1994's Exotic Tour. During the final European leg, the band played a show at London's Royal Albert Hall in aid of the Teenage Cancer Trust, where former member Alan Wilder joined Martin Gore on stage for a performance of \"Somebody\". In total the band played to more than 2.7 million people across 32 countries and the tour was one of the most profitable in America in 2009. The concerts held at Palau Sant Jordi, Barcelona, Spain were filmed and later released on DVD and Blu-ray release entitled \"\". In March 2010, Depeche Mode won the award for \"Best International Group \u2013 Rock / Pop\" at the Echo Awards in Germany.\nOn 6 June 2011, as the final commitment to their contract with EMI, the band released a remix compilation album, entitled \"\" that features remixes by former members Vince Clarke and Alan Wilder. Other remixers involved with the project were Nick Rhodes of Duran Duran, R\u00f6yksopp, Karlsson &amp; Winnberg of Miike Snow, Eric Prydz, Clark and more. A new remix of \"Personal Jesus\" by Stargate, entitled \"Personal Jesus 2011\", was released as a single on 30 May 2011, in support of the compilation.\nAlso in 2011, Depeche Mode contributed their cover of the U2 song \"So Cruel\" to the tribute album \"AHK-toong BAY-bi Covered\", honouring the 20th anniversary of the album \"Achtung Baby\". The compilation CD was released with the December 2011 issue of \"Q\".\n\"Delta Machine\" (2012\u20132014).\nIn October 2012 during a press conference in Paris, Dave Gahan, Martin Gore and Andy Fletcher announced plans for a new album and a 2013 worldwide tour starting from Tel Aviv and continuing in Europe and North America. Martin Gore revealed that Flood mixed the album, marking the producer's first studio collaboration with the band since 1993's \"Songs of Faith and Devotion\".\nIn December 2012, the band officially announced signing a worldwide deal with Columbia Records and releasing a new album in March 2013. On 24 January 2013, it was confirmed that the album was titled \"Delta Machine\". \"Heaven\", the debut single from \"Delta Machine\" was released commercially on Friday 1 February 2013 (although not in the UK). The release date in the UK was pushed back to 18 March 2013 (17 March 2013 on iTunes). The physical release still bore the Mute Records logo, even though the band have now severed ties with their long-standing label. Fletcher mentioned in an interview this was due to their \"devotion\" to the label and with the band's insistence.\"Delta Machine\" spawned two further singles, \"Soothe My Soul\" on 6 May and \"Should Be Higher\" on 11 October. Though neither performed well in the UK charts they did perform moderately in other European charts.\nIn March, the band announced North American dates to their Delta Machine Tour, starting 22 August from Detroit and ending 8 October in Phoenix. In June, other European dates were confirmed for early 2014. The final gig of the tour took place in Moscow, Russia on 7 March 2014, at Olimpiski venue.\nThat month, Depeche Mode won the award for \"Best International Group \u2013 Rock / Pop\" at the Echo Awards in Germany. Also, they were nominated at the category \"Album des Jahres (national oder international)\" for \"Delta Machine\" but lost against Helene Fischer's \"Farbenspiel\".\nOn 8 October 2014, the band announced \"Live in Berlin\", the new video and audio release filmed and recorded at the O2 World in Berlin, Germany in November 2013 during the Delta Machine Tour. It was released on 17 November 2014 worldwide.\n\"Spirit\" (2015\u20132021).\nIn a \"2015 Rolling Stone\" interview celebrating the 25th anniversary of \"Violator\", Gore stated that Johnny Cash's cover of \"Personal Jesus\" is his favorite cover version of a Depeche Mode song.\nOn 25 January 2016, Gore announced a projected return to the recording studio in April, with both Gore and Gahan having already written and demoed new songs. In September, the official Depeche Mode Facebook page hinted at a new release, later confirmed by the band to be a music video compilation, \"Video Singles Collection\", scheduled for release in November by Sony. In October 2016, the band announced their fourteenth album titled \"Spirit\". It was produced by James Ford, and was released on 17 March 2017.\n\"Where's the Revolution\", the lead single from \"Spirit\", was released 3 February 2017, along with its lyric video. The official video was published a week later, on 9 February. The Global Spirit Tour officially kicked off on 5 May 2017 with a performance in Stockholm, Sweden, at the Friends Arena. The first leg of the tour covered European countries only, ending with a final stadium show in Cluj-Napoca, Romania, at the Cluj Arena. The second leg of the tour covered North America and returned to Europe. The North America leg of the tour kicked off in Salt Lake City, Utah, on 23 August, at the USANA Amphitheatre. Depeche Mode broke a record when the band became the first to play four nights at the Hollywood Bowl. The band remained in North America until 15 November when they left for Dublin to resume the European leg. The band ended the tour in Europe with two sold-out shows on 23 and 25 July 2018 in Berlin, Germany, at the Waldb\u00fchne.\nIn September 2019, the band announced that \"Spirits in the Forest\", a documentary that was partially filmed during these shows by long-time collaborator Anton Corbijn, would be released in theatres for one night only, 21 November 2019. It was released on CD, DVD and Blu-ray under the title \"LiVE SPiRiTS\" on 26 June 2020.\nOn 7 November 2020, the band were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.\nFletcher's death and \"Memento Mori\" (2022\u2013present).\nOn 26 May 2022, Andy Fletcher died, aged 60, after suffering an aortic dissection while at home. His bandmates Gahan and Gore stated, \"we are shocked and filled with overwhelming sadness with the untimely passing of our dear friend, family member and bandmate Andy 'Fletch' Fletcher.\" Former Depeche Mode member Alan Wilder stated that learning of Fletcher's death was \"a real bolt from the blue.\"\nPrior to Fletcher's death, Gahan said: \"There's a ton of stuff that we've done with Depeche Mode that I'm really proud of. I think that's come with time and age. Martin put out a record last year which I really liked. I actually bought a copy because it wouldn't feel right otherwise. I know he's been pottering away in his studio as well, so I guess at some point next year we'll get together. Hopefully at least to just have a chat about what we both feel like we could move forward with.\"\nOn 15 August 2022, the social media accounts for Depeche Mode posted a photo of Gahan and Gore in a recording studio, with them tweeting, \"finding stability in what we know and love, and focusing on what gives life meaning and purpose\", which magazines like \"NME\" suggested was a hint at work on a new studio album.\nOn 4 October 2022, Depeche Mode announced their fifteenth studio album \"Memento Mori\" and a tour to support the album which started on 23 March 2023; the 23 March 2023 concert, which was held in the Golden 1 Center in Sacramento, California, would also mark Depeche Mode first performance in the United States in five years. The tour, which consisted of 112 shows, concluded on April 8, 2024.\nThe first single, \"Ghosts Again\", released on 9 February 2023, was co-written by Richard Butler of the Psychedelic Furs. It received relative success in the UK, charting at No. 14. \"Ghosts Again\" had widespread success in the US, charting in the top 10 of 3 \"Billboard\" charts. Reaching number 2 on the Adult Alternative Songs chart, Gahan said it \"captures this perfect balance of melancholy and joy\", while Gore said it has \"such an upbeat feel to it\" and how rare it is for the band to record a song that \"I just don't get sick of listening to.\"\nThe band stated that work on the album began during the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. Gahan and Gore said they would send each other ideas for songs, for example Gahan said, \"I played guitar and sort of sang on my iPhone\", while Gore \"sent it back with his angelic voice.\" They also stated that they would be working with James Ford once again as producer along with Marta Salogni mixing for the album.\n\"\", a documentary film chronicling the band's three concerts in Mexico City which were held in September 2023 during the Memento Mori World Tour, would be theatrically released on October 28, 2025.\nMusical style and influences.\nClarke was turned onto electronic music by the band Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark (OMD), without whom, he said, Depeche Mode would never have existed. Gore affirmed OMD's influence while they served as support on the Music for the Masses Tour in 1988. In a later interview, Gore explained his early objectives for Depeche Mode, saying, \"My dream was to combine the emotion of Neil Young or John Lennon transmitted by Kraftwerk's synthesisers. Soul music played by electronic instruments.\" Fletcher mentioned influences including the late 1970s punk rock scene, the post-punk bands Siouxsie and the Banshees and the Cure, and electronic group the Human League. Band members have also cited David Bowie, the Clash, Roxy Music and Brian Eno, Elvis Presley, the Velvet Underground, Fad Gadget, Suicide, and the blues.\nDepeche Mode were considered a teen pop group during their early period in the UK, and interviewed in teen pop magazines such as \"Smash Hits\". Following the departure of Clarke, their music began to take on a darker tone, establishing a darker sound in the band's music, as Gore assumed lead songwriting duties. Gore's lyrics include themes such as sex, religion, and politics. Gore has stated he feels lyrical themes which tackle issues related to solitude and loneliness are a better representation of reality, whereas he finds \"happy songs\" fake and unrealistic. At the same time, he asserts that the group's music contains \"an element of hope\".\nThe band had several rules that they stuck with over the course of many of their albums, including \"no presets\", \"no chords\", and \"no hi-hats\". For example, they had to assemble chords out of separate monophonic parts. Once they started adding samples to their music in 1982, they had rules regarding the use of samples: all samples must be original, and no sample could be used twice. Generally, they stuck to these rules, although almost every rule was broken at least once. An example of a exceptions were their re-use of a tom drum sample on both \"Stripped\" (1986) and \"Never Let Me Down Again\" (1987), and the hi-hat sound on the song \"Nothing\", although it was actually an (original) sample of the sound of a pneumatic bus door closing. Producer David Bascombe, who worked with the band on \"Music for the Masses\", explained that these rules helped shape the band's unique sound.\nDepeche Mode's music has been variously described as synth-pop, alternative dance, alternative rock, dance-rock, dark wave, EDM, electronic rock, industrial, new wave, pop rock and post-punk. The band have also experimented with other genres throughout their career, including avant-garde, electronica, pop, soul, techno, industrial rock, heavy metal and bossa nova.\nLegacy.\nDepeche Mode have released a total of 15 studio albums, 10 compilation albums, six live albums, eight box sets, 13 video albums, 71 music videos, and 54 singles. They have sold over 100 million records and played live to more than 35 million fans worldwide. The band has had 50 songs in the UK singles chart, and one US and two UK number-one albums. In addition, all of their studio albums have reached the UK Top 10 and their albums have spent over 210 weeks on the UK Charts. Along with the Red Hot Chili Peppers and U2, Depeche Mode are one of three acts that have charted at least once on the \"Billboard\" Alternative Airplay chart in every decade since its debut in 1988.\nIn 2006, American music critic Sasha Frere-Jones stated that \"the last serious English influence was Depeche Mode, who seem more and more significant as time passes.\" Depeche Mode's releases have been nominated for five Grammy Awards: \"Devotional\" for Best Long Form Music Video; \"I Feel Loved\" and \"Suffer Well\", both for Best Dance Recording; \"Sounds of the Universe\" for Best Alternative Album; and \"Wrong\" for Best Short Form Music Video. In addition, Depeche Mode have been honoured with a Brit Award for \"Enjoy the Silence\" in the Best British Single category, the first-ever \"Q\" Innovation Award, and an Ivor Novello Award for Martin Gore in the category of International Achievement.\nDepeche Mode were called \"the most popular electronic band the world has ever known\" by \"Q\", \"one of the greatest British pop groups of all time\" by \"The Sunday Telegraph\", and \"the quintessential eighties techno-pop band\" by \"Rolling Stone\" and AllMusic. They were ranked No. 2 on Electronic Music Realm's list of The 100 Greatest Artists of Electronic Music, and \"Q\" included them on their list of \"50 bands that changed the world\".\nOther musicians have stated their admiration for Depeche Mode. In an interview in 2009, Simple Minds lead singer Jim Kerr argued that Depeche Mode and U2 were the only contemporaries of his band which could be said to have \"stayed constantly relevant\". Muse's Matt Bellamy said, \"They had their own thing, their own style, own sound. I respect them very much.\" During Depeche Mode's induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, Coldplay's Chris Martin remarked, \"sonically, they were and are about throwing away all the rulebooks.\" Arcade Fire's Win Butler added, \"I feel like their music still sounds like it could come out 20 years from now. Depeche were able to take that spirit and spread it, which is really kind of a sacred responsibility.\"\nOn December 13, 2023, Los Angeles city council member Monica Rodriguez, officially declared December 13th as \"Depeche Mode Day\" in the city of Los Angeles. Dave Gahan and Martin Gore were present as they were honored in a public ceremony held at Los Angeles City Hall.\nInfluence.\nMany major artists have cited the band as an influence, including: Arcade Fire, the Killers, Nine Inch Nails, Chvrches, the Smashing Pumpkins, Coldplay, Muse, Metric, No Doubt, A Perfect Circle, Marilyn Manson, Linkin Park, the Crystal Method, Fear Factory, La Roux, Gotye, Rammstein, a-ha, Tegan and Sara and Paul van Dyk. Depeche Mode contemporaries Pet Shop Boys, Tears for Fears and Gary Numan have also cited the band as an influence. Colombian singer Shakira described \"Enjoy the Silence\" as the song that first sparked her passion for pop music.\nThe dark themes and moods of Depeche Mode's lyrics and music have been enjoyed by several heavy metal artists, and the band influenced acts such as Marilyn Manson and Deftones. Trent Reznor of Nine Inch Nails also cited Depeche Mode, in particular their 1986 album \"Black Celebration\", as a major influence on his beginnings. They have also been named as an influence on Detroit techno and indie rock.\nPhilanthropy.\nEarly in their career, Depeche Mode were dismissive of benefit concerts such as Live Aid. Gore stated, \"If these bands really care so much, they should just donate the money and let that be it. Why can't they do it without all the surrounding hype?\".\nSince 2010, the band have applied their celebrity and cultural longevity to help promote and raise funds for several notable charity endeavours. They lent their support to high-profile charities such as MusiCares, Cancer Research UK and the Teenage Cancer Trust. The band has also supported the Small Steps Project, a humanitarian organization based in the UK, aiming to assist economically disadvantaged children into education. They have partnered with Swiss watchmaker Hublot to support , aimed at the provision of clean drinking water in developing countries. Such collaboration led to the release of two different limited edition watches, the Hublot Big Bang Depeche Mode in 2017 and The Singles Limited Edition series based from the Big Bang model in 2018. The proceeds helped raise $1.7 million for Charity: Water. In 2014, the partnership hosted a gala and fundraiser at the TsUM building in Moscow, raising $1.4 million for the charity.\nTours.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8535", "revid": "4082870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8535", "title": "Discordian", "text": ""}
{"id": "8536", "revid": "45045051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8536", "title": "Differential cryptanalysis", "text": "General form of cryptanalysis applicable primarily to block ciphers\nDifferential cryptanalysis is a general form of cryptanalysis applicable primarily to block ciphers, but also to stream ciphers and cryptographic hash functions. In the broadest sense, it is the study of how differences in information input can affect the resultant difference at the output. In the case of a block cipher, it refers to a set of techniques for tracing differences through the network of transformation, discovering where the cipher exhibits non-random behavior, and exploiting such properties to recover the secret key (cryptography key).\nHistory.\nThe discovery of differential cryptanalysis is generally attributed to Eli Biham and Adi Shamir in the late 1980s, who published a number of attacks against various block ciphers and hash functions, including a theoretical weakness in the Data Encryption Standard (DES). It was noted by Biham and Shamir that DES was surprisingly resistant to differential cryptanalysis, but small modifications to the algorithm would make it much more susceptible.\nIn 1994, a member of the original IBM DES team, Don Coppersmith, published a paper stating that differential cryptanalysis was known to IBM as early as 1974, and that defending against differential cryptanalysis had been a design goal. According to author Steven Levy, IBM had discovered differential cryptanalysis on its own, and the NSA was apparently well aware of the technique. IBM kept some secrets, as Coppersmith explains: \"After discussions with NSA, it was decided that disclosure of the design considerations would reveal the technique of differential cryptanalysis, a powerful technique that could be used against many ciphers. This in turn would weaken the competitive advantage the United States enjoyed over other countries in the field of cryptography.\" Within IBM, differential cryptanalysis was known as the \"T-attack\" or \"Tickle attack\".\nWhile DES was designed with resistance to differential cryptanalysis in mind, other contemporary ciphers proved to be vulnerable. An early target for the attack was the FEAL block cipher. The original proposed version with four rounds (FEAL-4) can be broken using only eight chosen plaintexts, and even a 31-round version of FEAL is susceptible to the attack. In contrast, the scheme can successfully cryptanalyze DES with an effort on the order of 247 chosen plaintexts.\nAttack mechanics.\nDifferential cryptanalysis is usually a chosen plaintext attack, meaning that the attacker must be able to obtain ciphertexts for some set of plaintexts of their choosing. There are, however, extensions that would allow a known plaintext or even a ciphertext-only attack. The basic method uses pairs of plaintexts related by a constant \"difference\". Difference can be defined in several ways, but the eXclusive OR (XOR) operation is usual. The attacker then computes the differences of the corresponding ciphertexts, hoping to detect statistical patterns in their distribution. The resulting pair of differences is called a differential. Their statistical properties depend upon the nature of the S-boxes used for encryption, so the attacker analyses differentials formula_1 where\nformula_2\n(and \u2295 denotes exclusive or) for each such S-box \"S\". In the basic attack, one particular ciphertext difference is expected to be especially frequent. In this way, the cipher can be distinguished from random. More sophisticated variations allow the key to be recovered faster than an exhaustive search.\nIn the most basic form of key recovery through differential cryptanalysis, an attacker requests the ciphertexts for a large number of plaintext pairs, then assumes that the differential holds for at least \"r\" \u2212 1 rounds, where \"r\" is the total number of rounds. The attacker then deduces which round keys (for the final round) are possible, assuming the difference between the blocks before the final round is fixed. When round keys are short, this can be achieved by simply exhaustively decrypting the ciphertext pairs one round with each possible round key. When one round key has been deemed a potential round key considerably more often than any other key, it is assumed to be the correct round key.\nFor any particular cipher, the input difference must be carefully selected for the attack to be successful. An analysis of the algorithm's internals is undertaken; the standard method is to trace a path of highly probable differences through the various stages of encryption, termed a \"differential characteristic\".\nSince differential cryptanalysis became public knowledge, it has become a basic concern of cipher designers. New designs are expected to be accompanied by evidence that the algorithm is resistant to this attack and many including the Advanced Encryption Standard, have been proven secure against the attack.\nAttack in detail.\nThe attack relies primarily on the fact that a given input/output difference pattern only occurs for certain values of inputs. Usually the attack is applied in essence to the non-linear components as if they were a solid component (usually they are in fact look-up tables or \"S-boxes\"). Observing the desired output difference (between two chosen or known plaintext inputs) \"suggests\" possible key values.\nFor example, if a differential of 1 =&gt; 1 (implying a difference in the least significant bit (LSB) of the input leads to an output difference in the LSB) occurs with probability of 4/256 (possible with the non-linear function in the AES cipher for instance) then for only 4 values (or 2 pairs) of inputs is that differential possible. Suppose we have a non-linear function where the key is XOR'ed before evaluation and the values that allow the differential are {2,3} and {4,5}. If the attacker sends in the values of {6, 7} and observes the correct output difference it means the key is either 6 \u2295 K = 2, or 6 \u2295 K = 4, meaning the key K is either 2 or 4.\nIn essence, to protect a cipher from the attack, for an n-bit non-linear function one would ideally seek as close to 2\u2212(\"n\" \u2212 1) as possible to achieve \"differential uniformity\". When this happens, the differential attack requires as much work to determine the key as simply brute forcing the key.\nThe AES non-linear function has a maximum differential probability of 4/256 (most entries however are either 0 or 2). Meaning that in theory one could determine the key with half as much work as brute force, however, the high branch of AES prevents any high probability trails from existing over multiple rounds. In fact, the AES cipher would be just as immune to differential and linear attacks with a much \"weaker\" non-linear function. The incredibly high branch (active S-box count) of 25 over 4R means that over 8 rounds, no attack involves fewer than 50 non-linear transforms, meaning that the probability of success does not exceed Pr[attack] \u2264 Pr[best attack on S-box]50. For example, with the current S-box AES emits no fixed differential with a probability higher than (4/256)50 or 2\u2212300 which is far lower than the required threshold of 2\u2212128 for a 128-bit block cipher. This would have allowed room for a more efficient S-box, even if it is 16-uniform the probability of attack would have still been 2\u2212200.\nThere exist no bijections for even sized inputs/outputs with 2-uniformity. They exist in odd fields (such as GF(27)) using either cubing or inversion (there are other exponents that can be used as well). For instance, S(x) = x3 in any odd binary field is immune to differential and linear cryptanalysis. This is in part why the MISTY designs use 7- and 9-bit functions in the 16-bit non-linear function. What these functions gain in immunity to differential and linear attacks, they lose to algebraic attacks. That is, they are possible to describe and solve via a SAT solver. This is in part why AES (for instance) has an affine mapping after the inversion.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8537", "revid": "7802543", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8537", "title": "Document type definition", "text": "Set of markup declarations for SGML-family markup languageA document type definition (DTD) is a specification file that contains a set of \"markup declarations\" that define a \"document type\" for an SGML-family markup language (GML, SGML, XML, HTML). The DTD specification file can be used to validate documents. \nA DTD defines the valid building blocks of an XML document. It defines the document structure with a list of validated elements and attributes. A DTD can be declared inline inside an XML document, or as an external reference.\nA namespace-aware version of DTDs is being developed as Part 9 of ISO DSDL. DTDs persist in applications that need special publishing characters, such as the XML and HTML Character Entity References, which derive from larger sets defined as part of the ISO SGML standard effort. XML uses a subset of SGML DTD.\nAs of 2009[ [update]], newer XML namespace-aware schema languages (such as W3C XML Schema and ISO RELAX NG) have largely superseded DTDs as a better way to validate XML structure.\nAssociating DTDs with documents.\nA DTD is associated with an XML or SGML document by means of a document type declaration (DOCTYPE). The DOCTYPE appears in the syntactic fragment \"doctypedecl\" near the start of an XML document. The declaration establishes that the document is an instance of the type defined by the referenced DTD.\nDOCTYPEs make two sorts of declarations:\nThe declarations in the internal subset form part of the DOCTYPE in the document itself. The declarations in the external subset are located in a separate text file. The external subset may be referenced via a \"public identifier\" and/or a \"system identifier\". Programs for reading documents may not be required to read the external subset.\nAny valid SGML or XML document that references an \"external subset\" in its DTD, or whose body contains references to \"parsed external entities\" declared in its DTD (including those declared within its \"internal subset\"), may only be partially parsed but cannot be fully validated by \"validating\" SGML or XML parsers in their \"standalone\" mode (this means that these validating parsers do not attempt to retrieve these external entities, and their replacement text is not accessible).\nHowever, such documents are still fully parsable in the \"non\"-standalone mode of validating parsers, which signals an error if it can not locate these external entities with their specified \"public identifier\" (FPI) or \"system identifier\" (a URI), or are inaccessible. (Notations declared in the DTD are also referencing external entities, but these unparsed entities are not needed for the validation of documents in the \"standalone\" mode of these parsers: the validation of all external entities referenced by notations is left to the application using the SGML or XML parser). Non-validating parsers \"may\" eventually attempt to locate these external entities in the \"non\"-standalone mode (by partially interpreting the DTD only to resolve their declared parsable entities), but do not validate the content model of these documents.\nExamples.\nThe following example of a DOCTYPE contains both public and system identifiers:\n&lt;!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC \"-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN\"\n\"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd\"&gt;\nAll HTML 4.01 documents conform to one of three SGML DTDs. The public identifiers of these DTDs are constant and are as follows:\nThe system identifiers of these DTDs, if present in the DOCTYPE, are URI references. A system identifier usually points to a specific set of declarations in a resolvable location. SGML allows mapping public identifiers to system identifiers in catalogs that are optionally available to the URI resolvers used by document parsing software.\nThis DOCTYPE can only appear \"after\" the optional XML declaration, and before the document body, if the document syntax conforms to XML. This includes XHTML documents:\n&lt;?xml version=\"1.0\" encoding=\"utf-8\"?&gt;\n&lt;!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC \"-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN\"\n\"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd\"&gt;\n&lt;!-- the XHTML document body starts here--&gt;\n&lt;html xmlns=\"http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml\"&gt;\n&lt;/html&gt;\nAn additional internal subset can also be provided after the external subset:\n&lt;?xml version=\"1.0\" encoding=\"utf-8\"?&gt;\n&lt;!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC \"-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN\"\n\"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd\" [\n &lt;!-- an internal subset can be embedded here --&gt;\n&lt;!-- the XHTML document body starts here--&gt;\n&lt;html xmlns=\"http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml\"&gt;\n&lt;/html&gt;\nAlternatively, only the internal subset may be provided:\n&lt;?xml version=\"1.0\" encoding=\"utf-8\"?&gt;\n&lt;!DOCTYPE html [\n &lt;!-- an internal subset can be embedded here --&gt;\n&lt;!-- the XHTML document body starts here--&gt;\n&lt;html xmlns=\"http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml\"&gt;\n&lt;/html&gt;\nFinally, the document type definition may include no subset at all; in that case, it just specifies that the document has a single top-level element (this is an implicit requirement for all valid XML and HTML documents, but not for document fragments or for all SGML documents, whose top-level elements may be different from the implied root element), and it indicates the type name of the root element:\n&lt;?xml version=\"1.0\" encoding=\"utf-8\"?&gt;\n&lt;!DOCTYPE html&gt;\n&lt;!-- the XHTML document body starts here--&gt;\n&lt;html xmlns=\"http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml\"&gt;\n&lt;/html&gt;\nMarkup declarations.\nDTDs describe the structure of a class of documents via element and attribute-list declarations. Element declarations name the allowable set of elements within the document, and specify whether and how declared elements and runs of character data may be contained within each element. Attribute-list declarations name the allowable set of attributes for each declared element, including the type of each attribute value, if not an explicit set of valid values.\nDTD markup declarations declare which element types, attribute lists, entities, and notations are allowed in the structure of the corresponding class of XML documents.\nElement type declarations.\nAn element type declaration defines an element and its possible content. A valid XML document contains only elements that are defined in the DTD.\nVarious keywords and characters specify an element's content:\nFor example:\n&lt;!ELEMENT html (head, body)&gt;\n&lt;!ELEMENT p (#PCDATA | p | ul | dl | table | h1|h2|h3)*&gt;\nElement type declarations are ignored by \"non-validating\" SGML and XML parsers (in which cases, any elements are accepted in any order, and in any number of occurrences in the parsed document), but these declarations are still checked for form and validity.\nAttribute list declarations.\nAn attribute list specifies for a given element type the list of all possible attribute associated with that type. For each possible attribute, it contains:\nFor example:\n&lt;!ATTLIST img\n src CDATA #REQUIRED\n id ID #IMPLIED\n sort CDATA #FIXED \"true\"\n print (yes | no) \"yes\"\nHere are some attribute types supported by both SGML and XML:\nA default value can define whether an attribute must occur (codice_23) or not (codice_24), or whether it has a fixed value (codice_25), or which value should be used as a default value (\"\u2026\") in case the given attribute is left out in an XML tag.\nAttribute list declarations are ignored by \"non-validating\" SGML and XML parsers (in which cases any attribute is accepted within all elements of the parsed document), but these declarations are still checked for well-formedness and validity.\nEntity declarations.\nAn entity is similar to a macro. The entity declaration assigns it a value that is retained throughout the document. A common use is to have a name more recognizable than a numeric character reference for an unfamiliar character. Entities help to improve legibility of an XML text. In general, there are two types: internal and external.\nAn example of internal entity declarations (here in an internal DTD subset of an SGML document) is:\n&lt;!DOCTYPE sgml [\n &lt;!ELEMENT sgml ANY&gt;\n &lt;!ENTITY % std \"standard SGML\"&gt;\n &lt;!ENTITY % signature \" &amp;#x2014; &amp;author;.\"&gt;\n &lt;!ENTITY % question \"Why couldn&amp;#x2019;t I publish my books directly in %std;?\"&gt;\n &lt;!ENTITY % author \"William Shakespeare\"&gt;\n&lt;sgml&gt;&amp;question;&amp;signature;&lt;/sgml&gt;\nInternal entities may be defined in any order, as long as they are not referenced and parsed in the DTD or in the body of the document, in their order of parsing: it is valid to include a reference to a still undefined entity within the content of a parsed entity, but it is invalid to include anywhere else any named entity reference before this entity has been fully defined, including all other internal entities referenced in its defined content (this also prevents circular or recursive definitions of internal entities). This document is parsed as if it was:\n&lt;!DOCTYPE sgml [\n &lt;!ELEMENT sgml ANY&gt;\n &lt;!ENTITY % std \"standard SGML\"&gt;\n &lt;!ENTITY % signature \" \u2014 &amp;author;.\"&gt;\n &lt;!ENTITY % question \"Why couldn\u2019t I publish my books directly in standard SGML?\"&gt;\n &lt;!ENTITY % author \"William Shakespeare\"&gt;\n&lt;sgml&gt;Why couldn\u2019t I publish my books directly in standard SGML? \u2014 William Shakespeare.&lt;/sgml&gt;\nReference to the \"author\" internal entity is not substituted in the replacement text of the \"signature\" internal entity. Instead, it is replaced only when the \"signature\" entity reference is parsed within the content of the \"sgml\" element, but only by validating parsers (non-validating parsers do not substitute entity references occurring within contents of element or within attribute values, in the body of the document.\nThis is possible because the replacement text specified in the internal entity definitions permits a distinction between parameter entity references (that are introduced by the \"%\" character and whose replacement applies to the parsed DTD contents) and general entity references (that are introduced by the \"&amp;\" character and whose replacement is delayed until they are effectively parsed and validated). The \"%\" character for introducing parameter entity references in the DTD loses its special role outside the DTD and it becomes a literal character.\nHowever, the references to predefined character entities are substituted wherever they occur, without needing a validating parser (they are only introduced by the \"&amp;\" character).\nNotation declarations.\nNotations are used in SGML or XML. They provide a complete reference to unparsed external entities whose interpretation is left to the application (which interprets them directly or retrieves the external entity themselves), by assigning them a simple name, which is usable in the body of the document. For example, notations may be used to reference non-XML data in an XML 1.1 document. For example, to annotate SVG images to associate them with a specific renderer:\n&lt;!NOTATION type-image-svg SYSTEM \"image/svg\"&gt;\nThis declares the Media Type of external images with this type, and associates it with a notation name \"type-image-svg\". However, notation names usually follow a naming convention that is specific to the application generating or using the notation: notations are interpreted as additional meta-data whose effective content is an external entity and either a PUBLIC FPI, registered in the catalogs used by XML or SGML parsers, or a SYSTEM URI, whose interpretation is application dependent (here a MIME type, interpreted as a relative URI, but it could be an absolute URI to a specific renderer, or a URN indicating an OS-specific object identifier such as a UUID).\nThe declared notation name must be unique within all the document type declaration, i.e. in the external subset as well as the internal subset, at least for conformance with XML.\nNotations can be associated to unparsed external entities included in the body of the SGML or XML document. The PUBLIC or SYSTEM parameter of these external entities specifies the FPI and/or the URI where the unparsed data of the external entity is located, and the additional NDATA parameter of these defined entities specifies the additional notation (i.e., effectively the MIME type here). For example:\n&lt;!DOCTYPE sgml [\n &lt;!ELEMENT sgml (img)*&gt;\n &lt;!ELEMENT img EMPTY&gt;\n &lt;!ATTLIST img\n data ENTITY #IMPLIED&gt;\n &lt;!ENTITY example1SVG SYSTEM \"example1.svg\" NDATA example1SVG-rdf&gt;\n &lt;!NOTATION example1SVG-rdf SYSTEM \"example1.svg.rdf\"&gt;\n&lt;sgml&gt;\n &lt;img data=\"example1SVG\" /&gt;\n&lt;/sgml&gt;\nWithin the body of the SGML document, these referenced external entities (whose name is specified between \"&amp;\" and \";\") are \"not\" replaced like usual named entities (defined with a CDATA value), but are left as distinct unparsed tokens that may be used either as the value of an element attribute (like above) or within the element contents, provided that either the DTD allows such external entities in the declared content type of elements or in the declared type of attributes (here the ENTITY type for the data attribute), or the SGML parser is not validating the content.\nNotations may also be associated directly to elements as additional meta-data, without associating them to another external entity, by giving their names as possible values of some additional attributes (also declared in the DTD within the &lt;!ATTLIST ...&gt; declaration of the element). For example:\n&lt;!DOCTYPE sgml [\n &lt;!ELEMENT sgml (img)*&gt;\n the optional \"type\" attribute value can only be set to this notation.\n &lt;!ATTLIST sgml\n type NOTATION (\n type-vendor-specific ) #IMPLIED&gt;\n &lt;!ELEMENT img ANY&gt; &lt;!-- optional content can be only parsable SGML or XML data --&gt;\n The optional \"title\" attribute value must be parsable as text.\n The optional \"data\" attribute value is set to an unparsed external entity.\n The optional \"type\" attribute value can only be one of the two notations.\n &lt;!ATTLIST img\n title CDATA #IMPLIED\n data ENTITY #IMPLIED\n type NOTATION (\n type-image-svg |\n type-image-gif ) #IMPLIED&gt;\n Notations are referencing external entities and may be set in the \"type\" attributes above,\n or must be referenced by any defined external entities that cannot be parsed.\n &lt;!NOTATION type-image-svg PUBLIC \"-//W3C//DTD SVG 1.1//EN\"\n \"http://www.w3.org/Graphics/SVG/1.1/DTD/svg11.dtd\"&gt;\n &lt;!NOTATION type-image-gif PUBLIC \"image/gif\"&gt;\n &lt;!NOTATION type-vendor-specific PUBLIC \"application/VND.specific+sgml\"&gt;\n &lt;!ENTITY example1SVGTitle \"Title of example1.svg\"&gt; &lt;!-- parsed internal entity --&gt;\n &lt;!ENTITY example1SVG SYSTEM \"example1.svg\"&gt; &lt;!-- parsed external entity --&gt;\n &lt;!ENTITY example1GIFTitle \"Title of example1.gif\"&gt; &lt;!-- parsed internal entity --&gt;\n &lt;!ENTITY example1GIF SYSTEM \"example1.gif\" NDATA type-image-gif&gt; &lt;!-- unparsed external entity --&gt;\n&lt;sgml type=\"type-vendor-specific\"&gt;\n &lt;!-- an SVG image is parsable as valid SGML or XML text --&gt;\n &lt;img title=\"&amp;example1SVGTitle;\" type=\"type-image-svg\"&gt;&amp;example1SVG;&lt;/img&gt;\n &lt;!-- it can also be referenced as an unparsed external entity --&gt;\n &lt;img title=\"&amp;example1SVGTitle;\" data=\"example1SVG\" /&gt;\n &lt;!-- a GIF image is not parsable and can only be referenced as an external entity --&gt;\n &lt;img title=\"&amp;example1GIFTitle;\" data=\"example1GIF\" /&gt;\n&lt;/sgml&gt;\nThe example above shows a notation named \"type-image-svg\" that references the standard public FPI and the system identifier (the standard URI) of an SVG 1.1 document, instead of specifying just a system identifier as in the first example (which was a relative URI interpreted locally as a MIME type). This annotation is referenced directly within the unparsed \"type\" attribute of the \"img\" element, but its content is not retrieved. It also declares another notation for a vendor-specific application, to annotate the \"sgml\" root element in the document. In both cases, the declared notation named is used directly in a declared \"type\" attribute, whose content is specified in the DTD with the \"NOTATION\" attribute type (this \"type\" attribute is declared for the \"sgml\" element, as well as for the \"img\" element).\nHowever, the \"title\" attribute of the \"img\" element specifies the internal entity \"example1SVGTitle\" whose declaration that does not define an annotation, so it is parsed by validating parsers and the entity replacement text is \"Title of example1.svg\".\nThe content of the \"img\" element references another external entity \"example1SVG\" whose declaration also does not define a notation, so it is also parsed by validating parsers and the entity replacement text is located by its defined SYSTEM identifier \"example1.svg\" (also interpreted as a relative URI). The effective content for the \"img\" element be the content of this second external resource. The difference with the GIF image, is that the SVG image is parsed within the SGML document, according to the declarations in the DTD, where the GIF image is just referenced as an opaque external object (which is not parsable with SGML) via its \"data\" attribute (whose value type is an opaque ENTITY).\nOnly one notation name may be specified in the value of ENTITY attributes (there is no support in SGML, XML 1.0 or XML 1.1 for multiple notation names in the same declared external ENTITY, so separate attributes are needed). However multiple external entities may be referenced (in a space-separated list of names) in attributes declared with type ENTITIES, and where each named external entity is also declared with its own notation).\nNotations are also completely opaque for XML and SGML parsers, so they are not differentiated by the type of the external entity that they may reference (for these parsers they just have a unique name associated to a public identifier (an FPI) and/or a system identifier (a URI)).\nSome applications (but not XML or SGML parsers themselves) also allow referencing notations indirectly by naming them in the \"URN:\"name\"\" value of a standard CDATA attribute, everywhere a URI can be specified. However this behaviour is application-specific, and requires that the application maintains a catalog of known URNs to resolve them into the notations that have been parsed in a standard SGML or XML parser. This use allows notations to be defined only in a DTD stored as an external entity and referenced only as the external subset of documents, and allows these documents to remain compatible with validating XML or SGML parsers that have no direct support for notations.\nNotations are not used in HTML, or in basic profiles for XHTML and SVG, because:\nEven in validating SGML or XML 1.0 or XML 1.1 parsers, the external entities referenced by an FPI and/or URI in declared notations are not retrieved automatically by the parsers themselves. Instead, these parsers just provide to the application the parsed FPI and/or URI associated to the notations found in the parsed SGML or XML document, and with a facility for a dictionary containing all notation names declared in the DTD; these validating parsers also check the uniqueness of notation name declarations, and report a validation error if some notation names are used anywhere in the DTD or in the document body but not declared:\nXML DTDs and schema validation.\nThe XML DTD syntax is one of several XML schema languages. However, many of the schema languages do not fully replace the XML DTD. Notably, the XML DTD allows defining entities and notations that have no direct equivalents in DTD-less XML (because internal entities and parsable external entities are not part of XML schema languages, and because other unparsed external entities and notations have no simple equivalent mappings in most XML schema languages).\nMost XML schema languages are only replacements for element declarations and attribute list declarations, in such a way that it becomes possible to parse XML documents with \"non-validating\" XML parsers (if the only purpose of the external DTD subset was to define the schema). In addition, documents for these XML schema languages must be parsed separately, so validating the schema of XML documents in pure standalone mode is not really possible with these languages: the document type declaration remains necessary for at least identifying (with a XML Catalog) the schema used in the parsed XML document and that is validated in another language.\nA common misconception holds that a \"non-validating\" XML parser does not have to read document type declarations, when in fact, the document type declarations must still be scanned for correct syntax as well as validity of declarations, and the parser must still parse all entity declarations in the \"internal subset\", and substitute the replacement texts of internal entities occurring anywhere in the document type declaration or in the document body.\nA \"non-validating\" parser may, however, elect not to read parsable \"external entities\" (including the \"external subset\"), and does not have to honor the content model restrictions defined in element declarations and in attribute list declarations.\nIf the XML document depends on parsable external entities (including the specified \"external subset\", or parsable external entities declared in the \"internal subset\"), it should assert codice_26 in its XML declaration. The validating DTD may be identified by using XML Catalogs to retrieve its specified \"external subset\".\nIn the example below, the XML document is declared with codice_26 because it has an external subset in its document type declaration:\n&lt;?xml version=\"1.0\" encoding=\"UTF-8\" standalone=\"no\"?&gt;\n&lt;!DOCTYPE people_list SYSTEM \"example.dtd\"&gt;\n&lt;people_list /&gt;\nIf the XML document type declaration includes any SYSTEM identifier for the external subset, it can not be safely processed as standalone: the URI should be retrieved, otherwise there may be unknown named character entities whose definition may be needed to correctly parse the effective XML syntax in the internal subset or in the document body (the XML syntax parsing is normally performed \"after\" the substitution of all named entities, excluding the five entities that are predefined in XML and that are implicitly substituted \"after\" parsing the XML document into lexical tokens). If it just includes any PUBLIC identifier, it \"may\" be processed as standalone, if the XML processor knows this PUBLIC identifier in its local catalog from where it can retrieve an associated DTD entity.\nXML DTD schema example.\nAn example of a very simple external XML DTD to describe the schema of a list of persons might consist of:\n&lt;!ELEMENT people_list (person)*&gt;\n&lt;!ELEMENT person (name, birthdate?, gender?, socialsecuritynumber?)&gt;\n&lt;!ELEMENT name (#PCDATA)&gt;\n&lt;!ELEMENT birthdate (#PCDATA)&gt;\n&lt;!ELEMENT gender (#PCDATA)&gt;\n&lt;!ELEMENT socialsecuritynumber (#PCDATA)&gt;\nTaking this line by line:\nAn example of an XML file that uses and conforms to this DTD follows. The DTD is referenced here as an external subset, via the SYSTEM specifier and a URI. It assumes that we can identify the DTD with the relative URI reference \"example.dtd\"; the \"people_list\" after \"!DOCTYPE\" tells us that the root tags, or the first element defined in the DTD, is called \"people_list\":\n&lt;?xml version=\"1.0\" encoding=\"UTF-8\" standalone=\"no\"?&gt;\n&lt;!DOCTYPE people_list SYSTEM \"example.dtd\"&gt;\n&lt;people_list&gt;\n &lt;person&gt;\n &lt;name&gt;Fred Bloggs&lt;/name&gt;\n &lt;birthdate&gt;2008-11-27&lt;/birthdate&gt;\n &lt;gender&gt;Male&lt;/gender&gt;\n &lt;/person&gt;\n&lt;/people_list&gt;\nOne can render this in an XML-enabled browser (such as Internet Explorer or Mozilla Firefox) by pasting and saving the DTD component above to a text file named \"example.dtd\" and the XML file to a differently-named text file, and opening the XML file with the browser. The files should both be saved in the same directory. However, many browsers do not check that an XML document confirms to the rules in the DTD; they are only required to check that the DTD is syntactically correct. For security reasons, they may also choose not to read the external DTD.\nThe same DTD can also be embedded directly in the XML document itself as an internal subset, by encasing it within [square brackets] in the document type declaration, in which case the document no longer depends on external entities and can be processed in standalone mode:\n&lt;?xml version=\"1.0\" encoding=\"UTF-8\" standalone=\"yes\"?&gt;\n&lt;!DOCTYPE people_list [\n &lt;!ELEMENT people_list (person*)&gt;\n &lt;!ELEMENT person (name, birthdate?, gender?, socialsecuritynumber?)&gt;\n &lt;!ELEMENT name (#PCDATA)&gt;\n &lt;!ELEMENT birthdate (#PCDATA)&gt;\n &lt;!ELEMENT gender (#PCDATA)&gt;\n &lt;!ELEMENT socialsecuritynumber (#PCDATA)&gt;\n&lt;people_list&gt;\n &lt;person&gt;\n &lt;name&gt;Fred Bloggs&lt;/name&gt;\n &lt;birthdate&gt;2008-11-27&lt;/birthdate&gt;\n &lt;gender&gt;Male&lt;/gender&gt;\n &lt;/person&gt;\n&lt;/people_list&gt;\nAlternatives.\nAlternatives to DTDs (for specifying schemas) are available:\nSecurity.\nAn XML DTD can be used to create a Denial-of-service attack by defining nested entities that expand exponentially, or by sending the XML parser to an external resource that never returns.\nFor this reason, .NET Framework provides a property that allows prohibiting or skipping DTD parsing, and recent versions of Microsoft Office applications (Microsoft Office 2010 and higher) refuse to open XML files that contain DTD declarations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8539", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8539", "title": "Devil", "text": "Personification of evil\nA devil is the mythical personification of evil as it is conceived in various cultures and religious traditions. It is seen as the objectification of a hostile and destructive force. Jeffrey Burton Russell states that the different conceptions of the devil can be summed up as 1) a principle of evil independent from God, 2) an aspect of God, 3) a created being turning evil (a \"fallen angel\") or 4) a symbol of human evil.23\nEach tradition, culture, and religion with a devil in its mythos offers a different lens on manifestations of evil. The history of these perspectives intertwines with theology, mythology, psychiatry, art, and literature, developing independently within each of the traditions. It occurs historically in many contexts and cultures, and is given many different names\u2014Satan (Judaism), Lucifer (Christianity), Beelzebub (Judeo-Christian), Mephistopheles (German), Iblis (Islam)\u2014and attributes: it is portrayed as blue, black, or red; it is portrayed as having horns on its head, and without horns, and so on.\nEtymology.\nThe Modern English word \"devil\" derives from the Middle English \"devel\", from the Old English \"d\u0113ofol\", that in turn represents an early Germanic borrowing of the Latin \"diabolus\". \nThis in turn was borrowed from the Greek \"di\u00e1bolos\", \"slanderer\".\nThe word \"devil\" in today's Farsi is pronounced as \"dev\" or \"div\". In the \"Shahnameh\" they are mentioned as guardians of the Caspian Sea.\nDefinitions.\nIn his book \"The Devil: Perceptions of Evil from Antiquity to Primitive Christianity\", Jeffrey Burton Russell discusses various meanings and difficulties that are encountered when using the term \"devil\". He does not claim to define the word in a general sense, but he describes the limited use that he intends for the word in his book\u2014limited in order to \"minimize this difficulty\" and \"for the sake of clarity\". In this book Russell uses the word \"devil\" as \"the personification of evil found in a variety of cultures\", as opposed to the word \"Satan\", which he reserves specifically for the figure in the Abrahamic religions.\nYvonne Bonnetain describes the Devil as a mythic explanation model, in form of a personified supernatural power, for death, disease, and everything hostile to humanity.\nIn the Introduction to his book \"Satan: A Biography\", Henry Ansgar Kelly discusses various considerations and meanings that he has encountered in using terms such as \"devil\" and \"Satan\", etc. While not offering a general definition, he describes that in his book \"whenever \"diabolos\" is used as the proper name of Satan\", he signals it by using \"small caps\".\nThe \"Oxford English Dictionary\" has a variety of definitions for the meaning of \"devil\", supported by a range of citations: \"Devil\" may refer to Satan, the supreme spirit of evil, or one of Satan's emissaries or demons that populate Hell, or to one of the spirits that possess a demoniac person; \"devil\" may refer to one of the \"malignant deities\" feared and worshiped by \"heathen people\", a demon, a malignant being of superhuman powers; figuratively \"devil\" may be applied to a wicked person, or playfully to a rogue or rascal, or in empathy often accompanied by the word \"poor\" to a person\u2014\"poor devil\".\nHistory.\nPre-Historic period to Archaic period.\nMost early belief-systems had no unifying concept of evil. In the oldest available records, evil is part of nature. In Mesopotamia, evil is sometimes said to derive from primordial chaos, but there are no inherently evil demons or devils. Various spirits and deities could do both good and evil depending on whim. The oldest known Egyptian beliefs had no evil deities; the gods were morally ambivalent and required to submit to the divine order of the cosmos, evil being an action violating said harmony. In old Hindu beliefs, deities, reflecting the supreme reality, are both benevolent and fierce. Even in the Old Testament, the evil, and hence devilish characteristics, are an expression of Yahweh's wrath. Among ancient Middle Eastern beliefs, Zorastrianism was the first institutionized belief-system which developed a clear demonology headed by a supreme spirit of Evil (Angra Mainyu), i.e. Devil.\nAround 600 BC, Zarathustra urged his followers to turn away from the devas, in favor of dedicating worship to Ahura Mazda alone. Unique to Zarathustra's revelation was that he claimed that evil is not part of the Godhead (or ultimate reality), but a separate principle independent from God. For the formulation of Good and Evil as entirely separate principles, Zarathustra argued that God (Ahura Mazda) freely chooses goodness, while Angra Mainyu freely chooses evil. By doing so, he established the first known dualistic cosmological system, which would later influence other religions, including Judaism, Christianity, Manichaeism, and Islam. Alienated from the new sole deity, spirits of previous belief-systems thus became associated with the forces of evil and hence demons. As servants of the destructive spirit, the demons were believed to follow only evil; inflicting pain and causing destruction. Unfortunate souls, who find themselves in the domain of the evil spirits after death (i.e. in hell), are also tortured by the demons. Spirits found to align with the new sole deity then became the Godhead's servants (i.e. angels).\nThus, the originally monistic Canaanite form of Judaism absorbs parts of Persian dualistic tendencies during the Post-exilic period. However, Second-Temple Judaism, and later Christianity, differ from Persian dualism in some regards: the proposed omnipotence of God of the former does not allow for a radical dualism as proposed by Zorastrianism and later Manichaeism. Judeo-Christian tradition differs from earlier monistic beliefs by limiting the power of their Godhead through an evil principle or force, introduced by Zorastrianism. Christianity in particular, struggled with reconciling God's omnipresence with God's benevolence. While Zorastrianism sacrificed God's omnipotence for God's benevolence, thus giving rise to a principle Devil as independent from God, Christianity mostly insisted on the Devil being created and mildly dependent on God.\nPlatonism and early Christianity in Antiquity.\nOne way Christianity addressed the problem of evil was by distinguishing between mind and body, an idea inherited from Greek Platonism. Similar to Zorastrianism, Platonism was dualistic. However, Platonism and Christianity differ from Persian dualism insofar as that they associated goodness only with spirit and evil with matter, proposing a form of mind\u2013body dualism. According to Plato, God is like a craftsman (Demiurge) who builds the best possible world. However, God has to abide by the laws of nature and can only work with the material presented. Matter, thus, becomes the refractionary element in Plato's and later Neoplatonic models of the cosmos, resisting the perfection God originally intended. In religious beliefs, applying such theories of evil, matter (Greek: ) becomes a sphere of lack of goodness and transforms matter into the devilish principle par excellence.\nAccording to Neoplatonic cosmology, evil (or matter) results from a lack of goodness. The good spirit at the centre gives rise to several emanations, each decreasing in goodness and increasing in deficiency. Thus, in Christianity, following the privation theory of the Neo-Platonists, the Devil became the principle for the thing most remote from God. Details were worked out by Christian scholars, such as Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite and John of Damascus who argued that evil is merely a lack (or removal) of goodness. As such, the Devil was conceptualized as a fallen angel; a being brought forth as good first, but then turned evil by abandoning goodness. John of Damascus used the privation theory to combat dualistic approaches to evil. Similar rebuttals were written by Augustine of Hippo.\nThe possibly strongest form of body-mind dualism, and a radical step back towards absolute dualism as conceptualized earlier in Zorastrianism, was reestablished by Manichaeism. Manichaeism was a major religion founded in the third century AD by the Parthian prophet Mani (c.\u2009216\u2013274 AD), in the Sasanian Empire. One of its key concepts is the doctrine of \"Two Principles and Three Moments\": the world could be described as resulting from a past moment, in which two principles (good and evil) were separate, a contemporary moment in which both principles are mixed due to an assault of the world of darkness on the realm of light, and a future moment when both principles are distinct forever.\nSpread through Europe in late Antiquity and early Medieval Age.\nDue to Christian dualistic monotheism, non-Christian deities became associated with demons. Ephesians 6:12, stating \" our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the powers of this dark world and against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly realms\" inspired early Christians to think of themselves on a mission to \"drive out demons\". By the fourth century, most Christians took it for granted that the Greek pagans worshipped demons and thus belong to the realm of the spiritually impure. In the 2nd century, Justin Martyr already conceptualized the pagan deities as demons, responsible for persecution of Christians.\nBy the end of the sixth century, Mediterranean society widely identified themselves as unequivocally Christian, with an exception to Jews. The last recorded worship of another non-Christian deity is dated to the 570s. Tatian considered the pagan gods to be under the power of fate. The daimons (spirits) of the Greeks thus became the demons of the Christian's belief-system under the leadership of Zeus, whom they equated with he Devil, i.e. the leader of the foreign spirits. The Christians, however, would have broken free from the influence of the gods of the Greek pantheon and thus also free from the fetters of fate and the law.\nAbstract notions of the Devil, such as regarding evil as the mere absence of good, were far too subtle to be embraced by most theologians during the Early Middle Ages. Instead, they sought a more concrete image of the Devil to represent spiritual struggle and pain. Thus, the Devil became more of a concrete entity. From the 4th through the 12th centuries, Christian ideas combined with European pagan beliefs, created a vivid folklore about the Devil. In many German folktales, the deceived giants of pagan tales, are substituted by a devil. For example, the devil builds a bridge in exchange for the first passing being's soul, then people let a dog pass the bridge first and the devil is cheated. At the same time, magical rites calling upon pagan deities were replaced by references to Jesus Christ.\nRevival of Dualism in the Medieval Age.\nCosmological dualism underwent a revival in the 12th century by through Catharism, probably influenced by Bogomilism in the 10th century. What is known of the Cathars largely comes in what is preserved by the critics in the Catholic Church which later destroyed them in the Albigensian Crusade. Alain de Lille, c.\u20091195, accused the Cathars of believing in two gods, one of light and one of darkness. Durand de Huesca, responding to a Cathar tract c.\u20091220 indicates that they regarded the physical world as the creation of Satan. In the \"Gospel of the Secret Supper\", Lucifer, just as in prior Gnostic systems, appears as an evil demiurge, who created the material world and traps souls inside. Bogomilism owed many ideas to the earlier Paulicians in Armenia and the Near East and had strong impact on the history of the Balkans. Their true origin probably lies within earlier sects such as Nestorianism, Marcionism and Borboritism, who all share the notion of a docetic Jesus. Like these earlier movements, Bogomilites agree upon a dualism between body and soul, matter and spirit, and a struggle between good and evil. The Catholic church sanctioned dualistic teachings in the Fourth Council of the Lateran (1215), by affirming that God created everything from nothing; that the devil and his demons were created good, but turned evil by their own will; that humans yielded to the devil's temptations, thus falling into sin; and that, after Resurrection, the damned will suffer along with the devil, while the saved enjoy eternity with Christ. Only a few theologians from the University of Paris, in 1241, proposed the contrary assertion, that God created the devil evil and without his own decision.\nAfter the collapse of the Ottoman Empire, parts of Bogomil Dualism remained in Balkan folklore concerning creation: according to a story, dated back to the eleventh to thirteenth century, before God created the world, he meets a goose on the eternal ocean. The name of the Goose is reportedly \"Satanael\" and it claims to be a god. When God asks Satanael who he is, the devil answers \"the god of gods\". God requests that the devil then dive to the bottom of the sea to carry some mud, and from this mud, they fashioned the world. God created his fiery angels from the right part of a flint rock, and the Devil created his demons from the left part of the flint. Later, the devil tries to assault God but is thrown into the abyss. He remains lurking on the creation of God and planning another attack on heaven. This myth shares some resemblance with Pre-Islamic Turkic creation myths as well as Bogomilite thoughts.\nThe story bears resemblance to other Turko-Mongolian cosmogonies. According to one myth found among the Siberian Tatars, God and his first creation are envisaged in the form of ducks. God asks his creature and companion to dive into the ocean to retrieve some earth. However, the second duck, identified with Erlik Khan, turns against God and becomes his rival. A similar legend is recorded among the Altai Turks. Erlik and God swam together over the primordial waters. When God was about to create the Earth, he sent Erlik to dive into the waters and collect some mud. Erlik hid some inside his mouth to later create his own world. But when God commanded the Earth to expand, Erlik got troubled by the mud in his mouth. God aided Erlik to spit it out. The mud carried by Erlik gave place to the unpleasant areas of the world. Because of his sin, he was assigned to evil. Since he claimed equality with God by creating his own world, God punishes Erlik Khan, by granting him his own kingdom in the Underworld. In one variant, recorded by Verbitsky Vasily, not only Erlik Khan, but also the spirits he created, were banished form the heavens and cast down to the lower realms.\nChristianity.\nIn Christianity, the devil or Satan is a fallen angel who is the primary opponent of God. Some Christians also considered the Roman and Greek deities to be devils.\nChristianity describes Satan as a fallen angel who terrorizes the world through evil, is opposed to truth, and shall be condemned, together with the fallen angels who follow him, to eternal fire at the Last Judgment.\nChristian Bible.\nOld Testament.\nThe Devil is identified with several figures in the Bible including the serpent in the Garden of Eden, Lucifer, Satan, the tempter of the Gospels, Leviathan, and the dragon in the Book of Revelation. Some parts of the Bible, which do not refer to an evil spirit or Satan at the time of the composition of the texts, are interpreted as references to the Devil in Christian tradition. Genesis 3 mentions the serpent in the Garden of Eden, which tempts Adam and Eve into eating the forbidden fruit from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thus causing their expulsion from the Garden. The Babylonian myth of a rising star, as the embodiment of a heavenly being who is thrown down for his attempt to ascend into the higher planes of the gods, is also found in the Bible and interpreted as a fallen angel (Isaiah 14:12\u201315).\nEzekiel's cherub in Eden is thought to be a description of the major characteristic of the Devil, that he was created good, as a high ranking angel and lived in Eden, later turning evil on his own accord:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You were in Eden, the garden of God; every precious stone adorned you: ruby, topaz, emerald, chrysolite, onyx, jasper, sapphire, turquoise, and beryl. Gold work of tambourines and of pipes was in you. In the day that you were created they were prepared. You were the anointed cherub who covers: and I set you, so that you were on the holy mountain of God; you have walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire. You were perfect in your ways from the day that you were created, until unrighteousness was found in you.\u2014\u200a\nThe Hebrew term () was originally a common noun meaning \"accuser\" or \"adversary\" and derived from a verb meaning primarily \"to obstruct, oppose\". Satan is conceptualized as a heavenly being hostile to humans and a personification of evil 18 times in Job 1\u20132 and Zechariah 3. In the Book of Job, Job is a righteous man favored by God. Job 1:6\u20138 describes the \"sons of God\" () presenting themselves before God. Satan thinks Job only loves God because he has been blessed, so he requests that God tests the sincerity of Job's love for God through suffering, expecting Job to abandon his faith. God consents; Satan destroys Job's family, health, servants and flocks, yet Job refuses to condemn God.\nNew Testament.\nThe Devil figures much more prominently in the New Testament and in Christian theology than in the Old Testament. The Devil is a unique entity throughout the New Testament, neither identical to the demons nor the fallen angels, the tempter and perhaps rules over the kingdoms of earth. In the temptation of Christ (Matthew 4:8\u20139 and Luke 4:6\u20137), the devil offers all kingdoms of the earth to Jesus, implying they belong to him. Since Jesus does not dispute this offer, it may indicate that the authors of those gospels believed this to be true. This event is described in all three synoptic gospels, (Matthew 4:1\u201311, Mark 1:12\u201313 and Luke 4:1\u201313). Some Church Fathers, such as Irenaeus, reject that the Devil holds such power, arguing that, since the devil was a liar since the beginning, he also lied here and that all kingdoms belong to God, referring to Proverbs 21.\nAdversaries of Jesus are suggested to be under the influence of the Devil. speaks about the Pharisees as the \"offspring of the devil\". John 13:2 states that the Devil entered Judas Iscariot before Judas's betrayal (Luke 22:3). In all three synoptic gospels (Matthew 9:22\u201329, Mark 3:22\u201330 and Luke 11:14\u201320), Jesus himself is also accused of serving the Devil. Jesus's adversaries claim that he receives the power to cast out demons from Beelzebub, the Devil. In response, Jesus says that a house divided against itself will fall, and that there would be no reason for the devil to allow one to defeat the devil's works with his own power.\nAccording to the First Epistle of Peter, \"Like a roaring lion your adversary the devil prowls around, looking for someone to devour\" (1 Peter 5:8). The authors of the Second Epistle of Peter and the Epistle of Jude believe that God prepares judgment for the devil and his fellow fallen angels, who are bound in darkness until the Divine retribution. In the Epistle to the Romans, the inspirer of sin is also implied to be the author of death. The Epistle to the Hebrews speaks of the devil as the one who has the power of death but is defeated through the death of Jesus (Hebrews 2:14). In the Second Epistle to the Corinthians, Paul the Apostle warns that Satan is often disguised as an angel of light.\nIn the Book of Revelation, a dragon/serpent \"called the devil, or Satan\" wages war against the archangel Michael resulting in the dragon's fall. The devil is described with features similar to primordial chaos monsters, like the Leviathan in the Old Testament. The identification of this serpent as Satan supports identification of the serpent in Genesis with the devil.\nTheology.\nIn Christian theology the Devil is the personification of evil, traditionally held to have rebelled against God in an attempt to become equal to God himself. He is said to be a fallen angel, who was expelled from Heaven at the beginning of time, before God created the material world, and is in constant opposition to God.\nMany scholars explain the Devil's fall from God's grace in Neoplatonic fashion. According to Origen, God created rational creatures first then the material world. The rational creatures are divided into angels and humans, both endowed with free will, and the material world is a result of their evil choices. Therefore, the Devil is considered most remote from the presence of God, and those who adhere to the Devil's will follow the Devil's removal from God's presence. Similar, Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite considers evil as a deficiency having no real ontological existence. Thus the Devil is conceptualized as the entity most remote from God. Dante Alighieri's \"Inferno\" follows a similar portrayal of the Devil by placing him at the bottom of hell where he becomes the center of the material and sinful world to which all sinfulness is drawn.\nFrom the beginning of the early modern period (around the 1400s), Christians started to imagine the Devil as an increasingly powerful entity, actively leading people into falsehood. For Martin Luther the Devil was not a deficit of good, but a real, personal and powerful entity, with a presumptuous will against God, his word and his creation. Luther lists several hosts of \"greater\" and \"lesser\" devils. Greater devils would incite to greater sins, like unbelief and heresy, while lesser devils to minor sins like greed and fornication. Among these devils also appears Asmodeus known from the Book of Tobit. These anthropomorphic devils are used as stylistic devices for his audience, although Luther regards them as different manifestations of one spirit (i.e. the Devil).\nOthers rejected that the Devil has any independent reality on his own. David Joris was the first of the Anabaptists to suggest the Devil was only an allegory (c.\u20091540); this view found a small but persistent following in the Netherlands. The Devil as a fallen angel symbolized Adam's fall from God's grace and Satan represented a power within man. Rudolf Bultmann taught that Christians need to reject belief in a literal devil as part of formulating an authentic faith in today's world.\nGnostic religions.\nGnostic and Gnostic-influenced religions postulate the idea that the material world is inherently evil. The \"One true God\" is remote, beyond the material universe; therefore, this universe must be governed by an inferior imposter deity. This deity was identified with the deity of the Old Testament by some sects, such as the Sethians and the Marcions. Tertullian accuses Marcion of Sinope, that he &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; John Arendzen (1909) in the \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" (1913) mentions that Eusebius accused Apelles, the 2nd-century AD Gnostic, of considering the Inspirer of Old Testament prophecies to be not a god, but an evil angel. These writings commonly refer to the Creator of the material world as \"a demiurgus\" to distinguish him from the \"One true God\". Some texts, such as the Apocryphon of John and On the Origin of the World, not only demonized the Creator God but also called him by the name of the devil in some Jewish writings, \"Samael\".\nIslam.\nIn Islam, the principle of evil is expressed by two terms referring to the same entity: \"Shaitan\" (meaning \"astray\", \"distant\" or \"devil\") and \"Iblis\". Iblis is the proper name of the devil representing the characteristics of evil. According to the Quran, Iblis is \"one of the \"jinn\"\", which can refer to all sorts of invisible beings, including angels, demons, spirits, and devils. The early-Modern scholar Mahmud al-Alusi (1802 \u2013 29 July 1854 CE) summarizes viewpoints regarding the nature of the Devil prevailing throughout pre-Modern times:\nIblis is mentioned in the Quranic narrative about the creation of humanity. When God created Adam, he ordered the angels to prostrate themselves before him. Out of pride, Iblis refused and claimed to be superior to Adam.[Quran https://] Therefore, pride but also envy became a sign of \"unbelief\" in Islam. Thereafter, Iblis was condemned to Hell, but God granted him a request to lead humanity astray, knowing the righteous would resist Iblis's attempts to misguide them. In Islam, both good and evil are ultimately created by God. But since God's will is good, the evil in the world must be part of God's plan.\nGod allowed the Devil to seduce humanity. Evil and suffering are regarded as a test or a chance to prove confidence in God. Some philosophers and mystics emphasized Iblis himself as a role model of confidence in God. Because God ordered the angels to prostrate themselves, Iblis was forced to choose between God's command and God's will (not to praise someone other than God). He successfully passed the test, yet his disobedience caused his punishment and therefore suffering. However, he stays patient and is rewarded in the end.\nMuslims hold that the pre-Islamic jinn, tutelary deities, became subject under Islam to the judgment of God, and that those who did not submit to the law of God are devils.\nAlthough Iblis is often compared to the devil in Christian theology, Islam rejects the idea that Satan is an opponent of God and the implied struggle between God and the devil. Iblis might either be regarded as \"the most monotheistic\" or \"the greatest sinner\", but remains only a creature of God. Iblis did not become an unbeliever due to his disobedience, but because of attributing injustice to God; that is, by asserting that the command to prostrate himself before Adam was inappropriate. There is no reference to angelic revolt in the Quran and no mention of Iblis trying to take God's throne, and Iblis's sin could be forgiven at any time by God. According to the Quran, Iblis's disobedience was due to his disdain for humanity, a narrative already occurring in early New Testament apocrypha.\nAs in Christianity, Iblis was once a pious creature of God but later cast out of Heaven due to his pride. However, to maintain God's absolute sovereignty, Islam matches the line taken by Irenaeus instead of the later Christian consensus that the devil did not rebel against God but against humanity. Further, although Iblis is generally regarded as a real bodily entity, he plays a less significant role as the personification of evil than in Christianity. Iblis is merely a tempter, notable for inciting humans into sin by \"whispering\" into humans minds (\"wasw\u0101s\"), akin to the Jewish idea of the devil as \"yetzer hara\".\nOn the other hand, \"Shaitan\" refers unilaterally to forces of evil, including the devil Iblis who causes mischief. Shaitan is also linked to humans' psychological nature, appearing in dreams, causing anger, or interrupting the mental preparation for prayer. Furthermore, the term \"Shaitan\" also refers to beings who follow the evil suggestions of Iblis. Also, the principle of \"shaitan\" is in many ways a symbol of spiritual impurity, representing humans' own deficits, in contrast to a \"true Muslim\", who is free from anger, lust and other devilish desires.\nIn Muslim culture, devils are believed to be hermaphrodite creatures created from hell-fire, with one male and one female thigh, and able to procreate without a mate. It is generally believed that devils can harm the souls of humans through their whisperings. While whisperings tempt humans to sin, the devils might enter the hearth (\"qalb\") of an individual. If the devils take over the soul of a person, this would render them aggressive or insane. In extreme cases, the alterings of the soul are believed to have effect on the body, matching its spiritual qualities.\nSunni theology.\nIslamic theology (\"kalam\") does not discuss the role of Iblis in as much as related to angels and demons (\"jinn\" and \"shay\u0101\u1e6d\u012bn\"), but rather in his role as the principle of evil. One major concern of Muslim theologians was to disprove cosmological dualism, the idea that the Devil partakes in the creation of the world, i.e. that God creates goodness and the Devil creates evil. According to Sunni creed, God is the originator of both good and evil. Thus, the Devil, as embodiment of evil, is an example on the fate of the disbelievers (\"kuff\u0101r\"), rather than an independent principle. Like Iblis, disbelievers are also held to be misguided by God, for, as it has been demonstrated in the case of Iblis, belief and unbelief depend on God's will not on the individual.\nIt further shows that the blessed can become damned and the damned become blessed, as Iblis, when he was the leader of the angels, was happy, but miserable after his fall. Abu-Sufyani is the opposite example, someone who was miserable but then became blessed once he became a Muslim. The principle Devil also demonstrates that disobedience does not equal unbelief because Iblis became an unbeliever due to his arrogance and will to follow his own desires rather than loving God.\nIn Sufism and mysticism.\nIn contrast to Occidental philosophy, the Sufi idea of seeing \"Many as One\" and considering the creation in its essence as the Absolute, leads to the idea of the dissolution of any dualism between the ego substance and the \"external\" substantial objects. The rebellion against God, mentioned in the Quran, takes place on the level of the psyche that must be trained and disciplined for its union with the spirit that is pure. Since psyche drives the body, \"flesh\" is not the obstacle to humans but rather an unawareness that allows the impulsive forces to cause rebellion against God on the level of the psyche. Yet it is not a dualism between body, psyche and spirit, since the spirit embraces both psyche and corporeal aspects of humanity. Since the world is held to be the mirror in which God's attributes are reflected, participation in worldly affairs is not necessarily seen as opposed to God. The devil activates the selfish desires of the psyche, leading the human astray from the Divine. Thus, it is the \"I\" that is regarded as evil, and both Iblis and \"Pharao\" are present as symbols for uttering \"I\" in ones own behavior. Therefore, it is recommended to use the term \"I\" as little as possible. It is only God who has the right to say \"I\", since it is only God who is self-subsistent. Uttering \"I\" is therefore a way to compare oneself to God, regarded as \"shirk\".\nIslamist movements.\nMany Salafi strands emphasize a dualistic worldview between believers and unbelievers, The unbelievers are considered to be under the domain of the Devil and are the enemies of the faithful. The former are credited with tempting the latter to sin and away from God's path. The Devil will ultimately be defeated by the power of God, but remains until then a serious threat for the believer.\nThe notion of a substantial reality of evil (or a form of dualism between God and the Devil) has no precedence in the Quran or earlier Muslim traditions. The writings of ibn Sina, Ghazali, and ibn Taimiyya, all describe evil as the absence of good, rather than having any positive existence. Accordingly, infidelity among humans, civilizations, and empires are not described as evil or devilish in Classical Islamic sources. This is in stark contrast to Islamists, such as Osama bin Laden, who justifies his violence against the infidels by contrary assertions.\nWhile in classical hadiths, devils (\"shay\u0101\u1e6d\u012bn\") and jinn are responsible for ritual impurity, many Salafis substitute local demons by an omnipresent threat through the Devil himself. Only through remembrance of God and ritual purity, can the devil be kept away. As such, the Devil becomes an increasingly powerful entity who is believed to interfer with both personal and political life. For example, many Salafis blame the Devil for Western emancipation.\nJudaism.\nYahweh, the god in pre-exilic Judaism, created both good and evil, as stated in Isaiah 45:7: \"I form the light, and create darkness: I make peace, and create evil: I the Lord do all these things.\" The Devil does not exist in Jewish scriptures. Satan, who will later become a representative for the Devil in Christian tradition, is not yet the Devil. The Hebrew term \u015b\u0101\u1e6d\u0101n (Hebrew: \u05e9\u05b8\u05bc\u05c2\u05d8\u05b8\u05df), meaning \"accuser\" or \"adversary\", was applied to both human and heavenly adversaries. However, even when the term is referring to a supernatural adversary, such as in Numbers 22:22 and in Job 1\u20132, Satan is merely one \"of the Sons of God\", a manifestation of God's will.\nUnder influence of Zoroastrianism during the Achaemenid Empire, which introduced the idea of Evil as a separate principle into the Jewish belief system, Satan gradually developed into an independent principle, abolishing the Godhead from evil actions. In the Book of Jubilees, the evil angel Mastema substitutes deprecated actions of Yahweh. Nonetheless, Mastema can only act with God's permission and only succeeds when attacking non-Jewish nations.\nIn the Book of Enoch, there is an entire class of angels called satans. According to Jeffrey Burton Russell, Satan is yet another name for Azazel, the leader of the rebel angel of the story. Derek R. Brown argues that here, the Devil and the satans are still distinct: while Azazel and his angels rebel against God, the satans act on God's behalf as God's executioners of Divine Judgement. The fallen angels are blamed for introducing the forbidden arts of war into the world and sire demonic offspring with human women. By ascribing the origin of evil to angels acting from God independently, evil is attributed to something supernatural from without; external to the prevailing belief-system. Due to resemblance of the fallen angels with creatures of Greek mythology, the fallen angels might be a reaction invading Hellenistic culture, resulting in perceived oppression of the Jews.\nThe story of fallen angels, proposing a second independent power in heaven, was at odds with later Rabbinic Judaism. Therefore, the Book of Enoch, which depicted the evil as an independent force besides God were rejected. After the apocalyptic period, references to Satan in the Tanakh are thought to be allegorical.\nMandaeism.\nIn Mandaean mythology, Ruha fell apart from the World of Light and became the queen of the World of Darkness, also referred to as Sheol. She is considered evil and a liar, sorcerer and seductress.She gives birth to Ur, also referred to as Leviathan. He is portrayed as a large, ferocious dragon or snake and is considered the king of the World of Darkness. Together they rule the underworld and create the seven planets and twelve zodiac constellations. Also found in the underworld is Krun, the greatest of the five Mandaean Lords of the underworld. He dwells in the lowest depths of creation and his epithet is the 'mountain of flesh'. Prominent infernal beings found in the World of Darkness include \"lilith\", \"nalai\" (vampire), \"niuli\" (hobgoblin), \"latabi\" (devil), \"gadalta\" (ghost), \"satani\" (Satan) and various other demons and evil spirits.\nManichaeism.\nIn Manichaeism, God and the devil are two unrelated principles. God created \"good\" and inhabits the realm of light, while the devil (also called the \"prince of darkness\") created evil and inhabits the kingdom of darkness. The contemporary world came into existence, when the kingdom of darkness assaulted the kingdom of light and mingled with the spiritual world. At the end, the devil and his followers will be sealed forever and the kingdom of light and the kingdom of darkness will continue to co-exist eternally, never to commingle again.\nHegemonius (4th century CE) accuses that the Persian prophet Mani, founder of the Manichaean sect in the 3rd century CE, identified Jehovah as \"the devil god which created the world\" and said that \"he who spoke with Moses, the Jews, and the priests ... is the [Prince] of Darkness, ... not the god of truth.\"\nYazidism.\nDualism is rejected by Yazidis; according to Yazidism, evil is nonexistent\nand there is no entity that represents evil in opposition to God. Yazidis adhere to strict monism and are prohibited from uttering the word \"devil\" and from speaking of anything related to Hell.\nZoroastrianism.\n \nZoroastrianism probably introduced the first idea of the devil; a principle of evil independently existing apart from God. In Zoroastrianism, good and evil derive from two ultimately opposed forces. The force of good is called Ahura Mazda and the \"destructive spirit\" in the Avestan language is called Angra Mainyu. The Middle Persian equivalent is Ahriman. They are in eternal struggle and neither is all-powerful, especially Angra Mainyu is limited to space and time: in the end of time, he will be finally defeated. While Ahura Mazda creates what is good, Angra Mainyu is responsible for every evil and suffering in the world, such as toads and scorpions.\nIranian Zoroastrians also considered the Daeva as devil creature, because of this in the Shahnameh, it is mentioned as both Ahriman Div () as a devil.\nDevil in moral philosophy.\nSpinoza.\nA non-published manuscript of Spinoza's \"Ethics\" contained a chapter (Chapter XXI) on the devil, where Spinoza examined whether the devil may exist or not. He defines the devil as an entity which is contrary to God.46150 However, if the devil is the opposite of God, the devil would consist of Nothingness, which does not exist.145\nIn a paper called \"On Devils\", he writes that we can a priori find out that such a thing cannot exist. Because the duration of a thing results in its degree of perfection, and the more essence a thing possess the more lasting it is, and since the devil has no perfection at all, it is impossible for the devil to be an existing thing.72 Evil or immoral behaviour in humans, such as anger, hate, envy, and all things for which the devil is blamed for could be explained without the proposal of a devil.145 Thus, the devil does not have any explanatory power and should be dismissed (Occam's razor).\nRegarding evil through free choice, Spinoza asks how it can be that Adam would have chosen sin over his own well-being. Theology traditionally responds to this by asserting it is the devil who tempts humans into sin, but who would have tempted the devil? According to Spinoza, a rational being, such as the devil must have been, could not choose his own damnation. The devil must have known his sin would lead to doom, thus the devil was not knowing, or the devil did not know his sin will lead to doom, thus the devil would not have been a rational being. Spinoza concluded a strict determinism in which moral agency as a free choice, cannot exist.150\nKant.\nThe Devil found a way into rational discourse through Immanuel Kant's personification of the \"idea of absolute egoism\". In \"Religion Within the Limits of Reason Alone\", Immanuel Kant uses the devil as the personification of maximum moral reprehensibility. Deviating from the common Christian idea, Kant does not locate the morally reprehensible in sensual urges. Since evil has to be intelligible, only when the sensual is consciously placed above the moral obligation can something be regarded as morally evil. Thus, to be evil, the devil must be able to comprehend morality but consciously reject it, and, as a \"spiritual being\" (Geistwesen), having no relation to any form of sensual pleasure. It is necessarily required for the devil to be a spiritual being because if the devil were also a sensual being, it would be possible that the devil does evil to satisfy lower sensual desires, and does not act from the mind alone. The devil acts against morals, not to satisfy sensual lust, but solely for the sake of evil. As such, the devil is unselfish, for he does not benefit from his evil deeds.\nHowever, Kant denies that a human being could ever be completely devilish, since a human does not act evil for the sake of evil itself, but for is perceived as good, such as a law or self-love. Kant argues that despite that there are devilish vices (ingratitude, envy, and malicious joy), i.e., vices that do not bring any personal advantage, however, the person cannot act for the sake of evil itself and thus, not be considered a devil. In his \"Lecture on Moral Philosophy\" (1774/75) Kant gives an example of a tulip seller who was in possession of a rare tulip, but when he learned that another seller had the same tulip, he bought it from him and then destroyed it instead of keeping it for himself. If he had acted according to his sensual urges, the seller would have kept the tulip for himself to make a profit, but not have destroyed it. Nevertheless, the destruction of the tulip cannot be completely absolved from sensual impulses, since a sensual joy or relief still accompanies the destruction of the tulip and therefore cannot be thought of solely as a violation of morality.156\u2013173\nKant further argues that a (spiritual) devil would be a self-contradiction. If the devil would be defined by doing evil, the devil had no free choice in the first place. But if the devil had no free-choice, the devil could not have been held accountable for his actions, since he had no free will but was only following his nature.\nNames, titles, and epithets.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nContemporary belief.\nOpinion polls show that belief in the devil in Western countries is more common in the United States ... \nwhere it is more common among the religious, regular church goers, political conservatives, and the older and less well educated, but has declined in recent decades.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8540", "revid": "43070105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8540", "title": "Diesel engine", "text": "Type of internal combustion engine\nThe diesel engine is an internal combustion engine in which ignition of diesel fuel is caused by the elevated temperature of the air in the cylinder due to mechanical compression; thus, the diesel engine is called a compression-ignition engine (or CI engine). This contrasts with engines using spark plug-ignition of the air-fuel mixture, such as a petrol engine (gasoline engine) or a gas engine (using a gaseous fuel like natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas). The diesel engine is named after its inventor, German engineer Rudolf Diesel.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIntroduction.\nDiesel engines work by compressing only air, or air combined with residual combustion gases from the exhaust (known as exhaust gas recirculation, \"EGR\"). Air is inducted into the chamber during the intake stroke, and compressed during the compression stroke. This increases air temperature inside the cylinder so that atomised diesel fuel injected into the combustion chamber ignites. The torque a diesel engine produces is controlled by manipulating the air-fuel ratio (\u03bb); instead of throttling the intake air, the diesel engine relies on altering the amount of fuel that is injected, and thus the air-fuel ratio is usually high.\nThe diesel engine has the highest thermal efficiency \"(see engine efficiency)\" of any practical internal or external combustion engine due to its very high expansion ratio and inherent lean burn, which enables heat dissipation by excess air. A small efficiency loss is also avoided compared with non-direct-injection gasoline engines, as unburned fuel is not present during valve overlap, and therefore no fuel goes directly from the intake/injection to the exhaust. Low-speed diesel engines (as used in ships and other applications where overall engine weight is relatively unimportant) can reach effective efficiencies of up to 55%. The combined cycle gas turbine (Brayton and Rankine cycle) is a combustion engine that is more efficient than a diesel engine, but due to its mass and dimensions, is unsuitable for many vehicles, including watercraft and some aircraft. The world's largest diesel engines put in service are 14-cylinder, two-stroke marine diesel engines; they produce a peak power of almost 100\u00a0MW each.\nDiesel engines may be designed with either two-stroke or four-stroke combustion cycles. They were originally used as a more efficient replacement for stationary steam engines. Since the 1910s, they have been used in submarines and ships. Use in locomotives, buses, trucks, heavy equipment, agricultural equipment and electricity generation plants followed later. In the 1930s, they slowly began to be used in some automobiles. Since the 1970s energy crisis, demand for higher fuel efficiency has resulted in most major automakers, at some point, offering diesel-powered models, even in very small cars. According to Konrad Reif (2012), the EU average for diesel cars at the time accounted for half of newly registered cars. However, air pollution and overall emissions are more difficult to control in diesel engines compared to gasoline engines, so the use of diesel engines in the US is now largely relegated to larger on-road and off-road vehicles.\nThough aviation has traditionally avoided using diesel engines, aircraft diesel engines have become increasingly available in the 21st century. Since the late 1990s, for various reasons\u2014including diesel's inherent advantages over gasoline engines, but also for recent issues peculiar to aviation\u2014development and production of diesel engines for aircraft has surged, with over 5,000 such engines delivered worldwide between 2002 and 2018, particularly for light airplanes and unmanned aerial vehicles.\nHistory.\nDiesel's idea.\nIn 1878, Rudolf Diesel, who was a student at the \"Polytechnikum\" in Munich, attended the lectures of Carl von Linde. Linde explained that steam engines are capable of converting just 6\u201310% of the heat energy into work, but that the Carnot cycle allows conversion of much more of the heat energy into work by means of isothermal change in condition. According to Diesel, this ignited the idea of creating a highly efficient engine that could work on the Carnot cycle. Diesel was also introduced to a fire piston, a traditional fire starter using rapid adiabatic compression principles which Linde had acquired from Southeast Asia. After several years of working on his ideas, Diesel published them in 1893 in the essay \"Theory and Construction of a Rational Heat Motor\".\nConstant temperature.\nDiesel was heavily criticised for his essay, but only a few found the mistake that he made; his \"rational heat motor\" was supposed to utilise a constant temperature cycle (with isothermal compression) that would require a much higher level of compression than that needed for compression ignition. Diesel's idea was to compress the air so tightly that the temperature of the air would exceed that of combustion. However, such an engine could never perform any usable work. In his 1892 US patent (granted in 1895) #542846, Diesel describes the compression required for his cycle:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;pure atmospheric air is compressed, according to curve 1 2, to such a degree that, before ignition or combustion takes place, the highest pressure of the diagram and the highest temperature are obtained-that is to say, the temperature at which the subsequent combustion has to take place, not the burning or igniting point. To make this more clear, let it be assumed that the subsequent combustion shall take place at a temperature of 700\u00b0. Then in that case the initial pressure must be sixty-four atmospheres, or for 800\u00b0 centigrade the pressure must be ninety atmospheres, and so on. Into the air thus compressed is then gradually introduced from the exterior finely divided fuel, which ignites on introduction, since the air is at a temperature far above the igniting-point of the fuel. The characteristic features of the cycle according to my present invention are therefore, increase of pressure and temperature up to the maximum, not by combustion, but prior to combustion by mechanical compression of air, and there upon the subsequent performance of work without increase of pressure and temperature by gradual combustion during a prescribed part of the stroke determined by the cut-oil.\nConstant pressure.\nBy June 1893, Diesel had realised his original cycle would not work, and he adopted the constant pressure cycle. Diesel describes the cycle in his 1895 patent application. Notice that there is no longer a mention of compression temperatures exceeding the temperature of combustion. Now it is simply stated that the compression must be sufficient to trigger ignition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;1. In an internal-combustion engine, the combination of a cylinder and piston constructed and arranged to compress air to a degree producing a temperature above the igniting-point of the fuel, a supply for compressed air or gas; a fuel-supply; a distributing-valve for fuel, a passage from the air supply to the cylinder in communication with the fuel-distributing valve, an inlet to the cylinder in communication with the air-supply and with the fuel-valve, and a cut-oil, substantially as described.\nIn 1892, Diesel received patents in Germany, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States for \"Method of and Apparatus for Converting Heat into Work\". In 1894 and 1895, he filed patents and addenda in various countries for his engine; the first patents were issued in Spain (No.\u00a016,654), France (No.\u00a0243,531) and Belgium (No.\u00a0113,139) in December 1894, and in Germany (No.\u00a086,633) in 1895 and the United States (No.\u00a0608,845) in 1898.\nDiesel was attacked and criticised over several years. Critics claimed that Diesel never invented a new motor and that the invention of the diesel engine is fraud. Otto K\u00f6hler and Emil Capitaine were two of the most prominent critics of Diesel's time. K\u00f6hler had published an essay in 1887, in which he describes an engine similar to the engine Diesel describes in his 1893 essay. K\u00f6hler figured that such an engine could not perform any work. Emil Capitaine had built a petroleum engine with glow-tube ignition in the early 1890s; he claimed against his own better judgement that his glow-tube ignition engine worked the same way Diesel's engine did. His claims were unfounded and he lost a patent lawsuit against Diesel. Other engines, such as the Akroyd engine and the Brayton engine, also use an operating cycle that is different from the diesel engine cycle. Friedrich Sass says that the diesel engine is Diesel's \"very own work\" and that any \"Diesel myth\" is \"falsification of history\".\nThe first diesel engine.\nDiesel sought out firms and factories that would build his engine. With the help of Moritz Schr\u00f6ter and Max Gutermuth, he succeeded in convincing both Krupp in Essen and the Maschinenfabrik Augsburg. Contracts were signed in April 1893, and in early summer 1893, Diesel's first prototype engine was built in Augsburg. On 10 August 1893, the first ignition took place, the fuel used was petrol. In winter 1893/1894, Diesel redesigned the existing engine, and by 18 January 1894, his mechanics had converted it into the second prototype. During January that year, an air-blast injection system was added to the engine's cylinder head and tested. Friedrich Sass argues that, it can be presumed that Diesel copied the concept of air-blast injection from George B. Brayton, albeit that Diesel substantially improved the system. On 17 February 1894, the redesigned engine ran for 88 revolutions \u2013 one minute; with this news, Maschinenfabrik Augsburg's stock rose by 30%, indicative of the tremendous anticipated demands for a more efficient engine. On 26 June 1895, the engine achieved an effective efficiency of 16.6% and had a fuel consumption of 519\u00a0g\u00b7kW\u22121\u00b7h\u22121.\n However, despite proving the concept, the engine caused problems, and Diesel could not achieve any substantial progress. Therefore, Krupp considered rescinding the contract they had made with Diesel. Diesel was forced to improve the design of his engine and rushed to construct a third prototype engine. Between 8 November and 20 December 1895, the second prototype had successfully covered over 111 hours on the test bench. In the January 1896 report, this was considered a success.\nIn February 1896, Diesel considered supercharging the third prototype. Imanuel Lauster, who was ordered to draw the third prototype \"Motor 250/400\", had finished the drawings by 30 April 1896. During summer that year the engine was built, it was completed on 6 October 1896. Tests were conducted until early 1897. First public tests began on 1 February 1897. Moritz Schr\u00f6ter's test on 17 February 1897 was the main test of Diesel's engine. The engine was rated 13.1\u00a0kW with a specific fuel consumption of 324\u00a0g\u00b7kW\u22121\u00b7h\u22121, resulting in an effective efficiency of 26.2%. By 1898, Diesel had become a millionaire.\nOperating principle.\nOverview.\nThe characteristics of a diesel engine are\nThermodynamic cycle.\nThe diesel internal combustion engine differs from the gasoline powered Otto cycle by using highly compressed hot air to ignite the fuel rather than using a spark plug (\"compression ignition\" rather than \"spark ignition\").\nIn the diesel engine, only air is initially introduced into the combustion chamber. The air is then compressed with a compression ratio typically between 15:1 and 23:1. This high compression causes the temperature of the air to rise. At about the top of the compression stroke, fuel is injected directly into the compressed air in the combustion chamber. This may be into a (typically toroidal) void in the top of the piston or a \"pre-chamber\" depending upon the design of the engine. The fuel injector ensures that the fuel is broken down into small droplets, and that the fuel is distributed evenly. The heat of the compressed air vaporises fuel from the surface of the droplets. The vapour is then ignited by the heat from the compressed air in the combustion chamber, the droplets continue to vaporise from their surfaces and burn, getting smaller, until all the fuel in the droplets has been burnt. Combustion occurs at a substantially constant pressure during the initial part of the power stroke. The start of vaporisation causes a delay before ignition and the characteristic diesel knocking sound as the vapour reaches ignition temperature and causes an abrupt increase in pressure above the piston (not shown on the P-V indicator diagram). When combustion is complete the combustion gases expand as the piston descends further; the high pressure in the cylinder drives the piston downward, supplying power to the crankshaft.\nAs well as the high level of compression allowing combustion to take place without a separate ignition system, a high compression ratio greatly increases the engine's efficiency. Increasing the compression ratio in a spark-ignition engine where fuel and air are mixed before entry to the cylinder is limited by the need to prevent pre-ignition, which would cause engine damage. Since only air is compressed in a diesel engine, and fuel is not introduced into the cylinder until shortly before top dead centre (TDC), premature detonation is not a problem and compression ratios are much higher.\nThe pressure\u2013volume diagram (pV) diagram is a simplified and idealised representation of the events involved in a diesel engine cycle, arranged to illustrate the similarity with a Carnot cycle. Starting at 1, the piston is at bottom dead centre and both valves are closed at the start of the compression stroke; the cylinder contains air at atmospheric pressure. Between 1 and 2 the air is compressed adiabatically\u00a0\u2013 that is without heat transfer to or from the environment\u00a0\u2013 by the rising piston. (This is only approximately true since there will be some heat exchange with the cylinder walls.) During this compression, the volume is reduced, the pressure and temperature both rise. At or slightly before 2 (TDC) fuel is injected and burns in the compressed hot air. Chemical energy is released and this constitutes an injection of thermal energy (heat) into the compressed gas. Combustion and heating occur between 2 and 3. In this interval the pressure remains constant since the piston descends, and the volume increases; the temperature rises as a consequence of the energy of combustion. At 3 fuel injection and combustion are complete, and the cylinder contains gas at a higher temperature than at 2. Between 3 and 4 this hot gas expands, again approximately adiabatically. Work is done on the system to which the engine is connected. During this expansion phase the volume of the gas rises, and its temperature and pressure both fall. At 4 the exhaust valve opens, and the pressure falls abruptly to atmospheric (approximately). This is unresisted expansion and no useful work is done by it. Ideally the adiabatic expansion should continue, extending the line 3\u20134 to the right until the pressure falls to that of the surrounding air, but the loss of efficiency caused by this unresisted expansion is justified by the practical difficulties involved in recovering it (the engine would have to be much larger). After the opening of the exhaust valve, the exhaust stroke follows, but this (and the following induction stroke) are not shown on the diagram. If shown, they would be represented by a low-pressure loop at the bottom of the diagram. At 1 it is assumed that the exhaust and induction strokes have been completed, and the cylinder is again filled with air. The piston-cylinder system absorbs energy between 1 and 2\u00a0\u2013 this is the work needed to compress the air in the cylinder, and is provided by mechanical kinetic energy stored in the flywheel of the engine. Work output is done by the piston-cylinder combination between 2 and 4. The difference between these two increments of work is the indicated work output per cycle, and is represented by the area enclosed by the pV loop. The adiabatic expansion is in a higher pressure range than that of the compression because the gas in the cylinder is hotter during expansion than during compression. It is for this reason that the loop has a finite area, and the net output of work during a cycle is positive.\nEfficiency.\nThe fuel efficiency of diesel engines is better than most other types of combustion engines, due to their high compression ratio, high air\u2013fuel equivalence ratio (\u03bb), and the lack of intake air restrictions (i.e. throttle valves). Theoretically, the highest possible efficiency for a diesel engine is 75%. However, in practice the efficiency is much lower, with efficiencies of up to 43% for passenger car engines, up to 45% for large truck and bus engines, and up to 55% for large two-stroke marine engines. The average efficiency over a motor vehicle driving cycle is lower than the diesel engine's peak efficiency (for example, a 37% average efficiency for an engine with a peak efficiency of 44%). That is because the fuel efficiency of a diesel engine drops at lower loads, however, it does not drop quite as fast as the Otto (spark ignition) engine's.\nEmissions.\nDiesel engines are combustion engines and, therefore, emit combustion products in their exhaust gas. Due to incomplete combustion, diesel engine exhaust gases include carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, particulate matter, and nitrogen oxides pollutants. About 90 per cent of the pollutants can be removed from the exhaust gas using exhaust gas treatment technology. Road vehicle diesel engines have no sulfur dioxide emissions, because motor vehicle diesel fuel has been sulfur-free since 2003. Helmut Tsch\u00f6ke argues that particulate matter emitted from motor vehicles has negative impacts on human health.\nThe particulate matter in diesel exhaust emissions is sometimes classified as a carcinogen or \"probable carcinogen\" and is known to increase the risk of heart and respiratory diseases.\nElectrical system.\nIn principle, a diesel engine does not require any sort of electrical system. However, most modern diesel engines are equipped with an electrical fuel pump, and an electronic engine control unit.\nHowever, there is no high-voltage electrical ignition system present in a diesel engine. This eliminates a source of radio frequency emissions (which can interfere with navigation and communication equipment), which is why only diesel-powered vehicles are allowed in some parts of the American National Radio Quiet Zone.\nTorque control.\nTo control the torque output at any given time (i.e. when the driver of a car adjusts the accelerator pedal), a governor adjusts the amount of fuel injected into the engine. Mechanical governors have been used in the past, however electronic governors are more common on modern engines. Mechanical governors are usually driven by the engine's accessory belt or a gear-drive system and use a combination of springs and weights to control fuel delivery relative to both load and speed. Electronically governed engines use an electronic control unit (ECU) or electronic control module (ECM) to control the fuel delivery. The ECM/ECU uses various sensors (such as engine speed signal, intake manifold pressure and fuel temperature) to determine the amount of fuel injected into the engine.\nDue to the amount of air being constant (for a given RPM) while the amount of fuel varies, very high (\"lean\") air-fuel ratios are used in situations where minimal torque output is required. This differs from a petrol engine, where a throttle is used to also reduce the amount of intake air as part of regulating the engine's torque output. Controlling the timing of the start of injection of fuel into the cylinder is similar to controlling the ignition timing in a petrol engine. It is therefore a key factor in controlling the power output, fuel consumption and exhaust emissions.\nClassification.\nThere are several different ways of categorising diesel engines, as outlined in the following sections.\nRPM operating range.\nG\u00fcnter Mau categorises diesel engines by their rotational speeds into three groups:\nHigh-speed engines are used to power trucks (lorries), buses, tractors, cars, yachts, compressors, pumps and small electrical generators. As of 2018, most high-speed engines have direct injection. Many modern engines, particularly in on-highway applications, have common rail direct injection. On bigger ships, high-speed diesel engines are often used for powering electric generators. The highest power output of high-speed diesel engines is approximately 5\u00a0MW.\nMedium-speed engines are used in large electrical generators, railway diesel locomotives, ship propulsion and mechanical drive applications such as large compressors or pumps. Medium speed diesel engines operate on either diesel fuel or heavy fuel oil by direct injection in the same manner as low-speed engines. Usually, they are four-stroke engines with trunk pistons; a notable exception being the EMD 567, 645, and 710 engines, which are all two-stroke.\nThe power output of medium-speed diesel engines can be as high as 21,870\u00a0kW, with the effective efficiency being around 47-48% (1982). Most larger medium-speed engines are started with compressed air direct on pistons, using an air distributor, as opposed to a pneumatic starting motor acting on the flywheel, which tends to be used for smaller engines.\nMedium-speed engines intended for marine applications are usually used to power (ro-ro) ferries, passenger ships or small freight ships. Using medium-speed engines reduces the cost of smaller ships and increases their transport capacity. In addition to that, a single ship can use two smaller engines instead of one big engine, which increases the ship's safety.\nLow-speed diesel engines are usually very large in size and mostly used to power ships. There are two different types of low-speed engines that are commonly used: Two-stroke engines with a crosshead, and four-stroke engines with a regular trunk-piston. Two-stroke engines have a limited rotational frequency and their charge exchange is more difficult, which means that they are usually bigger than four-stroke engines and used to directly power a ship's propeller.\nFour-stroke engines on ships are usually used to power an electric generator. An electric motor powers the propeller. Both types are usually very undersquare, meaning the bore is smaller than the stroke. Low-speed diesel engines (as used in ships and other applications where overall engine weight is relatively unimportant) often have an effective efficiency of up to 55%. Like medium-speed engines, low-speed engines are started with compressed air, and they use heavy oil as their primary fuel.\nCombustion cycle.\nFour-stroke engines use the combustion cycle described earlier. Most smaller diesels, for vehicular use, for instance, typically use the four-stroke cycle. This is due to several factors, such as the two-stroke design's narrow powerband which is not particularly suitable for automotive use and the necessity for complicated and expensive built-in lubrication systems and scavenging measures. The cost effectiveness (and proportion of added weight) of these technologies has less of an impact on larger, more expensive engines, while engines intended for shipping or stationary use can be run at a single speed for long periods.\nTwo-stroke engines use a combustion cycle which is completed in two strokes instead of four strokes. Filling the cylinder with air and compressing it takes place in one stroke, and the power and exhaust strokes are combined. The compression in a two-stroke diesel engine is similar to the compression that takes place in a four-stroke diesel engine: As the piston passes through bottom centre and starts upward, compression commences, culminating in fuel injection and ignition. Instead of a full set of valves, two-stroke diesel engines have simple intake ports, and exhaust ports (or exhaust valves). When the piston approaches bottom dead centre, both the intake and the exhaust ports are \"open\", which means that there is atmospheric pressure inside the cylinder. Therefore, some sort of pump is required to blow the air into the cylinder and the combustion gasses into the exhaust. This process is called \"scavenging\". The pressure required is approximately 10-30\u00a0kPa.\nDue to the lack of discrete exhaust and intake strokes, all two-stroke diesel engines use a scavenge blower or some form of compressor to charge the cylinders with air and assist in scavenging. Roots-type superchargers were used for ship engines until the mid-1950s, however since 1955 they have been widely replaced by turbochargers. Usually, a two-stroke ship diesel engine has a single-stage turbocharger with a turbine that has an axial inflow and a radial outflow.\nScavenging in two-stroke engines.\nIn general, there are three types of scavenging possible:\nCrossflow scavenging is incomplete and limits the stroke, yet some manufacturers used it. Reverse flow scavenging is a very simple way of scavenging, and it was popular amongst manufacturers until the early 1980s. Uniflow scavenging is more complicated to make but allows the highest fuel efficiency; since the early 1980s, manufacturers such as MAN and Sulzer have switched to this system. It is standard for modern marine two-stroke diesel engines.\nFuel used.\nSo-called dual-fuel diesel engines or gas diesel engines burn two different types of fuel \"simultaneously\", for instance, a gaseous fuel and diesel engine fuel. The diesel engine fuel auto-ignites due to compression ignition, and then ignites the gaseous fuel. Such engines do not require any type of spark ignition and operate similar to regular diesel engines.\nFuel injection.\nThe fuel is injected at high pressure into either the combustion chamber, \"swirl chamber\" or \"pre-chamber,\" unlike petrol engines where the fuel is often added in the inlet manifold or carburetor. Engines where the fuel is injected into the main combustion chamber are called direct injection (DI) engines, while those which use a swirl chamber or pre-chamber are called indirect injection (IDI) engines.\nDirect injection.\nMost direct injection diesel engines have a combustion cup in the top of the piston where the fuel is sprayed. Many different methods of injection can be used. Usually, an engine with helix-controlled mechanic direct injection has either an inline or a distributor injection pump. For each engine cylinder, the corresponding plunger in the fuel pump measures out the correct amount of fuel and determines the timing of each injection. These engines use injectors that are very precise spring-loaded valves that open and close at a specific fuel pressure. Separate high-pressure fuel lines connect the fuel pump with each cylinder. Fuel volume for each single combustion is controlled by a slanted groove in the plunger which rotates only a few degrees releasing the pressure and is controlled by a mechanical governor, consisting of weights rotating at engine speed constrained by springs and a lever. The injectors are held open by the fuel pressure. On high-speed engines the plunger pumps are together in one unit. The length of fuel lines from the pump to each injector is normally the same for each cylinder in order to obtain the same pressure delay. Direct injected diesel engines usually use orifice-type fuel injectors.\nElectronic control of the fuel injection transformed the direct injection engine by allowing much greater control over the combustion.\nCommon rail (CR) direct injection systems do not have the fuel metering, pressure-raising and delivery functions in a single unit, as in the case of a Bosch distributor-type pump, for example. A high-pressure pump supplies the CR. The requirements of each cylinder injector are supplied from this common high pressure reservoir of fuel. An Electronic Diesel Control (EDC) controls both rail pressure and injections depending on engine operating conditions. The injectors of older CR systems have solenoid-driven plungers for lifting the injection needle, whilst newer CR injectors use plungers driven by piezoelectric actuators that have less moving mass and therefore allow even more injections in a very short period of time. Early common rail system were controlled by mechanical means.\nThe injection pressure of modern CR systems ranges from 140\u00a0MPa to 270\u00a0MPa.\nIndirect injection.\nAn indirect diesel injection system (IDI) engine delivers fuel into a small chamber called a swirl chamber, precombustion chamber, pre chamber or ante-chamber, which is connected to the cylinder by a narrow air passage. Generally the goal of the pre chamber is to create increased turbulence for better air / fuel mixing. This system also allows for a smoother, quieter running engine, and because fuel mixing is assisted by turbulence, injector pressures can be lower. Most IDI systems use a single orifice injector. The pre-chamber has the disadvantage of lowering efficiency due to increased heat loss to the engine's cooling system, restricting the combustion burn, thus reducing the efficiency by 5\u201310%. IDI engines are also more difficult to start and usually require the use of glow plugs. IDI engines may be cheaper to build but generally require a higher compression ratio than the DI counterpart. IDI also makes it easier to produce smooth, quieter running engines with a simple mechanical injection system since exact injection timing is not as critical. Most modern automotive engines are DI which have the benefits of greater efficiency and easier starting; however, IDI engines can still be found in the many ATV and small diesel applications. Indirect injected diesel engines use pintle-type fuel injectors.\nAir-blast injection.\nEarly diesel engines injected fuel with the assistance of compressed air, which atomised the fuel and forced it into the engine through a nozzle (a similar principle to an aerosol spray). The nozzle opening was closed by a pin valve actuated by the camshaft. Although the engine was also required to drive an air compressor used for air-blast injection, the efficiency was nonetheless better than other combustion engines of the time. However the system was heavy and it was slow to react to changing torque demands, making it unsuitable for road vehicles.\nUnit injectors.\nA \"unit injector\" system, also known as \"Pumpe-D\u00fcse\" (\"pump-nozzle\" in German) combines the injector and fuel pump into a single component, which is positioned above each cylinder. This eliminates the high-pressure fuel lines and achieves a more consistent injection. Under full load, the injection pressure can reach up to 220\u00a0MPa. Unit injectors are operated by a cam and the quantity of fuel injected is controlled either mechanically (by a rack or lever) or electronically.\nDue to increased performance requirements, unit injectors have been largely replaced by common rail injection systems.\nDiesel engine particularities.\nMass.\nThe average diesel engine has a poorer power-to-mass ratio than an equivalent petrol engine. The lower engine speeds (RPM) of typical diesel engines results in a lower power output. Also, the mass of a diesel engine is typically higher, since the higher operating pressure inside the combustion chamber increases the internal forces, which requires stronger (and therefore heavier) parts to withstand these forces.\nNoise (\"diesel clatter\").\nThe distinctive noise of a diesel engine, particularly at idling speeds, is sometimes called \"diesel clatter\". This noise is largely caused by the sudden ignition of the diesel fuel when injected into the combustion chamber, which causes a pressure wave that sounds like knocking.\nEngine designers can reduce diesel clatter through: indirect injection; pilot or pre-injection; injection timing; injection rate; compression ratio; turbo boost; and exhaust gas recirculation (EGR). Common rail diesel injection systems permit multiple injection events as an aid to noise reduction. Through measures such as these, diesel clatter noise is greatly reduced in modern engines. Diesel fuels with a higher cetane rating are more likely to ignite and hence reduce diesel clatter.\nCold weather starting.\nIn warmer climates, diesel engines do not require any starting aid (aside from the starter motor). However, many diesel engines include some form of preheating for the combustion chamber, to assist starting in cold conditions. Engines with a displacement of less than 1\u00a0litre per cylinder usually have glowplugs, whilst larger heavy-duty engines have flame-start systems. The minimum starting temperature that allows starting without pre-heating is 40\u00a0\u00b0C (104\u00a0\u00b0F) for precombustion chamber engines, 20\u00a0\u00b0C (68\u00a0\u00b0F) for swirl chamber engines, and 0\u00a0\u00b0C (32\u00a0\u00b0F) for direct injected engines.\nIn the past, a wider variety of cold-start methods were used. Some engines, such as Detroit Diesel engines used a system to introduce small amounts of ether into the inlet manifold to start combustion. Instead of glowplugs, some diesel engines are equipped with starting aid systems that change valve timing. The simplest way this can be done is with a decompression lever. Activating the decompression lever locks the outlet valves in a slight down position, resulting in the engine not having any compression and thus allowing for turning the crankshaft over with significantly less resistance. When the crankshaft reaches a higher speed, flipping the decompression lever back into its normal position will abruptly re-activate the outlet valves, resulting in compression \u2212 the flywheel's mass moment of inertia then starts the engine. Other diesel engines, such as the precombustion chamber engine XII Jv 170/240 made by Ganz &amp; Co., have a valve timing changing system that is operated by adjusting the inlet valve camshaft, moving it into a slight \"late\" position. This will make the inlet valves open with a delay, forcing the inlet air to heat up when entering the combustion chamber.\nSupercharging &amp; turbocharging.\nForced induction, especially turbocharging is commonly used on diesel engines because it greatly increases efficiency and torque output. Diesel engines are well suited for forced induction setups due to their operating principle which is characterised by wide ignition limits and the absence of fuel during the compression stroke. Therefore, knocking, pre-ignition or detonation cannot occur, and a lean mixture caused by excess supercharging air inside the combustion chamber does not negatively affect combustion.\nMajor manufacturers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFuel and fluid characteristics.\nDiesel engines can combust a huge variety of fuels, including several fuel oils that have advantages over fuels such as petrol. These advantages include:\nIn diesel engines, a mechanical injector system atomizes the fuel directly into the combustion chamber (as opposed to a Venturi jet in a carburetor, or a fuel injector in a manifold injection system atomizing fuel into the intake manifold or intake runners as in a petrol engine). Because only air is inducted into the cylinder in a diesel engine, the compression ratio can be much higher as there is no risk of pre-ignition provided the injection process is accurately timed. This means that cylinder temperatures are much higher in a diesel engine than a petrol engine, allowing less volatile fuels to be used.\nTherefore, diesel engines can operate on a huge variety of different fuels. In general, fuel for diesel engines should have a proper viscosity, so that the injection pump can pump the fuel to the injection nozzles without causing damage to itself or corrosion of the fuel line. At injection, the fuel should form a good fuel spray, and it should not have a coking effect upon the injection nozzles. To ensure proper engine starting and smooth operation, the fuel should be willing to ignite and hence not cause a high ignition delay, (this means that the fuel should have a high cetane number). Diesel fuel should also have a high lower heating value.\nInline mechanical injector pumps generally tolerate poor-quality or bio-fuels better than distributor-type pumps. Also, indirect injection engines generally run more satisfactorily on fuels with a high ignition delay (for instance, petrol) than direct injection engines. This is partly because an indirect injection engine has a much greater 'swirl' effect, improving vaporisation and combustion of fuel, and because (in the case of vegetable oil-type fuels) lipid depositions can condense on the cylinder walls of a direct-injection engine if combustion temperatures are too low (such as starting the engine from cold). Direct-injected engines with an MAN centre sphere combustion chamber rely on fuel condensing on the combustion chamber walls. The fuel starts vaporising only after ignition sets in, and it burns relatively smoothly. Therefore, such engines also tolerate fuels with poor ignition delay characteristics, and, in general, they can operate on petrol rated 86 RON.\nFuel types.\nIn his 1893 work \"Theory and Construction of a Rational Heat Motor\", Rudolf Diesel considers using coal dust as fuel for the diesel engine. However, Diesel just \"considered\" using coal dust (as well as liquid fuels and gas); his actual engine was designed to operate on petroleum, which was soon replaced with regular petrol and kerosene for further testing purposes, as petroleum proved to be too viscous. In addition to kerosene and petrol, Diesel's engine could also operate on ligroin.\nBefore diesel engine fuel was standardised, fuels such as petrol, kerosene, gas oil, vegetable oil and mineral oil, as well as mixtures of these fuels, were used. Typical fuels specifically intended to be used for diesel engines were petroleum distillates and coal-tar distillates such as the following; these fuels have specific lower heating values of:\n\"Source:\"\nThe first diesel fuel standards were the DIN 51601, VTL 9140-001, and NATO F 54, which appeared after World War II. The modern European EN 590 diesel fuel standard was established in May 1993; the modern version of the NATO F 54 standard is mostly identical with it. The DIN 51628 biodiesel standard was rendered obsolete by the 2009 version of the EN 590; FAME biodiesel conforms to the EN 14214 standard. Watercraft diesel engines usually operate on diesel engine fuel that conforms to the ISO 8217 standard (Bunker C). Also, some diesel engines can operate on gasses (such as LNG).\nGelling.\nDIN 51601 diesel fuel was prone to \"waxing\" or \"gelling\" in cold weather; both are terms for the solidification of diesel oil into a partially crystalline state. The crystals build up in the fuel system (especially in fuel filters), eventually starving the engine of fuel and causing it to stop running. Low-output electric heaters in fuel tanks and around fuel lines were used to solve this problem. Also, most engines have a \"spill return\" system, by which any excess fuel from the injector pump and injectors is returned to the fuel tank. Once the engine has warmed, returning warm fuel prevents waxing in the tank. Before direct injection diesel engines, some manufacturers, such as BMW, recommended mixing up to 30% petrol in with the diesel by fuelling diesel cars with petrol to prevent the fuel from gelling when the temperatures dropped below \u221215\u00a0\u00b0C.\nSafety.\nFuel flammability.\nDiesel fuel is less flammable than petrol, because its flash point is 55\u00a0\u00b0C, leading to a lower risk of fire caused by fuel in a vehicle equipped with a diesel engine.\nDiesel fuel can create an explosive air/vapour mix under the right conditions. However, compared with petrol, it is less prone due to its lower vapour pressure, which is an indication of evaporation rate. The Material Safety Data Sheet for ultra-low sulfur diesel fuel indicates a vapour explosion hazard for diesel fuel indoors, outdoors, or in sewers.\nCancer.\nDiesel exhaust has been classified as an IARC Group 1 carcinogen. It causes lung cancer and is associated with an increased risk for bladder cancer.\nEngine runaway (uncontrollable overspeeding).\nSee diesel engine runaway.\nApplications.\nThe characteristics of diesel have different advantages for different applications.\nPassenger cars.\nDiesel engines have long been popular in bigger cars and have been used in smaller cars such as superminis in Europe since the 1980s. They were popular in larger cars earlier, as the weight and cost penalties were less noticeable. Smooth operation as well as high low-end torque are deemed important for passenger cars and small commercial vehicles. The introduction of electronically controlled fuel injection significantly improved the smooth torque generation, and starting in the early 1990s, car manufacturers began offering their high-end luxury vehicles with diesel engines. Passenger car diesel engines usually have between three and twelve cylinders, and a displacement ranging from 0.8 to 6.0 litres. Modern powerplants are usually turbocharged and have direct injection.\nDiesel engines do not suffer from intake-air throttling, resulting in very low fuel consumption especially at low partial load (for instance: driving at city speeds). One fifth of all passenger cars worldwide have diesel engines, with many of them being in Europe, where approximately 47% of all passenger cars are diesel-powered. Daimler-Benz in conjunction with Robert Bosch GmbH produced diesel-powered passenger cars starting in 1936. The popularity of diesel-powered passenger cars in markets such as India, South Korea and Japan is increasing (as of 2018).\nCommercial vehicles and lorries.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;Source: ; View .&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nIn 1893, Rudolf Diesel suggested that the diesel engine could possibly power \"wagons\" (lorries). The first lorries with diesel engines were brought to market in 1924.\nModern diesel engines for lorries have to be both extremely reliable and very fuel efficient. Common-rail direct injection, turbocharging and four valves per cylinder are standard. Displacements range from 4.5 to 15.5 litres, with power-to-mass ratios of 2.5\u20133.5\u00a0kg\u00b7kW\u22121 for heavy duty and 2.0\u20133.0\u00a0kg\u00b7kW\u22121 for medium duty engines. V6 and V8 engines used to be common, due to the relatively low engine mass the V configuration provides. Recently, the V configuration has been abandoned in favour of straight engines. These engines are usually straight-6 for heavy and medium duties and straight-4 for medium duty. Their undersquare design causes lower overall piston speeds which results in increased lifespan of up to . Compared with 1970s diesel engines, the expected lifespan of modern lorry diesel engines has more than doubled.\nRailroad rolling stock.\nDiesel engines for locomotives are built for continuous operation between refuelings and may need to be designed to use poor quality fuel in some circumstances. Some locomotives use two-stroke diesel engines. Diesel engines have replaced steam engines on all non-electrified railroads in the world. The first diesel locomotives appeared in 1913, and diesel multiple units soon after. Nearly all modern diesel locomotives are more correctly known as diesel\u2013electric locomotives because they use an electric transmission: the diesel engine drives an electric generator which powers electric traction motors. While electric locomotives have replaced the diesel locomotive for passenger services in many areas diesel traction is widely used for cargo-hauling freight trains and on tracks where electrification is not economically viable.\nIn the 1940s, road vehicle diesel engines with power outputs of were considered reasonable for DMUs. Commonly, regular truck powerplants were used. The height of these engines had to be less than to allow underfloor installation. Usually, the engine was mated with a pneumatically operated mechanical gearbox, due to the low size, mass, and production costs of this design. Some DMUs used hydraulic torque converters instead. Diesel\u2013electric transmission was not suitable for such small engines. In the 1930s, the Deutsche Reichsbahn standardised its first DMU engine. It was a , 12-cylinder boxer unit, producing . Several German manufacturers produced engines according to this standard.\nWatercraft.\nThe requirements for marine diesel engines vary, depending on the application. For military use and medium-size boats, medium-speed four-stroke diesel engines are most suitable. These engines usually have up to 24 cylinders and come with power outputs in the one-digit Megawatt region. Small boats may use lorry diesel engines. Large ships use extremely efficient, low-speed two-stroke diesel engines. They can reach efficiencies of up to 55%. Unlike most regular diesel engines, two-stroke watercraft engines use highly viscous fuel oil. Submarines are usually diesel\u2013electric.\nThe first diesel engines for ships were made by A. B. Diesels Motorer Stockholm in 1903. These engines were three-cylinder units of 120\u00a0PS (88\u00a0kW) and four-cylinder units of 180\u00a0PS (132\u00a0kW) and used for Russian ships. In World War I, especially submarine diesel engine development advanced quickly. By the end of the War, double acting piston two-stroke engines with up to 12,200\u00a0PS (9\u00a0MW) had been made for marine use.\nAviation.\nEarly.\nDiesel engines had been used in aircraft before World War II, for instance, in the rigid airship \"LZ 129 Hindenburg,\" which was powered by four Daimler-Benz DB 602 diesel engines, or in several Junkers aircraft, which had Jumo 205 engines installed.\nIn 1929, in the United States, the Packard Motor Company developed America's first aircraft diesel engine, the Packard DR-980\u2014an air-cooled, 9-cylinder radial engine. They installed it in various aircraft of the era\u2014some of which were used in record-breaking distance or endurance flights, and in the first successful demonstration of ground-to-air radiophone communications (voice radio having been previously unintelligible in aircraft equipped with spark-ignition engines, due to electromagnetic interference). Additional advantages cited, at the time, included a lower risk of post-crash fire, and superior performance at high altitudes.\nOn March 6, 1930, the engine received an Approved Type Certificate\u2014first ever for an aircraft diesel engine\u2014from the U.S. Department of Commerce. However, noxious exhaust fumes, cold-start and vibration problems, engine structural failures, the death of its developer, and the industrial economic contraction of the Great Depression, combined to kill the program.\nModern.\nFrom then, until the late 1970s, there had not been many applications of the diesel engine in aircraft. In 1978, Piper Cherokee co-designer Karl H. Bergey argued that \"the likelihood of a general aviation diesel in the near future is remote.\"\nHowever, with the 1970s energy crisis and environmental movement, and resulting pressures for greater fuel economy, reduced carbon and lead in the atmosphere, and other issues, there was a resurgence of interest in diesel engines for aircraft. High-compression piston aircraft engines that run on aviation gasoline (\"avgas\") generally require the addition of toxic Tetraethyl lead to avgas, to avoid engine pre-ignition and detonation; but diesel engines do not require leaded fuel. Also, biodiesel can, theoretically, provide a net reduction in atmospheric carbon compared to avgas. For these reasons, the general aviation community has begun to fear the possible banning or discontinuance of leaded avgas.\nAdditionally, avgas is a specialty fuel in very low (and declining) demand, compared to other fuels, and its makers are susceptible to costly aviation-crash lawsuits, reducing refiners' interest in producing it. Outside the United States, avgas has already become increasingly difficult to find at airports (and generally), than less-expensive, diesel-compatible fuels like Jet-A and other jet fuels.\nBy the late 1990s / early 2000s, diesel engines were beginning to appear in light aircraft. Most notably, Frank Thielert and his Austrian engine enterprise, began developing diesel engines to replace the - gasoline/piston engines in common light aircraft use. First successful application of the Theilerts to production aircraft was in the Diamond DA42 Twin Star light twin, which exhibited exceptional fuel efficiency surpassing anything in its class, and its single-engined predecessor, the Diamond DA40 Diamond Star.\nIn subsequent years, several other companies have developed aircraft diesel engines, or have begun to\u2014most notably Continental Aerospace Technologies which, by 2018, was reporting it had sold over 5,000 such engines worldwide.\nThe United States' Federal Aviation Administration has reported that \"by 2007, various jet-fueled piston aircraft had logged well over 600,000 hours of service\". In early 2019, AOPA reported that a diesel engine model for general aviation aircraft is \"approaching the finish line.\" By late 2022, Continental was reporting that its \"Jet-A\" fueled engines had exceeded \"2,000... in operation today,\" with over \"9 million hours,\" and were being \"specified by major OEMs\" for Cessna, Piper, Diamond, Mooney, Tecnam, Glasair and Robin aircraft.\nIn recent years (2016), diesel engines have also found use in unmanned aircraft (UAV), due to their reliability, durability, and low fuel consumption.\nNon-road diesel engines.\nNon-road diesel engines are commonly used for construction equipment and agricultural machinery. Fuel efficiency, reliability and ease of maintenance are very important for such engines, whilst high power output and quiet operation are negligible. Therefore, mechanically controlled fuel injection and air-cooling are still very common. The common power outputs of non-road diesel engines vary a lot, with the smallest units starting at 3\u00a0kW, and the most powerful engines being heavy duty lorry engines.\nStationary diesel engines.\nStationary diesel engines are commonly used for electricity generation, but also for powering refrigerator compressors, or other types of compressors or pumps. Usually, these engines either run continuously with partial load, or intermittently with full load. Stationary diesel engines powering electric generators that put out an alternating current, usually operate with alternating load, but fixed rotational frequency. This is due to the mains' fixed frequency of either 50\u00a0Hz (Europe), or 60\u00a0Hz (United States). The engine's crankshaft rotational frequency is chosen so that the mains' frequency is a multiple of it. For practical reasons, this results in crankshaft rotational frequencies of either 25\u00a0Hz (1500 per minute) or 30\u00a0Hz (1800 per minute).\nDiesel engines with a flexible crankshaft.\nDiesel engines with a flexible crankshaft refer to internal combustion engines where the crankshaft exhibits a degree of elasticity due to operational stresses, manufacturing tolerances, and material properties. Unlike a perfectly rigid crankshaft, a flexible one undergoes dynamic deformations due to cyclic combustion forces, inertial loads, and lubrication effects, which can lead to eccentric motion and vibrational displacement. This flexibility can impact engine performance by influencing bearing loads, lubrication film distribution, and mechanical wear, potentially reducing efficiency and lifespan. Advanced modeling techniques, such as Finite Element Analysis (FEA) and Multi-Body Dynamics (MBD), are used to predict and mitigate these effects, enabling better engine design, improved fuel efficiency, and enhanced durability. The flexibility of a crankshaft decreases the mass flow rate of air that goes into cylinders, resulting in an unfavorable higher rate of exhaust emissions like CO.\nLow heat rejection engines.\nA special class of prototype internal combustion piston engines has been developed over several decades with the goal of improving efficiency by reducing heat loss. These engines are variously called adiabatic engines (due to better approximation of adiabatic expansion), low heat rejection engines, or high temperature engines. They are generally piston engines with combustion chamber parts lined with ceramic thermal barrier coatings. Some make use of pistons and other parts made of titanium which has a low thermal conductivity and density. Some designs are able to eliminate the use of a cooling system and associated parasitic losses altogether. Developing lubricants able to withstand the higher temperatures involved has been a major barrier to commercialization.\nFuture developments.\nIn mid-2010s literature, main development goals for future diesel engines are described as improvements of exhaust emissions, reduction of fuel consumption, and increase of lifespan (2014). It is said that the diesel engine, especially the diesel engine for commercial vehicles, will remain the most important vehicle powerplant until the mid-2030s. Editors assume that the complexity of the diesel engine will increase further (2014). Some editors expect a future convergency of diesel and Otto engines' operating principles due to Otto engine development steps made towards homogeneous charge compression ignition (2017).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8541", "revid": "49566734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8541", "title": "Dark Star", "text": "Dark Star or Darkstar may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "8543", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8543", "title": "District of Columbia", "text": ""}
{"id": "8544", "revid": "50751024", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8544", "title": "Drawing", "text": "Marking a surface to create images\nDrawing is a visual art that uses an instrument to mark paper or another two-dimensional surface, or a digital representation of such. Traditionally, the instruments used to create a drawing include pencils, crayons, and ink pens, sometimes in combination. More modern tools include computer styluses with mice and graphics tablets and gamepads in VR drawing software.\nA drawing instrument releases a small amount of material onto a surface, leaving a visible mark. There are many drawing instruments such as pen, pencils, pastel, crayons, markers, color pencils, water color, and more. The most common support for drawing is paper, although other materials, such as cardboard, vellum, wood, plastic, leather, canvas, and board, have been used. Temporary drawings may be made on a blackboard or whiteboard. Drawing has been a popular and fundamental means of public expression throughout human history. It is one of the simplest and most efficient means of communicating ideas. The wide availability of drawing instruments makes drawing one of the most common artistic activities.\nIn addition to its more artistic forms, drawing is frequently used in commercial illustration, animation, architecture, engineering, and technical drawing. A quick, freehand drawing, usually not intended as a finished work, is sometimes called a sketch. An artist who practices or works in technical drawing may be called a drafter, draftsman, or draughtsman.\nOverview.\nDrawing is one of the oldest forms of human expression within the visual arts. It is generally concerned with the marking of lines and areas of tone onto paper/other material, where the accurate representation of the visual world is expressed upon a plane surface. Traditional drawings were monochrome, or at least had little colour, while modern colored-pencil drawings may approach or cross a boundary between drawing and painting. In Western terminology, drawing is distinct from painting, even though similar media often are employed in both tasks. Dry media, normally associated with drawing, such as chalk, may be used in pastel paintings. Drawing may be done with a liquid medium, applied with brushes or pens. Using a brush for drawing is very widespread and here it is more the process of using lines and hatching, that characterises something as a drawing. Similar supports likewise can serve both: painting generally involves the application of liquid paint onto prepared canvas or panels, but sometimes an underdrawing is drawn first on that same support.\nDrawing is often exploratory, with considerable emphasis on observation, problem-solving and composition. Drawing is also regularly used in preparation for a painting, further obfuscating their distinction. Drawings created for these purposes are called sketches.\nThere are several categories of drawing, including:\nThere are also many drawing methods, such as:\nIn fields outside art, technical drawings or plans of buildings, machinery, circuitry and other things are often called \"drawings\" even when they have been transferred to another medium by printing.\nHistory.\nIn communication.\nDrawing is one of the oldest forms of human expression, with evidence for its existence preceding that of written communication. It is believed that drawing was used as a specialised form of communication before the invention of the written language, demonstrated by the production of cave and rock paintings around 30,000 years ago (Art of the Upper Paleolithic).\nThese drawings, known as pictograms, depicted objects and abstract concepts. The sketches and paintings produced by Neolithic times were eventually stylised and simplified in to symbol systems (proto-writing) and eventually into early writing systems.\nIn manuscripts.\nBefore the widespread availability of paper in Europe, monks in European monasteries used drawings, either as underdrawings for illuminated manuscripts on vellum or parchment, or as the final image. Drawing has also been used extensively in the field of science, as a method of discovery, understanding and explanation.\nIn science.\nDrawing diagrams of observations is an important part of scientific study.\nIn 1609, astronomer Galileo Galilei explained the changing phases of Venus and also the sunspots through his observational telescopic drawings. In 1924, geophysicist Alfred Wegener used illustrations to visually demonstrate the origin of the continents.\nAs artistic expression.\nDrawing is one of the easiest ways to visualise ideas and to express one's creativity; therefore it has been prominent in the world of art. Throughout much of history, drawing was regarded as the foundation for artistic practice. Initially, artists used and reused wooden tablets for the production of their drawings. Following the widespread availability of paper in the 14th century, the use of drawing in the arts increased. At this point, drawing was commonly used as a tool for thought and investigation, acting as a study medium whilst artists were preparing for their final pieces of work. The Renaissance brought about a great sophistication in drawing techniques, enabling artists to represent things more realistically than before, and revealing an interest in geometry and philosophy.\nThe invention of the first widely available form of photography led to a shift in the hierarchy of the arts. Photography offered an alternative to drawing as a method for accurately representing visual phenomena, and traditional drawing practice was given less emphasis as an essential skill for artists, particularly so in Western society.\nNotable artists and draftsmen.\nDrawing became significant as an art form around the late 15th century, with artists and master engravers such as Albrecht D\u00fcrer and Martin Schongauer (c.\u20091448\u20131491), the first Northern engraver known by name. Schongauer came from Alsace, and was born into a family of goldsmiths. Albrecht D\u00fcrer, a master of the next generation, was also the son of a goldsmith.\nOld Master Drawings often reflect the history of the country in which they were produced, and the fundamental characteristics of a nation at that time. In 17th-century Holland, a Protestant country, there were almost no religious artworks, and, with no King or court, most art was bought privately. Drawings of landscapes or genre scenes were often viewed not as sketches but as highly finished works of art. Italian drawings, however, show the influence of Catholicism and the Church, which played a major role in artistic patronage. The same is often true of French drawings, although in the 17th century the disciplines of French Classicism meant drawings were less Baroque than the more free Italian counterparts, which conveyed a greater sense of movement.\nIn the 20th century Modernism encouraged \"imaginative originality\" and some artists' approach to drawing became less literal, more abstract. World-renowned artists such as Pablo Picasso, Andy Warhol and Jean-Michel Basquiat helped challenge the status quo, with drawing being very much at the centre of their practice, and often re-interpreting traditional technique.\nBasquiat's drawings were produced in many different mediums, most commonly ink, pencil, felt-tip or marker, and oil-stick, and he drew on any surface that came to hand, such as doors, clothing, refrigerators, walls and baseball helmets.\nThe centuries have produced a canon of notable artists and draftsmen, each with their own distinct language of drawing, including:\nMaterials.\nThe \"medium\" is the means by which ink, pigment, or color are delivered onto the drawing surface. Most drawing media either are dry (e.g. graphite, charcoal, pastels, Cont\u00e9, silverpoint), or use a fluid solvent or carrier (marker, pen and ink). Watercolor pencils can be used dry like ordinary pencils, then moistened with a wet brush to get various painterly effects. Very rarely, artists have drawn with (usually decoded) invisible ink. Metalpoint drawing usually employs either silver or lead. More rarely used are gold, platinum, copper, brass, bronze, and tinpoint.\nPaper comes in a variety of different sizes and qualities, ranging from newspaper grade up to high quality and relatively expensive paper sold as individual sheets. Papers vary in texture, hue, acidity, and strength when wet. Smooth paper is good for rendering fine detail, but a more \"toothy\" paper holds the drawing material better. Thus a coarser material is useful for producing deeper contrast.\nNewsprint and typing paper may be useful for practice and rough sketches. Tracing paper is used to experiment over a half-finished drawing, and to transfer a design from one sheet to another. Cartridge paper is the basic type of drawing paper sold in pads. Bristol board and even heavier acid-free boards, frequently with smooth finishes, are used for drawing fine detail and do not distort when wet media (ink, washes) are applied. Vellum is extremely smooth and suitable for very fine detail. Coldpressed watercolor paper may be favored for ink drawing due to its texture.\nAcid-free, archival quality paper keeps its color and texture far longer than wood pulp based paper such as newsprint, which turns yellow and becomes brittle much sooner.\nThe basic tools are a drawing board or table, pencil sharpener and eraser, and for ink drawing, blotting paper. Other tools used are circle compass, ruler, and set square. Fixative is used to prevent pencil and crayon marks from smudging. Drafting tape is used to secure paper to drawing surface, and also to mask an area to keep it free of accidental marks, such as sprayed or spattered materials and washes. An easel or slanted table is used to keep the drawing surface in a suitable position, which is generally more horizontal than the position used in painting.\nTechnique.\nAlmost all draftsmen use their hands and fingers to apply the media, with the exception of some disabled individuals who draw with their mouth or feet.\nPrior to working on an image, the artist typically explores how various media work. They may try different drawing implements on practice sheets to determine value and texture, and how to apply the implement to produce various effects.\nThe artist's choice of drawing strokes affects the appearance of the image. Pen and ink drawings often use hatching \u2013 groups of parallel lines. Cross-hatching uses hatching in two or more different directions to create a darker tone. Broken hatching, or lines with intermittent breaks, form lighter tones \u2013 and controlling the density of the breaks achieves a gradation of tone. Stippling uses dots to produce tone, texture and shade. Different textures can be achieved depending on the method used to build tone.\nDrawings in dry media often use similar techniques, though pencils and drawing sticks can achieve continuous variations in tone. Typically a drawing is filled in based on which hand the artist favors. A right-handed artist draws from left to right to avoid smearing the image. Erasers can remove unwanted lines, lighten tones, and clean up stray marks. In a sketch or outline drawing, lines drawn often follow the contour of the subject, creating depth by looking like shadows cast from a light in the artist's position.\nSometimes the artist leaves a section of the image untouched while filling in the remainder. The shape of the area to preserve can be painted with masking fluid or cut out of a frisket and applied to the drawing surface, protecting the surface from stray marks until the mask is removed.\nAnother method to preserve a section of the image is to apply a spray-on \"fixative\" to the surface. This holds loose material more firmly to the sheet and prevents it from smearing. However the fixative spray typically uses chemicals that can harm the respiratory system, so it should be employed in a well-ventilated area such as outdoors.\nAnother technique is subtractive drawing in which the drawing surface is covered with graphite or charcoal and then erased to make the image.\nTone.\nShading is the technique of varying the tonal values on the paper to represent the shade of the material as well as the placement of the shadows. Careful attention to reflected light, shadows and highlights can result in a very realistic rendition of the image.\nBlending uses an implement to soften or spread the original drawing strokes. Blending is most easily done with a medium that does not immediately fix itself, such as graphite, chalk, or charcoal, although freshly applied ink can be smudged, wet or dry, for some effects. For shading and blending, the artist can use a blending stump, tissue, a kneaded eraser, a fingertip, or any combination of them. A piece of chamois is useful for creating smooth textures, and for removing material to lighten the tone. Continuous tone can be achieved with graphite on a smooth surface without blending, but the technique is laborious, involving small circular or oval strokes with a somewhat blunt point.\nShading techniques that also introduce texture to the drawing include hatching and stippling. A number of other methods produce texture. In addition to the choice of paper, drawing material and technique affect texture. Texture can be made to appear more realistic when it is drawn next to a contrasting texture; a coarse texture is more obvious when placed next to a smoothly blended area. A similar effect can be achieved by drawing different tones close together. A light edge next to a dark background stands out to the eye, and almost appears to float above the surface.\nThe direction and quality of light play a crucial role in shading, influencing the depth and dimension of a drawing. Understanding how light interacts with different surfaces helps artists create a sense of realism, whether rendering smooth, reflective materials or rough, matte textures. Observing real-world lighting conditions and practicing from life can enhance an artist\u2019s ability to depict convincing shadows and highlights.\nAdditionally, advanced shading techniques, such as cross-hatching and scumbling, allow for greater control over tonal transitions and surface detail. Cross-hatching involves layering intersecting lines to build depth and tone, while scumbling uses circular or scribbled strokes to create soft, organic shading. These methods, when combined with careful blending and texture application, provide artists with a versatile toolkit for achieving a range of effects, from soft gradients to bold, high-contrast compositions.\nForm and proportion.\nMeasuring the dimensions of a subject while blocking in the drawing is an important step in producing a realistic rendition of the subject. Tools such as a compass can be used to measure the angles of different sides. These angles can be reproduced on the drawing surface and then rechecked to make sure they are accurate. Another form of measurement is to compare the relative sizes of different parts of the subject with each other. A finger placed at a point along the drawing implement can be used to compare that dimension with other parts of the image. A ruler can be used both as a straightedge and a device to compute proportions.\nWhen attempting to draw a complicated shape such as a human figure, it is helpful at first to represent the form with a set of primitive volumes. Almost any form can be represented by some combination of the cube, sphere, cylinder, and cone. Once these basic volumes have been assembled into a likeness, then the drawing can be refined into a more accurate and polished form. The lines of the primitive volumes are removed and replaced by the final likeness. Drawing the underlying construction is a fundamental skill for representational art, and is taught in many books and schools. Its correct application resolves most uncertainties about smaller details, and makes the final image look consistent.\nA more refined art of figure drawing relies upon the artist possessing a deep understanding of anatomy and the human proportions. A trained artist is familiar with the skeleton structure, joint location, muscle placement, tendon movement, and how the different parts work together during movement. This allows the artist to render more natural poses that do not appear artificially stiff. The artist is also familiar with how the proportions vary depending on the age of the subject, particularly when drawing a portrait.\nPerspective.\nLinear perspective is a method of portraying objects on a flat surface so that the dimensions shrink with distance. Each set of parallel, straight edges of any object, whether a building or a table, follows lines that eventually converge at a vanishing point. Typically this convergence point is somewhere along the horizon, as buildings are built level with the flat surface. When multiple structures are aligned with each other, such as buildings along a street, the horizontal tops and bottoms of the structures typically converge at a vanishing point.\nWhen both the fronts and sides of a building are drawn, then the parallel lines forming a side converge at a second point along the horizon (which may be off the drawing paper.) This is a two-point perspective. Converging the vertical lines to a third point above or below the horizon then produces a three-point perspective.\nDepth can also be portrayed by several techniques in addition to the perspective approach above. Objects of similar size should appear ever smaller the further they are from the viewer. Thus the back wheel of a cart appears slightly smaller than the front wheel. Depth can be portrayed through the use of texture. As the texture of an object gets further away it becomes more compressed and busy, taking on an entirely different character than if it was close. Depth can also be portrayed by reducing the contrast in more distant objects, and by making their colors less saturated. This reproduces the effect of atmospheric haze, and cause the eye to focus primarily on objects drawn in the foreground.\nComposition.\nThe composition of the image is an important element in producing an interesting work of artistic merit. The artist plans element placement in the art to communicate ideas and feelings with the viewer. The composition can determine the focus of the art, and result in a harmonious whole that is aesthetically appealing and stimulating.\nThe illumination of the subject is also a key element in creating an artistic piece, and the interplay of light and shadow is a valuable method in the artist's toolbox. The placement of the light sources can make a considerable difference in the type of message that is being presented. Multiple light sources can wash out any wrinkles in a person's face, for instance, and give a more youthful appearance. In contrast, a single light source, such as harsh daylight, can serve to highlight any texture or interesting features.\nWhen drawing an object or figure, the skilled artist pays attention to both the area within the silhouette and what lies outside. The exterior is termed the negative space, and can be as important in the representation as the figure. Objects placed in the background of the figure should appear properly placed wherever they can be viewed.\nA study is a draft drawing that is made in preparation for a planned final image. Studies can be used to determine the appearances of specific parts of the completed image, or for experimenting with the best approach for accomplishing the end goal. However a well-crafted study can be a piece of art in its own right, and many hours of careful work can go into completing a study.\nProcess.\nIndividuals display differences in their ability to produce visually accurate drawings, when a visually accurate drawing is \"recognized as a particular object at a particular time and in a particular space, rendered with little addition of visual detail that can not be seen in the object represented or with little deletion of visual detail.\"\nInvestigative studies have aimed to explain the reasons why some individuals draw better than others.\nOne study posited four key abilities in the drawing process: motor skills required for mark-making, the drawer's own perception of their drawing, perception of objects being drawn, and the ability to make good representational decisions. Following this hypothesis, several studies have sought to conclude which of these processes are most significant in affecting the accuracy of drawings.\nMotor control is an important physical component in the 'Production Phase' of the drawing process. It has been suggested that motor control plays a role in drawing ability, though its effects are not significant.\nIt has been suggested that an individual's ability to perceive an object they are drawing is the most important stage in the drawing process. This suggestion is supported by the discovery of a robust relationship between perception and drawing ability.\nThis evidence acted as the basis of Betty Edwards' how-to-draw book, \"Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain\". Edwards aimed to teach her readers how to draw, based on the development of the reader's perceptual abilities.\nFurthermore, the influential artist and art critic John Ruskin emphasised the importance of perception in the drawing process in his book \"The Elements of Drawing\". He stated, \"For I am nearly convinced, that once we see keenly enough, there is very little difficult in drawing what we see.\"\nThis has also been shown to influence one's ability to create visually accurate drawings. Short-term memory plays an important part in drawing as one's gaze shifts between the object they are drawing and the drawing itself.\nSome studies comparing artists to non-artists have found that artists spend more time thinking strategically while drawing. In particular, artists spend more time on 'metacognitive' activities such as considering different hypothetical plans for how they might progress with a drawing.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8545", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8545", "title": "Dedham, Massachusetts", "text": "Dedham ( ) is a town in, and the county seat of, Norfolk County, Massachusetts, United States. Located on Boston's southwestern border, the population was 25,364 at the 2020 census.\nFirst settled by English colonists in 1635 and incorporated in 1636, Dedham established the first public school in America in 1643. Dedham is home to the Fairbanks House, the oldest surviving timber-frame house in the United States. On January 1, 1643, by unanimous vote, Dedham authorized the first taxpayer-funded public school, \"the seed of American education.\" The first man-made canal in North America, Mother Brook, was created in Dedham in 1639.\nThe town took an active part in the American Revolution and was home to the Dedham Liberty Pole in the late 18th century. When a split occurred at the First Church and Parish in Dedham, the resulting lawsuit became known as The Dedham Case, an important landmark in the separation of church and state. In 1921, the historic Sacco and Vanzetti trial was held in the Norfolk County Courthouse. Dedham is sometimes called the \"mother of towns\" because 14 present-day communities were included within its original broad borders.\nDedham is governed by a representative town meeting, a select board which appoints the town manager, and various other boards and committees. The town is served by MBTA's commuter rail and bus service. The Dedham Public Schools operates seven schools, and a number of private schools also operate within the town.\nHistory.\n17th century.\nSettled in 1635 by people from Roxbury and Watertown, Dedham was incorporated in 1636. It became the county seat of Norfolk County when the county was formed from parts of Suffolk County on March 26, 1793. When the Town was originally incorporated, the residents wanted to name it \"Contentment.\" The Massachusetts General Court overruled them and named the town after Dedham, Essex in England, where some of the original inhabitants were born. The boundaries of the town at the time stretched to the Rhode Island border.\nAt the first public meeting on August 15, 1636, eighteen men signed the town covenant. They swore that they would \"in the fear and reverence of our Almighty God, mutually and severally promise amongst ourselves and each to profess and practice one truth according to that most perfect rule, the foundation whereof is ever lasting love.\"\nThey also agreed that \"we shall by all means labor to keep off from us all such as are contrary minded, and receive only such unto us as may be probably of one heart with us, [and such] as that we either know or may well and truly be informed to walk in a peaceable conversation with all meekness of spirit, [this] for the edification of each other in the knowledge and faith of the Lord Jesus\u2026\" The covenant also stipulated that if differences were to arise between townsmen, they would seek arbitration for resolution and each would pay his fair share for the common good.\nDedham is home to the Fairbanks House, the oldest surviving timber-frame house in the United States, scientifically dated to 1637. On January 1, 1643, by unanimous vote, Dedham authorized the first taxpayer-funded public school, \"the seed of American education.\" Its first schoolmaster, Rev. Ralph Wheelock, a Clare College graduate, was paid 20\u00a0pounds annually to instruct the youth of the community. Descendants of these students would become presidents of Dartmouth College, Yale University, and Harvard University.\nThe first man-made canal in North America, Mother Brook, was created in Dedham in 1639. It linked the Charles River to the Neponset River. Although both are slow-moving rivers, they are at different elevations. The difference in elevation made the canal's current swift enough to power several local mills.\n18th century.\nJust 15 months after asking for their own church, 40 men living on the north side of the Charles River suddenly asked the General Court to separate them from Dedham. Their petition cited the inadequate services provided, namely schools and churches. They also said that, if they were simply to be made a precinct instead of a separate town, that they would suffer political reprisals. Dedham agreed that the services were inadequate and did not oppose the separation, but did try to reduce the amount of land the separatists were seeking. Dedham also asked for a delay of one year. The General Court agreed with the petitioners, however, and created the new town of Needham with the original boundaries requested. Those who remained in Dedham still held rights to the unallotted lands in Needham, however, and any decrease in taxes would be offset by a decrease in expenditures. There may have also been some satisfaction in separating themselves from those on the other side of the 1704 power struggle.\nIn November 1798, David Brown led a group in Dedham protesting the federal government; they set up a liberty pole, as people had before the American Revolution. It carried the words, \"No Stamp Act, No Sedition Act, No Alien Bills, No Land Tax, downfall to the Tyrants of America; peace and retirement to the President; Long Live the Vice President\", referring to then-President John Adams and Vice President Thomas Jefferson. Brown was arrested in Andover but because he could not afford the $4,000 bail, he was taken to Salem for trial. Brown was tried in June 1799. Although he wanted to plead guilty, Justice Samuel Chase urged him to name those who had helped him or subscribed to his writings in exchange for freedom. Brown refused, was fined $480, and sentenced to eighteen months in prison. It was the most severe sentence up to then imposed under the Alien and Sedition Acts.\n19th century.\nIn 1818, though citizens were still taxed for the support of ministers and other \"public teachers of religion\", Dedham set a precedent toward the separation of church and state. Residents of the town selected a minister different than that chosen by the church members; the selection by residents was confirmed by the Supreme Judicial Court. This decision increased support for the disestablishment of the Congregational churches.\nThe local Endicott Estate burned to the ground in 1904 after the local volunteer fire department, responding to three separate fires burning simultaneously, reached the Endicott fire last. By the time they arrived, only ashes remained. It is said that the estate's owner, Henry Bradford Endicott (also founder of the Endicott Johnson Corporation) took the burning of the homestead as a divine command to rebuild (which he did). The rebuilt Endicott Estate is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. The estate and surrounding grounds are open to the public, upholding Henry's stepdaughter Katherine's wish to use the house and property for \"educational, civic, social and recreational purposes.\"\n20th century.\nIn 1921, the historic Sacco and Vanzetti trial was held in the Norfolk County Courthouse. Dedham Pottery is a cherished class of antiques, characterized by a distinctive crackle glaze, blue-and-white color scheme, and a frequent motif of rabbits and other animals. Dedham is sometimes called the \"mother of towns\" because 14 present-day communities were included within its original broad borders.\n21st century.\nIn March 2023, Dedham dedicated a 84,000 square-foot public safety complex on the site of the former Town Hall at 26 Bryant Street.\nGeography.\nDedham is located at (42.244609, \u221271.165531). On the northwest it is bordered by Needham, on the southwest by Westwood, and on the southeast by Canton.\nOn the northeastern corner of High Street and Court Street, the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey placed a small medallion into a granite block showing an elevation of 112.288\u00a0feet. According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and (1.79%) is water.\nThe Town Forest is the only such forest in the nation located in the median strip of a highway.\nNeighborhoods.\nDedham is made up of a number of neighborhoods:\nClimate.\nDedham has a warm-summer humid continental climate (\"Dfb\" under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification system), with high humidity and precipitation year-round.\nDemographics.\nAs of the census of 2020, there were 23,464 people, 8,654 households, and 6,144 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 10,885 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 82.04% White, 5.1% Black or African American, 0.00% Native American, 1.87% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 0.80% from other races, and 6.8% from two or more races. 7.5% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. As of 2024, the most common ethnic groups are those of Irish or Italian heritage, with many descended from those who came to work in the mills along Mother Brook. The largest religious group are Catholics.\nThere were 8,654 households, of which 30.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them. 56.3% were married couples living together, 11.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.0% were non-families. 23.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.61 and the average family size was 3.14.\nDedham's population was spread out, with 22.2% under the age of 18, 5.8% from 18 to 24, 31.1% from 25 to 44, 24.2% from 45 to 64, and 16.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females, there were 93.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.0 males.\nThe median income for a household in the town was $61,699, and the median income for a family was $72,330. Males had a median income of $46,216 versus $35,682 for females. The per capita income for the town was $28,199. About 3.2% of families and 4.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 3.9% of those under age 18 and 6.5% of those age 65 or over.\nSeal and flag.\nThe town's seal was originally designed by a member of the Dedham Historical Society. In the center is a crest containing the Old Avery Oak. When the tree was finally felled, the gavel used by the Moderator at Town Meeting was carved out of it. Above the tree are the scales of justice, representing Dedham as the county seat and home to Norfolk County's courts. On the left of the tree are agricultural instruments, and on the right is a factory, showing Dedham's history first as a town of farmers and then as one with a number of mills and factories, particularly along Mother Brook. Below the tree is a banner with the word \"Contentment\", the name of the original plantation.\nThe town flag is red with the seal prominent and in the center. In the lower left corner is part of the Avery Oak, and in the lower right is part of the Fairbanks House. It hangs in the select board's chambers at town hall and in the Great Hall of the Massachusetts State House.\nGovernment.\nA charter adopted in 1998 lays out the basic structure of the Town government, although it has been amended occasionally over the years. A seven-member Charter Advisory Committee, appointed in 2012, recommended six substantial changes and numerous minor changes be made to the document. The Selectmen consolidated them into six articles for Town Meeting's consideration, and five were presented to the Meeting in 2013. Voters approved four of them in 2014. A version of the sixth and final proposal was adopted at the Spring 2014 Annual Town Meeting.\nTown Meeting.\nAccording to Dedham's charter, the \"administration of all the fiscal, prudential, and municipal affairs of the town, with the government thereof, shall be vested in a legislative branch, to consist of a representative town meeting.\" Town Meeting is to consist of no less than 270 members, but not more than necessary to achieve an equal number coming from each precinct. There are currently seven districts, but could be as few as six or as many as nine, with lines drawn by the Select Board and the Registrars of Voters every ten years.\nVotes are by voice unless members call for a standing or roll call vote, either of which can be called for by the Moderator. All Town officers are required to attend Town Meeting and multiple member bodies must send at least one representative who have all the privileges of a Member except the right to vote. If 5% of Town voters petition the Select Board within 14 days of Town Meeting, any action taken may be submitted to voters. The final result is to be determined by majority vote, but Town Meeting can not be overruled unless 20% of registered voters participate.\nTown Meeting sets its own rules and keeps a journal of proceedings. The Town Meeting may establish various ad-hoc and standing committees on which any Town Meeting Member or voter may serve.\nBefore each Spring Annual Town Meeting, the Public Service Recognition Award is given to recognize citizens who have performed outstanding acts of service to the community.\nTown Meeting members.\nCurrently Town Meeting consists of 273 members, or representatives, with each of the seven districts, or precincts, electing 39. Thirteen are elected from each precinct each year and serve a three-year term. Each precinct elects from its own members a chairman, vice chairman, and secretary.\nTo be eligible, candidates must have 10 registered voters from their precinct sign nomination papers. Town Meeting Representatives can not serve on any other elected board or on the Finance and Warrant Committee. Members who move from the district or are removed by redistricting may serve until the next Town Election; however, any member who moves out of the Town immediately ceases to be a Member.\nIn case of a vacancy, the remaining term is to be filled at the next town election. If no election is to take place within 120 days of the vacancy, then the district chairman is to call together the members of the district, and they are to elect a member who will serve until the next town election.\nWarrant.\nThe Warrant at Town Meeting includes the articles to be voted on. Any elected or appointed board, committee, town officer, or any ten voters may place an article on the warrant. Each article to be voted on is directed by the Select Board to an appropriate board or committee to hear and provide the original motion at Town Meeting. All articles expending funds are directed to the Finance Committee; articles dealing with planning and zoning to the Planning Board; articles relating to by-laws to the By-Law Committee. The Finance Committee recommendation has the force of the original motion on all articles except those related to zoning. The Planning Board makes the original motion for those.\nMini Town Meeting.\nThe chairmen of the several districts elect from amongst themselves a chairman. This Chairman of the chairmen hosts what is officially known as the District Chairmen's Warrant Review Meeting, but is much more commonly referred to as Mini Town Meeting. The \"Mini\", first held in 1978, is generally a week or two before the actual Town Meeting. The purpose of the Mini is to air out several of the contentious issues before bringing them to the floor of Town Meeting.\nSelect Board.\nThe executive branch of the Town Government is \"headed\" by a Select Board. The Board has five members who are elected for three-year terms and serve as the chief policy-making body for the town. They appoint a Town Manager, who runs the day-to-day affairs of the Town. They also appoint constables, registrars of voters and other election officers, the board of appeals, conservation commission, historic district commission, and members of several other multiple member boards. Dennis J. Teehan Jr. serves as chair, with Erin Boles Welsh serving as Vice Chair. James A. MacDonald, Dimitria Sullivan and Michelle Persson Reilly also serve as members.\nSelect board members set policy for all departments below it, but are not involved in the day-to-day affairs of the Town. They issue licenses and can investigate the affairs and the conduct of any town agency.\nTown Clerk.\nThe Elected Town Clerk serves a three-year term and works full-time for the Town. The Clerk is \"the keeper of vital statistics of the town and the custodian of the town seal and all public records, administer[s] the oaths of office to all town officers... [and is] the clerk of the town meeting.\" In the role as clerk of town meeting, he notifies the public and members of the Town Meeting and keeps a verbatim record of proceedings. The current Town Clerk is Paul Munchbach.\nTown Moderator.\nTown Meetings are presided over by the Town Moderator, but he has no vote unless all the Members present and voting are equally divided. At the first Town Meeting following the annual town election, he is to appoint, subject to Town Meeting's confirmation, a Deputy Moderator from the elected Members. The Deputy serves in case of the Moderator's absence or disability. The current Town Moderator is Dan Driscoll.\nOther boards and committees.\nThe seven members of the School Committee are elected for three-year terms and appoint a Superintendent of Schools. They also set policy for the School Department. The School Committee is currently chaired by Mayanne MacDonald Briggs, with Stephen Acosta serving as Vice Chair. The other members of the committee are Chris Polito, Leah Flynn Gallant, Laurie Twomey, Joshua Langmead, and William (Bill) Walsh.\nThe three elected members of the Board of Assessors serve three-year terms and annually make a fair cash valuation of all property within the town. The current chair is Michael T. Polito. Richard J. Schoenfeld serves as Vice Chair and George Panagopoulos serves as Secretary.\nThe three elected members of the Board of Health are responsible for the formulation and enforcement of rules and regulations affecting the environment and the public health. Currently the board is chaired by Bernadette Chriokas. Leanne Jasset serves as Vice Chair, and Emma Reidy serves as a member.\nThe Board of Library Trustees has five members, each of whom serves three-year terms, and has care of the town's public library at the Endicott Branch and Main Branch. The Board develops policies to dictate how the library functions and operates. The Board is responsible for the library's buildings, including library hours and building use outside of regular operating hours. The Board also reviews the Director's budget request, makes recommendations, and officially adopts the operating budget. The current chair is Tom Turner, with Brian Keaney serving as Vice Chair. Crystal Power serves as Clerk. Annette Raphel and Rita Chapdelaine also serve as members.\nThe five elected members of the Planning Board make studies and prepare plans concerning the resources, possibilities, and needs of the town. It also prepares the Master Plan. Currently the board is chaired by Michael A. Podolski, Esq., with Jessica Porter serving as Vice Chair. James E. O'Brien IV serves as Clerk. John Bethoney and James F. McGrail, Esq. are also members. Andrew Pepoli serves as an unelected Associate.\nThere are five elected members of the Parks &amp; Recreation Commission. https:// states that the goal of the commission is to promote physical education, play, recreation, sport and other programs for people of all ages. The commission is currently chaired by Lisa Farnham, with Jon Briggs serving as Vice Chair. Lisa Moran, Chuck Dello Iacono, and Ryan O'Toole are also members.\nThere are five elected Commissioners of Trust Funds who manage and control all funds left, given, bequeathed, or devised to the town, and distribute the income in accordance with the terms of the respective trusts. The commission's Chair is Emily Reynolds, with Nicole P Munchbach serving as Vice Chair and Salvatore A Spada as Clerk. Robert Desmond and Dan Jon Oneil Jr. are also members.\nThere are five members of the Housing Authority Board. Four are elected by the Town and one is appointed by the Commonwealth Commissioner of Community Affairs. As members of the Board, they have all of the powers and duties which are given to housing authorities under the constitution and laws of the Commonwealth. The current chair is Donna M. Brown Rego and Margaret Matthews serves as the Assistant Chair &amp; State Appointee. Skye Kessler serves as Treasurer, John B. Kane as Assistant Treasurer, and John Wagner as a member.\nPolitics.\nDedham has shown a consistent trend of support for the Democratic Party in recent presential elections. From 1996 to 2024, Dedham's voting patterns have leaned heavily Democratic, with the party consistently winning the majority of votes. In the 2024 presidential election, Democrat Kamala Harris secured 63.27% of the vote, making a slight decrease from the 67.81% that Democrat Joe Biden received in 2020.\nIn the 1980 election, the Republican Ronald Reagan notably received 46.81% of the vote, marking a significant challenge to the Democrats during that period. Prior to that, Dedham displayed a more competitive political landscape, with Republicans achieving over 50% of the vote in several elections, such as 1956 (61.84%) and 1948 (63.17%). The mid-20th century was characterized by a stronger Republican presence, with the party frequently outperforming Democrats in the early decades of the century.\nDedham's modern political identity aligns with broader statewide trends in Massachusetts, where Democratic candidates typically secure a commanding share of the vote. Despite shifts in national political dynamics, Dedham's electoral results indicate a stable commitment to Democratic candidates, reflecting its position within a predominantly Democratic region. Third-party candidates have historically gained minimal support, though certain elections, such as 1992 and 1980, saw relatively higher percentages of third-party votes, reaching up to 22.38% and 15.91%, respectively.\nTelevision and film.\nDedham has been featured on both television and film screens.\nInfrastructure.\nRoads.\nThere are over 550 named streets in Dedham, and it continues to grow. Street names are assigned by the Select Board. There are 16 different street suffixes in use. The longest street is High Street, with 3.5 miles in Dedham, and the shortest is a tie between Kings Court and Redwood Court, both about 60 feet long.\nThe very first the first street in Dedham to be laid out with house lots on either side, as opposed to simply being a road to connect one farm to another, was Church Street. It was laid out by Rev. William Montague from the Colburn Grant. Norfolk Street was next, followed by School street.\nIn the 1800s, West Street turned south at what is today Burgess Lane and continued to Westfield Street. After Route 128 was built, it severed several roads in the area. That portion of West Street became Burgess Lane in the north and Schoolmaster Lane in the south. The portion of Westfield Street west of the highway became known as Country Club Road, named for the Dedham Country and Polo Club.\nMany streets were named for famous Dedhamites:\nPublic transportation.\nCommuter rail service from Boston's South Station is provided by the MBTA with stops at and on its Franklin/Foxboro Line. Also, MBTA bus routes 34 Dedham Square to Forest Hills serves Washington Street, Dedham Square, and the Dedham Mall, route 34E Walpole Center to Forest Hills serves Washington Street and Dedham Square, and route 35 Dedham Mall to Forest Hills serves Washington Street and the Dedham Mall.\nPolice and Fire.\nIn March 2023, Dedham opened a 84,000 square-foot public safety complex on the site of the former Town Hall at 26 Bryant Street. The complex combines the equipment and personnel of the town's fire, police, and dispatch departments. This building replaced the previous police station at 600 High Street (built 1962) and fire station at 436 Washington Street (built 1952).\nEducation.\nPublic education.\nThe Dedham Public Schools operates seven schools and is known for the first implementation of a tax supported, free public school system, now used nationally.\nPrivate education.\nIn addition, there are several private schools in the town, including:\nPoints of interest.\nThree districts have been recognized for their historic and architectural significance:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8546", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8546", "title": "Death Factory", "text": "Death factory is a colloquial name for extermination camps.\nDeath Factory may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "8547", "revid": "36933743", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8547", "title": "Book of Deuteronomy", "text": "Fifth book of the Torah in the Hebrew Bible\nDeuteronomy (; ) is the fifth and final book of the Torah (in Judaism), where it is called () which makes it the fifth book of the Hebrew Bible and Christian Old Testament.\nChapters 1\u201330 of the book consist of three sermons or speeches delivered to the Israelites by Moses on the Plains of Moab, shortly before they enter the Promised Land. The first sermon recounts the forty years of wilderness wanderings which had led to that moment and ends with an exhortation to observe the law. The second sermon reminds the Israelites of the need to follow Yahweh and the laws (or teachings) he has given them, on which their possession of the land depends. The third sermon offers the comfort that, even should the nation of Israel prove unfaithful and so lose the land, with repentance all can be restored. The final four chapters (31\u201334) contain the Song of Moses, the Blessing of Moses, and the narratives recounting the passing of the mantle of leadership from Moses to Joshua and, finally, the death of Moses on Mount Nebo.\nOne of its most significant verses is Deuteronomy 6:4, the Shema Yisrael, which has been described as the definitive statement of Jewish identity for theistic Jews: \"Hear, O Israel: the LORD our God, the LORD is one.\" Verses 6:4\u20135 were also quoted by Jesus in Mark 12:28\u201334 as the Great Commandment.\nTraditionally, it was believed that God dictated the Torah to Moses, but most modern scholars date Deuteronomy to the 7th\u20135th centuries BCE.\nStructure.\nPatrick D. Miller in his commentary on Deuteronomy suggests that different views of the structure of the book will lead to different views on what it is about. The structure is often described as a series of three speeches or sermons (chapters 1:1\u20134:43, 4:44\u201329:1, 29:2\u201330:20) followed by a number of short appendices or some kind of epilogue (31:1\u201334:12), consist of commission of Joshua, the song of Moses and the death of Moses.\nOther scholars have compared the structure of Deuteronomy with Hittite treaties or other ancient Near Eastern treaty texts. But it is clear that Deuteronomy is not in itself simply the text of a treaty, as Deuteronomy is more than simply applying the secular model of treaty to Israel's relationship with God.\nThe Ten Commandments (Decalogue) in chapter 5 serve as a blueprint for the rest of the book, as chapters 12\u201326 are the exposition of the Decalogue, thus the expanded Decalogue.\nSummary.\n\"(The following \"literary\" outline of Deuteronomy is from John Van Seters; it can be contrasted with Alexander Rof\u00e9's \"covenantal\" analysis in his \"Deuteronomy: Issues and Interpretation\".)\"\nThe final verses, Deuteronomy 34:10\u201312, \"never again did there arise in Israel a prophet like Moses,\" make a claim for the authoritative Deuteronomistic view of theology and its insistence that the worship of Yahweh as the sole deity of Israel was the only permissible religion, having been sealed by the greatest of prophets.\nDeuteronomic Code.\nDeuteronomy 12\u201326, the Deuteronomic Code, is the oldest part of the book and the core around which the rest developed. It is a series of mitzvot (\"commands\") to the Israelites regarding how they should conduct themselves in the Promised Land.\nComposition.\nComposition history.\nMosaic authorship of the Torah, the belief that the five books of the Torah \u2013 including the Book of Deuteronomy \u2013 were dictated by God to Moses on Mount Sinai, is an ancient Jewish tradition that was codified by Maimonides (1135\u20131204 CE) as the 8th of the 13 Jewish principles of faith. Virtually all modern secular scholars, and most Christian and Jewish scholars, reject the Mosaic authorship of the Book of Deuteronomy and date the book much later, between the 7th and 5th centuries BCE. Its authors were probably the Levite caste, collectively referred to as the Deuteronomist, whose economic needs and social status the book reflects. The historical background to the book's composition is currently viewed in the following general terms:\nChapters 12\u201326, containing the Deuteronomic Code, are the earliest section. Since the idea was first put forward by W. M. L. de Wette in 1805, most scholars have accepted that this portion of the book was composed in Jerusalem in the 7th century BCE in the context of religious reforms advanced by King Hezekiah (reigned c. 716\u2013687 BCE), although some have argued for other dates, such as during the reign of his successor Manasseh (687\u2013643 BCE) or even much later, such as during the exilic or postexilic periods (597\u2013332 BCE).\nThere is a suggestion in Moshe Weinfeld's translation and commentary on Deuteronomy, based on substantive affinities between the blessings and curses that appear in the book and the vassal treaties of Esarhaddon (pledging allegiance to the God of Israel and the Law in one version and to Esarhaddon in the documents exhumed from the archaeological record), that an important phase in the compilation of Deuteronomic law occurs at the same time as (and may be partly identical to) the Josianic reform. Weinfeld stringently rejects and dismantles the notion that the main body of the work might be post-exilic, without dismissing the obvious and unremarkable truth that textual changes accruing over generations of copying that extend for centuries are likely to have occurred and may be evident in the text. The dates that Esarhaddon reigned as an Assyrian 'King of the Universe' tend to prohibit any notion that the book was nearing a form that approaches its final draft during the reign of Hezekiah. However, the presence of Jeremiah on the scene, and of a general presence of northern refugees in the territory of Judah during Josiah's reign and thus throughout his reform, go some distance toward reconciling this reading with the notion that Deuteronomy is passed down to Judah as a Mosaic tradition of the north, insofar as Jeremiah has been interpreted as a liaison between the refugees of Israel and the native citizens of Judah sympathetic to both sides who enjoyed a reputation of authority in both communities.\nApart from the main body of the law of Moses in Deuteronomy, the second prologue (Ch. 5\u201311), and the first prologue (Ch. 1\u20134) appear as distinct units of the text; the chapters following 26 are similarly layered.\nIsrael\u2013Judah division.\nThe prophet Isaiah, active in Jerusalem about a century before Josiah, makes no mention of the Exodus, covenants with God, or disobedience to God's laws. In contrast, Isaiah's contemporary Hosea, active in the northern kingdom of Israel, makes frequent references to the Exodus, the wilderness wanderings, a covenant, the danger of foreign gods and the need to worship Yahweh alone. This discrepancy has led scholars to conclude that these traditions behind Deuteronomy have a northern origin. Whether the Deuteronomic Code was written in Josiah's time (late 7th century BCE) or earlier is subject to debate, but many of the individual laws are older than the collection itself. The two poems at chapters 32\u201333 \u2013 the Song of Moses and the Blessing of Moses were probably originally independent.\nPosition in the Hebrew Bible.\nDeuteronomy occupies a puzzling position in the Bible, linking the story of the Israelites' wanderings in the wilderness to the story of their history in Canaan without quite belonging totally to either. The wilderness story could end quite easily with Numbers, and the story of Joshua's conquests could exist without it, at least at the level of the plot. But in both cases there would be a thematic (theological) element missing. Scholars have given various answers to the problem.\nThe Deuteronomistic history theory is currently the most popular. Deuteronomy was originally just the law code and covenant, written to cement the religious reforms of Josiah, and later expanded to stand as the introduction to the full history. But there is an older theory, which sees Deuteronomy as belonging to Numbers, and Joshua as a sort of supplement to it. This idea still has supporters, but the mainstream understanding is that Deuteronomy, after becoming the introduction to the history, was later detached from it and included with Genesis\u2013Exodus\u2013Leviticus\u2013Numbers because it already had Moses as its central character. According to this hypothesis, the death of Moses was originally the ending of Numbers, and was simply moved from there to the end of Deuteronomy.\nThemes.\nOverview.\nDeuteronomy stresses the uniqueness of God, the need for drastic centralisation of worship, and a concern for the position of the poor and disadvantaged. Its many themes can be organised around the three poles of Israel, Yahweh, and the covenant which binds them together.\nIsrael.\nThe themes of Deuteronomy in relation to Israel are election, faithfulness, obedience, and Yahweh's promise of blessings, all expressed through the covenant: \"obedience is not primarily a duty imposed by one party on another, but an expression of covenantal relationship.\" Yahweh has elected Israel as his special property (Deuteronomy 7:6 and elsewhere), and Moses stresses to the Israelites the need for obedience to God and covenant, and the consequences of unfaithfulness and disobedience. Yet the first several chapters of Deuteronomy are a long retelling of Israel's past disobedience \u2013 but also God's gracious care, leading to a long call to Israel to choose life over death and blessing over curse (chapters 7\u201311).\nYahweh.\nDeuteronomy's concept of God changed over time. The earliest 7th century layer is monolatrous; not denying the reality of other gods but enforcing only the worship of Yahweh in Jerusalem. In the later, Exilic layers from the mid-6th century, especially chapter 4, this becomes monotheism, the idea that only one god exists. God is simultaneously present in the Temple and in heaven \u2013 an important and innovative concept called \"name theology.\"\nAfter the review of Israel's history in chapters 1 to 4, there is a restatement of the Ten Commandments in chapter 5. This arrangement of material highlights God's sovereign relationship with Israel prior to the giving of establishment of the Law.\nCovenant.\nThe core of Deuteronomy is the covenant that binds Yahweh and Israel by oaths of fidelity and obedience. God will give Israel blessings of the land, fertility, and prosperity so long as Israel is faithful to God's teaching; disobedience will lead to curses and punishment. But, according to the Deuteronomists, Israel's prime sin is lack of faith, apostasy: contrary to the first and fundamental commandment (\"Thou shalt have no other gods before me\") the people have entered into relations with other gods.\nDillard and Longman in their \"Introduction to the Old Testament\" stress the living nature of the covenant between Yahweh and Israel as a nation: The people of Israel are addressed by Moses as a unity, and their allegiance to the covenant is not one of obeisance, but comes out of a pre-existing relationship between God and Israel, established with Abraham and attested to by the Exodus event, so that the laws of Deuteronomy set the nation of Israel apart, signaling the unique status of the Jewish nation.\nThe land is God's gift to Israel, and many of the laws, festivals and instructions in Deuteronomy are given in the light of Israel's occupation of the land. Dillard and Longman note that \"In 131 of the 167 times the verb \"give\" occurs in the book, the subject of the action is Yahweh.\" Deuteronomy makes the Torah the ultimate authority for Israel, one to which even the king is subject.\nInfluence on Judaism and Christianity.\nJudaism.\nDeuteronomy 6:4\u20135 (\"Hear, O Israel (\"shema Yisra'el\"): the LORD is our God, the LORD is one!\") is the fundamental creed of Judaism\u2014the Shema Yisrael\u2014and its twice-daily recitation is a mitzvah (religious commandment) for religious Jews. The recitation of the \"Shema\" continues with Deuteronomy 6:5\u20139:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And you shall love the eternal your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your might. Take to heart these instructions with which I charge you this day. Impress them upon your children. Recite them when you stay at home and when you are away, when you lie down and when you get up. Bind them as a sign on your hand and let them serve as a symbol on your forehead; inscribe them on the doorposts of your house and on your gates (RJPS).\n\"Love the eternal your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your might\" became a principle central to Judaism: to return God's love in faith, relationship, and fulfillment of God's commandments.\nChristianity.\nIn the Gospel of Matthew, Jesus cited Deuteronomy 6:5 as the Great Commandment. The earliest Christian authors interpreted Deuteronomy's prophecy of the restoration of Israel as having been fulfilled (or superseded) by Jesus and the establishment of the Christian Church (Luke 1\u20132, Acts 2\u20135); Jesus was interpreted to be the \"one (i.e., prophet) like me\" predicted by Moses in Deuteronomy 18:15 (Acts 3:22\u201323). While the exact position of Paul the Apostle and Judaism is still debated, a common view is that in place of \"mitzvot\" given by God to the Jewish people in Deuteronomy and the rest of the Torah, Paul the Apostle, drawing on Deuteronomy 30:11\u201314, claimed that the keeping of the Mosaic covenant was superseded by faith in Jesus and the Gospel (the New Covenant).\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8550", "revid": "38095930", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8550", "title": "Down", "text": "Down most often refers to:\nDown may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "8551", "revid": "23073402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8551", "title": "David", "text": "Biblical figure and Israelite monarch\nDavid (; , \"beloved one\") was a king of ancient Israel and Judah, according to the Hebrew Bible and Old Testament.\nThe Tel Dan stele, an Aramaic-inscribed stone erected by a king of Aram-Damascus in the late 9th/early 8th centuries BCE to commemorate a victory over two enemy kings, contains the phrase (), which is translated as \"House of David\" by most scholars. The Mesha Stele, erected by King Mesha of Moab in the 9th century BCE, may also refer to the \"House of David\", although this is disputed. According to Jewish works such as the \"Seder Olam Rabbah\", \"Seder Olam Zutta\", and \"Sefer ha-Qabbalah\" (all written over a thousand years later), David ascended the throne as the king of Judah in 885 BCE. Apart from this, all that is known of David comes from biblical literature, the historicity of which has been extensively challenged, and there is little detail about David that is concrete and undisputed. Debates persist over several controversial issues: the exact timeframe of David's reign and the geographical boundaries of his kingdom; whether the story serves as a political defense of David's dynasty against accusations of tyranny, murder and regicide; the homoerotic relationship between David and Jonathan; whether the text is a Homer-like heroic tale adopting elements from its Ancient Near East parallels; and whether elements of the text date as late as the Hasmonean period.\nIn the biblical narrative of the Books of Samuel, David is described as a young shepherd and harpist whose heart is devoted to Yahweh, the one true God. He gains fame and becomes a hero by killing Goliath. He becomes a favorite of Saul, the first king of Israel, but is forced to go into hiding when Saul suspects David of plotting to take his throne. After Saul and his son Jonathan are killed in battle, David is anointed king by the tribe of Judah and eventually all the tribes of Israel. He conquers Jerusalem, makes it the capital of a united Israel, and brings the Ark of the Covenant to the city. He commits adultery with Bathsheba and arranges the death of her husband, Uriah the Hittite. David's son Absalom later tries to overthrow him, but David returns to Jerusalem after Absalom's death to continue his reign. David desires to build a temple to Yahweh, but is denied because of the bloodshed of his reign. He dies at age 70 and chooses Solomon, his son with Bathsheba, as his successor instead of his eldest son Adonijah. David is honored as an ideal king and the forefather of the future Hebrew Messiah in Jewish prophetic literature, and many psalms are attributed to him.\nDavid is also richly represented in post-biblical Jewish written and oral tradition and referenced in the New Testament. Early Christians interpreted the life of Jesus of Nazareth in light of references to the Hebrew Messiah and to David; Jesus is described as being directly descended from David in the Gospel of Matthew and the Gospel of Luke. In the Quran and hadith, David is described as an Israelite king as well as a prophet of Allah. The biblical David has inspired many interpretations in art and literature over the centuries.\nBiblical account.\nFamily.\nThe First Book of Samuel and the First Book of Chronicles both identify David as the son of Jesse, the Bethlehemite, the youngest of eight sons. He also had at least two sisters: Zeruiah, whose sons all went on to serve in David's army, and Abigail, whose son Amasa served in Absalom's army, Absalom being one of David's younger sons. While the Bible does not name his mother, the Talmud identifies her as Nitzevet, a daughter of a man named Adael, and the Book of Ruth claims him as the great-grandson of Ruth, the Moabite, by Boaz.\nDavid is described as cementing his relations with various political and national groups through marriage. According to , King Saul said that he would make whoever killed Goliath a very wealthy man, give his daughter to him and declare his father's family exempt from taxes in Israel. Saul offered David his oldest daughter, Merab, a marriage David respectfully declined. Saul then gave Merab in marriage to Adriel the Meholathite. Having been told that his younger daughter Michal was in love with David, Saul gave her in marriage to David upon David's payment in Philistine foreskins (ancient Jewish historian Josephus lists the dowry as 100 Philistine heads). Saul became jealous of David and tried to have him killed. David escaped. Then Saul sent Michal to Galim to marry Palti, son of Laish. David then took wives in Hebron, according to 2 Samuel 3; they were Ahinoam the Yizre'elite; Abigail, the widow of Nabal the Carmelite; Maacah, the daughter of Talmay, king of Geshur; Haggith; Abital; and Eglah. Later, David wanted Michal back and Abner, Ish-bosheth's army commander, delivered her to him, causing Palti great grief.\nThe Book of Chronicles lists his sons with his various wives and concubines. In Hebron, David had six sons: Amnon, by Ahinoam; Daniel, by Abigail; Absalom, by Maachah; Adonijah, by Haggith; Shephatiah, by Abital; and Ithream, by Eglah (). By Bathsheba, his sons were Shammua, Shobab, Nathan, and Solomon. David's sons born in Jerusalem of his other wives included Ibhar, Elishua, Eliphelet, Nogah, Nepheg, Japhia, Elishama and Eliada (). Jerimoth, who is not mentioned in any of the genealogies, is mentioned as another of his sons in . His daughter Tamar, by Maachah, is raped by her half-brother Amnon. David fails to bring Amnon to justice for his violation of Tamar, because he is his firstborn and he loves him, and so Absalom (her full brother) kills Amnon to avenge Tamar.\nNarrative.\nGod is angered when Saul, Israel's king, unlawfully offers a sacrifice and later disobeys a divine command both to kill all of the Amalekites and to destroy their confiscated property. Consequently, God sends the prophet Samuel to anoint a shepherd, David, the youngest son of Jesse of Bethlehem, to be king instead.\nAfter God sends an evil spirit to torment Saul, his servants recommend that he send for a man skilled in playing the lyre. A servant proposes David, whom the servant describes as \"skillful in playing, a man of valor, a warrior, prudent in speech, and a man of good presence; and the Lord is with him.\" David enters Saul's service as one of the royal armour-bearers and plays the lyre to soothe the king.\nWar comes between Israel and the Philistines, and the giant Goliath challenges the Israelites to send out a champion to face him in single combat. David, sent by his father to bring provisions to his brothers serving in Saul's army, declares that he can defeat Goliath. Refusing the king's offer of the royal armour, he kills Goliath with his sling. Saul inquires the name of the young hero's father.\nSaul sets David over his army. All Israel loves David, but his popularity causes Saul to fear him (\"What else can he wish but the kingdom?\"). Saul plots his death, but Saul's son Jonathan, who loves David, warns him of his father's schemes and David flees. He goes first to Nob, where he is fed by the priest Ahimelech and given Goliath's sword, and then to Gath, the Philistine city of Goliath, intending to seek refuge with King Achish there. Achish's servants or officials question his loyalty, and David sees that he is in danger there. He goes next to the cave of Adullam, where his family joins him. From there he goes to seek refuge with the king of Moab, but the prophet Gad advises him to leave and he goes to the Forest of Hereth, and then to Keilah, where he is involved in a further battle with the Philistines. Saul plans to besiege Keilah so that he can capture David, so David leaves the city in order to protect its inhabitants. From there he takes refuge in the mountainous Wilderness of Ziph.\nJonathan meets with David again and confirms his loyalty to David as the future king. After the people of Ziph notify Saul that David is taking refuge in their territory, Saul seeks confirmation and plans to capture David in the Wilderness of Maon, but his attention is diverted by a renewed Philistine invasion and David is able to secure some respite at Ein Gedi. Returning from battle with the Philistines, Saul heads to Ein Gedi in pursuit of David. Needing privacy \"to attend to his needs\", Saul enters the cave where, as it happens, David and his supporters are hiding. David realises he has an opportunity to kill Saul, but instead, he secretly cuts off a piece of Saul's robe. When Saul leaves the cave, David comes out to pay homage to the king, and to demonstrate using the piece of robe that he holds no malice towards him. The two are thus reconciled and Saul recognises David as his successor.\nA similar passage occurs in , when David is able to infiltrate Saul's camp on the hill of Hachilah and remove his spear and a jug of water from his side while he and his guards lie asleep. In this account, David is advised by Abishai that this is his opportunity to kill Saul, but David declines, saying he will not \"stretch out [his] hand against the Lord's anointed\". In the morning, David once again demonstrates to Saul that, despite ample opportunity, he did not deign to harm him. Saul, despite having already reconciled with David, confesses that he has been wrong to pursue David, and blesses him.\nIn , David begins to doubt Saul's sincerity, and reasons that the king will eventually make another attempt on his life. David appeals to king Achish of Gath to grant him and his family sanctuary. Achish agrees, and upon hearing that David has fled to Philistia, Saul ceases to pursue him, though no such pursuit seemed to be in progress at the time. Achish permits David to reside in Ziklag, close to the border between Philistia and Judah. To further ingratiate himself to Achish and the Philistines, David and his men raid the Geshurites, the Girzites, and the Amalekites, but lead the royal court to believe they are attacking the Israelites, the Jerahmeelites, and the Kenites. While Achish comes to believe that David had become a loyal vassal, the princes (or lords) of Gath remain unconvinced, and at their request, Achish instructs David to remain behind to guard the camp when the Philistines march against Saul. David returns to Ziklag and saves his wives and the citizens from an Amalekite raid. Jonathan and Saul are killed in battle with the Philistines, and after hearing of their deaths, David travels to Hebron, where he is anointed king over Judah. In the north, Saul's son Ish-Bosheth is anointed king of Israel, and war ensues until Ish-Bosheth is murdered.\nWith the death of Saul's son, the elders of Israel come to Hebron and David is anointed king over all of Israel. He conquers Jerusalem, previously a Jebusite stronghold, and makes it his capital. He brings the Ark of the Covenant to the city, intending to build a temple for God, but the prophet Nathan forbids it, prophesying that the temple would be built by one of David's sons. Nathan also prophesies that God has made a covenant with the house of David stating, \"your throne shall be established forever\". David wins additional victories over the Philistines, Moabites, Edomites, Amalekites, Ammonites and king Hadadezer of Aram-Zobah, after which they become tributaries. His fame increases as a result, earning the praise of figures like King Toi of Hamath, Hadadezer's rival.\nDuring a siege of the Ammonite capital of Rabbah, David remains in Jerusalem. He spies a woman, Bathsheba, bathing and summons her; she becomes pregnant. The text in the Bible does not explicitly state whether Bathsheba consented to sex with David. David calls her husband, Uriah the Hittite, back from the battle to rest, hoping that he will go home to have sex with his wife and the child will be presumed to be his. Uriah does not visit his wife, however, so David conspires to have him killed in the heat of battle. David then marries the widowed Bathsheba. In response, Nathan, after trapping the king in his guilt with a parable that actually described his sin in analogy, prophesies the punishment that will fall upon him, stating \"the sword shall never depart from your house.\" When David acknowledges that he has sinned, Nathan advises him that his sin is forgiven and he will not die, but the child will.\nIn fulfillment of Nathan's words, the child born of the union between David and Bathsheba dies, and another of David's sons, Absalom, fueled by vengeance and lust for power, rebels. Thanks to Hushai, a friend of David who was ordered to infiltrate Absalom's court to successfully sabotage his plans, Absalom's forces are routed at the battle of the Wood of Ephraim, and he is caught by his long hair in the branches of a tree where, contrary to David's order, he is killed by Joab, the commander of David's army. David laments the death of his favourite son: \"O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! Would I had died instead of you, O Absalom, my son, my son!\" until Joab persuades him to recover from \"the extravagance of his grief\" and to fulfill his duty to his people. David returns to Gilgal and is escorted across the River Jordan and back to Jerusalem by the tribes of Judah and Benjamin.\nWhen David is old and bedridden, Adonijah, his eldest surviving son and natural heir, declares himself king. Bathsheba and Nathan go to David and obtain his agreement to crown Bathsheba's son Solomon as king, according to David's earlier promise, and the revolt of Adonijah is put down. David dies at the age of 70 after reigning for 40 years, and on his deathbed counsels Solomon to walk in the ways of God and to take revenge on his enemies.\nPsalms.\nThe Book of Samuel calls David a skillful harp (lyre) player and \"the sweet psalmist of Israel.\" Yet, while almost half of the Psalms are headed \"A Psalm of David\" (also translated as \"to David\" or \"for David\") and tradition identifies several with specific events in David's life (e.g., Psalms 3, 7, 18, 34, 51, 52, 54, 56, 57, 59, 60, 63 and 142), the headings are late additions and no psalm can be attributed to David with certainty.\nPsalm 34 is attributed to David on the occasion of his escape from Abimelech (or King Achish) by pretending to be insane. According to the parallel narrative in 1 Samuel 21, instead of killing the man who had exacted so many casualties from him, Abimelech allows David to leave, exclaiming, \"Am I so short of madmen that you have to bring this fellow here to carry on like this in front of me? Must this man come into my house?\"\nInterpretation in Abrahamic tradition.\nRabbinic Judaism.\nDavid is an important figure in Rabbinic Judaism, with many legends about him. According to one tradition, David was raised as the son of his father Jesse and spent his early years herding his father's sheep in the wilderness while his brothers were in school.\nDavid's adultery with Bathsheba is interpreted as an opportunity to demonstrate the power of repentance, and the Talmud says it was not adultery at all, citing a Jewish practice of divorce on the eve of battle. Furthermore, according to Talmudic sources, Uriah's death was not murder, because Uriah had committed a capital offense by refusing to obey a direct command from the King. However, in tractate Sanhedrin, David expressed remorse over his transgressions and sought forgiveness. God ultimately forgave David and Bathsheba but would not remove their sins from Scripture.\nIn Jewish legend, David's sin with Bathsheba is the punishment for David's excessive self-consciousness. He had besought God to lead him into temptation so that he might give proof of his constancy like Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who successfully passed the test and whose names later were united with God's, while David failed through the temptation of a woman.\nAccording to midrashim, Adam gave up 70 years of his life for the life of David. Also, according to the Talmud Yerushalmi, David was born and died on the Jewish holiday of Shavuot (Feast of Weeks). His piety was said to be so great that his prayers could bring down things from Heaven.\nChristianity.\nThe Messiah concept is fundamental in Christianity. Originally an earthly king ruling by divine appointment (\"the anointed one\", as the title Messiah had it), in the last two centuries BCE the \"son of David\" became the apocalyptic and heavenly one who would deliver Israel and usher in a new kingdom. This was the background to the concept of Messiahship in early Christianity, which interpreted the career of Jesus \"by means of the titles and functions assigned to David in the mysticism of the Zion cult, in which he served as priest-king and in which he was the mediator between God and man\".\nThe early Church believed that \"the life of David foreshadowed the life of Christ; Bethlehem is the birthplace of both; the shepherd life of David points out Christ, the Good Shepherd; the five stones chosen to slay Goliath are typical of the five wounds; the betrayal by his trusted counsellor, Ahitophel, and the passage over the Cedron remind us of Christ's Sacred Passion. Many of the Davidic Psalms, as we learn from the New Testament, are clearly typical of the future Messiah.\" In the Middle Ages, \"Charlemagne thought of himself, and was viewed by his court scholars, as a 'new David'. [This was] not in itself a new idea, but [one whose] content and significance were greatly enlarged by him\".\nWestern Christian churches celebrate David's feast day on 29 December or 6 October, Eastern-rite on 19 December. The Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Catholic Churches celebrate the feast day of the \"Holy Righteous Prophet and King David\" on the Sunday of the Holy Forefathers (two Sundays before the Great Feast of the Nativity of the Lord) and on the Sunday of the Holy Fathers (Sunday before the Nativity), when he is commemorated together with other ancestors of Jesus. He is also commemorated on the Sunday after the Nativity, together with Joseph and James, the Brother of the Lord and on 26 December (Synaxis of the Mother of God).\nMiddle Ages.\nIn European Christian culture of the Middle Ages, David was made a member of the Nine Worthies, a group of heroes encapsulating all the ideal qualities of chivalry. His life was thus proposed as a valuable subject for study by those aspiring to chivalric status. This aspect of David in the Nine Worthies was popularised first through literature, and thereafter adopted as a frequent subject for painters and sculptors.\nDavid was considered a model ruler and a symbol of divinely ordained monarchy throughout medieval Western Europe and Eastern Christendom. He was perceived as the biblical predecessor to Christian Roman and Byzantine emperors and the name \"New David\" was used as an honorific reference to these rulers. The Georgian Bagratids and the Solomonic dynasty of Ethiopia claimed direct biological descent from him. Likewise, kings of the Frankish Carolingian dynasty frequently connected themselves to David; Charlemagne himself occasionally used \"David\" his pseudonym.\nIslam.\nDavid (Arabic: \u062f\u0627\u0648\u0648\u062f \"D\u0101'\u016bd\" or \"D\u0101w\u016bd\") is an important figure in Islam as one of the major prophets God sent to guide the Israelites. He is mentioned several times in the Quran with the Arabic name \u062f\u0627\u0648\u062f, \"D\u0101w\u016bd\" or \"D\u0101'\u016bd\", often with his son Solomon. In the Quran, David killed Goliath (), a giant soldier in the Philistine army. When David killed Goliath, God granted him kingship and wisdom and enforced it (). David was made God's \"vicegerent on earth\" () and God further gave David sound judgment (; , Q26) as well as the Psalms, regarded as books of divine wisdom (; ). The birds and mountains united with David in uttering praise to God (; ; ), while God made iron soft for David (), God also instructed David in the art of fashioning chain mail out of iron (); this knowledge gave David a major advantage over his bronze and cast iron-armed opponents, not to mention the cultural and economic impact. Together with Solomon, David gave judgment in a case of damage to the fields () and David judged the matter between two disputants in his prayer chamber (). Since there is no mention in the Quran of the wrong David did to Uriah nor any reference to Bathsheba, Muslims reject this narrative.\nMuslim tradition and the \"hadith\" stress David's zeal in daily prayer as well as in fasting. Quran commentators, historians and compilers of the numerous \"Stories of the Prophets\" elaborate upon David's concise quranic narratives and specifically mention David's gift in singing his Psalms, his beautiful recitation, and his vocal talents. His voice is described as having a captivating power, weaving its influence not only over man but over all beasts and nature, who would unite with him to praise God.\nHistoricity.\nLiterary analysis.\nBiblical literature and archaeological finds are the only sources that attest to David's life. Some scholars have concluded that this was likely compiled from contemporary records of the 11th and 10th centuries BCE, but that there is no clear historical basis for determining the exact date of compilation. Other scholars believe that the Books of Samuel were substantially composed during the time of Josiah, king of Judah, at the end of the 7th century BCE, extended during the Babylonian captivity and substantially complete by about 550 BCE. Old Testament scholar A. Graeme Auld contends that further editing was done even after then\u2014the silver quarter-shekel Saul's servant offers to Samuel in \"almost certainly fixes the date of the story in the Persian or Hellenistic period\" because a quarter-shekel was known to exist in Hasmonean times. The authors and editors of Samuel drew on many earlier sources, including, for their history of David, the \"history of David's rise\" and the \"succession narrative\". The Books of Chronicles, which tells the story from a different point of view, was probably composed in the period 350\u2013300 BCE, and uses Samuel and Kings as its source.\nBiblical evidence indicates that David's Judah was something less than a full-fledged monarchy: it often calls him (lit.\u2009'prince, chief'; ) rather than (); David sets up none of the complex bureaucracy that a kingdom needs. His army is made up of volunteers and his followers are largely relations or from his home region of Hebron.\nBeyond this, the full range of possible interpretations is available. A number of scholars consider the David story to be a heroic tale similar to the legend of King Arthur or the epics of Homer, while others find such comparisons questionable.\nThe instance in the Book of Jashar, excerpted in 2 Samuel 1:26, where David \"proclaims that Jonathan's love was sweeter to him than the love of a woman\", has been compared to Achilles' comparison of Patroclus to a girl and Gilgamesh's love for Enkidu \"as a woman\". Others hold that the David story is a political apology\u2014an answer to contemporary charges against him, of his involvement in murders and regicide. The authors and editors of Samuel and Chronicles aimed not to record history but to promote David's reign as inevitable and desirable, and for this reason there is little about David that is concrete and undisputed. Other scholars argue that, notwithstanding the apologetic tenor of the story, the authors of Samuel were also critical of David in several respects, suggesting that the text presents a complex portrait of him rather than a purely propagandistic one.\nSome other studies of David have been written: Baruch Halpern has pictured him as a brutal tyrant, a murderer, and a lifelong vassal of Achish, the Philistine king of Gath; Steven McKenzie argues that David came from a wealthy family, and was an \"ambitious and ruthless\" tyrant who murdered his opponents, including his sons. Joel S. Baden has called him \"an ambitious, ruthless, flesh-and-blood man who achieved power by any means necessary, including murder, theft, bribery, sex, deceit, and treason\". William G. Dever described him as \"a serial killer\".\nJacob L. Wright has written that the most popular legends about David, including his killing of Goliath, his affair with Bathsheba, and his ruling of the unified Kingdom of Israel rather than just Judah, are the creation of those who lived generations after him, in particular those living in the late Persian or Hellenistic periods.\nArchaeological findings.\nThe Tel Dan stele, discovered in 1993, is an inscribed stone erected by Hazael, a king of Damascus in the late 9th/early 8th centuries BCE. It commemorates the king's victory over two enemy kings, and contains the phrase , bytdwd, which most scholars translate as \"House of David\". Other scholars have challenged this reading, but this is likely a reference to a dynasty of the Kingdom of Judah which traced its ancestry to a founder named David.\nTwo epigraphers, Andr\u00e9 Lemaire and \u00c9mile Puech, hypothesised in 1994 that the Mesha Stele from Moab, dating from the 9th century, also contain the words \"House of David\" at the end of Line 31, although this was considered as less certain than the mention in the Tel Dan inscription. In May 2019, Israel Finkelstein, Nadav Na'aman, and Thomas R\u00f6mer concluded from the new images that the ruler's name contained three consonants and started with a \"bet\", which excludes the reading \"House of David\" and, in conjunction with the monarch's city of residence \"Horonaim\" in Moab, makes it likely that the one mentioned is King Balak, a name also known from the Hebrew Bible. Later that year, Michael Langlois used high-resolution photographs of both the inscription itself, and the 19th-century original squeeze of the then still intact stele to reaffirm Lemaire's view that line 31 contains the phrase \"House of David\". Replying to Langlois, Na'aman argued that the \"House of David\" reading is unacceptable because the resulting sentence structure is extremely rare in West Semitic royal inscriptions.\nBesides the two steles, Bible scholar and Egyptologist Kenneth Kitchen suggests that David's name also appears in a relief of the pharaoh Shoshenq I, who is usually identified with Shishak in the Bible. The relief claims that Shoshenq raided places in Palestine in 925 BCE, and Kitchen interprets one place as \"Heights of David\", which was in southern Judah and the Negev where the Bible says David took refuge from Saul. The relief is damaged and interpretation is uncertain.\nArchaeological analysis.\nOf the evidence in question, John Haralson Hayes and James Maxwell Miller wrote in 2006: \"If one is not convinced in advance by the biblical profile, then there is nothing in the archaeological evidence itself to suggest that much of consequence was going on in Palestine during the tenth century BCE, and certainly nothing to suggest that Jerusalem was a great political and cultural center.\" This echoed the 1995 conclusion of Am\u00e9lie Kuhrt, who noted that \"there are no royal inscriptions from the time of the united monarchy (indeed very little written material altogether), and not a single contemporary reference to either David or Solomon,\" while noting, \"against this must be set the evidence for substantial development and growth at several sites, which is plausibly related to the tenth century.\"\nIn 2007, Israel Finkelstein and Neil Asher Silberman stated that the archaeological evidence shows that Judah was sparsely inhabited and Jerusalem no more than a small village. The evidence suggested that David ruled only as a chieftain over an area which cannot be described as a state or as a kingdom, but more as a chiefdom, much smaller and always overshadowed by the older and more powerful kingdom of Israel to the north. They posited that Israel and Judah were not monotheistic at the time and that later 7th-century redactors sought to portray a past golden age of a united, monotheistic monarchy in order to serve contemporary needs. They noted a lack of archeological evidence for David's military campaigns and a relative underdevelopment of Jerusalem, the capital of Judah, compared to a more developed and urbanized Samaria, capital of Israel during the 9th century BCE.\nIn 2010, Amihai Mazar wrote that the United Monarchy of the 10th century BCE can be described as a \"state in development\". He compared David to Labaya, a Caananite warlord living during the time of Pharaoh Akhenaten. While Mazar believes that David reigned over Israel during the 11th century BCE, he argues that much of the Biblical text is of \"literary-legendary nature\". According to William G. Dever, the reigns of Saul, David and Solomon are reasonably well attested, but \"most archeologists today would argue that the United Monarchy was not much more than a kind of hill-country chiefdom\". Avraham Faust and Zev Farber argue that David managed to establish a mini-empire through multiple conquests which are archaeologically attested in destruction layers of many urban centers dating to his time.\nLester L. Grabbe wrote in 2017: \"The main question is what kind of settlement Jerusalem was in Iron IIA: was it a minor settlement, perhaps a large village or possibly a citadel but not a city, or was it the capital of a flourishing\u2014or at least an emerging\u2014state? Assessments differ considerably\". Isaac Kalimi wrote in 2018, \"No contemporaneous extra-biblical source offers any account of the political situation in Israel and Judah during the tenth century BCE, and as we have seen, the archaeological remains themselves cannot provide any unambiguous evidence of events.\"\nThe view of Davidic Jerusalem as a village has been challenged by Eilat Mazar's excavation of the Large Stone Structure and the Stepped Stone Structure in 2005. Mazar proposed that these two structures may have been architecturally linked as one unit and that they date to the time of King David. Mazar supports this dating with a number of artifacts, including pottery, two Phoenician-style ivory inlays, a black-and-red jug, and a radiocarbon-dated bone, estimated to be from the 10th century. Dever, Amihai Mazar, Avraham Faust, and Nadav Na'aman have argued in favour of the 10th-century BCE dating and responded to challenges to it. In 2010, Eilat Mazar announced the discovery of part of the ancient city walls around the City of David, which she believes date to the 10th century BCE. According to Mazar, this would prove that an organized state did exist in the 10th century. In 2006, Kenneth Kitchen came to a similar conclusion, arguing that \"the physical archaeology of tenth-century Canaan is consistent with the former existence of a unified state on its terrain.\"\nScholars such as Israel Finkelstein, Lily Singer-Avitz, Ze'ev Herzog and David Ussishkin do not accept these conclusions. Finkelstein does not accept the dating of these structures to the 10th century BCE, based in part on the fact that later structures on the site penetrated deep into underlying layers, that the entire area had been excavated in the early 20th century and then backfilled, that pottery from later periods was found below earlier strata, and that consequently the finds collected by E. Mazar cannot necessarily be considered as retrieved \"in situ\". Aren Maeir said in 2010 that he has seen no evidence that these structures are from the 10th century BCE and that proof of the existence of a strong, centralized kingdom at that time remains \"tenuous.\"\nExcavations at Khirbet Qeiyafa by archaeologists Yosef Garfinkel and Saar Ganor found an urbanized settlement radiocarbon dated to the 10th century, which supports the existence of an urbanised kingdom. The Israel Antiquities Authority stated: \"The excavations at Khirbat Qeiyafa clearly reveal an urban society that existed in Judah already in the late eleventh century BCE. It can no longer be argued that the Kingdom of Judah developed only in the late eighth century BCE or at some other later date.\" But other scholars have criticized the techniques and interpretations to reach some conclusions related to Khirbet Qeiyafa, such as Israel Finkelstein and Alexander Fantalkin of Tel Aviv University, who have instead proposed that the city is to be identified as part of a northern Israelite polity.\nIn 2018, Avraham Faust and Yair Sapir stated that a Canaanite site at Tel Eton, about 30 miles from Jerusalem, was taken over by a Judahite community by peaceful assimilation and transformed from a village into a central town at some point in the late 11th or early 10th century BCE. This transformation used some ashlar blocks in construction, which they argued supports the United Monarchy theory.\nArt and culture.\nLiterature.\nLiterary works about David include:\nFilm.\nDavid has been depicted several times in films; these are some of the best-known:\nPlaying cards.\nFor a considerable period, starting in the 15th century and continuing until the 19th, French playing card manufacturers assigned to each of the court cards names taken from history or mythology. In this context, the King of spades was often known as \"David\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nstyle=\"width:100%\" class=\"wraplinks\""}
{"id": "8556", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8556", "title": "Diablo II", "text": "2000 video game\nDiablo II is a 2000 action role-playing game developed by Blizzard North and published by Blizzard Entertainment for Microsoft Windows, Classic Mac OS, and OS X. The game, with its dark fantasy and horror themes, was conceptualized and designed by David Brevik and Erich Schaefer, who, with Max Schaefer, acted as project leads on the game. The senior producers were Matthew Householder and Bill Roper. The game was developed over a three-year period, with a crunch time of a year and a half.\nSet shortly after the events of \"Diablo\", the player controls a new hero, attempting to stop the destruction unleashed by Diablo's return. The game's four acts feature a variety of locations and settings to explore and battle in, as well as an increased cast of characters to play as and interact with.\nBuilding on the success of its predecessor, \"Diablo\" (1997), and improving the gameplay, both in terms of updated character progression and a better-developed story, \"Diablo II\" was one of the most popular games of 2000 and has been cited as one of the greatest games of all time. Major factors that contributed to the game's success include its continuation of popular fantasy themes from the previous game and its access to Blizzard's free online play service, Battle.net. An expansion to the game, \"\", was released in 2001.\n\"Diablo III\", the sequel to \"Diablo II\", was released on May 15, 2012. \"\", a remastered version of \"Diablo II\" which also includes the \"Lord of Destruction\" expansion, was released on September 23, 2021.\nGameplay.\n\"Diablo II\"'s storyline progresses through four chapters or \"acts\", the \"Lord of Destruction\" expansion adds the fifth chapter Act V which continues the story where Act IV left off. Each act follows a predetermined path, but the wilderness and dungeons between key areas are randomly generated. The player progresses through the story by completing a series of quests within each act (six per act, except for Act IV which only have three quests), compared to the preceding \"Diablo\" which most quests are assigned at random and most are optional. \"Diablo II\" also has optional side dungeons for extra monsters and experience. \nIn contrast to the first \"Diablo\", whose levels consisted of descending deeper and deeper into a Gothic-themed dungeon and Hell, \"Diablo II\"'s environments are much more varied. Act I is similar to the original \"Diablo\"; the Rogue Encampment is a simple palisade fort, with plains and boreal forests making up the wilderness area, and the Monastery resembles the typical medieval fortress. Act II mimics Ancient Egypt's desert and tombs; Lut Gholein resembles a Middle Eastern city and palace during the Crusades. Act III is supposedly based on the Central American jungles; Kurast is inspired by the lost Mayan civilization. Act IV takes place in Hell, modeled on the classical Christian conception with rocks and lava, leading up to a medieval cathedral with demonic features. Added in the expansion, Act V's style is mainly mountainous to showcase the ascending of Mount Arreat by traversing alpine plateaus and icy tunnels and caverns, though there are portals leading to Hellish side dungeons (similar to Act IV), and at the Arreat Summit is the Worldstone Keep whose architecture is inspired by Angkor Wat.\nIn addition to the acts, there are three sequential difficulty levels: Normal, Nightmare, and Hell; completing the game (four Acts in the original or five Acts in the expansion) on a difficulty setting will open up the next level. On higher difficulties, monsters are more varied, stronger, and may be resistant or immune to an element or physical damage; experience is penalized on dying, and the player's resistances are handicapped. However, better items are rewarded to players as they go through higher difficulties. A character retains all abilities and items between difficulties and may return to a lower difficulty at any time, albeit it is not possible to replay the quests that are already completed.\nPlayers can create a hardcore character. In normal mode, the player can resurrect their character if killed and resume playing, while a hardcore character has only one life. If killed, the character is permanently dead and unplayable. In addition, all items and equipment on that character will be lost unless another friendly character has the \"loot\" icon checked. Standard and hardcore characters play on separate online channels; as such a hardcore player can never appear in the same game session as a standard player.\nItem system.\n\"Diablo II\" uses a system of randomly generated equipment similar to the original \"Diablo\", but more complicated. Weapons and armor are divided into several quality levels: normal, magical, set, rare, and unique. Normal quality items are base items with a fixed set of basic properties, such as attribute requirements, maximum durability, armor rating (on armor), block chance (on shields), damage, and attack speed (on weapons). Magical quality items have blue names and one or two randomly selected bonuses, such as bonuses attributes, skills, or damage, indicated by a prefix or suffix. Rare quality items have randomly generated yellow names and 2 to 6 random properties. Unique items have fixed names in gold text, and instead of randomized properties, they have a set of 3 to 8 preselected properties. Green-named set items have fixed names and preselected properties like unique items, and belong to specifically named sets of 2 to 6 items. Additional properties known as set bonuses are activated by equipping multiple or all items from the same set. These are themed on individuals, like Civerb's cudgel, shield, and amulet, each of which provides individual bonuses which are enhanced if two or more of the items are used to equip a character. It is unusual to encounter more than one item from a set in a single playthrough of the game, so collectors need to play the game many times to accumulate all items from a set or purchase them online from other players who possess them but do not need them. Additionally, items can possess sockets, which can be used to upgrade items by adding gems for various bonuses.\n\"Diablo II\" includes an item crafting system. An item called the Horadric Cube is used to combine two or more items to create a new item. For example, three identical lower-quality gems can be combined to create a single higher-quality gem, and three small rejuvenation potions can be combined to create a single, more powerful rejuvenation potion.\nCharacter classes.\n\"Diablo II\" allows the player to choose between five different character classes: Amazon, Necromancer, Barbarian, Sorceress, and Paladin. Each character has different strengths, weaknesses, and sets of skills to choose from, as well as varying beginning attributes. The maximum level that any character can obtain is level 99.\nTwo additional character classes, the Druid and Assassin, were added in the expansion \"\".\nThe player can enlist the help of one hireling (computer-controlled mercenaries) from a mercenary captain in the town; Rogue Scouts (archers with Amazon abilities), Desert Mercenaries or Town Guards (melee fighters with Paladin auras), Iron Wolves (elemental spellcasters with occasional melee capability), and Barbarians (melee fighters with many hitpoints), from Acts I, II, III, and V, respectively. In the original release of the game, hirelings would not follow the player through different Acts, nor be revived if killed. The expansion allows players to retain their mercenary throughout the entire game as well as equipping them with armor and weapons, plus hirelings gain experience and attributes like the player although their level cannot surpass that of their master character. Typically, players choose a hireling that provides something missing from their character class; for instance, the melee-focused Paladin may choose an Iron Wolf for ranged magical support.\nIn \"Heroes of the Storm\" (2015), playable characters Cassia and Xul represent the Amazon and the Necromancer classes, respectively.\nMultiplayer.\n\"Diablo II\" can be played multiplayer on a local area network (LAN) or the Blizzard's Battle.net online service. Unlike the original \"Diablo\", \"Diablo II\" was made specifically with online gaming in mind. Several spells (such as auras or war cries) multiply their effectiveness if they are cast within a party, and although dungeons still exist, they were largely replaced by open spaces.\nBattle.net is divided into \"Open\" and \"Closed\" realms. Single-player characters may be played on open realms; only Battle.net characters that are stored on Blizzard's servers may be played on closed realms as a measure against cheating, where they must be played at least once every 90 days to avoid expiration. Open games are subject to many abuses as the characters are stored on the players' own hard drives. Many cheats that were used on closed realms do not exist or work any longer. Hacks, bots, and programs which allow the player to run multiple instances of the game at the same time are not allowed by Blizzard. They are rarely used anymore. Blizzard cracked down on spambots which advertise sites selling Diablo II's virtual items for real-world currency.\nAs the game can be played cooperatively (Players vs. Environment, PvE), groups of players with specific sets of complementary skills can finish some of the game's climactic battles in a matter of seconds, providing strong incentives for party-oriented character builds. Up to eight players can be in one game; they can either unite as a single party, play as individuals, or form multiple opposing parties. Experience gained, monsters' hit points and damage, and the number of items dropped are all increased as more players join a game, though not in a strictly proportional manner. Players are allowed to duel each other with all damage being reduced in player vs player (PvP). The bounty for a successful kill in PvP is a portion of the gold and the \"ear\" of the defeated player (with the previous owner's name and level at the time of the kill).\nThe Ladder System is reset at various intervals by Blizzard to allow for all players to start fresh with new characters on an equal footing. Ladder seasons have lasted from as short as six months to over a year. When a ladder season ends, all ladder characters are transferred to the non-ladder population. Certain rare items are available only within ladder games, although they can be traded for and exchanged on non-ladder after the season has ended.\nThe game has been patched extensively; the precise number of patches is impossible to determine as Battle.net has the capability of making minor server-side patches to address urgent bugs. As of July 2016[ [update]], the game is in version 1.14d. Through the patch history, several exploits and bugs such as item duplication have been addressed, as well as major revamps to the game's balance (such as the ability to redo skills and attributes). Not all patches have affected \"Diablo II\" directly, as several were designed to address aspects of the expansion to the game and had minimal effects on \"Diablo II\".\nPlot.\n\"Diablo II\" takes place after the end of the previous game, \"Diablo\", in the world of Sanctuary. In \"Diablo\", an unnamed warrior defeated Diablo and attempted to contain the Lord of Terror's essence within his own body. Since then, the hero has become corrupted by the demon's spirit, causing demons to enter the world around him and wreak havoc.\nA band of adventurers who pass through the Rogue Encampment hear these stories of destruction and attempt to find out the cause of the evil, starting with this corrupted \"Dark Wanderer.\" As the story develops, the truth behind this corruption is revealed: the soulstones were originally intended to imprison the Prime Evils after they were banished to the mortal realm by the Lesser Evils. With the corruption of Diablo's soulstone, the demon is able to control the Dark Wanderer and is attempting to free his two brothers, Mephisto and Baal. Baal, united with the mage Tal-Rasha, is imprisoned in a tomb near Lut Gholein. Mephisto is imprisoned in the eastern temple city of Kurast.\nAs the story progresses, cut scenes show the Dark Wanderer's journey as a drifter named Marius follows him. Marius, now in an asylum, narrates the events to a hooded visitor, whom he initially believes to be the Archangel Tyrael. The player realizes that the Dark Wanderer's mission is to reunite with the other prime evils, Baal and Mephisto. The story is divided up into four acts:\nAct I \u2013 The adventurers rescue Deckard Cain, who is imprisoned in Tristram, and then begin following the Dark Wanderer. The Dark Wanderer has one of the lesser evils, Andariel, corrupt the Sisters of the Sightless Eye (Rogues) and take over their Monastery. The adventurers overcome Andariel and then follow the Wanderer east.\nAct II \u2013 While the adventurers search the eastern desert for Tal-Rasha's tomb, the Dark Wanderer gets there first. Marius is tricked into removing Baal's soulstone from Tal-Rasha and Tyrael charges Marius with taking the soulstone to Hell to destroy it.\nAct III \u2013 The Dark Wanderer and Baal look for Mephisto in the Temple of Kurast. Still imprisoned in the dungeon below the temple, Mephisto was able to corrupt the High Council of Zakarum and take over the region. While the adventurers fight their way to the temple, Mephisto is rejoined by his brothers; the three open a portal to Hell, the Dark Wanderer sheds his human form, becomes the demon Diablo, and goes through the portal. The adventurers arrive later, defeat Mephisto, who was left guarding the entrance, and take his soulstone.\nAct IV \u2013 The adventurers slay Diablo in Hell and destroy the soulstones of Mephisto and Diablo on the Hellforge, preventing their return.\nIn the epilogue, Marius indicates he was too weak to enter Hell, and that he fears the stone's effects on him. He gives the soulstone to his visitor. The visitor reveals himself to actually be Baal, the last surviving Prime Evil now in possession of his own soulstone. He then kills Marius and sets the asylum on fire.\nThe story continues with Act V, in the expansion \"\" where Baal attempts to corrupt the mythical Worldstone on Mount Arreat. Upon returning to the Pandemonium Fortress after defeating Diablo, Tyrael opens a portal to send the adventurers to Arreat.\nDevelopment.\n\"Diablo II\" was announced by Blizzard in 1997, with a planned launch in the first quarter of 1998. According to designer and project lead Erich Schaefer, \"Diablo II never had an official, complete design document... for the most part we just started making up new stuff.\" Lead developer David Brevik wanted to fix all of the outstanding issues from the first \"Diablo\", including improved multiplayer, more distinction between the character classes, and building the game more horizontally across a large virtual space of land rather than the vertical, multilevel dungeon of \"Diablo\". The game was slated to have two years of development work, but it took Blizzard North over three years to finish. Part of this delay was attributed to Brevik's focus on gameplay from \"Ultima Online\", and trying to improve on features from that game for \"Diablo\". Brevik also brought in concepts from games like \"Civilization\" and \"Master of Orion\", which led to the creation of the character skill tree. The team was given creative freedom to come up with further ideas, often spending time playing video games for inspiration, but this haphazard development path led to the game's delay. After missing a key deadline in 1998, Blizzard North entered crunch during 1999 to assure the game would release by 2000.\n\"Diablo II\", despite having less than one percent of the original code from \"Diablo\" and having much of its content and internal coding done from scratch, was seen by the testers as \"more of the same.\" The game was meant to be released simultaneously both in North America and internationally. This allowed the marketing and PR department for Blizzard North to focus their efforts in building up excitement in players worldwide for the first week of sales, contributing to the game's success. The cover art, designed by Gerald Brom, originally had a hole in the forehead of the character but the hole was hidden after Columbine High School massacre happened. Over 70 people worked on the game.\nA second expansion beyond \"Lord of Destruction\" had been in the design stages of development at Blizzard, according to David Brevik, but never reached the production stage. In addition to adding new classes, areas, monsters, and items, the expansion would have brought in more elements of a massively multiplayer online (MMO) game featuring elements like guild halls, what Brevik considered an \"ARPG+MMO\". Brevik said the expansion was shelved when most of the Blizzard North staff left the company around June 2003.\nMusic.\nThe score was composed by Matt Uelmen and integrates creepy ambience with melodic pieces. The style of the score is ambient industrial and experimental. It was recorded in Redwood City, Oakland, and San Mateo, California, from April 1997 to March 2000.\nSome tracks were created by reusing the tracks from the original game, while others by rearranging tracks that were out-takes. Other scores are combinations of parts that were created more than a year after the first game's release. A single track usually integrates recorded samples from sound libraries, live recorded instrument interpretation samples specially meant for the game (guitar, flute, oriental percussion), and electronic instruments also, making the tracks difficult for later live interpretations.\nWhile the player visits the town, the game recreates the peaceful atmosphere from the first \"Diablo\" game, so for that the theme from Act I called \"Rogue\" comes back with the same chords of the original piece, reproducing only a part of the original \"Diablo\" town theme. For Act II Mustafa Waiz, a percussionist, and Scott Petersen, the game's sound designer, worked on the drum samples. Waiz played on the dumbek, djembe, and finger cymbals which gave Matt Uelmen a base upon which to build tracks around.\nThe town theme from Act II, \"Toru\", makes strong statement of departure from the world of Act I while also maintaining a thematic connection to what had come before. It is the first time in the series to be used some radically different elements than the guitars and choral sounds that dominate both the original Diablo and the opening quarter of \"Diablo II\". The foundation of the \"Toru\" piece is found in exciting dynamics of a Chinese wind gong. The instrument radically changes color from a steady mysterious drone to a harsh, fearsome noise, which gives exotic feeling and at the same time the pacing of the second town. In all sequences of Act II with deserts and valleys, Arabic percussion sounds dominate.\nThe composer was impressed by two of the Spectrasonics music libraries, \"Symphony of Voices\" and \"Heart of Asia\". He used samples from \"Heart of Asia\" in the \"Harem\" piece from Act II. The \"Crypt\" track uses a sample from \"Symphony of Voices\"; the choral phrase \"Miserere\". Voice samples from \"Heart of Asia\", \"Heart of Africa\", and \"Symphony of Voices\" by Spectrasonics.\nThe \"Harem\" track samples from \"Heart of Asia\" the Sanskrit Female 1 samples.\nRelease.\nThe game was released in \"Collector's Edition\" format, containing bonus collector's material, a copy of the \"Diablo\" \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" pen-and-paper campaign setting, and promotional movies for other Blizzard games. In 2000, the \"Diablo II: Exclusive Gift Set\" similarly contained exclusive collector's material and promotional videos, as well as a copy of the official strategy guide. The 2000 released \"Diablo Gift Pack\" contained copies of \"Diablo\" and \"Diablo II\", but no expansions. The 2001 \"Diablo: Battle Chest\" version contained copies of \"Diablo II\", \"Diablo II: Lord of Destruction\", the official strategy guide, and the original \"Diablo\". Recently however , the \"Battle Chest\" edition no longer contains the original \"Diablo\".\nDiablo II was released in Japan through Capcom.\nSupport and legacy.\nUntil 2016, Blizzard provided limited support for \"Diablo II\", including occasional patches. Although the original CD retail release worked on Windows 95/98/Me/NT4SP5, the current version downloadable from Battle.net requires at least Windows 2000/XP.\nAround 2008, the announcement of \"Diablo III\" renewed the interest in its predecessor and brought more attention to the many mods available for the game.\nIn 2015, an unofficial port for the ARM architecture-based Pandora handheld became available by static recompilation and reverse engineering of the original x86 version.\nOn March 11, 2016, Blizzard released the 1.14a Patch, which added support for Windows 7 and newer, a macOS installer and support for OS X 10.10 and 10.11. \"Diablo II\" is not supported on macOS 10.15, due to Apple completely dropping compatibility with 32-bit binaries in this version.\n\"Diablo II: Resurrected\".\nA remaster of the original and expansion, entitled \"Diablo II: Resurrected\", was released in 2021 for Windows, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Xbox One, Xbox Series X and Series S, and Nintendo Switch. The remaster includes updated graphics, smoother gameplay and re-rendering of the game's cutscenes, and supports cross-progression between the different platforms. The remastered version supports online features for players within the same console family, but not local co-op. Cross-platform play was not available upon release, although there is a possibility of it being included in a future update. The game also features quality-of-life improvements that Blizzard can implement by taking advantage of modern computers and consoles, including support for controllers on all systems, easier means of item identification, and shared stashes of items between all of a player's characters. But the designers also forego elements such as quest markers that are common in modern games, preserving as much of the original experience as possible, and making the re-master almost completely unchanged from the original \"Diablo II\".\nReception.\nCritical reviews.\n\"Diablo II\" has a positive reception. The PC version of the game achieves an overall score of 88/100 on Metacritic and 89% at GameRankings. GameSpy awarded the game an 86 out of 100, \"IGN\" awarded the game an 8.3 out of 10, and \"GameSpot\" awarded the game an 8.5 out of 10.\nGreg Vederman reviewed the PC version of the game for \"Next Generation\", rating it five stars out of five, and stated that \"\"Diablo II\" is a must-have PC title. That's all there is to it.\"\nAwards.\n\"Diablo II\" earned \"GameSpot\"'s 2000 runner-up Reader's Choice Award for role-playing game of the year. \"Diablo II\" was awarded with \"PC Role-Playing Game of the Year\", \"PC Game of the Year\", and \"Game of the Year\" from the Academy of Interactive Arts and Sciences during the 4th Annual Interactive Achievement Awards. In August 2016, \"Diablo II\" placed 21st on \"Time\"'s The 50 Best Video Games of All Time list. It was placed at No. 8 on \"Game Informer\"'s \"Top 100 RPGs Of All Time\" list.\nSales.\nOn its debut day, \"Diablo II\" sold 184,000 units. The game's global sales reached 1 million copies after two weeks, and 2 million after one and a half months. It was awarded a spot in the Guinness Book of World Records 2000 edition for being the fastest selling computer game ever, with more than 1 million units sold in the first two weeks of availability. Its sales during 2000 alone reached 2.75 million globally; 33% of these copies were sold outside the United States, with South Korea making up the largest international market. ', ', ', ' and \"Diablo III\" have since surpassed \"Diablo II\"'s record to become fastest-selling computer games ever at their times of release, according to Blizzard.\nIn the United States, PC Data tracked 308,923 sales for \"Diablo II\" during the June 25 \u2013 July 1 period, including sales of its Collector's Edition. This drew revenues of $17.2 million. Domestic sales reached 790,285 units ($41.05 million) by the end of October 2000, according to PC Data. Another $4.47 million were earned in the region by that date via sales of the \"Collector's Edition\". \"Diablo II\" finished 2000 with 970,131 sales in the United States, for a gross of $48.2 million.\n\"Diablo II\"'s success continued in 2001: from February to the first week of November, it totaled sales of 306,422 units in the United States. It was ultimately the country's eighth best-selling computer title of 2001, with sales of 517,037 units and revenues of $19.3 million. Its lifetime domestic sales climbed to 1.7 million units, for $67.1 million in revenue, by August 2006. At this time, this led \"Edge\" to declare it the United States' second-largest computer game hit released since January 2000. It received a \"Gold\" sales award from the Entertainment and Leisure Software Publishers Association (ELSPA), indicating sales of at least 200,000 copies in the United Kingdom.\n\"Diablo II\" became a major hit in the German market and debuted at #1 on Media Control's computer game sales chart for June 2000. Speaking with Havas Interactive's public relations director, \"PC Player\"'s Udo Hoffman noted that the representative \"had to make an effort on the phone to avoid singing and jubilating\" over the game's commercial performance. The Verband der Unterhaltungssoftware Deutschland (VUD) presented \"Diablo II\" with a \"Gold\" award after three weeks of availability, indicating sales of at least 100,000 units across Germany, Austria and Switzerland. It maintained first place for July and rose to \"Platinum\" status (200,000 sales) by the end of the month. The game proceeded to place in Media Control's top 10 through October, peaking at #2 in August, and in the top 30 through December. By the end of 2000, roughly 350,000 units had been sold in the German market. \"Diablo II\" continued to chart in January 2001, with a placement of 24th, and its \"Limited Edition\" debuted in second place for February. That April, the VUD presented the game with a \"Double-Platinum\" certification, for 400,000 sales. This made it one of the region's best-selling computer games ever at that time.\nAs of June 29, 2001, \"Diablo II\" has sold 4 million copies worldwide. Copies of \"Diablo: Battle Chest\" continue to be sold in retail stores, appearing on the NPD Group's top 10 PC games sales list as recently as 2010. Even more remarkably, the \"Diablo: Battle Chest\" was the 19th best-selling PC game of 2008 \u2013 a full eight years after the game's initial release \u2013 and 11 million users still played \"Diablo II\" and \"StarCraft\" over Battle.net in 2010.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8559", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8559", "title": "Diesel Engine", "text": ""}
{"id": "8560", "revid": "46051904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8560", "title": "Design", "text": "Plan for the construction of an object or system\nA design is the concept or proposal for an object, process, or system. The word \"design\" refers to something that is or has been intentionally created by a thinking agent, and is sometimes used to refer to the inherent nature of something \u2013 its design. The verb \"to design\" expresses the process of developing a design. In some cases, the direct construction of an object without an explicit prior plan may also be considered to be a design, such as in arts and crafts. A design is expected to have a purpose within a specific context, typically aiming to satisfy certain goals and constraints while taking into account aesthetic, functional and experiential considerations. Traditional examples of designs are architectural and engineering drawings, circuit diagrams, sewing patterns, and less tangible artefacts such as business process models.\nDesigning.\nPeople who produce designs are called \"designers\". The term 'designer' usually refers to someone who works professionally in one of the various design areas. Within the professions, the word 'designer' is generally qualified by the area of practice (for example: a fashion designer, a product designer, a web designer, or an interior designer), but it can also designate other practitioners such as architects and engineers (see below: Types of designing). A designer's sequence of activities to produce a design is called a design process, with some employing designated processes such as design thinking and design methods. The process of creating a design can be brief (a quick sketch) or lengthy and complicated, involving considerable research, negotiation, reflection, modeling, interactive adjustment, and re-design.\nDesigning is also a widespread activity outside of the professions of those formally recognized as designers. In his influential book \"The Sciences of the Artificial,\" the interdisciplinary scientist Herbert A. Simon proposed that, \"Everyone designs who devises courses of action aimed at changing existing situations into preferred ones.\" According to the design researcher Nigel Cross, \"Everyone can \u2013 and does \u2013 design,\" and \"Design ability is something that everyone has, to some extent, because it is embedded in our brains as a natural cognitive function.\"\nHistory of design.\nThe study of design history is complicated by varying interpretations of what constitutes 'designing'. Many design historians, such as John Heskett, look to the Industrial Revolution and the development of mass production. Others subscribe to conceptions of design that include pre-industrial objects and artefacts, beginning their narratives of design in prehistoric times. Originally situated within art history, the historical development of the discipline of design history coalesced in the 1970s, as interested academics worked to recognize design as a separate and legitimate target for historical research. Early influential design historians include German-British art historian Nikolaus Pevsner and Swiss historian and architecture critic Sigfried Giedion.\nDesign education.\nIn Western Europe, institutions for design education date back to the nineteenth century. The Norwegian National Academy of Craft and Art Industry was founded in 1818, followed by the United Kingdom's Government School of Design (1837), and Konstfack in Sweden (1844). The Rhode Island School of Design was founded in the United States in 1877. The German art and design school Bauhaus, founded in 1919, greatly influenced modern design education.\nDesign education covers the teaching of theory, knowledge, and values in the design of products, services, and environments, with a focus on the development of both particular and general skills for designing. Traditionally, its primary orientation has been to prepare students for professional design practice, based on project work and studio, or atelier, teaching methods.\nThere are also broader forms of higher education in design studies and design thinking. Design is also a part of general education, for example within the curriculum topic, Design and Technology. The development of design in general education in the 1970s created a need to identify fundamental aspects of 'designerly' ways of knowing, thinking, and acting, which resulted in establishing design as a distinct discipline of study.\nDesign process.\nSubstantial disagreement exists concerning how designers in many fields, whether amateur or professional, alone or in teams, produce designs. Design researchers Dorst and Dijkhuis acknowledged that \"there are many ways of describing design processes,\" and compare and contrast two dominant but different views of the design process: as a rational problem-solving process and as a process of reflection-in-action. They suggested that these two paradigms \"represent two fundamentally different ways of looking at the world\u00a0\u2013 positivism and constructionism.\" The paradigms may reflect differing views of how designing \"should be\" done and how it \"actually is\" done, and both have a variety of names. The problem-solving view has been called \"the rational model,\" \"technical rationality\" and \"the reason-centric perspective.\" The alternative view has been called \"reflection-in-action,\" \"coevolution\" and \"the action-centric perspective.\"\nRational model.\nThe rational model was independently developed by Herbert A. Simon, an American scientist, and two German engineering design theorists, Gerhard Pahl and Wolfgang Beitz. It posits that:\nThe rational model is based on a rationalist philosophy and underlies the waterfall model, systems development life cycle, and much of the engineering design literature. According to the rationalist philosophy, design is informed by research and knowledge in a predictable and controlled manner.\nTypical stages consistent with the rational model include the following:\nEach stage has many associated best practices.\nCriticism of the rational model.\nThe rational model has been widely criticized on two primary grounds:\nAction-centric model.\nThe action-centric perspective is a label given to a collection of interrelated concepts, which are antithetical to the rational model. It posits that:\nThe action-centric perspective is based on an empiricist philosophy and broadly consistent with the agile approach and methodical development. Substantial empirical evidence supports the veracity of this perspective in describing the actions of real designers. Like the rational model, the action-centric model sees design as informed by research and knowledge.\nAt least two views of design activity are consistent with the action-centric perspective. Both involve these three basic activities:\nThe concept of the design cycle is understood as a circular time structure, which may start with the thinking of an idea, then expressing it by the use of visual or verbal means of communication (design tools), the sharing and perceiving of the expressed idea, and finally starting a new cycle with the critical rethinking of the perceived idea. Anderson points out that this concept emphasizes the importance of the means of expression, which at the same time are means of perception of any design ideas.\nPhilosophies.\nPhilosophy of design is the study of definitions, assumptions, foundations, and implications of design. There are also many informal 'philosophies' for guiding design such as personal values or preferred approaches.\nApproaches to design.\nSome of these values and approaches include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8561", "revid": "3255160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8561", "title": "Denormalization", "text": "Strategy used on previously-normalized databases\nDenormalization is a strategy used on a previously-normalized database to increase performance. In computing, denormalization is the process of trying to improve the read performance of a database, at the expense of losing some write performance, by adding redundant copies of data or by grouping data. It is often motivated by performance or scalability in relational database software needing to carry out very large numbers of read operations. Denormalization differs from the unnormalized form in that denormalization benefits can only be fully realized on a data model that is otherwise normalized.\nImplementation.\nA normalized design will often \"store\" different but related pieces of information in separate logical tables (called relations). If these relations are stored physically as separate disk files, completing a database query that draws information from several relations (a \"join operation\") can be slow. If many relations are joined, it may be prohibitively slow. There are two strategies for dealing with this by denormalization:\nDBMS support.\nWith this approach, database administrators can keep the logical design normalized, but allow the database management system (DBMS) to store additional redundant information on disk to optimize query response. In this case it is the DBMS software's responsibility to ensure that any redundant copies are kept consistent. This method is often implemented in SQL as indexed views (Microsoft SQL Server) or materialized views (Oracle, PostgreSQL). A view may, among other factors, represent information in a format convenient for querying, and the index ensures that queries against the view are optimized physically.\nDBA implementation.\nWith this approach, a database administrator or designer has to denormalize the logical data design. With care this can achieve a similar improvement in query response, but at a cost \u2014 it is now the database designer's responsibility to ensure that the denormalized database does not become inconsistent. This is done by creating rules in the database called \"constraints\", that specify how the redundant copies of information must be kept synchronized, which may easily make the de-normalization procedure pointless. It is the increase in logical complexity of the database design and the added complexity of the additional constraints that make this approach hazardous. Moreover, constraints introduce a trade-off, speeding up reads (codice_1 in SQL) while slowing down writes (codice_2, codice_3, and codice_4). This means a denormalized database under heavy write load may offer \"worse\" performance than its functionally equivalent normalized counterpart.\nDenormalization versus not normalized data.\nA denormalized data model is not the same as a data model that has not been normalized, and denormalization should only take place after a satisfactory level of normalization has taken place and that any required constraints and/or rules have been created to deal with the inherent anomalies in the design. For example, all the relations are in third normal form and any relations with join dependencies and multi-valued dependencies are handled appropriately.\nExamples of denormalization techniques include:\nWith the continued dramatic increase in all three of storage, processing power and bandwidth, on all levels, denormalization in databases has moved from being an unusual or extension technique, to the commonplace, or even the norm. For example, one specific downside of denormalization was, simply, that it \"uses more storage\" (that is to say, literally more columns in a database). With the exception of truly enormous systems, increased storage requirements is considered a relatively small problem in the 2020s.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8562", "revid": "13974845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8562", "title": "Differential topology", "text": "Branch of mathematics\nIn mathematics, differential topology is the field dealing with the topological properties and smooth properties of smooth manifolds. In this sense differential topology is distinct from the closely related field of differential geometry, which concerns the \"geometric\" properties of smooth manifolds, including notions of size, distance, and rigid shape. By comparison differential topology is concerned with coarser properties, such as the number of holes in a manifold, its homotopy type, or the structure of its diffeomorphism group. Because many of these coarser properties may be captured algebraically, differential topology has strong links to algebraic topology.\nThe central goal of the field of differential topology is the classification of all smooth manifolds up to diffeomorphism. Since dimension is an invariant of smooth manifolds up to diffeomorphism type, this classification is often studied by classifying the (connected) manifolds in each dimension separately:\nBeginning in dimension 4, the classification becomes much more difficult for two reasons. Firstly, every finitely presented group appears as the fundamental group of some 4-manifold, and since the fundamental group is a diffeomorphism invariant, this makes the classification of 4-manifolds at least as difficult as the classification of finitely presented groups. By the word problem for groups, which is equivalent to the halting problem, it is impossible to classify such groups, so a full topological classification is impossible. Secondly, beginning in dimension four it is possible to have smooth manifolds that are homeomorphic, but with distinct, non-diffeomorphic smooth structures. This is true even for the Euclidean space formula_3, which admits many exotic formula_3 structures. This means that the study of differential topology in dimensions 4 and higher must use tools genuinely outside the realm of the regular continuous topology of topological manifolds. One of the central open problems in differential topology is the four-dimensional smooth Poincar\u00e9 conjecture, which asks if every smooth 4-manifold that is homeomorphic to the 4-sphere, is also diffeomorphic to it. That is, does the 4-sphere admit only one smooth structure? This conjecture is true in dimensions 1, 2, and 3, by the above classification results, but is known to be false in dimension 7 due to the Milnor spheres.\nImportant tools in studying the differential topology of smooth manifolds include the construction of smooth topological invariants of such manifolds, such as de Rham cohomology or the intersection form, as well as smoothable topological constructions, such as smooth surgery theory or the construction of cobordisms. Morse theory is an important tool which studies smooth manifolds by considering the critical points of differentiable functions on the manifold, demonstrating how the smooth structure of the manifold enters into the set of tools available. Oftentimes more geometric or analytical techniques may be used, by equipping a smooth manifold with a Riemannian metric or by studying a differential equation on it. Care must be taken to ensure that the resulting information is insensitive to this choice of extra structure, and so genuinely reflects only the topological properties of the underlying smooth manifold. For example, the Hodge theorem provides a geometric and analytical interpretation of the de Rham cohomology, and gauge theory was used by Simon Donaldson to prove facts about the intersection form of simply connected 4-manifolds. In some cases techniques from contemporary physics may appear, such as topological quantum field theory, which can be used to compute topological invariants of smooth spaces.\nFamous theorems in differential topology include the Whitney embedding theorem, the hairy ball theorem, the Hopf theorem, the Poincar\u00e9\u2013Hopf theorem, Donaldson's theorem, and the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture.\nDescription.\nDifferential topology considers the properties and structures that require only a smooth structure on a manifold to be defined. Smooth manifolds are 'softer' than manifolds with extra geometric structures, which can act as obstructions to certain types of equivalences and deformations that exist in differential topology. For instance, volume and Riemannian curvature are invariants that can distinguish different geometric structures on the same smooth manifold\u2014that is, one can smoothly \"flatten out\" certain manifolds, but it might require distorting the space and affecting the curvature or volume.\nOn the other hand, smooth manifolds are more rigid than the topological manifolds. John Milnor discovered that some spheres have more than one smooth structure\u2014see Exotic sphere and Donaldson's theorem. Michel Kervaire exhibited topological manifolds with no smooth structure at all. Some constructions of smooth manifold theory, such as the existence of tangent bundles, can be done in the topological setting with much more work, and others cannot.\nOne of the main topics in differential topology is the study of special kinds of smooth mappings between manifolds, namely immersions and submersions, and the intersections of submanifolds via transversality. More generally one is interested in properties and invariants of smooth manifolds that are carried over by diffeomorphisms, another special kind of smooth mapping. Morse theory is another branch of differential topology, in which topological information about a manifold is deduced from changes in the rank of the Jacobian of a function.\nFor a list of differential topology topics, see the following reference: List of differential geometry topics.\nDifferential topology versus differential geometry.\nDifferential topology and differential geometry are first characterized by their \"similarity\". They both study primarily the properties of differentiable manifolds, sometimes with a variety of structures imposed on them.\nOne major difference lies in the nature of the problems that each subject tries to address. In one view, differential topology distinguishes itself from differential geometry by studying primarily those problems that are \"inherently global\". Consider the example of a coffee cup and a donut. From the point of view of differential topology, the donut and the coffee cup are \"the same\" (in a sense). This is an inherently global view, though, because there is no way for the differential topologist to tell whether the two objects are the same (in this sense) by looking at just a tiny (\"local\") piece of either of them. They must have access to each entire (\"global\") object.\nFrom the point of view of differential geometry, the coffee cup and the donut are \"different\" because it is impossible to rotate the coffee cup in such a way that its configuration matches that of the donut. This is also a global way of thinking about the problem. But an important distinction is that the geometer does not need the entire object to decide this. By looking, for instance, at just a tiny piece of the handle, they can decide that the coffee cup is different from the donut because the handle is thinner (or more curved) than any piece of the donut.\nTo put it succinctly, differential topology studies structures on manifolds that, in a sense, have no interesting local structure. Differential geometry studies structures on manifolds that do have an interesting local (or sometimes even infinitesimal) structure.\nMore mathematically, for example, the problem of constructing a diffeomorphism between two manifolds of the same dimension is inherently global since \"locally\" two such manifolds are always diffeomorphic. Likewise, the problem of computing a quantity on a manifold that is invariant under differentiable mappings is inherently global, since any local invariant will be \"trivial\" in the sense that it is already exhibited in the topology of formula_5. Moreover, differential topology does not restrict itself necessarily to the study of diffeomorphism. For example, symplectic topology\u2014a subbranch of differential topology\u2014studies global properties of symplectic manifolds. Differential geometry concerns itself with problems\u2014which may be local \"or\" global\u2014that always have some non-trivial local properties. Thus differential geometry may study differentiable manifolds equipped with a \"connection\", a \"metric\" (which may be Riemannian, pseudo-Riemannian, or Finsler), a special sort of \"distribution\" (such as a CR structure), and so on.\nThis distinction between differential geometry and differential topology is blurred, however, in questions specifically pertaining to local diffeomorphism invariants such as the tangent space at a point. Differential topology also deals with questions like these, which specifically pertain to the properties of differentiable mappings on formula_5 (for example the tangent bundle, jet bundles, the Whitney extension theorem, and so forth).\nThe distinction is concise in abstract terms: \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8564", "revid": "12331483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8564", "title": "Diffeomorphism", "text": "Isomorphism of differentiable manifolds\nIn mathematics, a diffeomorphism is an isomorphism of differentiable manifolds. It is an invertible function that maps one differentiable manifold to another such that both the function and its inverse are continuously differentiable.\nDefinition.\nGiven two differentiable manifolds formula_1 and formula_2, a continuously differentiable map formula_3 is a diffeomorphism if it is a bijection and its inverse formula_4 is differentiable as well. If these functions are formula_5 times continuously differentiable, formula_6 is called a formula_7-diffeomorphism.\nTwo manifolds formula_1 and formula_2 are diffeomorphic (usually denoted formula_10) if there is a diffeomorphism formula_6 from formula_1 to formula_2. Two formula_7-differentiable manifolds are formula_7-diffeomorphic if there is an formula_16 times continuously differentiable bijective map between them whose inverse is also formula_5 times continuously differentiable. A formula_18-diffeomorphism is simply a diffeomorphism, and a formula_19-diffeomorphism is a homeomorphism.\nDiffeomorphisms of subsets of manifolds.\nGiven a subset formula_20 of a manifold formula_1 and a subset formula_22 of a manifold formula_2, a function formula_24 is said to be smooth if for all formula_25 in formula_20 there is a neighborhood formula_27 of formula_25 and a smooth function formula_29 such that the restrictions agree: formula_30 (note that formula_31 is an extension of formula_6). The function formula_6 is said to be a diffeomorphism if it is bijective, smooth and its inverse is smooth.\nLocal description.\nTesting whether a differentiable map is a diffeomorphism can be made locally under some mild restrictions. This is the Hadamard-Caccioppoli theorem:\nIf formula_34, formula_35 are connected open subsets of formula_36 such that formula_35 is simply connected, a differentiable map formula_38 is a diffeomorphism if it is proper and if the differential formula_39 is bijective (and hence a linear isomorphism) at each point formula_40 in formula_34.\nSome remarks:\nIt is essential for formula_35 to be simply connected for the function formula_6 to be globally invertible (under the sole condition that its derivative be a bijective map at each point). For example, consider the \"realification\" of the complex square function \n formula_44 \nThen formula_6 is surjective and it satisfies \n formula_46 \nThus, though formula_47 is bijective at each point, formula_6 is not invertible because it fails to be injective (e.g. formula_49).\nSince the differential at a point (for a differentiable function) \n formula_50 \nis a linear map, it has a well-defined inverse if and only if formula_47 is a bijection. The matrix representation of formula_47 is the formula_53 matrix of first-order partial derivatives whose entry in the formula_54-th row and formula_55-th column is formula_56. This so-called Jacobian matrix is often used for explicit computations.\nDiffeomorphisms are necessarily between manifolds of the same dimension. Imagine formula_6 going from dimension formula_58 to dimension formula_59. If formula_60 then formula_47 could never be surjective, and if formula_62 then formula_47 could never be injective. In both cases, therefore, formula_47 fails to be a bijection.\nIf formula_47 is a bijection at formula_40 then formula_6 is said to be a local diffeomorphism (since, by continuity, formula_68 will also be bijective for all formula_69 sufficiently close to formula_40).\nGiven a smooth map from dimension formula_58 to dimension formula_59, if formula_73 (or, locally, formula_47) is surjective, formula_6 is said to be a submersion (or, locally, a \"local submersion\"); and if formula_73 (or, locally, formula_47) is injective, formula_6 is said to be an immersion (or, locally, a \"local immersion\").\nA differentiable bijection is \"not\" necessarily a diffeomorphism. formula_79, for example, is not a diffeomorphism from formula_80 to itself because its derivative vanishes at 0 (and hence its inverse is not differentiable at 0). This is an example of a homeomorphism that is not a diffeomorphism.\nWhen formula_6 is a map between differentiable manifolds, a diffeomorphic formula_6 is a stronger condition than a homeomorphic formula_6. For a diffeomorphism, formula_6 and its inverse need to be differentiable; for a homeomorphism, formula_6 and its inverse need only be continuous. Every diffeomorphism is a homeomorphism, but not every homeomorphism is a diffeomorphism.\nformula_86 is a diffeomorphism if, in coordinate charts, it satisfies the definition above. More precisely: Pick any cover of formula_1 by compatible coordinate charts and do the same for formula_2. Let formula_89 and formula_90 be charts on, respectively, formula_1 and formula_2, with formula_34 and formula_35 as, respectively, the images of formula_89 and formula_90. The map formula_97 is then a diffeomorphism as in the definition above, whenever formula_98.\nExamples.\nSince any manifold can be locally parametrised, we can consider some explicit maps from formula_99 into formula_99.\n formula_101 \n We can calculate the Jacobian matrix:\n formula_102\n The Jacobian matrix has zero determinant if and only if formula_103. We see that formula_6 could only be a diffeomorphism away from the formula_40-axis and the formula_69-axis. However, formula_6 is not bijective since formula_108, and thus it cannot be a diffeomorphism.\n formula_109 \n where the formula_110 and formula_111 are arbitrary real numbers, and the omitted terms are of degree at least two in \"x\" and \"y\". We can calculate the Jacobian matrix at 0:\n formula_112\n We see that \"g\" is a local diffeomorphism at 0 if, and only if, \n formula_113\n i.e. the linear terms in the components of \"g\" are linearly independent as polynomials.\n formula_114\n We can calculate the Jacobian matrix:\n formula_115\n The Jacobian matrix has zero determinant everywhere! In fact we see that the image of \"h\" is the unit circle.\nSurface deformations.\nIn mechanics, a stress-induced transformation is called a deformation and may be described by a diffeomorphism.\nA diffeomorphism formula_38 between two surfaces formula_34 and formula_35 has a Jacobian matrix formula_73 that is an invertible matrix. In fact, it is required that for formula_25 in formula_34, there is a neighborhood of formula_25 in which the Jacobian formula_73 stays non-singular. Suppose that in a chart of the surface, formula_124\nThe total differential of \"u\" is\nformula_125, and similarly for \"v\".\nThen the image formula_126 is a linear transformation, fixing the origin, and expressible as the action of a complex number of a particular type. When (\"dx\",\u2009\"dy\") is also interpreted as that type of complex number, the action is of complex multiplication in the appropriate complex number plane. As such, there is a type of angle (Euclidean, hyperbolic, or slope) that is preserved in such a multiplication. Due to \"Df\" being invertible, the type of complex number is uniform over the surface. Consequently, a surface deformation or diffeomorphism of surfaces has the conformal property of preserving (the appropriate type of) angles.\nDiffeomorphism group.\nLet formula_1 be a differentiable manifold that is second-countable and Hausdorff. The diffeomorphism group of formula_1 is the group of all formula_7 diffeomorphisms of formula_1 to itself, denoted by formula_131 or, when formula_5 is understood, formula_133. This is a \"large\" group, in the sense that\u2014provided formula_1 is not zero-dimensional\u2014it is not locally compact.\nTopology.\nThe diffeomorphism group has two natural topologies: \"weak\" and \"strong\" . When the manifold is compact, these two topologies agree. The weak topology is always metrizable. When the manifold is not compact, the strong topology captures the behavior of functions \"at infinity\" and is not metrizable. It is, however, still Baire.\nFixing a Riemannian metric on formula_1, the weak topology is the topology induced by the family of metrics\n formula_136\nas formula_137 varies over compact subsets of formula_1. Indeed, since formula_1 is formula_140-compact, there is a sequence of compact subsets formula_141 whose union is formula_1. Then:\n formula_143\nThe diffeomorphism group equipped with its weak topology is locally homeomorphic to the space of formula_7 vector fields . Over a compact subset of formula_1, this follows by fixing a Riemannian metric on formula_1 and using the exponential map for that metric. If formula_5 is finite and the manifold is compact, the space of vector fields is a Banach space. Moreover, the transition maps from one chart of this atlas to another are smooth, making the diffeomorphism group into a Banach manifold with smooth right translations; left translations and inversion are only continuous. If formula_148, the space of vector fields is a Fr\u00e9chet space. Moreover, the transition maps are smooth, making the diffeomorphism group into a Fr\u00e9chet manifold and even into a regular Fr\u00e9chet Lie group. If the manifold is formula_140-compact and not compact the full diffeomorphism group is not locally contractible for any of the two topologies. One has to restrict the group by controlling the deviation from the identity near infinity to obtain a diffeomorphism group which is a manifold; see .\nLie algebra.\nThe Lie algebra of the diffeomorphism group of formula_1 consists of all vector fields on formula_1 equipped with the Lie bracket of vector fields. Somewhat formally, this is seen by making a small change to the coordinate formula_40 at each point in space:\n formula_153\nso the infinitesimal generators are the vector fields\n formula_154\nTransitivity.\nFor a connected manifold formula_1, the diffeomorphism group acts transitively on formula_1. More generally, the diffeomorphism group acts transitively on the configuration space formula_177. If formula_1 is at least two-dimensional, the diffeomorphism group acts transitively on the configuration space formula_179 and the action on formula_1 is multiply transitive .\nExtensions of diffeomorphisms.\nIn 1926, Tibor Rad\u00f3 asked whether the harmonic extension of any homeomorphism or diffeomorphism of the unit circle to the unit disc yields a diffeomorphism on the open disc. An elegant proof was provided shortly afterwards by Hellmuth Kneser. In 1945, Gustave Choquet, apparently unaware of this result, produced a completely different proof.\nThe (orientation-preserving) diffeomorphism group of the circle is pathwise connected. This can be seen by noting that any such diffeomorphism can be lifted to a diffeomorphism formula_6 of the reals satisfying formula_182; this space is convex and hence path-connected. A smooth, eventually constant path to the identity gives a second more elementary way of extending a diffeomorphism from the circle to the open unit disc (a special case of the Alexander trick). Moreover, the diffeomorphism group of the circle has the homotopy-type of the orthogonal group formula_183.\nThe corresponding extension problem for diffeomorphisms of higher-dimensional spheres formula_184 was much studied in the 1950s and 1960s, with notable contributions from Ren\u00e9 Thom, John Milnor and Stephen Smale. An obstruction to such extensions is given by the finite abelian group formula_185, the \"group of twisted spheres\", defined as the quotient of the abelian component group of the diffeomorphism group by the subgroup of classes extending to diffeomorphisms of the ball formula_186.\nConnectedness.\nFor manifolds, the diffeomorphism group is usually not connected. Its component group is called the mapping class group. In dimension 2 (i.e. surfaces), the mapping class group is a finitely presented group generated by Dehn twists; this has been proved by Max Dehn, W. B. R. Lickorish, and Allen Hatcher). Max Dehn and Jakob Nielsen showed that it can be identified with the outer automorphism group of the fundamental group of the surface.\nWilliam Thurston refined this analysis by classifying elements of the mapping class group into three types: those equivalent to a periodic diffeomorphism; those equivalent to a diffeomorphism leaving a simple closed curve invariant; and those equivalent to pseudo-Anosov diffeomorphisms. In the case of the torus formula_187, the mapping class group is simply the modular group formula_188 and the classification becomes classical in terms of elliptic, parabolic and hyperbolic matrices. Thurston accomplished his classification by observing that the mapping class group acted naturally on a compactification of Teichm\u00fcller space; as this enlarged space was homeomorphic to a closed ball, the Brouwer fixed-point theorem became applicable. Smale conjectured that if formula_1 is an oriented smooth closed manifold, the identity component of the group of orientation-preserving diffeomorphisms is simple. This had first been proved for a product of circles by Michel Herman; it was proved in full generality by Thurston.\nHomeomorphism and diffeomorphism.\nSince every diffeomorphism is a homeomorphism, given a pair of manifolds which are diffeomorphic to each other they are in particular homeomorphic to each other. The converse is not true in general. \nWhile it is easy to find homeomorphisms that are not diffeomorphisms, it is more difficult to find a pair of homeomorphic manifolds that are not diffeomorphic. In dimensions 1, 2 and 3, any pair of homeomorphic smooth manifolds are diffeomorphic. In dimension 4 or greater, examples of homeomorphic but not diffeomorphic pairs exist. The first such example was constructed by John Milnor in dimension 7. He constructed a smooth 7-dimensional manifold (called now Milnor's sphere) that is homeomorphic to the standard 7-sphere but not diffeomorphic to it. There are, in fact, 28 oriented diffeomorphism classes of manifolds homeomorphic to the 7-sphere (each of them is the total space of a fiber bundle over the 4-sphere with the 3-sphere as the fiber).\nMore unusual phenomena occur for 4-manifolds. In the early 1980s, a combination of results due to Simon Donaldson and Michael Freedman led to the discovery of exotic formula_199: there are uncountably many pairwise non-diffeomorphic open subsets of formula_199 each of which is homeomorphic to formula_199, and also there are uncountably many pairwise non-diffeomorphic differentiable manifolds homeomorphic to formula_199 that do not embed smoothly in formula_199.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8566", "revid": "849267558", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8566", "title": "Diesel engines", "text": ""}
{"id": "8567", "revid": "50693860", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8567", "title": "Dune Messiah", "text": "1969 science fiction novel by Frank Herbert\nDune Messiah is a 1969 science fiction novel by American writer Frank Herbert, the second in his \"Dune\" series of six novels. A sequel to \"Dune\" (1965), it was originally serialized in \"Galaxy\" magazine in 1969, and then published by Putnam the same year. \"Dune Messiah\" and its own sequel \"Children of Dune\" (1976) were collectively adapted by the Sci-Fi Channel in 2003 into a miniseries entitled \"Frank Herbert's Children of Dune\".\nA film adaptation covering the events of the novel, titled ', is in production from filmmaker Denis Villeneuve to serve as a sequel to his films \"Dune\" (2021) and ' (2024). It is scheduled to be released in 2026.\nPlot.\nPaul \"Muad'Dib\" Atreides has ruled as Emperor for 12 years. By accepting the role of messiah to the Fremen, he has unleashed a jihad which has conquered most of the known universe, but is powerless to stop the lethal excesses of the religious juggernaut he has created. Although 61 billion people have perished, Paul's prescient visions indicate this is far from the worst possible outcome for humanity. Motivated by this knowledge, Paul hopes to set humanity on a course that will not inevitably lead to stagnation and destruction, while at the same time acting as ruler of the empire and focal point of the Fremen religion.\nThe Bene Gesserit, Spacing Guild, and Tleilaxu conspire to dethrone Paul, with the Guild Navigator Edric using his prescience to shield their meetings with the Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother Mohiam and Tleilaxu Face Dancer Scytale, from Paul's visions. Mohiam enlists Princess Irulan, daughter of the deposed Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV, who is wed to Paul for political purposes. Paul has refused to father a child with Irulan, but he and his Fremen concubine Chani have also failed to produce an heir, causing tension within his monarchy. Desperate both to secure her place in the Atreides dynasty and to preserve the bloodline for the Bene Gesserit breeding program, Irulan has secretly been giving contraceptives to Chani. Paul is aware of this fact, but has foreseen that the birth of his heir will bring Chani's death, and does not want to lose her.\nEdric gifts Paul a ghola named Hayt, a reanimated being of Tleilaxu-make in the image of the deceased Duncan Idaho, Paul's childhood teacher and friend. The conspirators hope the presence of the ghola will weaken Paul's ability to rule by both disconcerting him and appealing to his emotional vulnerability. Furthermore, Paul's acceptance of the gift weakens his support among the Fremen, who see the Tleilaxu and their tools as unclean. Chani, taking matters into her own hands, switches to a traditional Fremen fertility diet, preventing Irulan from tampering with her food, and soon becomes pregnant. However, Chani's extended consumption of Irulan's contraceptive has weakened her, endangering the pregnancy.\nPaul learns of a Fremen conspiracy against him, but sees the strands of a Tleilaxu plot. As Paul's soldiers target the conspirators, an atomic weapon sourced from the Tleilaxu called a stone burner destroys the area. Many soldiers are maimed or killed, and Paul is blinded by the attack. By tradition, all blind Fremen exile themselves in the desert, but Paul shocks the Fremen by proving he can still see despite his condition. His oracular powers have become so developed that he can foresee everything, so by moving through his life in lockstep with his visions, he can see even the slightest details of the world around him. Posing as a dwarf servant to Paul, the Tleilaxu agent Bijaz implants a command in Hayt, compelling him to kill Paul if triggered. During childbirth, Chani's weakened body succumbs to the pain and she dies. Paul's reaction to her death triggers the command in Hayt to kill Paul, however, Hayt's ghola body resists, and the trauma forces Duncan's full consciousness to be recovered, simultaneously making him independent of Tleilaxu control.\nBefore her death, Chani gives birth to twins who, like Paul, have full access to both their male and female ancestral memories. The son is a total surprise for Paul, who had only foreseen the birth of their daughter. Scytale offers to revive Chani as a ghola, revealing the full purpose behind Hayt's presence and the restoration of his memories. Paul refuses, considering the possibility that the Tleilaxu might program a Chani ghola in some diabolical way. Scytale threatens the infants with a knife, demanding all of Paul's CHOAM holdings in return for his children's lives. By successfully escaping the oracular trap and setting the universe on a new path, Paul has been rendered completely blind, yet he is able to kill Scytale with a dagger to the eye due to a psychic vision from his son's perspective. Now prophetically and physically blind, Paul chooses to embrace the Fremen tradition and walks alone into the desert, winning the fealty of the Fremen for his children, who will inherit his empire.\nPaul leaves his sister Alia, herself worshipped by the Fremen and now romantically involved with Duncan, as regent for the twins, whom he has named Leto and Ghanima. Alia orders Stilgar to execute Edric, Mohiam, and others involved in the plot against her brother, going against his wish that none of them should be harmed. Alia spares Irulan, who in grief for Paul has renounced her loyalty to the Bene Gesserit and vowed to dedicate her life as a teacher to Paul's children. Duncan notes the irony that Chani's death and Paul's nullification have enabled them to triumph against their enemies: the Spacing Guild and the Bene Tleilaxu have been discredited, Irulan's defection from the Bene Gesserit removes the sisterhood's last lever against the Atreides, and Paul has escaped deification by walking into the desert as a man, while guaranteeing Fremen support for the Atreides line.\nPublication history.\nParts of \"Dune Messiah\" (and its sequel \"Children of Dune\") were written prior to the completion of \"Dune\" itself. The novel appeared initially as a five part serial in \"Galaxy Science Fiction\" magazine published from June (cover dated July) to October (cover dated November) 1969 with illustrations by Jack Gaughan. A Putnam hardback edition also appeared in October 1969. The American and British editions contain different prologues which summarized the events of \"Dune\". \"Dune Messiah\" and \"Children of Dune\" were published in a single volume by the Science Fiction Book Club in 2002, and in 1979 by Gollancz with \"Dune\" as \"The Great Dune Trilogy\".\nAnalysis.\nHerbert likened the initial trilogy of novels (\"Dune\", \"Dune Messiah\", and \"Children of Dune\") to a fugue, and while \"Dune\" was a heroic melody, \"Dune Messiah\" was its inversion. Paul rises to power in \"Dune\" by seizing control of the single critical resource in the universe, melange. His enemies are dead or overthrown, and he is set to take the reins of power and bring a hard but enlightened peace to the universe. Herbert chose in the books that followed to undermine Paul's triumph with a string of failures and philosophical paradoxes.\nCritical reception.\n\"Galaxy Science Fiction\" called \"Dune Messiah\" \"Brilliant ... It was all that \"Dune\" was, and maybe a little more.\" Spider Robinson enjoyed the book \"even as [he] was driving a truck through the holes in its logic, because it had the same majestic rolling grandeur of the previous book.\" \"Challenging Destiny\" called the novel \"The perfect companion piece to \"Dune\" ... Fascinating.\"\nAdaptations.\nDavid Lynch had planned to adapt sequels to \"Dune\" during the film's production in 1983\u20131984, with a script tentatively-titled \"Dune II\". Based on \"Dune Messiah\", the film had some differences from the novel's story, much like the first film had. After the critical and commercial failure of \"Dune\", the sequel did not proceed. The partial script developed by Lynch with notes by Frank Herbert was discovered in summer 2023 at Herbert's archives at California State University, Fullerton.\n\"Dune Messiah\" and its sequel \"Children of Dune\" (1976) were collectively adapted by the Sci-Fi Channel in 2003 into a miniseries entitled \"Frank Herbert's Children of Dune\". The first installment of the three part, six-hour miniseries covers the bulk of the plot of \"Dune Messiah\". The second and third installments adapt \"Children of Dune\".\nVilleneuve trilogy.\nPrior to the release of his 2021 theatrical adaptation \"Dune\", director Denis Villeneuve confirmed at the 2021 Venice Film Festival that a film based on \"Dune Messiah\" was planned, and it would serve as the third film in a trilogy. After ' (covering the second half of the first novel) was officially greenlit in October 2021, Villeneuve reiterated his hope to continue the series with a third film based on \"Dune Messiah\". In April 2024, following the critical and commercial success of \"Dune: Part Two\", Legendary Pictures confirmed that an adaptation of \"Dune Messiah\" was in development, with Villeneuve returning as director. Principal photography for the film, titled ', began on July 7, 2025, with the film scheduled to be released in the United States by Warner Bros. Pictures on December 18, 2026.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8569", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8569", "title": "Duke Nukem 3D", "text": "1996 first-person shooter video game\nDuke Nukem 3D is a 1996 first-person shooter game developed by 3D Realms and published by FormGen for MS-DOS. It is a sequel to the platform games \"Duke Nukem\" and \"Duke Nukem II\", published by 3D Realms.\n\"Duke Nukem 3D\" features the adventures of the titular Duke Nukem, voiced by Jon St. John, who fights against an alien invasion on Earth. Along with \"Wolfenstein 3D\", \"Doom\" and \"Quake\", \"Duke Nukem 3D\" is considered to be responsible for popularizing first-person shooters, and was released to major critical acclaim. Reviewers praised the interactivity of the environments, gameplay, level design, and unique risqu\u00e9 humor, a mix of pop-culture satire and lampooning of over-the-top Hollywood action heroes. However, it also incited controversy due to its violence, erotic elements, and portrayal of women. Since its release, \"Duke Nukem 3D\" has been cited as one of the greatest video games ever made.\nThe shareware version was originally released on January 29, 1996, while the full version of the game was released on April 19, 1996. The \"Plutonium PAK\", an expansion pack which updated the game to version 1.4 and added a fourth eleven-level episode, was released on October 21, 1996. The \"Atomic Edition\", a standalone version of the game that included the content from the \"Plutonium PAK\" and updated the game to version 1.5, was released on December 11, 1996. A fifth episode was released on October 11, 2016, with \"20th Anniversary World Tour\" published by Gearbox Software. A sequel, \"Duke Nukem Forever\", was released in 2011.\nGameplay.\nAs a first-person shooter whose gameplay is similar to \"Doom\", the gameplay of \"Duke Nukem 3D\" involves moving through levels presented from the protagonist's point of view, shooting enemies on the way. The environments in \"Duke Nukem 3D\" are highly destructible and interactive; most props can be destroyed by the player.\nLevels were designed in a fairly non-linear manner such that players can advantageously use air ducts, back doors, and sewers to avoid enemies or find hidden caches. These locations are also filled with objects the player can interact with. Some confer gameplay benefits to the player; light switches make it easier to see, while water fountains and broken fire hydrants provide some health points. Others are simply there as a diversion. Tipping strippers provokes a quote from Duke, and a provocative reveal from the dancer.\nDuke's arsenal consists of the \"Mighty Foot\" (a basic kick attack), a pistol, a shotgun, a triple-barrelled chain gun, a rocket-propelled grenade launcher, pipe bombs, freezethrower and shrink rays, laser land mines, and the rapid-fire \"Devastator\" rocket launcher. The \"Atomic Edition\" version of the game also has an \"Expander\", the opposite of the shrink-ray weapon. Lastly, the \"20th Anniversary World Tour\" version of the game also has an \"Incinerator\", the opposite of the freezethrower (with fiery projectiles instead of ice).\nVarious items can be picked up during gameplay. The portable medkit allows players to heal Duke at will. Steroids speed up Duke's movement, as well as instantly reversing the effects of the shrink-ray weapon and increasing the strength of Duke's Mighty Foot for a short period. Night vision goggles allow players to see enemies in the dark. The \"HoloDuke\" device projects a hologram of Duke, which can be used to distract enemies. Protective boots allow Duke to cross dangerously hot or toxic terrain. In sections where progress requires more aquatic legwork, an aqua-lung allows Duke to take longer trips underwater. Duke's jet pack allows the player to move vertically and gain access to otherwise inaccessible areas.\nThe game features a wide variety of enemies; some of which are aliens and other mutated humans. The LAPD have been turned into \"Pig Cops\", a play on the derogatory term \"pig\" for police officers, with LARD emblazoned on their uniforms. As is usual for a first-person shooter, Duke Nukem encounters a large number of lesser foes, as well as bosses, usually at the end of episodes. Like Duke, these enemies have access to a wide range of weapons and equipment, and some weaker enemies have jet packs.\nPlot.\nSetting.\n\"Duke Nukem 3D\" is set on Earth \"sometime in the early 21st century\". The levels of \"Duke Nukem 3D\" take players outdoors and indoors through rendered street scenes, military bases, deserts, a flooded city, space stations, Moon bases, and a Japanese restaurant.\nThe game contains several humorous references to pop culture. Some of Duke's lines are drawn from movies such as \"Aliens\", \"Dirty Harry\", \"Evil Dead II\", \"Full Metal Jacket\", \"Jaws\", \"Pulp Fiction\", and \"They Live\"; the captured women saying \"Kill me\" is a reference to \"Aliens\". Players will encounter corpses of famous characters such as Luke Skywalker, Indiana Jones, Snake Plissken, the protagonist of \"Doom\", and a smashed T-800. In the first episode, players navigate a tunnel in the wall of a prison cell hidden behind a poster, just like in \"The Shawshank Redemption\". During the second episode, players can see a Monolith (from \"\") on the Moon and use it as a teleport to complete the level.\nStory.\nThere is little narrative in the game, only a brief text prelude located under \"Help\" in the Main Menu, and a few cutscenes after the completion of an episode. The game picks up right after the events of \"Duke Nukem II\", with Duke returning to Earth in his space cruiser. As Duke descends on Los Angeles in hopes of taking a vacation, his ship is shot down by unknown hostiles. While sending a distress signal, Duke learns that aliens are attacking Los Angeles and have mutated the LAPD. With his vacation plans now ruined, Duke hits the \"eject\" button, and vows to do whatever it takes to stop the alien invasion.\nIn \"Episode One: \"L.A. Meltdown\"\", Duke fights his way through a dystopian Los Angeles. At a strip club, he is captured by pig-cops, but escapes the alien-controlled penitentiary and tracks down the alien cruiser responsible for the invasion in the San Andreas Fault. Duke confronts and kills an Alien Battlelord in the final level. Duke discovers that the aliens were capturing women, and detonates the ship. Levels in this episode include a movie theater, a red-light district, a prison, and a nuclear-waste disposal facility.\nIn \"Episode Two: \"Lunar Apocalypse\"\", Duke journeys to space, where he finds many of the captured women held in various incubators throughout space stations that had been conquered by the aliens. Duke reaches the alien mother ship on the Moon and kills an alien Overlord. As Duke inspects the ship's computer, it is revealed that the plot to capture women was merely a ruse to distract him. The aliens have already begun their attack on Earth.\nIn \"Episode Three: \"Shrapnel City\"\", Duke battles the massive alien presence through Los Angeles once again, and kills the leader of the alien menace: the Cycloid Emperor. The game ends as Duke promises that after some \"R&amp;R\", he will be \"...ready for more action!\", as an anonymous woman calls him back to bed. Levels in this episode include a sushi bar, a movie set, a subway, and a hotel.\nThe story continues in the \"Atomic Edition\". In \"Episode Four: \"The Birth\"\", it is revealed that the aliens used a captured woman to give birth to the Alien Queen, a creature which can quickly spawn deadly alien protector drones. Duke is dispatched back to Los Angeles to fight hordes of aliens, including the protector drones. Eventually, Duke finds the lair of the Alien Queen, and kills her, thus thwarting the alien plot. Levels in this episode include a fast-food restaurant (\"Duke Burger\"), a supermarket, a Disneyland parody called \"Babe Land\", a police station, the oil tanker \"Exxon Valdez\", and Area 51.\nWith the release of \"20th Anniversary World Tour\", the story progresses further. In \"Episode Five: \"Alien World Order\"\", Duke finds out that the aliens initiated a world-scale invasion, so he sets out to repel their attack on various countries. Duke proceeds to clear out aliens from Amsterdam, Moscow, London, San Francisco, Paris, the Giza pyramid complex, and Rome, with the final showdown with the returning alien threat taking place in Los Angeles, taking the game full circle. There, he defeats the Cycloid Incinerator, the current alien leader, stopping their threat for good.\nDevelopment.\n\"Duke Nukem 3D\" was developed on a budget of roughly $300,000. The development team consisted of 8 people for most of the development cycle, increasing to 12 or 13 people near the end. At one point, the game was being programmed to allow the player to switch between first-person view, third-person view, and fixed camera angles. Scott Miller of 3D\u00a0Realms recalled that \"with \"Duke\u00a03D\", unlike every shooter that came before, we wanted to have sort of real life locations like a cinema theatre, you know, strip club, bookstores...\" The game's development started in 1994.\n\"LameDuke\" is an early prototype of \"Duke Nukem 3D\", which was released by 3D\u00a0Realms as a \"bonus\" one year after the release of the official version. It has been released as is, with no support. \"LameDuke\" features four episodes: \"Mr.\u00a0Caliber\", \"Mission Cockroach\", \"Suck Hole\", and \"Hard Landing\". Certain weapons were altered from the original versions and/or removed.\nThe original official website was created by Jeffrey D. Erb and Mark Farish of Intersphere Communications Ltd.\nRelease.\nConsole versions and add-ons.\n\"Duke Nukem 3D\" was ported to many consoles of the time. All of the ports featured some sort of new content.\nSoundtrack.\nLee Jackson's theme song \"Grabbag\" has elicited many covers and remixes over the years by both fans and professional musicians, including an officially sanctioned studio version by thrash metal band Megadeth. Another version of the song was recorded by Chris Kline in August 2005. 3D Realms featured it on the front page of their website and contracted with Kline to use it to promote their Xbox Live release of \"Duke Nukem\u00a03D\".\nSales.\n\"Duke Nukem 3D\" was a commercial hit, selling about 3.5 million copies. In the United States alone, it was the 12th best-selling computer game in the period from 1993 to 1999, with 950,000 units sold. NPD Techworld, a firm that tracked sales in the United States, reported 1.25 million units sold of \"Duke Nukem 3D\" by December 2002.\nSource ports.\nFollowing the release of the \"Doom\" source code in 1997, players wanted a similar source code release from 3D Realms. The last major game to make use of the \"Duke Nukem 3D\" source code was TNT Team's \"World War II GI\" in 1999. Its programmer, Matthew Saettler, obtained permission from 3D Realms to expand the gameplay enhancements done on \"WWII GI\" to \"Duke Nukem 3D\".\n\"EDuke\" was a semi-official branch of \"Duke Nukem 3D\" that was released as a patch as \"Duke Nukem 3D\" v2.0 for \"Atomic Edition\" users on July 28, 2000. It included a demo mod made by several beta testers. It focused primarily on enhancing the CON scripting language in ways which allowed those modifying the game to do much more with the system than originally possible. Though a further version was planned, it never made it out of beta. It was eventually cancelled due to programmer time constraints. About a month after the release of the \"Duke Nukem 3D\" source code, \"Blood\" project manager Matt Saettler released the source code for both \"EDuke\" v2.0 and EDuke v2.1, the test version of which would have eventually become the next \"EDuke\" release, under the GPL.\nThe source code to the \"Duke Nukem 3D\" v1.5 executable, which uses the Build engine, was released as free software under the GPL-2.0-or-later license on April 1, 2003. The game content remains under a proprietary license. The game was quickly ported by enthusiasts to modern operating systems.\nThe first \"Duke Nukem 3D\" port was from icculus.org. It is a cross-platform project that allows the game to be played on AmigaOS, AmigaOS 4, AROS, BeOS, FreeBSD, Linux, Mac OS X, MorphOS, Solaris, and Windows rather than MS-DOS. The icculus.org codebase would later be used as the base for several other ports, including \"Duke3d_32\".\nAnother popular early project is Jonathon Fowler's \"JFDuke3D\", which, in December 2003, received backing from the original author of Build, programmer Ken Silverman. Fowler, in cooperation with Silverman, released a new version of \"JFDuke3D\" using Polymost, an OpenGL-enhanced renderer for Build which allows hardware acceleration and 3D model support along with 32-bit color high resolution textures. Another project based on \"JFDuke3D\" called \"xDuke\", unrelated to the \"xDuke\" project based on \"Duke3d_w32\", runs on the Xbox. Silverman has since helped Fowler with a large portion of other engine work, including updating the network code, and helping to maintain various other aspects of the engine. Development was semi-active between 2005 and 2020, since then, new versions are regularly published.\nWhile a few short-lived MS-DOS-based \"EDuke\" projects emerged, it was not until the release of \"EDuke32\", an extended version of \"Duke3D\" incorporating variants of both Fowler's Microsoft Windows \"JFDuke3D\" code, and Saettler's \"EDuke code\", by one of 3D Realms' forum moderators in late 2004, that \"EDuke's\" scripting extensions received community focus. Among the various enhancements, support for advanced shader model 3.0 based graphics was added to \"EDuke32\" during late 2008-early 2009. In June 2008, thanks to significant porting contributions from the DOSBox team, \"EDuke32\" became the only \"Duke Nukem 3D\" source port to compile and run natively on 64-bit Linux systems without the use of a 32-bit compatibility environment.\nOn April 1, 2009, an OpenGL Shader Model 3.0 renderer was revealed to have been developed for \"EDuke32\", named \"Polymer\" to distinguish from Ken Silverman's \"Polymost\". It allows for much more modern effects such as dynamic lighting and normal mapping. Although Polymer is fully functional, it is technically incomplete and unoptimized, and is still in development. As of the fifth installment of the \"High Resolution Pack\", released in 2011, the Polymer renderer is mandatory. In 2011, another significant development of \"EDuke32\" was the introduction of true room over room (TROR), where sectors can be placed over other sectors, and can be seen at the same time. In practice, this allows for true three-dimensional level design that was previously impossible, although the base engine is still 2D.\nOn December 18, 2012, the \"Chocolate Duke Nukem 3D\" source port was released. Inspired by \"Chocolate Doom\", the primary goal was to refactor the code so developers could easily read and learn from it, as well as make it portable.\nIn February 2013, a source code review article was published that described the internal working of the code.\nReception.\nAll versions of the game have earned a positive aggregate score on GameRankings and Metacritic. The original release on MS-DOS holds an aggregate score of 89% on GameRankings and a score of 89/100 on Metacritic. The version released on Nintendo 64 holds an aggregate score of 74% on GameRankings and a score of 73/100 on Metacritic. The version released on Xbox 360 holds an aggregate score of 81% on GameRankings while it holds a score of 80/100 on Metacritic. The iOS version holds an aggregate score of 64% on GameRankings.\nDaniel Jevons of \"Maximum\" gave it five out of five stars, calling it \"absolutely perfect in every respect.\" He particularly cited the game's speed and fluidity even on low-end PCs, imaginative weapons, varied and identifiable environments, true 3D level designs, and strong multiplayer mode. A \"Next Generation\" critic summarized: \"\"Duke Nukem 3D\" has everything \"Doom\" doesn't, but it also doesn't leave out the stuff that made \"Doom\" a classic.\" He praised the imaginative weapons, long and complex single-player campaign, competitive multiplayer, built-in level editor, and parental lock. Reviewers paid a lot of attention to the sexual content within the game. Reception of this element varied: Tim Soete of \"GameSpot\" felt that it was \"morally questionable\", while the Game Revolution reviewer noted that it was \"done in a tongue-in-cheek manner,\" and he was \"not personally offended\". GamingOnLinux reviewer Hamish Paul Wilson commented in a later retrospective how the game's \"dark dystopian atmosphere filled with pornography and consumerist decadence\" in his view helped to ground \"the game's more outlandish and obscene moments in context\", concluding that \"in a world as perverse as this, someone like Duke becoming its hero seems almost inevitable.\"\n\"Next Generation\" reviewed the Macintosh version of the game and stated that \"Though it took a year, the Mac port of \"Duke Nukem 3D\" is an impressive feat, both for the game's own features, and the quality of the port.\"\nThe Saturn version also received generally positive reviews, with critics particularly praising the use of real-world settings for the levels and Duke's numerous one-liners. Reviewers were also generally impressed with how accurately it replicates the PC version. AllGame editor Colin Williamson highly praised the Sega Saturn port, referring to it as \"one of the best versions\" and that it was \"probably one of the best console ports ever released.\" \"GamePro\" summarized that \"All the gore, vulgarity, go-go dancers, and ultra-intense 3D combat action that made Duke Nukem [3D] excel on the PC are firmly intact in the Saturn version, making it one of the premier corridor shooters on the system.\" However, some complained at the limitations of this version's multiplayer. Dan Hsu of \"Electronic Gaming Monthly\" said it was unfortunate that it supports only two players instead of four, while \"Sega Saturn Magazine\" editor Rich Leadbetter complained at the multiplayer being only supported through the Sega NetLink and not the Saturn link cable, since the NetLink was not being released in Europe, effectively making the Saturn version single-player only to Europeans.\nThe Nintendo 64 version was likewise positively received, with critics almost overwhelmingly praising the new weapons and polygonal explosions, though some said that the use of sprites for most enemies and objects makes the game look outdated. While commenting that the deathmatch gameplay is less impressive than that of \"GoldenEye 007\", critics also overwhelmingly applauded the port's multiplayer features. \"Next Generation\" stated that \"The sound effects and music are solid, the levels are still interactive as heck, and it's never quite felt so good blasting enemies with a shotgun or blowing them to chunks with pipe bombs.\" \"GamePro\" opined that the censoring of sexual content from the port stripped the game of all uniqueness, but the vast majority of critics held that the censorship, though unfortunate, was not extensive enough to eliminate or even reduce Duke's distinctive personality. Peer Schneider of \"IGN\" called it \"a better and much more intense shooter than \"\" and \"Doom\u00a064\", and currently the best N64 game with a two-player co-op mode. If you don't already own the PC or Saturn version of Duke, do yourself a favor and get it.\" Crispin Boyer of \"Electronic Gaming Monthly\", while complaining that the large weapons obscure too much of the player's view in four-player mode, assessed that \"You're not gonna find a better console version of Duke.\"\nThe PlayStation console port met with more mixed reviews. \"GamePro\" and Tim Soete of \"GameSpot\" both found this conversion technically inferior, particularly the frame rate. Both also complained that the control configuration only provides three presets, with no option for custom configuration. Soete also found the game had become dated by the time this version was released, though he still recommended it for those who do not own a PC. \"IGN\"'s Jay Boor gave it a more enthusiastic recommendation, saying it \"plays exactly like its PC predecessor\" and praising the PlayStation-exclusive levels and link cable support.\n\"Duke Nukem 3D\" was a finalist for CNET Gamecenter's 1996 \"Best Action Game\" award, which ultimately went to \"Quake\". In 1996, \"Next Generation\" ranked it as the 35th top game of all time, called \"for many, the game \"Quake\" should have been.\" In 1996 \"Computer Gaming World\" named \"Duke Nukem 3D\" #37 overall among the best games of all time and #13 among the \"best ways to die in computer gaming\". It won a 1996 Spotlight Award for Best Action Game. In 1998, \"PC Gamer\" declared it the 29th-best computer game ever released, and the editors called it \"a gaming icon\" and \"an absolute blast\".\n\"PC Gamer\" magazine's readers' voted it #13 on its all-time top games poll. The editors of \"PC Game\" ranked it as the 12th top game of all time in 2001 citing the game's humor and pop-culture references, and as the 15th best games of all time in 2005. \"GamePro\" included it among the most important video games of all time. In 2009, IGN's Cam Shea ranked it as the ninth top 10 Xbox Live Arcade game, stating that it was as fun as it was in its initial release, and praised the ability to rewind to any point before the player died.\nControversy.\n\"Duke Nukem 3D\" was attacked by some critics, who alleged that it promoted pornography and murder. In response to the criticism encountered, censored versions of the game were released in certain countries in order to avoid it being banned altogether. A similar censored version was carried at Wal-Mart retail stores in the United States.\nIn Australia, the game was originally refused classification on release. 3D\u00a0Realms repackaged the game with the parental lock feature permanently enabled, although a patch available on the 3D\u00a0Realms website allowed the user to revert the game back into its uncensored U.S. version. The OFLC then attempted to have the game pulled from the shelves, but it was discovered that the distributor had notified them of this fact and the rating could not be surrendered; six months later, the game was reclassified and released uncensored with an MA15+ rating. In Germany, the BPjM placed the game on their \"List\u00a0B\" (\"List of Media Harmful to Young People\") of videos games, thus prohibiting its advertisement in the public. However, it was not fully confiscated, meaning that an adult could still request to see the game and buy it. In 1999, \"Duke Nukem 3D\" was banned in Brazil, along with \"Doom\" and several other first-person shooters, after a rampage in and around a movie theater was supposedly inspired by the first level in the game.\nDespite such concerns from critics, legislators, and publishers, Scott Miller later recounted that 3D\u00a0Realms saw very little negative feedback to the game's controversial elements from actual gamers or their parents. He pointed out that \"Duke Nukem 3D\" was appropriately rated \"M\" and had no real nudity, and speculated that that was enough to make it inoffensive to the general public.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8572", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8572", "title": "Dao", "text": ""}
{"id": "8573", "revid": "2179844", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8573", "title": "Daoism\u2013Taoism romanization issue", "text": ""}
{"id": "8574", "revid": "13455310", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8574", "title": "Tao Te Ching", "text": "Chinese classic text\nThe Tao Te Ching or D\u00e0o D\u00e9 J\u012bng, () often Laozi in Chinese and scholarship, is an ancient Chinese classic text, becoming a foundational work of Taoism. It is traditionally credited to the sage Laozi, though with some several early versions recovered, the texts authorship and dates of composition and compilation are debated. The oldest excavated portion dates to the late 4th century\u00a0BCE. While tradition places Laozi earlier, modern versions of the text could more conservatively be estimated to date back to the late Warring States period (475 \u2013 221 BCE), not having been recovered that early.\nThe \"Tao Te Ching\" is central to both philosophical and religious Taoism, and has been highly influential on Chinese philosophy and religious practice in general. It is generally taken as preceding the \"Zhuangzi\", the other core Taoist text. Terminology originating within the text has been reinterpreted and elaborated upon by Legalist thinkers, Confucianists, and particularly Chinese Buddhists, introduced to China significantly after the initial solidification of Taoist thought. One of the most translated texts in world literature, the text is well known in the West.\nTitle.\nIn English, the title is commonly rendered \"Tao Te Ching\", following the Wade\u2013Giles romanization, or as \"Daodejing\", following pinyin. It can be translated as \"The Classic of the Way and its Power\", \"The Book of the Tao and Its Virtue\", \"The Book of the Way and of Virtue\", \"The Tao and its Characteristics\", \"The Canon of Reason and Virtue\", \"The Classic Book of Integrity and the Way\", \"The Book of Virtues\", or \"A Treatise on the Principle and Its Action\".\nAncient Chinese books were commonly referenced by the name of their real or supposed author, in this case the \"Old Master\", Laozi. As such, the \"Tao Te Ching\" is also sometimes called the \"Laozi\", especially in Chinese sources.\nThe title \"Tao Te Ching\", designating the work's status as a classic, was first applied during the reign of Emperor Jing of Han (157\u2013141\u00a0BCE). Other titles for the work include the honorific \"Sutra of the Way and Its Power\" () and the descriptive \"Five Thousand Character Classic\" ().\nAuthorship.\nThe \"Tao Te Ching\" is traditionally ascribed to Laozi, whose historical existence has been a matter of scholarly debate. His name, which means \"Old Master\", has only fueled controversy on this issue. Legends claim variously that Laozi was \"born old\" and that he lived for 996 years, with 12 previous incarnations starting around the time of the Three Sovereigns before the 13th as Laozi. Some scholars have expressed doubts about Laozi's historicity.\nThe first biographical reference to Laozi is in the \"Records of the Grand Historian\", by Chinese historian Sima Qian (c.\u2009145\u201386 BCE), which combines three stories. In the first, Laozi was a contemporary of Confucius (551\u2013479\u00a0BCE). His surname was Li (), and his personal name was Er () or Dan (). He was an official in the imperial archives, and wrote a book in two parts before departing to the West; at the request of the keeper of the Han-ku Pass, Yinxi, Laozi composed the \"Tao Te Ching\". In the second story, Laozi, also a contemporary of Confucius, was Lao Laizi (), who wrote a book in 15 parts. Third, Laozi was the grand historian and astrologer Lao Dan (), who lived during the reign of Duke Xian of Qin (r.\u2009384\u00a0\u2013\u00a0362\u00a0BCE).\nTextual history.\nPrincipal versions.\nAmong the many transmitted editions of the \"Tao Te Ching\" text, the three primary ones are named after early commentaries. The \"Yan Zun Version\", which is only extant for the \"Te Ching\", derives from a commentary attributed to Han dynasty scholar Yan Zun (, fl.\u200980\u00a0BCE\u00a0\u2013 10\u00a0CE). The \"Heshang Gong\" version is named after the legendary Heshang Gong (\"legendary sage\"), who supposedly lived during the reign of Emperor Wen of Han (180\u2013157\u00a0BCE). This commentary has a preface written by Ge Xuan (164\u2013244\u00a0CE), granduncle of Ge Hong, and scholarship dates this version to c.\u2009the 3rd century\u00a0CE. The origins of the \"Wang Bi\" version have greater verification than either of the above. Wang Bi (226\u2013249\u00a0CE) was a Three Kingdoms-period philosopher and commentator on the \"Tao Te Ching\" and \"I Ching\".\nArchaeologically recovered manuscripts.\n\"Tao Te Ching\" scholarship has advanced from archaeological discoveries of manuscripts, some of which are older than any of the received texts. Beginning in the 1920s and 1930s, Marc Aurel Stein and others found thousands of scrolls in the Mogao Caves near Dunhuang. They included more than 50 partial and complete manuscripts. Another partial manuscript has the \"Xiang'er\" commentary, which had previously been lost.\nIn 1973, archaeologists discovered copies of early Chinese books, known as the Mawangdui Silk Texts, in a tomb dated to 168\u00a0BCE. They included two nearly complete copies of the text, referred to as Text A () and Text B (), both of which reverse the traditional ordering and put the \"Te Ching\" section before the \"Tao Ching\", which is why the Henricks translation of them is named \"Te-Tao Ching\". Based on calligraphic styles and imperial naming taboo avoidances, scholars believe that Text A can be dated to about the first decade and Text B to about the third decade of the 2nd century\u00a0BCE.\nIn 1993, the oldest known version of the text, written on bamboo slips, was found in a tomb near the town of Guodian () in Jingmen, Hubei, and dated prior to 300\u00a0BCE. The Guodian Chu Slips comprise around 800 slips of bamboo with a total of over 13,000 characters, about 2,000 of which correspond with the \"Tao Te Ching.\"\nBoth the Mawangdui and Guodian versions are generally consistent with the received texts, excepting differences in chapter sequence and graphic variants. Several recent \"Tao Te Ching\" translations utilise these two versions, sometimes with the verses reordered to synthesize the new finds.\nChronological theories.\nAlthough debated more in early scholarship, early modern scholars like Feng Youlan and Herrlee G. Creel still considered the work a compilation; Gu Jiegang believed it to have been written over three centuries. Most modern scholarship holds the text to be a compilation, as typical for long-form early Chinese texts. Discussing concepts of names and realities, Feng Youlan's early work theorized the school of names as preceding the work, but it does not demonstrate school of names influence the way the \"Zhuangzi\" does.\nDerived of Sima Qian's perspective in the mid-early Han dynasty, the term Daoist would typically bring Laozi and Zhuangzi to mind. Alongside the Han Feizi, the Tao Te Ching was likely becoming more influential than Shen Buhai and the Zhuangzi by Sima Qian's time, if they were not already influential going back to the late Warring States period. Sima Qian discusses them together, but names the chapter \"Biographies of Laozi and Han Fei\". Though influencing the Han Feizi and Huangdi Sijing, Shen Dao does not appear maintain the influence of Shang Yang and Shen Buhai going into the Han dynasty.\nBased on Shen Dao, there was some Jixia Academy academic development in early Laozi-type currents by the early mid Warring States period, but is difficult to say how complete the Tao te Ching was. But the Guanzi would theoretically have been influential among late Warring States period nobles. Early survey considered the Guanzi most prominent in the recovered Daoistic Huangdi Sijing, which didn't quote the Tao te Ching yet. It is easier to place a subsequent more marked increase in Tao te Ching influence closer to the end of Warring States period, where it is found in the Han Feizi.\nThough scholar Pei Wang primarily treats the similarities and differences of Laozi, the Huangdi Sijing and Han Feizi, at least in review with Pei Wang, Yuri Pines \"Dao Companion to China's fa tradition\" has modernly expressed openness to the \"indebtedness\" of early Warring States thinkers like Shen Buhai to Laozi.\nBefore Zhuangzi.\nLinguistic studies of the \"Tao Te Ching\"'s vocabulary and rime scheme point to a date of composition after the early \"Classic of Poetry\" (or Book of Songs), but before the \"Zhuangzi\", and would generally be taken as preceding the \"Zhuangzi\". This is the traditional \"before Zhuangzi\" theory. Although the Book of Songs is a diverse work, they do not bear any \"especial\" resemblance. Upholding the traditional early dating of Sima Qian, Hong Kong Sinologist Liu Xiaogan argued that the Tao Te Ching's poetic structure resembles the Book of Songs more than the later, Warring States period Songs of Chu.\nCompared with Laozi by Sima Qian, the text would traditionally be taken as preceding Shen Buhai. Questioning their chronology, Creel proposed that Shen Buhai may have preceded it as well, but Shen Buhai does bear a \"striking\" resemblance to Laozi. Although not enough to eliminate a late dating, the discovery of the early Mawangdui silk texts and Guodian Chu Slips again made a dating before the third-century BCE more probable. Admittedly, the Mawangdui's Huangdi Sijing is itself modernly considered a late compilation, but it does increase the theoretical likelihood of prominent Laozi and similar currents dating back to the late Warring States period, with the possibility of earlier Laozi currents more complete than might be expected otherwise.\nAs one suggestion the work is an ancient text, ancient texts are arguably divided in two parts. The Mawangdui versions divide the text in two parts, and one version also didn't have chapters yet. When the Tao te Ching did get chapters, they weren't given titles. Alongside the Huangdi Sijing, late Warring States texts Xunzi and Han Feizi are the first to give titles to chapters. As another criticism of late theories for the work, although the earliest recovered versions are from late in the range of possible dating, their language is already \"coherent and natural\". Benjamin I. Schwartz still considered the Tao Te Ching remarkably unified by the time of the Mawangdui, even if these versions swap the two halves of the text.\nAfter Zhuangzi.\nEssentially the dating of A.C. Graham, the Stanford Encyclopedia supposes compilation of the \"current\" text as dating back to the late Warring States period circa 250 BCE, drawing on a wide range of versions further dating back a century or two.\nTermed the \"After Zhuangzi\" theory, representative of Ch'ien Mu and Graham, a lack of early references contributes to Graham's late dating. While the Zhuangzi is the first \"reference\" for the Tao Te Ching, its Inner Chapters do not demonstrate familiarity with it. Thus, an early stratum representative of the \"Zhuangzi's\" core Inner Chapters may have preceded it. As argued by Creel, as a work which includes discussion of government, the \"Tao te Ching\"'s more governmentally complex ideas of Dao or wu wei could well be expected to come after some early ideas of them represented in the Zhuangzi, which didn't as much involve government. The Analects have wu wei as an idea of government, but one of virtue, not a technique of governmental control like the \"Tao te Ching\".\nListed in the Outer \"Zhuangzi's\" history after Mozi but before Laozi and Zhuangzi, Shen Dao shares content with the Inner \"Zhuangzi\", and can also be directly compared with the Tao Te Ching. Less technically complex than Shen Buhai, Shen Dao's current might theoretically even precede him, back to the fourth century BCE. Sinologist Chad Hansen does not consider the Outer \"Zhuangzi\" entirely accurate chronologically, but positioned Shen Dao under \"Pre-Laozi Daoist Theory\" for the theoretical framework of the Stanford Encyclopedia of Daoism's 2024 edition. With Shen Dao being comparable, his time would theoretically form a grounding for its development, or \"might\" have existed by his time, if the Zhuangzi's (and other) indications are not chronologically accurate.\nThe late Han Feizi has the work's earliest known commentaries, though it can be argued that it influences the Huangdi Sijing. With a compilation supposed to date back to the late Warring States period, but including earlier Shen Dao content, Leo S Chang \"theorizes\" potential Laozi influences for the Sijing, with some passages similar to the Zhuangzi. But it does not actually quote the Laozi. As Chang notes, there are \"no lengthy parallel expressions between\" the Sijing and Laozi, arguably baring more resemblance to the Guanzi. The Sijing has similar ideas to Laozi of strategically \"assuming feminine conduct\", but the ruler switches to an active posture at \"the right moment\", countervailing against Laozi's passivity. In Laozi, the Dao gives birth to the One; in the Sijing, they are the same. Laozi disparages law; the Sijing's law 'derives from Dao'.\nContents.\nStructure and style.\nThe \"Tao Te Ching\" is a text of around 5,162 to 5,450 Chinese characters in 81 brief chapters or sections (). There is some evidence that the chapter divisions were later additions\u2014for commentary, or as aids to rote memorisation\u2014and that the original text was more fluidly organised. It has two parts, the \"Tao Ching\" (; chapters 1\u201337) and the \"Te Ching\" (; chapters 38\u201381), which may have been edited together into the received text, possibly reversed from an original \"Te Tao Ching\".\nContrasting with Confucianism, its general statements are free of narration or reference to \"any \"particular\" persons, times, or places.\" The written style is laconic, with few grammatical particles. While the ideas are singular, the style is poetic, combining two major strategies: short, declarative statements, and intentional contradictions, encouraging varied, contradictory interpretations. The first of these strategies creates memorable phrases, while the second forces the reader to reconcile supposed contradictions. With a partial reconstruction of the pronunciation of Old Chinese spoken during the \"Tao Te Ching\"'s composition, approximately three-quarters rhymed in the original language.\nThe Chinese characters in the earliest versions were written in seal script, while later versions were written in clerical script and regular script styles.\nTranslation.\nThe \"Tao Te Ching\" has been translated into Western languages over 250 times, mostly to English, German, and French. According to Holmes Welch, \"It is a famous puzzle which everyone would like to feel he had solved.\" The first English translation of the \"Tao Te Ching\" was produced in 1868 by the Scottish Protestant missionary John Chalmers, entitled \"The Speculations on Metaphysics, Polity, and Morality of the \"Old Philosopher\" Lau-tsze\". It was heavily indebted to Julien's French translation and dedicated to James Legge, who later produced his own translation for Oxford's \"Sacred Books of the East\".\nOther notable English translations of the \"Tao Te Ching\" are those produced by Chinese scholars and teachers: a 1948 translation by linguist Lin Yutang, a 1961 translation by author John Ching Hsiung Wu, a 1963 translation by sinologist Din Cheuk Lau, another 1963 translation by professor Wing-tsit Chan, and a 1972 translation by Taoist teacher Gia-Fu Feng together with his wife Jane English.\nMany translations are written by people with a foundation in Chinese language and philosophy who are trying to render the original meaning of the text as faithfully as possible into English. Some of the more popular translations are written from a less scholarly perspective, giving an individual author's interpretation. Critics of these versions claim that their translators deviate from the text and are incompatible with the history of Chinese thought. Russell Kirkland goes further to argue that these versions are based on Western Orientalist fantasies and represent the colonial appropriation of Chinese culture. Other Taoism scholars, such as Michael LaFargue and Jonathan Herman, argue that while they do not pretend to scholarship, they meet a real spiritual need in the West. These Westernized versions aim to make the wisdom of the Tao Te Ching more accessible to modern English-speaking readers by, typically, employing more familiar cultural and temporal references.\nChallenges in translation.\nThe \"Tao Te Ching\" is written in Classical Chinese, which generally poses a number of challenges for interpreters and translators. As Holmes Welch notes, the written language \"has no active or passive, no singular or plural, no case, no person, no tense, no mood.\" Moreover, the received text lacks many grammatical particles which are preserved in the older Mawangdui and Beida texts, which permit the text to be more precise. Lastly, many passages of the \"Tao Te Ching\" are deliberately ambiguous.\nSince there is very little punctuation in Classical Chinese, determining the precise boundaries between words and sentences is not always trivial. Deciding where these phrasal boundaries are must be done by the interpreter. Some translators have argued that the received text is so corrupted due to its original medium being bamboo strips linked with silk threads\u2014that it is impossible to understand some passages without some transposition of characters.\nNotable translations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8577", "revid": "37576545", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8577", "title": "Detroit Lions", "text": "National Football League franchise in Detroit, Michigan\nThe Detroit Lions are a professional American football team based in Detroit. The Lions compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the National Football Conference (NFC) North division. The team plays their home games at Ford Field in Downtown Detroit.\nThe franchise was founded in Portsmouth, Ohio, as the Portsmouth Spartans in 1928 and joined the NFL on July 12, 1930. Amid financial struggles, the franchise was relocated to Detroit in 1934 and renamed the Lions in reference to the city's Major League Baseball (MLB) franchise, the Detroit Tigers.\nThe Lions won four between 1935 and 1957. Following the 1957 championship, the franchise did not win a playoff game until the 1991 season and did not win another until the 2023 season. They are the only franchise operational for the entirety of the Super Bowl era to not appear in the Super Bowl.\nLogos and uniforms.\nAside from a brief change to scarlet and black from 1948 to 1950 instituted by then head coach Bo McMillin, which was influenced by his years as coach at Indiana, the Lions' uniforms have basically remained the same since they moved to Detroit in 1934\u2013silver helmets, silver pants, and either blue or white jerseys.\nGlenn Presnell, the then last surviving member of the 1934 Lions, recalled that after the Portsmouth Spartans relocated to Detroit, team owner George A. Richards asked him and his wife to pick the Lions' colors from combinations that included red and white, orange and black, and blue and silver. The Presnells liked blue and silver the best, so Richards selected it. The blue used by the Lions is officially known as \"Honolulu blue\", which is inspired by the color of the waves off the coast of Hawaii.\nThere have been minor changes to the uniform design throughout the years, such as changing the silver stripe patterns on the jersey sleeves, and changing the colors of the jersey numbers. \"TV numbers\", which are auxiliary uniform numbers to help TV broadcasters identify players from the line of scrimmage, were added to the jersey sleeves in 1956. White trim was added to the logo in 1970, with outlines (white on the blue jersey, silver on the white jersey) added to the numbers in 1972; the color arrangement on the numbers on the blue jerseys was reversed in 1982. The silver facemasks became blue in 1984. In 1998, the team wore blue pants with their white jerseys along with gray socks but dropped that combination after the season. In 1999, the \"TV numbers\" on the sleeves were moved to the shoulders.\nIn 1994, every NFL team wore throwback jerseys, and the Lions' were similar to the jerseys worn during their 1935 championship season. The helmets and pants were solid silver, the jerseys Honolulu blue with silver numbers and the jersey did not have \"TV numbers\" on the sleeves. The team wore solid blue socks and black cleats. The helmets also did not have logos, as helmets were simple leather back then. The Lions also wore 1950s-style jerseys during their traditional Thanksgiving Day games from 2001 to 2004 as the NFL encouraged teams to wear throwback jerseys on Thanksgiving Day.\nIn 2003, the team added black trim to their logo and jerseys. The facemasks on the helmet changed from blue to black with the introduction of the new color. In 2005, the team introduced an alternate black jersey.\nFor 2008, the team dropped the black jersey in favor of a throwback uniform to commemorate the franchise's 75th anniversary. The throwback uniform became the team's permanent alternate jersey in 2009, replacing the former black alternate. The Lions officially unveiled a new logo and uniforms on April 20, 2009. The logo was given a flowing mane and fangs, while the typeface featured a modern font.\nOn February 1, 2017, the Lions announced a new typeface, logo, and the complete removal of the color black from the team identity. While the previous logo was retained, the border was changed from black to silver. The Lions then unveiled the new uniforms on April 13, 2017, which included the white jersey and blue pants combo for the first time since 1998. They introduced an alternate all-gray uniform, an alternate all-Honolulu blue uniform, and a helmet with a silver face mask. The Lions also added the initials \"WCF\" to the left sleeve as a permanent tribute to William Clay Ford, who owned the team from 1963 until his death in 2014. The sleeve addition replaced the black \"WCF\" patch on the left breast that was added after Ford's death.\nOn September 20, 2021, the Lions wore white pants with their road white uniforms against the Green Bay Packers. The white pants, which lacked striping, were previously worn during the \"scarlet and black\" era in the 1948 and 1949 seasons.\nOn April 12, 2023, the Lions announced they would celebrate their 90th season in franchise history during the 2023 season with a commemorative logo and jersey patch. The inspiration for the patch is an homage to their logo from 1961 to 1969, which is also honored in the WCF memorial logo and the 60th commemorative season logo. On June 21, 2023, the Lions unveiled an alternate blue helmet. The helmet, which features the 1960s logo, was paired with the gray uniform. This was the first time the Lions wore a blue helmet since 1955.\nOn April 18, 2024, the Lions unveiled a new jersey set. The home jersey, referred to as \"One Pride\", features a redefined Honolulu blue with white block numbers trimmed in silver and sleeves striped in silver with white accents. The home jersey is paired with silver pants with Honolulu blue stripes with white accents or solid Honolulu blue pants. The road white jersey, referred to as \"the 313\", features Honolulu blue block numbers, stripes trimmed in silver, and a Honolulu blue \"Detroit\" wordmark on the front. The road jersey is paired with solid Honolulu blue or solid white pants. The primary silver helmet with a Honolulu blue face mask and Honolulu blue stripes with white accents is worn with the home and road jerseys. The black alternate jersey, referred to as \"Motor City Muscle\", features Honolulu blue numbers and stripes trimmed in silver along with a \"Lions\" wordmark on the front. It is worn with the alternate Honolulu blue helmet featuring black stripes with silver accents and the leaping lion logo in black with silver accents. The black jersey is paired with solid black or solid Honolulu blue pants.\nThe black jersey was a favorite of head coach Dan Campbell, who wore the original version during his playing days. According to Lions team president Rod Wood, it was Campbell who lobbied for the black jersey to return, which happened after the Lions won the NFC North division title in 2023. The throwback jersey was retained and updated with the refreshed Honolulu blue. The throwback jersey is paired with a silver helmet that is worn with a silver or a Honolulu blue face mask. The William Clay Ford (WCF) memorial decal has been placed on the back of the primary and alternate helmets.\nThroughout the 2024 season, the silver pants were only worn once (a Week 2 defeat against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers), and the throwbacks were not worn at all. Instead, they mainly wore either the all-blue or all-white uniforms, with the Lions winning all of their regular season games in either combination. The throwback uniforms were initially scheduled to wear in Week 18 against the Minnesota Vikings, but the Lions decided to wear their all-black alternate uniforms instead. Detroit went 2\u20131 in the all-black uniforms.\nThanksgiving Day tradition.\nIn 1934, then team owner George A. Richards, who also was the owner of a major radio affiliate of the NBC Blue Network, WJR in Detroit, the forerunner to today's ABC, negotiated an agreement with NBC to carry his Thanksgiving game live across all of the network's stations. Excluding the years of 1939\u20131944, due to World War II, the Lions have played on Thanksgiving ever since.\nCurrent roster and former players of note.\nRetired numbers.\nNotes:\nSpecial cases\n75th Season All-Time Team.\nOn November 9, 2008, the Lions honored the 75th Season All-Time Team during halftime against the Jacksonville Jaguars. The team was chosen via an online fan poll and selection committee. Bold indicates those elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\nNote:\nLions All-Time Team.\nOn September 29, 2019, the Lions honored their All-Time Team in celebration of the NFL's centennial during halftime against the Kansas City Chiefs. The team was chosen via fan voting, contributions from the Detroit Lions Legends Community, team executives, and select members of the media. Bold indicates those elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\nNote:\nStaff.\nHead coaches.\nThe Lions have had 30 head coaches throughout their franchise history. Their first head coach was Hal Griffen, who compiled a 5\u20136\u20133 (.464) overall record with the team of 1930. Wayne Fontes was the longest-tenured head coach in Lions history, serving from 1988 to 1996. The current head coach of the Lions is Dan Campbell, who was hired on January 20, 2021.\nRivalries.\nDivisional.\nChicago Bears.\nThe Lions and Chicago Bears first met in 1930 when the Lions were known as the Portsmouth Spartans. The Bears and Lions have been division rivals since 1933. As of the 2025 season, the Bears lead the series 105\u201381\u20135.\nGreen Bay Packers.\nThe Lions and Green Bay Packers first met in 1929 when the Lions were known as the Portsmouth Spartans. The Lions and Packers have been division rivals since 1933. As of the 2025 season, the Packers lead the series 108\u201378\u20137.\nMinnesota Vikings.\nThe Lions and Minnesota Vikings have played twice annually since the Vikings entered the NFL in 1961, excluding 1982 due to the strike that occurred that season. As of the 2025 season, the Vikings lead the all-time series 81\u201345\u20132.\nFormer.\nTampa Bay Buccaneers.\nThe Lions and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers were also division opponents in the NFC Central from 1977 to 2001. As of the 2025 season, the Lions lead the all-time series 34\u201330.\nHistoric.\nCleveland Browns.\nThe Lions also share a rivalry with the Cleveland Browns, which began in the 1950s when the Browns and Lions played each other in four NFL Championship Games. The Lions won three of those championships, while the Browns won one. This was one of the NFL's best rivalries in the 1950s. Since the AFL\u2013NFL merger of 1970, the teams have met much less frequently due to the Browns' move to the American Football Conference (AFC). From 2002 to 2014, the two teams played an annual preseason game known as the \"Great Lakes Classic\". As of the 2025 season, the Lions lead the all-time series 20\u20136, with three of those wins coming in postseason play.\nLos Angeles Rams.\nThe Lions have played the Rams more than any other non-divisional team with 89 total matchups over the years dating back to 1937. In the 2023\u201324 playoffs, the Rams and Lions met for their first postseason matchup since 1952. The Lions won 24\u201323 in Matthew Stafford's first game back in Detroit since being traded to the Rams. As of the 2025 season, the Rams lead the all-time series 45\u201343\u20131.\nRadio and television.\nRadio.\nThe Lions' flagship radio station is WXYT-FM. Dan Miller does play-by-play, Lomas Brown does color commentary, and T. J. Lang is the sideline reporter.\nIn 2015, the team announced that they were moving from WXYT-FM to WJR for the 2016 NFL season, ending a 20-year relationship with CBS Radio. The decision to part with WXYT was reportedly instigated by a demand by the team for the station to fire on-air personality Mike Valenti, who has had a history of making critical comments about the Lions during his drivetime show, as a condition of any future renewal. A CBS Radio spokesperson stated that their refusal was meant to maintain the station's integrity.\nThe Lions' flagship station returned to WXYT-FM starting with the 2021 season.\nTV.\nPreseason.\nIn 2015, WJBK took over from WXYZ-TV as the flagship station for Lions preseason games. In 2025, the announcers were Jason Benetti with play-by-play, T. J. Lang with color commentary, and Dannie Rogers with sideline reports. Games are produced by FanDuel Sports Network Detroit.\nRegular season.\nRegular season games are broadcast regionally on Fox, except when the Lions play an AFC team in Detroit, in which case the game airs regionally on CBS; however, since 2014, with the institution of the NFL's \"cross flex\" broadcast rules, any Lions game slated to air on Fox can be moved to CBS. The Thanksgiving Day game in Detroit is always televised nationally, alternating between Fox in odd years and CBS in even years. In 2011, the Lions became the last NFC team to play on NBC's \"Sunday Night Football\" since the network began airing Sunday night games in 2006.\nBlackouts.\nThe Lions' winless performance in 2008 and 2\u201314 season in 2009, coupled with the effects of the Great Recession in Michigan, led to several local broadcast blackouts, as local fans did not purchase enough tickets by the 72-hour blackout deadline. The first blackout in the then seven-year history of Ford Field was on October 26, 2008, against the Washington Redskins. The previous 50 regular season home games had been sellouts. The second home game of the 2009 season in which the Lions broke the losing streak, also against the Redskins, was blacked out locally, as well as the comeback victory over the Cleveland Browns. The Lions had only one blackout in 2010, yet another Redskins game, which the Lions won 37\u201325. However, in 2015, the NFL suspended its blackout policies, meaning that all Lions games will be shown on local TV, regardless of tickets sold.\nGames were also often blacked out at the Lions' previous home, the 80,000-seat Pontiac Silverdome, despite winning seasons and the success and popularity of star players such as Barry Sanders.\nLions cheerleaders.\nOn June 13, 2016, the Lions announced the addition of cheerleaders to the organization. The team also announced that Rebecca Girard-Smoker, formerly the director of the Detroit Pistons dance team, would be the coach of the cheerleading squad. It marked the first time in over 40 years the team had an official cheerleading squad. The cheerleading squad is a part of the entertainment during football games, and active at community events.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "8578", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8578", "title": "Dyne", "text": "Unit of force in the CGS system\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe dyne (symbol: dyn; from grc \" \"\" ()\"\u00a0'power, force') is a derived unit of force specified in the centimetre\u2013gram\u2013second (CGS) system of units, a predecessor of the modern SI.\nHistory.\nThe name dyne was first proposed as a CGS unit of force in 1873 by a Committee of the British Association for the Advancement of Science.\nDefinition.\nThe dyne is defined as \"the force required to accelerate a mass of one gram at a rate of one centimetre per second squared\". An equivalent definition of the dyne is \"that force which, acting for one second, will produce a change of velocity of one centimetre per second in a mass of one gram\". \nOne dyne is equal to 10 micronewtons, 10\u22125 N or to 10 nsn (nanosthenes) in the old metre\u2013tonne\u2013second system of units. \nUse.\nThe dyne per centimetre is a unit traditionally used to measure surface tension. For example, the surface tension of distilled water is 71.99 dyn/cm at 25\u00a0\u00b0C (77\u00a0\u00b0F). (In SI units this is or .) \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8579", "revid": "37576545", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8579", "title": "Detroit Tigers", "text": "Major League Baseball franchise in Detroit, Michigan\nThe Detroit Tigers are an American professional baseball team based in Detroit. The Tigers compete in Major League Baseball (MLB) as a member club of the American League (AL) Central Division. One of the AL's eight charter franchises, the club was founded in Detroit as a member of the minor league Western League in 1894 and is the only Western League team still in its original city. They are also the oldest American League team still playing in their original city under their original name. \nSince their establishment as a major league franchise in 1901, the Tigers have won four World Series championships (1935, 1945, 1968, and 1984), 11 AL pennants (1907, 1908, 1909, 1934, 1935, 1940, 1945, 1968, 1984, 2006, 2012), and four AL Central division championships (2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014). They also won division titles in 1972, 1984, and 1987 as a member of the AL East. Since 2000, the Tigers have played their home games at Comerica Park in Downtown Detroit.\nThe Tigers constructed Bennett Park at the corner of Michigan Avenue and Trumbull Avenue in Corktown just west of Downtown Detroit and began playing there in 1896. In 1912, the team moved into Navin Field, which was built on the same location. It was expanded in 1938 and renamed Briggs Stadium. It was renamed Tiger Stadium in 1961 and the Tigers played there until 1999.\nFrom 1901 to 2025, the Tigers' overall win\u2013loss record is 9,763\u20139,642\u201393 (). The franchise's best winning percentage was in 1934, while its worst was in 2003.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nWestern League beginnings (1894\u20131900).\nThe franchise was founded as a member of the reorganized Western League in 1894. They originally played at Boulevard Park, sometimes called League Park. It was located on East Lafayette, then called Champlain Street, between Helen and East Grand Boulevard, near Belle Isle. In 1895, owner George Vanderbeck decided to build Bennett Park at the corner of Michigan and Trumbull Avenues, which would remain the team's base of operations for the next 104 seasons. The first game at The Corner was an exhibition on April 13, 1896. The team, now occasionally called the \"Tigers,\" beat a local semi-pro team, known as the Athletics, by a score of 30\u20133. The Tigers played their first Western League game at Bennett Park on April 28, 1896, defeating the Columbus Senators 17\u20132.\nAt the end of the 1897 season, Rube Waddell was loaned to the team to gain professional experience. After being fined, Waddell left Detroit to pitch in Canada.\nWhen the Western League renamed itself the American League for 1900, it was still a minor league, but the next year, it broke from the National Agreement and declared itself a major league, openly competing with the National League for players and for fans in four contested cities. For a while, there were rumors of the team relocating to Pittsburgh. However, these rumors were put to rest when the two leagues made peace in 1903 when they signed a new National Agreement.\nFirst Major League season (1901).\nThe Tigers were established as a charter member of the now major league American League in 1901. They played their first game as a major league team at home against the Milwaukee Brewers on April 25, 1901, with an estimated 10,000 fans at Bennett Park. After entering the ninth inning behind 13\u20134, the team staged a dramatic comeback to win 14\u201313. The team finished third in the eight-team league.\nThat initial season they were the first major league team to have a mascot\u2014a red tiger on a dark background\u2014on their ballcap. It was replaced by the letter \"D\" in 1903, and their iconic Olde English-style letterform appeared the following year.\nThe Cobb era (1905\u20131926).\n1905.\nIn 1905, the team acquired 18-year-old Ty Cobb, a fearless player who came to be regarded as one of the greatest players of all time. The addition of Cobb to an already talented team that included Sam Crawford, Hughie Jennings, Bill Donovan and George Mullin quickly yielded results.\n1907 American League Champions.\nBehind the hitting of outfielders Ty Cobb (.350) and Sam Crawford (.323), and the pitching of Bill Donovan and Ed Killian (25 wins each), the Tigers went 92\u201358 to win the AL pennant in 1907 by 1.5 games over the Philadelphia Athletics. They moved on to their first World Series appearance against the Chicago Cubs.\nGame 1 ended in a rare 3\u20133 tie, called due to darkness after 12 innings. The Tigers scored only three runs in the succeeding four games, never scoring more than one run in a game, and lost the Series, 4\u20130.\n1908 American League Champions.\nThe Tigers won the AL by just a half-game over the 90\u201364 Cleveland Naps with a 90\u201363 record. Cobb hit .324, while Sam Crawford hit .311 with 7 home runs, which was enough to lead the league in the \"dead ball\" era.\nThe Cubs, however, defeated the Tigers again in the 1908 World Series, this time in five games. This would be the Cubs' last World Championship until 2016.\n1909 American League Champions.\nIn 1909, Detroit posted a 98\u201354 season, winning the AL pennant by 3.5 games over the Athletics. Ty Cobb won the batting triple crown in 1909, hitting .377 with 9 home runs (all inside-the-park) and 107 RBIs. He also led the league with 76 stolen bases. George Mullin was the pitching hero, going 29\u20138 with a 2.22 ERA, while fellow pitcher Ed Willett went 21\u201310. Mullin's 11\u20130 start in 1909 was a Tigers record for 104 years, finally being broken by Max Scherzer's 13\u20130 start in 2013.\nIt was hoped that a new opponent in the 1909 Series, the Pittsburgh Pirates, would yield different results. The Tigers performed better in the Fall Classic, taking Pittsburgh to seven games, but they were blown out 8\u20130 in the decisive game at Bennett Park.\n1910\u20131914.\nThe Tigers dropped to third place in the American League in 1910 with an 86\u201368 record. They posted 89 wins in 1911 to finish second, but were still well behind a powerhouse Philadelphia Athletics team that won 101 games. The team sunk to a dismal sixth place in both the 1912 and 1913 seasons. A bright spot in 1912 was George Mullin pitching the franchise's first no-hitter in a 7\u20130 win over the St. Louis Browns on July 4, his 32nd birthday.\nCobb went into the stands in a May 15, 1912, game to attack a fan that was abusing him, and was suspended. Three days later, the Tigers protested the suspension by fielding a team of replacement players against the Philadelphia Athletics. They lost 24\u20132. During this five-season stretch, Cobb posted batting averages of .383, .420, .409, .390 and .368, winning the batting title every year.\n1915.\nIn 1915, the Tigers won a then-club record 100 games, but narrowly lost the AL pennant to the Boston Red Sox, who won 101 games. The 1915 Tigers were led by an outfield consisting of Ty Cobb, Sam Crawford, and Bobby Veach that finished #1, #2, and #3 in RBIs and total bases. Cobb also set a stolen base record with 96 steals in 1915 that stood until 1962, when it was broken by Maury Wills. Baseball historian Bill James has ranked the 1915 Tigers outfield as the greatest in the history of baseball. The only team in Tigers' history with a better winning percentage than the 1915 squad was the 1934 team that lost the World Series to the St. Louis Cardinals.\n1916\u20131920.\nThe Tigers dropped to third place in 1916 with an 87\u201367 record, and would remain mired in the middle of the AL standings the rest of the decade, never winning more than 80 games. In the late teens and into the 1920s, Cobb continued to be the marquee player, though he was pushed by budding star outfielder Harry Heilmann, who went on to hit .342 for his career.\nHughie Jennings left the Tigers after the 1920 season, having accumulated 1,131 wins as a manager. This stood as a Tiger record until 1992, when it was broken by Sparky Anderson. Cobb himself took over managerial duties in 1921, but during his six years at the helm, the Tigers topped out at 86 wins and never won a pennant.\n1921.\nIn 1921, the Tigers amassed 1,724 hits and a team batting average of .316, the highest team hit total and batting average in AL history. That year, outfielders Harry Heilmann and Ty Cobb finished #1 and #2 in the American League batting race with batting averages of .394 and .389, respectively. The downfall of the 1921 Tigers, however, was the absence of good pitching. The team ERA was 4.40. Without pitching to support the offense, the 1921 Tigers finished in sixth place in the American League at 71\u201382, 27 games behind the New York Yankees.\nOn August 19, 1921, Cobb collected his 3,000th career hit off Elmer Myers of the Boston Red Sox. Aged 34 at the time, he is still the youngest player to reach that milestone, also reaching it in the fewest at-bats (8,093).\n1922\u20131926.\nThe Tigers continued to field good teams during Ty Cobb's tenure as player-manager, finishing as high as second in 1923, but lack of quality pitching kept them from winning a pennant. Harry Heilmann hit .403 in 1923, becoming the last AL player to top .400 until Ted Williams hit .406 in 1941. In 1925, Heilmann collected six hits in a season-ending doubleheader to win the batting title, finishing at .393 to Tris Speaker's .389.\nCobb announced his retirement in November 1926 after 22 seasons with the Tigers, though he would return to play two more seasons with the Philadelphia Athletics.\nThe Tigers break through (1927\u20131940).\n1927\u20131933.\nThough the Tigers struggled with mediocre records in the seven years following Cobb's departure, they were building a solid foundation, adding slugging first baseman Hank Greenberg and pitchers Tommy Bridges and Schoolboy Rowe to a lineup that already included second baseman Charlie Gehringer.\nIn 1927, Harry Heilmann flirted with a .400 batting average all year, eventually finishing at .398 and winning his fourth AL batting title.\nFollowing the 1933 season, the Tigers added perhaps the final piece of the puzzle, acquiring catcher Mickey Cochrane from the Philadelphia Athletics to serve as player-manager.\n1934 American League Champions.\nThe Tigers won the 1934 AL pennant with a 101\u201353 record, at the time a team record for wins, and still the best win percentage (.656) in team history. The Tigers infield (Hank Greenberg and Charlie Gehringer, along with shortstop Billy Rogell and third baseman Marv Owen) accumulated 462 runs during the season, with Gehringer (214 hits, .356 average) leading the way. Schoolboy Rowe led a strong pitching staff, winning 16 straight decisions at one point of the season and finishing with a 24\u20138 record.\nThe Tigers would fall in the 1934 World Series in seven games to the \"Gashouse Gang\" St. Louis Cardinals. After winning a tight battle in Game 5 with a 3\u20131 decision over Dizzy Dean, Detroit took a 3\u20132 series lead, but would lose the next two games at Navin Field (Tiger Stadium). For the second time in a World Series Game 7, Detroit folded. St. Louis scored seven times in the third inning off starter Elden Auker and a pair of relievers, while Dean baffled the Tiger hitters en route to an 11\u20130 victory. The final game was marred by an ugly incident. After spiking Tigers third baseman Marv Owen in the sixth inning, Cardinals left fielder Joe Medwick had to be removed from the game for his own safety by Commissioner Kenesaw Mountain Landis after being pelted with debris from angry fans in the large temporary bleacher section in left field.\n1935 World Series Champions.\nThe Tigers 1935 lineup featured four future Hall of Famers (Hank Greenberg, Mickey Cochrane, Goose Goslin and Charlie Gehringer). Although they did not challenge the 1934 team's 101 wins, their 93\u201358 record was good enough to give them the AL pennant by three games over the New York Yankees. Greenberg was named AL MVP after hitting .328 and leading the league in home runs (36), extra-base hits (98) and RBIs (168). Incredibly, Greenberg's RBI total was 48 higher than the next closest player (Lou Gehrig, with 120). The Tigers also got strong contributions from Gehringer (.330), Cochrane (.319) and starting pitchers Tommy Bridges (21\u201310) and Elden Auker (18\u20137).\nThe Tigers finally won their first World Series, defeating the Chicago Cubs, 4\u20132. Game 6 concluded with Goslin's dramatic walk-off RBI single, scoring Cochrane for a 4\u20133 victory.\nAfter owner Frank Navin died in the offseason, Walter Briggs Sr. took over control of the team.\n1936\u20131939.\nDespite being forecast to win the American League pennant again in 1936, the Tigers fell to a distant second place behind the New York Yankees both that season and in 1937. The team fell further down the standings with an 84\u201370 record in 1938 and an 81\u201373 record in 1939. Hank Greenberg nevertheless provided some excitement for Tigers fans in 1938 by challenging the single-season home run record held by Babe Ruth (60). He went into the season's final weekend against the Cleveland Indians with 58 home runs, tied with Jimmie Foxx for the most by a right-handed batter at the time, but he failed to homer.\nDuring the final week of the 1938 season, the Tigers presciently held out doubts about a pennant in 1939, but figured that 1940 would be their year.\n1940 American League Champions.\nIn a tight three-team race, the 90\u201364 Tigers won the 1940 AL pennant by one game over the Cleveland Indians and two games over the New York Yankees. Prior to the season, first baseman Hank Greenberg was persuaded to move to left field to make room for Rudy York, whom the Tigers had deemed no longer suitable to be their catcher. The move proved successful. York hit .316 with 33 home runs and 134 RBIs. Greenberg batted .340 and slammed 41 home runs while driving in 150. Greenberg won his second AL MVP award, becoming the first major leaguer to win the award at two different positions. Charlie Gehringer batted .313 while collecting 101 walks (for a .428 on-base percentage) and scoring 108 runs.\nBobo Newsom was the ace of the Tiger pitching staff in 1940, going 21\u20135 with a 2.83 ERA. An unlikely hero on the mound this season was 30-year-old rookie Floyd Giebell. Making just his third major league start on September 27, Giebell was called upon to pitch the pennant-clinching game against Bob Feller of the Indians. Feller surrendered just three hits, one being a 2-run homer by Rudy York, while Giebell blanked the Tribe for a 2\u20130 victory.\nThe Tigers lost the 1940 World Series to the Cincinnati Reds in seven games. Despite a heroic effort by Bobo Newsom, the Tigers came up short in the deciding game, losing 2\u20131. Newsom's father had died in a Cincinnati hotel room after watching his son win Game 1. An inspired Newsom won Game 5 and pitched Game 7 on just one day's rest. This was the third time the Tigers had lost a World Series in a deciding seventh game.\nThe war years (1941\u20131945).\nWith Hank Greenberg serving in World War II for all or parts of the 1941\u20131944 seasons, the Tigers struggled to recapture the glory of 1940. They finished no higher than fifth place in 1941\u20131943, but did manage a second-place finish in 1944, largely on the strength of pitchers Hal Newhouser and Dizzy Trout, who won 29 and 27 games, respectively. Newhouser, who was 29\u20139 with a 2.22 ERA, won the first of his two consecutive AL MVP awards this season. The Tigers were in first place as late as September 18, but would finish one game behind the St. Louis Browns for the AL pennant.\n1945 World Series Champions.\nWith the end of World War II and the timely return of Hank Greenberg and others from the military, the Tigers won the AL pennant by just 1.5 games over the Washington Senators with an 88\u201365 record. Virgil Trucks returned from the U.S. Navy in time to pitch &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5+1\u20443 innings of 1-run ball in the pennant-clinching game, with starter Hal Newhouser pitching the final &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+2\u20443 innings in relief. Newhouser won the pitching triple crown, leading the AL in wins (25), ERA (1.81) and strikeouts (212). He became the first pitcher in the history of the AL, and still the only pitcher as of 2025, to win the MVP Award in two consecutive seasons.\nWith Newhouser, Trucks and Dizzy Trout on the mound and Greenberg leading the offense, Detroit responded in a World Series Game 7 for the first time, staking Newhouser to a 5\u20130 lead before he threw a pitch en route to a 9\u20133 victory over the Cubs. Because many stars had not yet returned from the military, some baseball scholars have deemed the 1945 World Series to be among the worst-played contests in World Series history. For example, prior to the World Series, Chicago sportswriter Warren Brown was asked who he liked, and he answered, \"I don't think either one of them can win.\"\nA long drought (1946\u20131967).\n1946\u20131950.\nFollowing their World Series win in 1945, the Tigers continued to have winning records for the remainder of the decade, finishing second in the AL three times, but never winning the pennant.\nHal Newhouser had another outstanding season in 1946, again leading the league in wins (26) and ERA (1.94) while striking out a career-high 275 batters. He nearly won his third straight AL MVP award, finishing second to Ted Williams, who had led the Boston Red Sox to 104 wins (12 games ahead of the second-place Tigers). Also in 1946, the Tigers acquired George Kell, a third baseman who would become a 10-time all-star and Hall of Famer. He batted over .300 in eight straight seasons (1946\u201353), and finished with a career .306 average. Kell won the batting title in a very close race with Ted Williams in 1949, going 2-for-3 on the last day of the season to edge out the Red Sox slugger, .34291 to .34276.\nThe 1950 season was particularly frustrating, as the Tigers posted a 95\u201359 record for a .617 winning percentage, the fourth-best in team history at the time. However, they finished that season three games behind a strong New York Yankees team that went on to sweep the Philadelphia Phillies in the World Series.\n1951\u20131960.\nOver the next 10 years, the Tigers sank to the middle and lower ranks of the American League. The team had only three winning records over this span and never finished higher than fourth place. The last place 1952 team went 50\u2013104 (.325), which was the worst season in Tigers history until the 2003 team lost 119 games. Despite the dismal season, starter Virgil Trucks threw two no-hitters in 1952, becoming only the third pitcher in major league history to accomplish this feat. 1952 also saw Tiger first baseman Walt Dropo get a hit in 12 consecutive plate appearances over a three-game stretch from July 14 to 15, tying a major league record set by Johnny Kling in 1902.\nTeam owner Walter Briggs Sr. died in 1952. His son Walter Briggs Jr. inherited the team, but he was forced to sell it in 1956 to broadcast media owners John Fetzer and Fred Knorr.\nNotwithstanding Detroit's fall in the standings, the decade saw the debut of outfielder Al Kaline in 1953. One of the few major league players who never played a day in the minor leagues, he would hit over .300 nine times in his career. He also made 15 All-Star teams, won 10 Gold Gloves, and featured one of the league's best arms in right field. In 1955, the 20-year-old Kaline hit .340 to become the youngest-ever batting champion in major league history, finishing runner-up to Yogi Berra in that season's AL MVP voting.\n1958 saw the Tigers become the second to last team to integrate their roster when Dominican player Ozzie Virgil Sr. joined the team. Only the Boston Red Sox trailed the Tigers in integrating their roster.\n1961.\nAs the American League expanded from 8 to 10 teams, Detroit began its slow ascent back to success with an outstanding 1961 campaign. The Tigers led the majors in runs scored and won 101 games, a whopping 30-game improvement over the 71\u201383 1960 team, but still finished eight games behind the Yankees. This marked one of the few times in major league history that a team failed to reach the postseason despite winning 100 or more games, though it had happened once before to the Tigers in 1915. First baseman Norm Cash won the batting title with a .361 average, while teammate Al Kaline finished second. Cash never hit over .286 before or after the 1961 season, and would later say of the accomplishment: \"It was a freak. Even at the time, I realized that.\" Cash's plate heroics, which also included 41 home runs and 132 RBI, might have earned him MVP honors were it not for New York's Roger Maris bashing a then record 61 homers the same season. Cash also drew 124 walks for a league-leading .487 on-base percentage. Tigers outfielder Rocky Colavito actually bettered Cash's home run and RBI totals, with 45 and 140, respectively.\nThe 1961 club featured two non-white starters, Bill Bruton and Jake Wood, and later in the 1960s, black players such as Willie Horton, Earl Wilson, and Gates Brown would contribute to Detroit's rise in the standings.\n1962\u20131966.\nAs a strong nucleus developed, Detroit repeatedly posted winning records throughout the 1960s. In 1963, pitchers Mickey Lolich and Denny McLain entered the rotation. Outfielders Willie Horton (1963), Mickey Stanley (1964) and Jim Northrup (1964) would also come aboard around this time.\nThe team managed a third-place finish during a bizarre 1966 season, in which manager Chuck Dressen and acting manager Bob Swift were both forced to resign their posts because of health problems. Thereafter, Frank Skaff took over the managerial reins until the end of the season. Both Dressen and Swift died during the year; Dressen died of a heart attack in August, while Swift died of lung cancer in October. Following the season, the Tigers hired Mayo Smith to be their new manager.\n1967.\nIn 1967, the Tigers were involved in one of the closest pennant races in history. Because of rainouts, the Tigers were forced to play back-to-back doubleheaders against the California Angels over the final two days of the season. They needed to sweep the doubleheader on the last day of the season to force a one-game playoff with the Boston Red Sox. The Tigers won the first game, but lost the second, giving the Red Sox the pennant with no playoff. Detroit finished the season at 91\u201371, one game behind Boston. Starter Earl Wilson, acquired the previous season from the Red Sox, led the Tigers (and the major leagues) with 22 wins and would form a strong 1\u20132\u20133 combination with Denny McLain and Mickey Lolich over the next few years.\n1968\u20131972.\nGlory in '68: 1968 World Series Champions.\nThe Tigers finally returned to the World Series in 1968. The team grabbed first place from the Baltimore Orioles on May 10 and would not relinquish the position, clinching the pennant on September 17 and finishing with a 103\u201359 record. In a year that was marked by dominant pitching, starter Denny McLain went 31\u20136 (with a 1.96 ERA), the first time a pitcher had won 30 or more games in a season since Dizzy Dean accomplished the feat in 1934; no pitcher has accomplished it since. McLain won the AL MVP and Cy Young Award for his efforts.\n1968 World Series.\nIn the 1968 World Series, the Tigers met the defending World Series champion St. Louis Cardinals, led by starter Bob Gibson, who had posted a modern-era record 1.12 ERA during the regular season, and speedy outfielder Lou Brock. This was the first time the Tigers and Cardinals had met in the World Series since 1934. The series was predicated with a bold decision by manager Mayo Smith to play center fielder Mickey Stanley at shortstop, replacing the slick fielding but weak hitting of Ray Oyler. Stanley had never played shortstop before, but was a Gold Glover in the outfield and an excellent athlete. Smith played him at short for the final nine games of the regular season and all seven World Series games, with Oyler only appearing as a late-inning defensive replacement. This allowed Smith to play an outfield of Willie Horton, Jim Northrup and Al Kaline in every game.\nIn Game 1, Gibson completely shut down the Detroit lineup, striking out a World Series record 17 batters en route to an easy 4\u20130 win. However, due in no small part to pitcher Mickey Lolich's victories in Games 2 and 5, the Tigers climbed back into the World Series. Many fans believe the turning point came in the fifth inning of Game 5, with the Tigers down three games to one, and trailing in the game, 3\u20132. Left fielder Willie Horton made a perfect throw to home plate to nail Lou Brock, who tried to score from second base standing up, as catcher Bill Freehan blocked the plate with his foot. The Tigers came back with three runs in the seventh to win that game, 5\u20133, and stay alive. The Cardinals would not threaten to score the rest of this game, and scored only two more meaningless runs over the remainder of the series. In Game 6, McLain ensured a Game 7 by notching his only win of the World Series, a 13\u20131 blowout, despite pitching on only two days' rest.\nIn Game 7 at Busch Memorial Stadium, Lolich, also pitching on two days' rest, faced Gibson. Both men pitched brilliantly, putting zeros up on the scoreboard for much of the game. In the bottom of the sixth inning, the Cardinals looked primed to take the lead as Lou Brock singled to lead off the inning, only to be promptly picked off by Lolich. One out later, Curt Flood followed with another single, and was also picked off by Lolich. In the top of the seventh, an exhausted Gibson finally cracked, giving up two-out singles to Norm Cash and Willie Horton. Jim Northrup then struck the decisive blow, lashing a triple to center field over the head of Flood, who appeared to misjudge how hard the ball was hit. That scored both Cash and Horton; Northrup himself was then brought home by a Bill Freehan double. Detroit added an insurance run in the ninth. A ninth-inning solo home run by Mike Shannon was all the Cardinals could muster against Lolich as the Tigers took the game, 4\u20131, and the World Series, 4\u20133. \nThe Tigers became only the third team to ever win the World Series after being down 3\u20131. For his three victories that propelled the Tigers to the championship, Lolich was named the World Series Most Valuable Player. As of 2024[ [update]], Lolich is the last pitcher to have three complete-game victories in a single World Series.\n1969\u20131971.\n1969 saw further expansion as both leagues realigned into two divisions of six teams, and the Tigers were placed in the American League East. That year, Detroit failed to defend its title, despite Denny McLain having another outstanding season with a 24\u20139 campaign, earning him his second straight Cy Young Award (co-winner with Baltimore's Mike Cuellar). The Tigers' 90 wins placed them a distant second in the division to a very strong Baltimore Orioles team, which had won 109 games.\nThe Tigers suffered a disappointing 1970 season, finishing fourth in the AL East with a 79\u201383 record. Following the season, Mayo Smith was let go and was replaced by Billy Martin. In a playing career that was primarily spent with the New York Yankees, Martin played his final games with the Minnesota Twins and stayed in that organization after his retirement. He managed the Twins to an AL West Division title in 1969, but was fired after that season due to rocky relationships with his players, which included a legendary fight with pitcher Dave Boswell in an alley behind Detroit's Lindell AC sports bar.\nAlso during the offseason, Denny McLain, who had been suspended three times and had a 3\u20135 record, was part of an eight-player deal with the Washington Senators in what would turn out to be a heist for Detroit. The Tigers acquired pitcher Joe Coleman, shortstop Eddie Brinkman and third baseman Aurelio Rodr\u00edguez.\nMartin's Tigers posted 91 wins in 1971. However, they had to settle for a second-place finish behind the Orioles, who won 101 games to take their third straight AL East Division crown. The season was highlighted by Mickey Lolich's 308 strikeouts, which led the AL and is still the single-season record in franchise history. Lolich also won 25 games and posted a 2.92 ERA while throwing an incredible 376 innings and completing 29 of his 45 starts. Coleman paid immediate dividends for Detroit, winning 20 games, while McLain went 10\u201322 for the Senators and was out of baseball by the following season.\n1972 AL East Champions.\nJoe Coleman, Eddie Brinkman and Aurelio Rodr\u00edguez all played critical roles in 1972, when the Tigers captured their first AL East division title. Oddities of the schedule due to an early season strike allowed the 86\u201370 Tigers to win the division by just &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 game. Brinkman was named Tiger of the Year by the Detroit Baseball Writers, despite a .203 batting average, as he committed just 7 errors in 728 chances (.990 fielding percentage). He also had a streak of 72 games and 331 chances without an error during the season, both AL records for a shortstop. Mickey Lolich was his steady self for the Tigers, winning 22 games with a sparkling 2.50 ERA, while Coleman won 19 and had a 2.80 ERA. Starter Woodie Fryman, acquired on August 2, was the final piece of the puzzle as he went 10\u20133 over the last two months of the regular season and posted a minuscule 2.06 ERA. Fryman was also the winning pitcher in the division-clinching game against the Boston Red Sox, a 3\u20131 victory on October 3.\n1972 ALCS.\nIn the 1972 American League Championship Series, Detroit faced the American League West division champion Oakland Athletics, who had become steadily competitive ever since the 1969 realignment. In Game 1 of the ALCS in Oakland, Mickey Lolich, the hero of '68, took the hill and allowed just one run over nine innings. The Athletics' ace, Catfish Hunter, matched Lolich, surrendering only a solo home run to Norm Cash, and the game went into extra innings. Al Kaline hit a solo homer to break a 1\u20131 tie in the top of the 11th inning, only to be charged with a throwing error on Gonzalo M\u00e1rquez's game-tying single in the bottom half of the frame that allowed Gene Tenace to score the winning run. Blue Moon Odom shut down Detroit 5\u20130 in Game 2. The end of Game 2 was marred by an ugly incident in which Tigers reliever Lerrin LaGrow hit A's shortstop and leadoff hitter Bert Campaneris on the ankle with a pitch. An angered Campaneris threw the bat at LaGrow, and LaGrow ducked just in time for the bat to sail over his head. Both benches cleared, and though no punches were thrown, both LaGrow and Campaneris were suspended for the remainder of the series. It was widely believed that Martin had ordered the pitch that hit Campaneris, who had three hits, two stolen bases and two runs scored in the game.\nAs the series shifted to Detroit, the Tigers caught their stride. Joe Coleman held the A's scoreless on seven hits in Game 3, striking out 14 batters in a 3\u20130 victory for the Tigers. Game 4 was another pitchers' duel between Hunter and Lolich, resulting again in a 1\u20131 tie at the end of nine innings. Oakland scored two runs in the top of the 10th and put the Tigers down to their last three outs. Detroit pushed two runs across the plate to tie the game before Jim Northrup came through in the clutch again. His single off Dave Hamilton scored Gates Brown to give the Tigers a 4\u20133 win and even the series at two games apiece.\nA first-inning run on an RBI ground out from Bill Freehan, set up by a Gene Tenace passed ball that allowed Dick McAuliffe to reach third, gave Detroit an early lead in the deciding fifth and final game in Detroit. Reggie Jackson's steal of home in the second inning tied it up, though Jackson was injured in a collision with Freehan and had to leave the game. Tenace's two-out single to left field plated George Hendrick to give Oakland a 2\u20131 lead in the fourth inning. The run was controversial to many Tigers fans, as Hendrick was ruled safe at first base two batters prior to the Tenace hit. Hendrick appeared to be out by two steps on a grounder to short, but umpire John Rice ruled that Norm Cash pulled his foot off first base. Replays and photos, however, show that Cash did not pull his foot. Thanks to that play and four innings of scoreless relief from Vida Blue, the A's took the AL pennant and a spot in the World Series.\nA slow decline (1973\u20131978).\nThe 1973 season saw the Tigers drop to third place in the division, with an 85\u201377 record. Joe Coleman posted another 23 wins, but the other Tiger starters had subpar seasons. Willie Horton hit .316, but injuries limited him to just 111 games. Jim Northrup posted the best batting average of his career (.307) but was inexplicably limited to part-time duty (119 games played), which Northrup attributed to an ongoing feud with Billy Martin that had actually started in the 1972 ALCS. Northrup even proclaimed to the press that Martin \"took the fun out of the game.\" Martin did not survive the 1973 season as manager. He was fired that September after ordering his pitchers to throw spitballs (and telling the press that he did so) in protest of opposing Cleveland Indians pitcher Gaylord Perry, whom Martin was convinced was doing the same. Third base coach Joe Schultz served as interim manager for the remainder of the season.\nA bright spot for the Tigers in 1973 was relief pitcher John Hiller, who marked his first full season since suffering a heart attack in 1971 by collecting a league-leading 38 saves and posting a brilliant 1.44 ERA. Hiller's saves total would stand as a Tiger record until 2000, when it was broken by Todd Jones' 42 saves (Jones' record would later be broken by Jos\u00e9 Valverde's 49 saves in 2011).\nAfter the season, the Tigers hired Ralph Houk to be their new manager. Houk served in that capacity for five full seasons, through the end of the 1978 season. The roster of players who played under Houk were mostly aging veterans from the 1960s, whose performance had slipped from their peak years. The Tigers did not have a winning season from 1974 to 1977, and their 57 wins in the 1975 season was the team's lowest since 1952. Perhaps the biggest signal of decline for the Tigers was the retirement of Kaline following the 1974 season, after he notched his 3,000th career hit. Kaline finished with 3,007 hits and was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in his first year of eligibility in 1980.\n1976: The Year of The Bird.\nTiger fans were provided a glimmer of hope when 21-year-old rookie Mark Fidrych made his debut in 1976. Fidrych, known as \"The Bird\", was a colorful character known for talking to the baseball and other eccentricities. During a game against the Yankees, Graig Nettles responded to Fidrych's antics by talking to his bat. After making an out, he later lamented that his Japanese-made bat did not understand him. Fidrych entered the All-Star break at 9\u20132 with a 1.78 ERA, and was the starting pitcher for the American League in the All-Star Game played that year in Philadelphia to celebrate the American Bicentennial. He finished the season with a record of 19\u20139 and an American League-leading ERA of 2.34. Fidrych, the AL Rookie of the Year, was one of the few bright spots that year with the Tigers finishing next to last in the AL East in 1976.\nAurelio Rodr\u00edguez won the Gold Glove Award in 1976 at third base, snapping a streak in which Hall of Famer Brooks Robinson had won it for 16 consecutive seasons.\n1977\u20131978.\nInjuries to his knee, and later his arm, drastically limited Fidrych's appearances in 1977\u201378. Perhaps more important, however, was the talent coming up through the Tigers farm system at the time. Jack Morris, Lance Parrish, Alan Trammell and Lou Whitaker all made their debuts in 1977, and would help the team to 88 wins in 1978, the only winning season under Houk.\nThe \"Bless You Boys\" era (1979\u20131987).\nHouk's immediate successor as Tigers manager in 1979 was Les Moss, but Moss would only last until June of that year. From June 14, 1979, until the end of the 1995 season, the team was managed by George \"Sparky\" Anderson, one of baseball's winningest managers and winner of two World Series rings as manager of the Cincinnati Reds during their peak as The Big Red Machine. When Anderson joined the Tigers in 1979 and assessed the team's young talent, he boldly predicted that it would be a pennant winner within five years.\nAcerbic Detroit TV sports anchor Al Ackerman initiated the phrase \"Bless You Boys\". Originally used as a sarcastic remark, Ackerman's phrase would take on a new meaning in 1984.\nThe Roar of '84: 1984 World Series Champions.\nAs in 1968, the Tigers' next World Series season would be preceded by a disappointing second-place finish, as the 1983 Tigers won 92 games to finish six games behind the Baltimore Orioles in the AL East.\nThe first major news of the 1984 season actually came in late 1983, when broadcasting magnate John Fetzer, who had owned the Tigers since 1957, sold the team to Domino's Pizza founder and CEO Tom Monaghan for $53 million.\nThe 1984 team got off to a 9\u20130 start highlighted by Jack Morris tossing a nationally televised no-hitter against Chicago in the fourth game of the season. They stayed hot for most of the year, posting a 35\u20135 record over their first forty games and cruising to a franchise-record 104 victories. The Tigers led the division from opening day until the end of the regular season and finished a staggering 15 games ahead of the second-place Toronto Blue Jays. Closer Willie Hern\u00e1ndez, acquired from the 1983 NL champion Philadelphia Phillies in the offseason, won both the Cy Young Award and AL MVP, a rarity for a relief pitcher.\n1984 ALCS.\nThe Tigers faced the Kansas City Royals in the American League Championship Series. In Game 1, Alan Trammell, Lance Parrish and Larry Herndon went deep to crush the Royals 8\u20131 at Royals Stadium (now Kauffman Stadium). In Game 2, the Tigers scored twice in the 11th inning when Johnny Grubb doubled off Royals closer Dan Quisenberry en route to a 5\u20133 victory. The Tigers completed the sweep at Tiger Stadium in Game 3. Marty Castillo's third-inning RBI fielder's choice would be all the help Detroit would need. Milt Wilcox outdueled Charlie Leibrandt, and after Hernandez got Darryl Motley to pop out to preserve the 1\u20130 win, the Tigers were returning to the World Series.\n1984 World Series.\nIn the NLCS, the San Diego Padres rallied from losing the first two games to overcome the Chicago Cubs and prevent a fifth Cubs-Tigers series. The Tigers would open the 1984 World Series on the road in San Diego.\nIn Game 1, Larry Herndon hit a two-run home run that gave the Tigers a 3\u20132 lead. Jack Morris pitched a complete game with 2 runs on 8 hits, and Detroit drew first blood. The Padres evened the series the next night despite pitcher Ed Whitson being chased after pitching &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u20443 of an inning and giving up three runs on five Tiger hits. Tigers starter Dan Petry exited the game after &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4+1\u20443 innings when Kurt Bevacqua's three-run homer gave San Diego a 5\u20133 lead they would not relinquish.\nWhen the series shifted to the Motor City, the Tigers took command. In Game 3, a two-out rally in the second inning, highlighted by Marty Castillo's 2-run homer, led to four runs and the yanking of Padres starter Tim Lollar after &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+2\u20443 innings. The Padres never recovered, losing 5\u20132. Eric Show continued the parade of bad outings in Game 4, getting bounced after &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+2\u20443 innings after giving up a pair of 2-run homers to World Series MVP Alan Trammell in his first two at-bats. Trammell's homers held up with the help of another Morris complete game, and the Tigers' 4\u20132 win gave them a commanding lead in the series.\nIn Game 5, Kirk Gibson's two-run shot in the first inning would be the beginning of another early end for the Padres' starter Mark Thurmond. Although the Padres would pull back even at 3\u20133, chasing Petry in the fourth inning in the process, the Tigers retook the lead on a Rusty Kuntz sacrifice fly (actually a pop-out to retreating second baseman Alan Wiggins that the speedy Gibson was able to score on), and then went up 5\u20133 on a solo homer by Parrish.\nGibson came to bat in the eighth inning with runners on second and third and the Tigers clinging to a 5\u20134 lead. A \"Sounds of the Game\" video made during the Series by MLB Productions captured this moment, and has been played on TV a number of times since then. Padres manager Dick Williams was shown in the dugout flashing four fingers, ordering an intentional walk, before San Diego reliever Goose Gossage summoned him to the mound. Sparky Anderson was seen and heard yelling to Gibson, \"He don't want to walk you!\", and making a swing-the-bat gesture. As Anderson had suspected, Gossage threw a 1\u20130 fastball on the inside corner, and Gibson was ready. He launched the pitch into Tiger Stadium's right field upper deck for a three-run homer, giving the Tigers a four-run lead and effectively clinching the game and the series.\nAurelio L\u00f3pez pitched &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20443 innings of relief and retired all seven batters he faced, earning the win. Despite allowing a rare run in the top of the 8th inning, Willie Hern\u00e1ndez got the save as Tony Gwynn flew out to Larry Herndon to end the game, sending Detroit into a wild victory celebration.\nThe Tigers led their division wire-to-wire, from opening day and every day thereafter, culminating in the World Series championship. This had not been done in the major leagues since the 1955 Brooklyn Dodgers. With the win, Anderson became the first manager to win the World Series in both leagues.\n1987 AL East Champions.\nAfter a pair of third-place finishes in 1985 and 1986, the 1987 Tigers faced lowered expectations\u00a0\u2013 which seemed to be confirmed by an 11\u201319 start to the season. However, the team hit its stride thereafter and gradually gained ground on its AL East rivals. This charge was fueled in part by the acquisition of pitcher Doyle Alexander from the Atlanta Braves in exchange for minor league pitcher John Smoltz. Alexander started 11 games for the Tigers, posting a 9\u20130 record and a 1.53 ERA. Smoltz, a Michigan native, went on to have a long and productive career, mostly with the Braves, and was ultimately inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 2015. Despite the Tigers' great season, they entered September neck-and-neck with the Toronto Blue Jays. The two teams would square off in seven hard-fought games during the final two weeks of the season. All seven games were decided by one run, and in the first six of the seven games, the winning run was scored in the final inning of play. At Exhibition Stadium, the Tigers dropped three in a row to the Blue Jays before winning a dramatic extra-inning showdown.\nThe Tigers entered the final week of the 1987 season 2.5 games behind. After a series against the Baltimore Orioles, the Tigers returned home trailing by a game and swept the Blue Jays. Detroit clinched the division in a 1\u20130 victory over Toronto in front of 51,000 fans at Tiger Stadium on October 4. Frank Tanana went all nine innings for the complete-game shutout, and outfielder Larry Herndon gave the Tigers their lone run on a second-inning home run. Detroit finished the season two games ahead of Toronto, securing the best record in the majors (98\u201364).\nIn what would prove to be their last postseason appearance until 2006, the Tigers were upset in the 1987 American League Championship Series by the 85\u201377 Minnesota Twins (who in turn won the World Series that year) 4\u20131. The Twins clinched the series in Game 5 at Tiger Stadium, 9\u20135.\nA new approach (1988\u20131995).\nDespite their 1987 division title victory, the Tigers proved unable to build on their success. The team lost Kirk Gibson to free agency in the offseason, but still spent much of 1988 in first place in the AL East. A late season slump left the team in second place at 88\u201374, one game behind the Boston Red Sox.\nIn 1989, the team collapsed to a 59\u2013103 record, worst in the majors. The franchise then attempted to rebuild using a power-hitting approach, with sluggers Cecil Fielder, Rob Deer and Mickey Tettleton joining Trammell and Whitaker in the lineup (fitting for the team with the most 200+ home run seasons in baseball history). In 1990, Fielder led the American League with 51 home runs (becoming the first player to hit 50 since George Foster in 1977, and the first AL player since Roger Maris and Mickey Mantle in 1961), and finished second in the voting for AL MVP. He hit 44 home runs and collected 132 RBI in 1991, again finishing second in the AL MVP balloting. Behind the hitting of Fielder and others, the Tigers improved by 20 wins in 1990 (79\u201383), and posted a winning record in 1991 (84\u201378). However, the team lacked quality pitching, despite Bill Gullickson's 20 wins in 1991, and its core of key players began to age, setting the franchise up for decline. Their minor league system was largely barren of talent as well, producing only a few everyday players during the 1990s. Adding insult to injury, the Tigers and radio station WJR announced in December 1990 that they were not renewing the contract of long-time Hall of Fame play-by play announcer Ernie Harwell, and that the 1991 season would be Harwell's last with the team. The announcement was met with resounding protests from fans, both in Michigan and around the baseball world.\n1992 saw the Tigers win only 75 games, with Fielder being one of the few bright spots as he won the AL RBI title for a third straight season (124). In August 1992, the franchise was sold to Mike Ilitch, the President and CEO of Little Caesars Pizza who also owned the Detroit Red Wings. One of Ilitch's first moves as the new owner was to rehire Ernie Harwell. Late in the season, Sparky Anderson won his 1,132nd game as a Tiger manager, passing Hughie Jennings for the most all-time wins in franchise history. The team also responded with an 85\u201377 season in 1993, but it would be their last winning season for a number of years.\nOn October 2, 1995, manager Sparky Anderson chose to not only end his career with the Tigers, but retire from baseball altogether.\nRandy Smith era (1996\u20132002).\nFrom 1994 to 2005, the Tigers did not post a winning record, the longest sub-.500 stretch in franchise history. In 1996, the Tigers lost a then-team record 109 games, under new general manager Randy Smith. The only team in the majors to have a longer stretch without a winning season during this time were the Pittsburgh Pirates, who did not have a winning record in the years spanning 1993 to 2012. The Tigers' best record over this span was 79\u201383, recorded in 1997 and 2000.\nIn 1998, the Tigers moved from the AL East, where they had been since the divisions were created in 1969, to the AL Central as part of a realignment necessitated by the addition of the expansion Tampa Bay Devil Rays.\nIn 2000, the team left Tiger Stadium in favor of Comerica Park.\nSoon after it opened, Comerica Park drew criticism for its deep dimensions, which made it difficult to hit home runs; the distance to left-center field (395\u00a0ft), in particular, was seen as unfair to hitters. This led to the nickname \"Comerica National Park.\" The team made a successful bid to bring in slugger Juan Gonz\u00e1lez from the Texas Rangers for the inaugural season at Comerica Park. After four consecutive seasons of no fewer than 39 home runs, Gonz\u00e1lez only hit 22 homers in 2000. He cited Comerica Park's dimensions as a major reason why he turned down a multiyear contract extension. In 2003, the franchise largely quieted the criticism by moving in the left-center fence to , taking the flagpole in that area out of play, a feature carried over from Tiger Stadium. In 2005, the team moved the bullpens to the vacant area beyond the left field fence and filled the previous location with seats.\nIn late 2001, Dave Dombrowski, former general manager of the 1997 World Series champion Florida Marlins, was hired as team president. In 2002, the Tigers started the season 0\u20136, prompting Dombrowski to fire the unpopular Smith, as well as manager Phil Garner. Dombrowski then took over as general manager and named bench coach Luis Pujols to finish the season as interim manager. The team finished 55\u2013106. After the season was over, Pujols was let go.\nMost losses in franchise history (2003).\nDave Dombrowski hired popular former shortstop Alan Trammell to manage the team in 2003. With fellow 1984 teammates Kirk Gibson and Lance Parrish on the coaching staff, the rebuilding process began. On August 30, 2003, the Tigers' defeat at the hands of the Chicago White Sox caused them to join the 1962 New York Mets, who were a first-year expansion team, as the only modern MLB teams to lose 100 games before September. They avoided tying the 1962 Mets' then modern MLB record of 120 losses only by winning five of their last six games of the season, including three out of four against the Minnesota Twins, who had already clinched the AL Central and were resting their stars.\nMike Maroth went 9\u201321, becoming the first pitcher to lose 20 games since Brian Kingman lost 20 for the Oakland Athletics in 1980. Maroth, Jeremy Bonderman (6\u201319), and Nate Cornejo (6\u201317) were the top three pitchers in losses in the entire major leagues, the first time in history that this had occurred.\nThe Tigers finished 43\u2013119, the worst record in franchise history. This eclipsed the previous AL record of 117 losses set by the 1916 Philadelphia Athletics, which was later surpassed by the 2024 Chicago White Sox. While the 2003 Tigers rank as the fourth worst team in major league history based on total losses, they fare slightly better based on winning percentage. Their .265 win percentage is the majors' seventh-worst since 1900. \nRebuilding the franchise (2004\u20132006).\nAfter the embarrassing 2003 season, the Tigers vowed to make changes. Under Dave Dombrowski, the franchise demonstrated a willingness to sign marquee free agents. In 2004, the team signed or traded for several talented but high-risk veterans, such as Fernando Vi\u00f1a, Rondell White, Iv\u00e1n Rodr\u00edguez, Ugueth Urbina, and Carlos Guill\u00e9n, and the gamble paid off. The 2004 Tigers finished 72\u201390, a 29-game improvement over the previous season. This was the largest improvement in the AL since the Baltimore Orioles had a 33-game improvement from 1988 to 1989.\nPrior to the 2005 season, the Tigers spent a large sum for two prized free agents, Troy Percival and Magglio Ord\u00f3\u00f1ez. On June 8, 2005, the Tigers traded pitcher Ugueth Urbina and infielder Ram\u00f3n Mart\u00ednez to the Philadelphia Phillies for Pl\u00e1cido Polanco. The Tigers stayed on the fringes of contention for the AL wild card for the first four months of the season, but then faded badly, finishing 71\u201391. The collapse was perceived as being due both to injuries and to a lack of player unity; Rodr\u00edguez in particular was disgruntled, taking a leave of absence during the season to deal with a difficult divorce. Trammell, though popular with the fans, took part of the blame for the poor clubhouse atmosphere and lack of continued improvement, and he was fired at the end of the season.\nA highlight of the 2005 campaign was Detroit's hosting of the Major League Baseball All-Star Game, its first since 1971. In the Home Run Derby, Rodr\u00edguez finished second, losing to the Phillies' Bobby Abreu.\nIn October 2005, Jim Leyland, who managed Dombrowski's 1997 World Series champion Florida Marlins, replaced Trammell as manager; two months later, in response to Troy Percival's arm problems, closer Todd Jones, who had spent five seasons in Detroit (1997\u20132001), signed a two-year deal to return to the Tigers. Veteran left-hander Kenny Rogers also joined the Tigers from the Texas Rangers in late 2005.\nThe return of the Tigers: 2006 American League Champions.\nAfter years of futility, the 2006 season showed signs of hope. The impressive rookie campaigns of eventual AL Rookie of the Year Justin Verlander, centerfielder Curtis Granderson, and flamethrowing relief pitcher Joel Zumaya, coupled with a well-publicized early-season tirade by Leyland, helped the team explode and quickly rise to the top of the AL Central. The team reached a high point when they were 40 games over .500, but a second half swoon started to raise questions about the team's staying power. On August 27, a 7\u20131 victory over the Cleveland Indians gave the Tigers their 82nd victory and their first winning season since 1993. On September 24, the Tigers beat the Kansas City Royals 11\u20134 to clinch their first playoff berth since 1987. A division title seemed inevitable. All that was required was one win in the final five games of the season, which included three games against the Royals, whom the Tigers had manhandled much of the season. However, the Tigers lost all five games to finish 95\u201367, and the division title went to the 96\u201366 Minnesota Twins. The Tigers instead settled for the AL wild card.\nThe playoffs saw the Tigers beat the heavily favored New York Yankees 3\u20131 in the ALDS and sweep the Oakland Athletics in the 2006 ALCS, thanks to a walk-off home run in Game 4 by right fielder Magglio Ord\u00f3\u00f1ez. They advanced to the World Series, where they lost to the underdog St. Louis Cardinals in five games.\nFalling short (2007\u20132010).\n2007.\nDuring the offseason, the Tigers traded for outfielder Gary Sheffield, who had been a part of the 1997 World Series champion Florida Marlins managed by Jim Leyland. In addition to acquisitions, Dombrowski developed a productive farm system. Justin Verlander and Joel Zumaya, the most notable rookie contributors to the 2006 team, were followed by Andrew Miller, who was drafted in 2006 and called up early in the 2007 campaign, and minor leaguer Cameron Maybin, an athletic five-tool outfielder ranked #6 in Baseball America's 2007 Top 100 Prospects.\nOn June 12, Verlander threw the Tigers' first no-hitter since 1984 (Jack Morris) and the first in Comerica Park history, in a 4\u20130 win over the Milwaukee Brewers. The Tigers had the best record in baseball in late July, but lost a few players to injuries and started to play poorly in the second half. The Tigers were officially eliminated from playoff competition on September 26, 2007, when the New York Yankees clinched a wild card berth. The Tigers, at 88\u201374, finished second in the AL Central.\nMagglio Ord\u00f3\u00f1ez captured the AL batting title in 2007 with a .363 average, becoming the first Tiger to win it since Norm Cash did so in 1961.\n2008.\nGoing into the 2008 season, the franchise traded for prominent talent in \u00c9dgar Renter\u00eda (from the Atlanta Braves) and Miguel Cabrera and Dontrelle Willis (from the Florida Marlins). However, the Tigers, who now boasted the second-highest team payroll in the majors at over $138 million, began the regular season by losing seven straight games. The Tigers climbed back, and at the midway point of the season, they were 42\u201340. In the end, the team finished miserably, slumping to a 74\u201388 record. Justin Verlander finished with his worst season as a pro, as he went 11\u201317 with a 4.84 ERA. The Tigers also lost closer Todd Jones to retirement on September 25, 2008. Despite the disappointing season, the team set an attendance record in 2008, drawing 3,202,654 customers to Comerica Park.\n2009.\nGoing into the 2009 season, the Tigers acquired starter Edwin Jackson from the 2008 AL Champion Tampa Bay Rays, and called up rookie and former #1 draft pick Rick Porcello. Jackson was outstanding in the first half, making his first All-Star team, while Porcello was solid most of the year, posting a 14\u20139 record with a 3.96 ERA and displaying grit and maturity beyond his 20 years of age. Justin Verlander bounced back from an off 2008 to win 19 games. He posted a 3.45 ERA and led the AL in strikeouts (269) to finish third in the AL Cy Young balloting. Fernando Rodney assumed the closer role in spring training, replacing the retired Todd Jones. Rodney responded with 37 saves in 38 tries, while Bobby Seay, Fu-Te Ni, Brandon Lyon, and Ryan Perry shored up the middle relief that plagued the team in 2007 and 2008.\nDespite the improvements, the Tigers once again found themselves struggling to hold a lead in the AL Central. The team entered September with a 7-game lead in the division, but wound up tied with the Minnesota Twins at 86 wins by the final day of the regular season. The season ended on October 6 with a 6\u20135 loss in 12 innings to the Twins in the tie-breaker game, leaving the Tigers with an 86\u201377 record. The Tigers spent 146 days of the 2009 season in first place, but became the first team in Major League history to lose a three-game lead with four games left to play.\n2010.\nEntering 2010, the Tigers parted ways with Curtis Granderson and Edwin Jackson as part of a three-way trade with the New York Yankees and Arizona Diamondbacks; in return they picked up outfield prospect Austin Jackson and pitchers Phil Coke, Max Scherzer and Daniel Schlereth. Jackson made the Tigers opening day roster, and was American League Rookie of the Month for April. 2010 also saw the debut of Brennan Boesch, who was named the AL Rookie of the Month for May and June.\nAt the All-Star break, the Tigers were a half-game out of first place in the AL Central, behind the Chicago White Sox. However, a slow start after the break and injuries to three key players sent the Tigers into yet another second half tailspin. The Tigers finished the season in third place with an 81\u201381 record, 13 games back of the division-winning Minnesota Twins. While playing outstanding baseball at home, the Tigers were just 29\u201352 on the road.\nAmong the season highlights were Miguel Cabrera hitting .328 with 38 home runs and an AL-best 126 RBI, earning the AL Silver Slugger Award at first base and finishing second in the AL MVP race (earning 5 of 28 first-place votes). Jackson (.293 average, 103 runs, 181 hits, 27 stolen bases) finished second in the AL Rookie of the Year voting. Justin Verlander enjoyed another strong season (18\u20139 record, 3.37 ERA, 219 strikeouts).\nThe near-perfect game.\nOn June 2, 2010, Armando Galarraga was pitching a perfect game against the Cleveland Indians with 2 outs in the top of the ninth inning when first-base umpire Jim Joyce made a controversial call, ruling Jason Donald safe at first. Video replay showed he was out. A tearful Joyce later said, \"I just cost that kid a perfect game. I thought he beat the throw. I was convinced he beat the throw, until I saw the replay.\" Galarraga would later tell reporters that Joyce apologized to him directly and gave him a hug. The next day, with Joyce umpiring home plate, Galarraga brought out the lineup card and the two shook hands. Despite nationwide support for overturning the call, which included supportive statements from the Governor of Michigan and the White House, commissioner Bud Selig let the call stand. However, he said he would look into expanding instant replay in the future.\nDivision winners (2011\u20132014).\n2011: First AL Central Championship.\nThe Tigers returned much of their roster from 2010, while adding relief pitcher Joaqu\u00edn Benoit, catcher/DH Victor Martinez, and starting pitcher Brad Penny.\nOn May 7, Verlander took a perfect game against the Toronto Blue Jays into the 8th inning. After a walk to J. P. Arencibia, Verlander coaxed a double-play grounder and went on to the 9th inning to complete his second career no-hitter by facing the minimum 27 batters. It was the seventh no-hitter in Tigers history. On August 27, Verlander defeated the Minnesota Twins, 6\u20134, to become the first Tiger since Bill Gullickson in 1991 to win 20 games in a season. Verlander also became the first major league pitcher since Curt Schilling in 2002 to reach 20 wins before the end of August.\nIn May, the Tigers were as many as eight games back of the first place Cleveland Indians. However, they would start to play better.\nThe Tigers sent five players to the 2011 All-Star Game. Catcher Alex Avila was voted in as a starter, while Justin Verlander, Jos\u00e9 Valverde and Miguel Cabrera were added as reserves. Verlander was unavailable to play in the All-Star Game due to the rule where starting pitchers who play the Sunday beforehand are ineligible. Shortstop Jhonny Peralta was later added to the All-Star team when the Yankees' Derek Jeter was unable to play due to injury.\nAs a three-way battle for the division title developed between the Tigers, Indians, and Chicago White Sox, the Tigers put together an 18\u201310 record in August to begin to pull away. Starter Doug Fister, who was acquired at the trade deadline, provided an immediate spark, going 8\u20131 over the final two months of the season with a sparkling 1.79 ERA. After a loss on September 1, the Tigers reeled off a 12-game winning streak to put any thoughts of another late-season collapse to rest. The streak consisted of four consecutive three-game sweeps over their AL Central Division rivals. It was the Tigers' longest winning streak since the 1934 team won 14 straight. On September 16, the Tigers clinched the AL Central Division title with a 3\u20131 win over the Oakland Athletics. It was their first AL Central title since joining the division in 1998, and first division title of any kind since 1987.\nMembers of the 2011 Tigers won multiple statistical awards in 2011. Verlander won the pitching triple crown, leading the AL in wins (24), ERA (2.40) and strikeouts (250). On November 15, Verlander was a unanimous selection for the AL Cy Young Award. In a much closer vote six days later, Verlander also won AL MVP, becoming the first pitcher to do so since Dennis Eckersley in 1992. Valverde was the AL saves leader with 49 (in 49 save opportunities), winning the 2011 MLB Delivery Man of the Year Award. Cabrera won the AL batting title with a .344 average, while also leading the AL in on-base percentage (.448) and doubles (48).\nThe Tigers beat the New York Yankees by a score of 3\u20132 in Game 5 of the ALDS, winning the series 3\u20132. They advanced to the ALCS, but they lost to the defending AL Champion Texas Rangers, 4\u20132.\n2012: American League Champions.\nIn 2012, the Tigers looked to defend their 2011 AL Central Division title, with the hopes of earning a second consecutive playoff appearance. On January 24, the Tigers signed free agent All-Star first baseman Prince Fielder to a 9-year, $214 million contract. The move came shortly after the Tigers learned that V\u00edctor Mart\u00ednez had torn his anterior cruciate ligament during offseason training in Lakeland, Florida, and would likely miss the entire 2012 season. Miguel Cabrera moved back to his original position of third base, leading to the eventual release of veteran Brandon Inge on April 26. On July 23, the Tigers acquired veteran second baseman Omar Infante, who played for Detroit in 2003\u201307, and starting pitcher An\u00edbal S\u00e1nchez from the Miami Marlins in exchange for starting pitcher Jacob Turner and two other minor leaguers.\nAt the midway point of the 2012 season, the Tigers were three games under .500 (39\u201342). The team played much better in the second half and, after a fierce battle down the stretch with the Chicago White Sox, the Tigers clinched the AL Central division title on October 1 with a 6\u20133 win against the Kansas City Royals. Coupled with the Tigers' division title in 2011, it marked the first back-to-back divisional titles in team history, and first back-to-back postseason appearances since 1934\u201335. The Tigers concluded the season with an 88\u201374 record.\nOn the final day of the season, Cabrera earned the Triple Crown in batting, leading the AL in batting average (.330), home runs (44), and runs batted in (139). No player had accomplished this feat since Carl Yastrzemski in 1967. On the mound, starters Justin Verlander and Max Scherzer finished first and second among the American League strikeout leaders, with 239 and 231, respectively. Verlander (17\u20138, 2.64 ERA) finished second in the Cy Young Award balloting to David Price of the Tampa Bay Rays.\nIn the American League Division Series, the Tigers defeated the Oakland Athletics, 3\u20132, earning their second straight trip to the American League Championship Series. The Tigers completed a four-game sweep of the New York Yankees in the ALCS to win their 11th AL pennant and earn a trip to the World Series. In the World Series, the Tigers were swept by the San Francisco Giants.\nOn November 15, 2012, Cabrera was named AL MVP.\n2013: American League title defense.\nThe Tigers entered the 2013 season looking to defend their 2012 AL pennant. Key acquisitions in the offseason included signing free agent outfielder Torii Hunter to a two-year, $26 million contract, while also signing their 2012 trade deadline acquisition, pitcher An\u00edbal S\u00e1nchez, to a five-year, $80 million deal. The Tigers also signed free agent catcher Brayan Pe\u00f1a to a one-year contract. Moreover, ace starter Justin Verlander signed a $180 million contract extension. The Tigers placed six players on the 2013 American League All-Star team: Miguel Cabrera, Prince Fielder, Jhonny Peralta, Torii Hunter, Max Scherzer and Justin Verlander.\nOn September 25, the Tigers clinched their third consecutive AL Central Division title. Tigers pitchers struck out 1,428 batters during the regular season, breaking the record of 1,404 held by the 2003 Chicago Cubs. Cabrera (.348 average, 44 HR, 139 RBI) was voted the AL MVP for the second straight season, while Scherzer (21\u20133, 2.90 ERA, 240 strikeouts) won the AL Cy Young Award.\nThe Tigers played the Oakland Athletics for the second straight year in the ALDS, and defeated the A's, 3\u20132. The Tigers set a record by striking out 57 Oakland batters in the ALDS. With his Game 5 gem, Verlander ran his postseason scoreless streak against Oakland to 30 innings.\nThe Tigers advanced to their third straight ALCS, where they played the Boston Red Sox for the first ever time in the postseason. The Tigers would be defeated in six games.\n2014: Changes at the top.\nJim Leyland stepped down from his managerial position after eight years with Detroit, and the Tigers hired Brad Ausmus as Leyland's successor. On November 20, 2013, the Tigers traded Prince Fielder to the Texas Rangers for three time All-Star second baseman Ian Kinsler plus cash considerations with regard to Fielder's remaining contract amount. The Tigers later traded starting pitcher Doug Fister to the Washington Nationals for infielder Steve Lombardozzi Jr. and pitchers Ian Krol and Robbie Ray.\nIn an effort to improve a bullpen that often struggled in 2013, the Tigers signed veteran closer Joe Nathan to a two-year, $20 million contract, with a club option for 2016, and later signed Joba Chamberlain to a one-year, $2.5 million deal. On May 2, 2014, a month into the season, with the bullpen having a combined 5.37 ERA, which was 29th out of 30 in MLB, the Tigers signed free agent reliever Joel Hanrahan to a one-year contract. However, he never came off the disabled list to pitch for the team. The team further bolstered the bullpen near the MLB trading deadline, dealing pitchers Corey Knebel and Jake Thompson to the Texas Rangers in exchange for former All-Star closer Joakim Soria on July 23.\nOn July 31, with just hours left before the end of the non-waiver trade deadline, the Tigers traded pitcher Drew Smyly and shortstop Willy Adames to the Tampa Bay Rays, and Austin Jackson to the Seattle Mariners in a three-team deal to acquire pitcher David Price from the Rays. With the acquisition of Price, the Tigers became the first team in major league history with three consecutive Cy Young Award winners in its starting rotation.\nOn September 28, the last day of the regular season, Price pitched a 3\u20130 gem against the Minnesota Twins, and the Tigers clinched their fourth consecutive AL Central Division title. The 90\u201372 Tigers finished one game ahead of the Kansas City Royals.\nThe Tigers faced the Baltimore Orioles in the 2014 American League Division Series, where they were swept, 3\u20130. J. D. Martinez became the first player in franchise history to hit home runs in his first two career postseason games. Both were part of back-to-back homers, with V\u00edctor Mart\u00ednez and Nick Castellanos in Games 1 and 2, respectively.\n2015: Mid-season reboot.\nBrad Ausmus continued to manage the Tigers for a second season. Free agents Max Scherzer and Torii Hunter left for other teams at the end of the year, while Rick Porcello, Eugenio Su\u00e1rez, Robbie Ray, and prospect Devon Travis were all lost through trades. On the receiving end, the Tigers traded for slugger Yoenis C\u00e9spedes, relief pitcher Alex Wilson, speedy outfielder Anthony Gose and starting pitchers Alfredo Sim\u00f3n and Shane Greene.\nAfter winning the first six games of the year in record-breaking fashion, the season slowly went downhill for the Tigers. Inconsistent pitching, division rivals outperforming expectations, and injuries to multiple players, including Joe Nathan, who only appeared in one game, Victor Mart\u00ednez, and career first stints on the disabled list for Justin Verlander and Miguel Cabrera, sent the team below the .500 mark as the trade deadline came and the decision was made to \"reboot\" the team. Within a two-day span in late July, the Tigers traded David Price, Joakim Soria and Cespedes, receiving six well regarded prospects in return, including Daniel Norris and Michael Fulmer.\nOn August 4, longtime general manager Dave Dombrowski was released by the team, with assistant GM Al Avila being promoted to general manager and president of baseball operations.\nDespite difficulties, the Tigers still ended up sending four players to the 2015 MLB All-Star Game: Miguel Cabrera received his 10th career All-Star selection and the starting nod, but could not play due to injury; David Price received his 5th career selection as well as the credit for the win for the American League; and J.D. Martinez and Jose Iglesias both received their first career All-Star selections.\nThe Tigers ended the season in last place in the AL Central Division with a record of 74\u201387. The pitching staff was one of the worst in MLB, ending 27th in ERA, 28th in FIP, and 27th in WHIP. However, the team also ended with a team batting average of .270, the best in MLB, while Miguel Cabrera finished with the highest player batting average in the AL and MLB (.338), earning his fourth batting title in five years.\n2016.\nBrad Ausmus and the Tigers entered the 2016 season with new pitching coach Rich Dubee and 9 out of 25 members of the 2015 roster being replaced through trades and free agency. Prominent additions included two highly sought free agents, starting pitcher Jordan Zimmermann and outfielder Justin Upton, as well as players acquired through trades: outfielder Cameron Maybin, and the veteran closer Francisco Rodriguez, who led a totally revamped bullpen. The Tigers lost two 2016 draft picks due to free agent compensation but, because of their bottom-ten finish in 2015, they kept their first round pick. Key veteran losses include catcher Alex Avila and outfielder Rajai Davis, who both signed free agent deals with other teams in the division.\nThe Tigers finished the season with a record of 86\u201375, eight games behind the first place Cleveland Indians. Detroit was the final team to fall out of contention for a wild card spot, losing Saturday and Sunday games to the Atlanta Braves, while the two teams they were chasing, Baltimore and Toronto, got needed wins.\nPitcher Michael Fulmer, acquired from the New York Mets organization in 2015, won the 2016 AL Rookie of the Year Award.\nRebuilding (2017\u20132023).\n2017.\nMike Ilitch, the Tigers owner since 1992, died at the age of 87 on February 10, 2017. The team remains in an Ilitch family trust, under the leadership of Mike's son, Christopher Ilitch. Like the Detroit Red Wings, the Tigers honored their owner in multiple ways, the most prominent being a \"Mr. I\" uniform patch.\nAfter a disappointing record through the All-Star break, the Tigers began committing to a rebuild, trading J. D. Martinez, Alex Avila and Justin Wilson in July, plus Justin Upton and Justin Verlander in August. On September 22, the Tigers announced that the team would not extend manager Brad Ausmus' contract past the 2017 season, ending his four-year tenure as manager. Under the management of Ausmus, the Tigers had a record of 314\u2013332 (.486 winning percentage) and won one AL Central division title in 2014. The Tigers went 6\u201324 in September, ending the season in a tie for the worst record in MLB with the San Francisco Giants. However, due to a tiebreaker, the Tigers were awarded the number one overall pick in the 2018 MLB Draft.\n2018.\nOn October 20, 2017, the Tigers announced that Ron Gardenhire and the team had reached a three-year agreement for the former Minnesota Twins skipper to succeed Brad Ausmus as the team's manager. While rebuilding with young players, the team also lost slugger Miguel Cabrera and expected ace pitcher Michael Fulmer to extensive stints on the disabled list. This led the team to the same 64\u201398 record as the previous year, the fifth worst record in MLB, but still good for third place in a very weak AL Central division.\n2019.\nSignificant changes to the 2019 season opening roster include the departure of Jos\u00e9 Iglesias, and the one-year signings of the middle infield tandem of Jordy Mercer and Josh Harrison, both formerly of the Pittsburgh Pirates. On March 19, it was announced that Michael Fulmer would undergo Tommy John surgery and miss the 2019 season. The Tigers finished the season with a 47\u2013114 record, the worst in all of Major League Baseball, and their second worst season in franchise history after their 43\u2013119 record in 2003. The 2019 Tigers tied the 1939 St. Louis Browns for the most home losses (59) during a season in the modern era.\n2020.\nOn April 6, Al Kaline died at the age of 85. Kaline had been affiliated with the team for 67 years, most recently as an executive. The Tigers wore a No. 6 patch to honor him. In the shortened 60-game season due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Tigers remained in playoff contention heading into September. On September 19, manager Ron Gardenhire announced his retirement from baseball effective immediately, citing health concerns. Bench coach Lloyd McClendon was named interim manager for the remainder of the season. The Tigers ultimately faded down the stretch, finishing with a 23\u201335 record.\n2021.\nOn October 30, 2020, the Tigers hired A. J. Hinch as manager. On May 18, 2021, Spencer Turnbull pitched the eighth no-hitter in Tigers history against the Seattle Mariners. Turnbull became the first Tigers player to throw a no-hitter since Justin Verlander on May 7, 2011. The Tigers finished the season with a 77\u201385 record. This outperformed preseason predictions for the team, most of which said the Tigers would finish last.\n2022.\nOn August 10, 2022, the Tigers fired Al Avila as general manager. On September 19, 2022, the Tigers hired Scott Harris as president of baseball operations. The Tigers finished the season with a 66\u201396 record and had one of the worst offenses in the league. On October 25, 2022, the Tigers hired Rob Metzler as vice president and assistant general manager.\n2023.\nOn September 21, 2023, the Tigers hired Jeff Greenberg as general manager. The Tigers finished the season with a 78\u201384 record, and in second place in the division. This was the final season for long-time Tigers slugger Miguel Cabrera, who announced he would retire from playing. Following his retirement, he joined the Tigers' front office as a special assistant to Scott Harris.\nReturn to the playoffs (2024\u2013present).\n2024.\n2024 was expected to be another quiet year for the Tigers. That appeared to be the case for much of the season as the team was 55\u201363 on August 10. The Tigers then went 31\u201311 to clinch a playoff berth for the first time since 2014 on September 27. They finished the season with a 86\u201376 record.\nIn the American League Wild Card Series, the Tigers swept the Houston Astros 2\u20130, securing their first postseason series win since 2013. In the American League Division Series, the Tigers were defeated by the Cleveland Guardians in five games.\n2025.\nDespite a strong first half where they had the best overall record at 59\u201334 on July 8, the Tigers faltered severely in the second half, going 28\u201337 after the All-Star Game, including a 7\u201317 record in September. As a result, the Cleveland Guardians, who were 15.5 games behind them on July 8 and 10.5 games back on September 1, won the AL Central Division title at 88\u201374. Their collapse has been described as one of the worst in all of MLB history. Nevertheless, on September 27, the Tigers clinched a postseason berth for the second consecutive season with a 2\u20131 win over the Boston Red Sox. They finished with the same 87\u201375 record as the Houston Astros, but secured the last playoff spot via the head-to-head tiebreaker.\nThe Tigers defeated the Guardians in the American League Wild Card Series, 2\u20131. In the American League Division Series, the Tigers were defeated by the Seattle Mariners in five games.\nNickname.\nThe team was referred to as the Wolverines and Creams in their inaugural season in 1894 before they became the Tigers. There are various legends about how they got their nickname. One involves the striped socks they wore. George Stallings, the team's manager, took credit for the name. However, the earliest known use of it appeared in the \"Detroit Free Press\" on April 16, 1895, a year prior to Stallings joining the team.\nIn the book \"A Place for Summer: A Narrative History of Tiger Stadium\", Richard Bak states that the name originated from the Detroit Light Guard military unit, who were known as \"The Tigers\". They had played significant roles in certain Civil War battles and in the 1898 Spanish\u2013American War. Upon entry into the majors, the ballclub sought and received formal permission from the Light Guard to use its trademark. From that day forth, the team has been known as the Tigers.\nRivalries.\nChicago White Sox.\nThe series between the Tigers and Chicago White Sox is one of the oldest active rivalries in the league today. Both teams joined the American League in 1901 after being charter members of the original Western League. Both have actively played one another annually for over 120 seasons. As is often the case between professional sports teams located in Chicago or Detroit, there usually exists a rivalry as such with the Bulls\u2013Pistons rivalry of the NBA, the Blackhawks\u2013Red Wings rivalry of the NHL, and the Bears\u2013Lions rivalry of the NFL. Despite playing one another for over 2,200 games, both teams have yet to meet in the postseason.\nDivisional.\nThe Tigers also maintain divisional rivalries with the Cleveland Guardians, the Kansas City Royals, and the Minnesota Twins. The rivalry with Cleveland came to a head when the Tigers played at Progressive Field on August 7, 2013, with the teams first and second in the AL Central standings. Many Tigers fans who made the short trip to Cleveland started several \"Let's go Tigers!\" chants while the game was tied in the 9th inning. Cleveland fans countered with a \"Detroit's bankrupt!\" chant, in reference to the city's 2013 bankruptcy. Footage of the chants from SportsTime Ohio circulated online, with many baseball fans on social media criticizing Cleveland fans for the chant due to the circumstances of Detroit's financial situation. The Tigers ended up defeating Cleveland 6\u20135 in 14 innings. The teams met in the postseason for the first time in the 2024 American League Division Series, where the Guardians won the series 3\u20132. They met again in the 2025 American League Wild Card Series, where the Tigers won the series 2\u20131.\nOther teams.\nThe Tigers have a holdover rivalry with the Toronto Blue Jays due to when the Tigers competed in the AL East.\nAlthough the Tigers have had limited postseason matchups with their divisional rivals, they developed a significant playoff rivalry with the New York Yankees in 2006, 2011 and 2012, which saw the Tigers win each series, including a four-game sweep in the 2012 ALCS. \nAdditionally, the Tigers have had some rivalries with NL teams that they have faced repeatedly in the World Series, such as the Chicago Cubs (four times) and St. Louis Cardinals (three times). In interleague play, the Pittsburgh Pirates are the Tigers' \"natural rival.\"\nFanbase.\nThere are numerous Tigers fans along the Lake Erie region throughout the state of Michigan, northwestern Ohio, southwestern Ontario, as well as a small fan base in and around the Erie, Pennsylvania area, due in part to Detroit's proximity to these regions as well as the presence of the Tigers' Double-A affiliate Erie SeaWolves in northwestern Pennsylvania. The Tigers have their Triple-A affiliate Toledo Mud Hens in Toledo, Ohio in addition to their Double-A affiliate in Erie. \nThe Tigers continue to develop a strong and long line of baseball fans in Ontario; the majority of baseball fans in southwestern Ontario generally support the Tigers over the Toronto Blue Jays. The cities of Windsor and Sarnia, Ontario, have large fan bases of loyal Tigers fans.\nRally cry.\nDuring the 1968 season, the team was cheered on by the phrase, \"Go Get 'Em, Tigers\", which was made popular by a song of the same name written and recorded by Artie Fields. \"Sock it to 'em, Tigers!\" was also a popular phrase during this time.\nDuring the 1984 World Series championship run, the team was cheered on to the cry, \"Bless You Boys,\" a phrase coined by sportscaster Al Ackerman.\nIn 2005, the team began using the phrase \"Who's Your Tiger?\" as its slogan.\nDuring the 2006 season, a rally cry caught on in the Tigers' dugout. In a June game against the New York Yankees, Tigers pitcher Nate Robertson was featured in an in-game interview with FSN Detroit. During the interview, Robertson began to stuff Big League Chew bubble gum into his mouth. The Tigers would spark a rally, in which they came back to tie the game. As a result, the phrase \"Gum Time\" became popular.\nAdditionally, the chant of a local man, the late James Van Horn, who patrolled the streets around Comerica Park yelling out \"Eat 'Em Up Tigers! Eat 'Em Up!\", was very popular.\nIn 2009, the team used the phrase \"Always a Tiger\" as its slogan.\nIn 2011, the slogan was switched back to \"Who's Your Tiger?\"\nDuring the 2018 season, a rally cry caught on with both players and fans. In a May game against the Los Angeles Angels, a goose appeared on the field during a second rain delay. After a few minutes, it left the field only to fly into the scoreboard. The goose was unharmed. When the game resumed, the Tigers scored five runs in the sixth inning and won the game, 6\u20131. As a result, the goose was referred to as the \"Rally Goose\" and the phrase became popular.\nUniforms and logos.\nThe Tigers have worn essentially the same home uniform since 1934\u00a0\u2014 solid white jersey with navy blue piping down the front and an Old English \"D\" on the left chest, white pants, navy blue hat with a white letter D in the blackletter or \"textur\"/\"textualis\" typeface associated with Middle and Early Modern English and popularly referred to as \"Old English\" even though it was not used for that language. On the Tigers' road uniforms, the D on their hats is orange and a script \"Detroit\" appears across the jersey. The script \"Detroit\" design was first used as part of their road jersey in 1930, and would remain so until 1959, when they changed it to a block lettering style. \nThe current version of the Tigers' road uniform was first worn in 1994, initially with racing stripes, before going with a stripe-free design from 1995 to 1997, and then to the current version featuring navy piping inspired by the team's mid-1950s road uniforms. Prior to readopting the orange \"D\" all-navy road cap with this uniform, the Tigers wore two different cap variations with orange brim: one with just the orange \"D\" which they only wore in 1994, and another featuring a tiger walking through a white \"D\" logo trimmed in orange, which they wore until 1997. \nThe Tigers previously sported road uniforms with a block \"Detroit\" lettering from 1960 to 1993, adding orange trim in 1972. The caps initially featured white trim within the orange \"D\" until 1982. A version of the team's blackletter D was first seen on Tigers uniforms in 1904, after using a simple block D in 1903. The blackletter D appeared frequently after that until being established in 1934. In 1960, the Tigers changed their uniform to read \"Tigers\" in script form, but the change only lasted one season before the traditional uniform was reinstated.\nThe Tigers used to have different versions of the Old English D on the cap and jersey. In 2018, the Tigers changed the classic curved logo on their home uniforms to match that of the sharp-cornered hat logo; additionally, the logo on the cap was enlarged. In 2019, the Tigers reverted to the smaller logo on the cap, but kept the cap sharp-cornered 'D' on the home jerseys.\nIn 2023, the Tigers entered into a uniform sponsorship deal with Meijer, the state's major supercenter chain based in Grand Rapids and a longtime team sponsor. The uniform patch's logo (attached to the sleeve of the player's dominant hand) is rendered solely in navy blue on white for the home uniform, and white text on a black background for the road jersey with an orange outline.\nUnique characteristics of the Tigers uniforms:\nAlternate jerseys:\nIn 1995, the Tigers introduced a solid navy blue alternate jersey, which featured the team's primary logo at the time, a tiger stepping through the D, on the chest. It was worn for one home game.\nThe Tigers wear the throwback jerseys of the Detroit Stars for their annual Negro Leagues Tribute Game in order to pay tribute to the Negro leagues players and their contributions to the game of baseball.\nThe Tigers wear a white and navy blue home jersey with \"Tigres\" across the chest for their annual \"\u00a1Fiesta Tigres!\" game to recognize and honor the contributions of Hispanic and Latino players and coaches to the game of baseball.\nLike all of MLB, the Tigers wore a highly stylized and brightly colored jersey for Players Weekend. In the inaugural games from August 25\u201327, 2017, their away jerseys were grey with bright orange with \"Tigers\" on the chest, the orange cap had a tiger instead of the Old English \"D\" on it. Players were also encouraged to use nicknames on the back of their jerseys. In the 2018 season, the Tigers wore a blue jersey with orange sleeves that said \"Tigers\" on the chest, with an orange cap that had a tiger on it.\nIn 2024, the Tigers unveiled their first City Connect jersey, which is a nod to Detroit's automobile industry. The primarily navy blue jersey with electric blue tire tread patterns has the \"Motor City\" nickname emblazoned in front along with racing stripes on the sleeves and pants. The sleeve patch features the diamond highway shield for the Michigan State Trunkline Highway System and alludes to Comerica Park's location on Woodward Avenue, otherwise known as M-1, with the team's \"D\" logo replacing the \"block M\"; when shown in a different light, it shows Detroit's 313 area code, with the 3's rendered in a reflective text. Along the jock tag is the illustration of a tiger's eyes below the team name. The cap is navy blue with \"Detroit\" emblazoned in front, and the right side features a faux vehicle identification number tag, \"190135456884\", referencing the Tigers' first American League season of 1901 and its four World Series championships mentioned by the year in two digits.\nBaseball Hall of Famers.\nDetroit Tigers Hall of Famers\nAffiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum\nDetroit Tigers\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFord C. Frick Award recipients.\nDetroit Tigers Ford C. Frick Award recipients\nAffiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRetired numbers and honorees.\nThis is how the retired numbers and honored names are displayed on the outfield walls at Comerica Park:\nIn left field:\nIn right field:\nAlmost all the players with retired numbers (and Ty Cobb) also have statues of themselves that sit behind their names, which are painted on the left-center field wall.\nNational Avenue, which runs behind the third-base stands at the Tigers' previous home Tiger Stadium, was renamed Cochrane Street for Mickey Cochrane. Cherry Street, which runs behind the left-field stands at Tiger Stadium, was renamed Kaline Drive for Al Kaline.\nThe most recent number retired by the Tigers was Jim Leyland, who had his No. 10 retired on August 3, 2024.\nMinor league affiliations.\nThe Detroit Tigers farm system consists of seven minor league affiliates.\nBroadcasters.\nRadio.\nThe Tigers' current flagship radio station is WXYT-FM (97.1 FM). Dan Dickerson does play-by-play with Bobby Scales, Dan Petry, and Andy Dirks rotating on color commentary. On games where Dickerson is assigned to work on television, Greg Gania, the radio voice of the Erie SeaWolves, the Tigers' Double-A affiliate, serves as an alternate. Games are syndicated throughout Michigan, Toledo and Archbold, Ohio.\nTelevision.\nAs of 2025, the Tigers' current exclusive local television rights holder is FanDuel Sports Network Detroit, which picked up the rights in 1998 taking them away from Pro-Am Sports System, owned by Post-Newsweek Stations. The Tigers renewed in 2008, over a bid from a rival regional sports channel by Dish Network and AT&amp;T's U-verse. During the 2016 season, the Tigers averaged a 7.56 rating and 138,000 viewers on primetime TV broadcasts. Through 25 games in 2017, their games have averaged a 5.57 rating, which was fifth in the major league.\nThe Tigers' television broadcast team consists of Jason Benetti on play-by-play and former Tigers players Andy Dirks, Dan Petry, Todd Jones, and Carlos Pe\u00f1a rotating on color commentary. On games where Benetti is assigned to work for Fox Sports, Dan Dickerson serves as an alternate.\nFacilities.\nThe team maintains a training center in the Dominican Republic.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8580", "revid": "11692354", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8580", "title": "Diocletian", "text": "Roman emperor from 284 to 305\nDiocletian ( ; ; ; 242/245 \u2013 311/312), nicknamed Jovius, was Roman emperor from 284 until his abdication in 305. He was born Diocles to a family of low status in the Roman province of Dalmatia. As with other Illyrian soldiers of the period, Diocles rose through the ranks of the military early in his career, serving under Aurelian and Probus, and eventually becoming a cavalry commander for the army of Emperor Carus. After the deaths of Carus and his son Numerian on a campaign in Persia, Diocles was proclaimed emperor by the troops, taking the name \"Diocletianus\". The title was also claimed by Carus's surviving son, Carinus, but Diocletian defeated him in the Battle of the Margus.\nDiocletian's reign stabilized the empire and ended the Crisis of the Third Century. He initiated the process of the Roman Empire split and appointed fellow officer Maximian as \"Augustus\", co-emperor, in 286. Diocletian reigned in the Eastern Empire, and Maximian reigned in the Western Empire. Diocletian delegated further on 1 March 293, appointing Galerius and Constantius as junior colleagues (each with the title \"Caesar\"), under himself and Maximian respectively. Under the Tetrarchy, or \"rule of four\", each tetrarch would rule over a quarter-division of the empire. Diocletian secured the empire's borders and purged it of all threats to his power. He defeated the Sarmatians and Carpi during several campaigns between 285 and 299, the Alamanni in 288, and usurpers in Egypt between 297 and 298. Galerius, aided by Diocletian, campaigned successfully against Persia, the empire's traditional enemy, and in 299, he sacked their capital, Ctesiphon. Diocletian led the subsequent negotiations and achieved a lasting and favorable peace.\nDiocletian separated and enlarged the empire's civil and military services and reorganized the empire's provincial divisions, establishing the largest and most bureaucratic government in the history of the empire. He established new administrative centers in Nicomedia, Mediolanum, Sirmium, and Trevorum, closer to the empire's frontiers than the traditional capital at Rome. Building on third-century trends towards absolutism, he styled himself an autocrat, elevating himself above the empire's masses with imposing forms of court ceremonies and architecture. Bureaucratic and military growth, constant campaigning, and construction projects increased the state's expenditures and necessitated a comprehensive tax reform. From at least 297 on, imperial taxation was standardized, made more equitable, and levied at generally higher rates.\nNot all of Diocletian's plans were successful: the Edict on Maximum Prices (301), his attempt to curb inflation via price controls, was counterproductive and quickly ignored. Although effective while he ruled, Diocletian's tetrarchic system collapsed after his abdication due to the competing dynastic claims of Maxentius and Constantine, sons of Maximian and Constantius respectively. The Diocletianic Persecution (303\u2013312), the empire's last, largest, and bloodiest official persecution of Christianity, failed to eliminate Christianity in the empire. After 324, Christianity became the empire's preferred religion under Constantine. Despite these failures and challenges, Diocletian's reforms fundamentally changed the structure of the Roman imperial government and helped stabilize the empire economically and militarily, enabling the empire to remain essentially intact for another 150 years despite being near the brink of collapse in Diocletian's youth. Weakened by illness, Diocletian left the imperial office on 1 May 305, becoming the first Roman emperor to abdicate the position voluntarily. He lived out his retirement in his palace on the Dalmatian coast, tending to his vegetable gardens. His palace eventually became the core of the modern-day city of Split in Croatia.\nEarly life.\nDiocletian was born in Dalmatia, probably at or near the town of Salona (modern Solin, Croatia), to which he retired later in life. His original name was Diocles (in full, Gaius Valerius Diocles), possibly derived from Dioclea, the name of both his mother and her supposed place of birth. Diocletian's official birthday was 22 December, and his year of birth has been estimated at between 242 and 245 based on a statement that he was aged 68 at death (his death year is not certain). His parents were of low status; Eutropius records \"that he is said by most writers to have been the son of a scribe, but by some to have been a freedman of a senator called Anullinus.\" The first forty years of his life are mostly obscure. Diocletian was an \"Illyricianus\" who served under Aurelian and Probus. According to some scholars Diocles was trained and promoted by Aurelian and Probus, according to other scholars there is no reliable evidence of Diocles's early career. The 12th-century Byzantine chronicler Joannes Zonaras states that he was \"Dux Moesiae\", a commander of forces on the lower Danube. The often-unreliable \"Historia Augusta\" states that he served in Gaul, but this is not corroborated by other sources and is ignored by modern historians. The first time Diocletian's whereabouts are accurately established was in 282 when the Emperor Carus made him commander of the \"Protectores domestici\", the elite cavalry force directly attached to the Imperial household. This post earned him the honor of a consulship in 283.\nDeath of Numerian.\nCarus's death, amid a successful war with Persia and in mysterious circumstances\u00a0\u2013 he was believed to have been struck by lightning or killed by Persian soldiers\u00a0\u2013 left his sons Numerian and Carinus as the new \"Augusti\". Carinus quickly made his way to Rome from his post in Gaul and arrived there by January 284, becoming the legitimate Emperor in the West. Numerian lingered in the East. The Roman withdrawal from Persia was orderly and unopposed. The Sassanid king Bahram II could not field an army against them as he was still struggling to establish his authority. By March 284, Numerian had only reached Emesa (Homs) in Syria; by November, only Asia Minor. In Emesa he was apparently still alive and in good health: he issued the only extant rescript in his name there, but after he left the city, his staff, including the prefect Aper (Numerian's father-in-law and the dominant influence in his entourage), reported that he suffered from an inflammation of the eyes. He traveled in a closed coach from then on. When the army reached Bithynia, some of the soldiers smelled an odor emanating from the coach. They opened its curtains and found Numerian dead. Both Eutropius and Aurelius Victor describe Numerian's death as an assassination.\nAper officially broke the news in Nicomedia (\u0130zmit) in November. Numerian's generals and tribunes called a council for the succession, and chose Diocles as Emperor, in spite of Aper's attempts to garner support. On 20 November 284, the army of the east gathered on a hill outside Nicomedia. The army unanimously saluted Diocles as their new \"Augustus\", and he accepted the purple imperial vestments. He raised his sword to the light of the sun and swore an oath disclaiming responsibility for Numerian's death. He asserted that Aper had killed Numerian and concealed it. In full view of the army, Diocles drew his sword and killed Aper. Soon after Aper's death, Diocles changed his name to the more Latinate \"Diocletianus\"\u00a0\u2013 in full, Gaius Valerius Diocletianus.\nConflict with Carinus.\nAfter his accession, Diocletian and Lucius Caesonius Bassus were named as consuls and assumed the \"fasces\" in place of Carinus and Numerian. Bassus was a member of a senatorial family from Campania, a former consul and proconsul of Africa, chosen by Probus for signal distinction. He was skilled in areas of government where Diocletian presumably had no experience. Diocletian's elevation of Bassus symbolized his rejection of Carinus' government in Rome, his refusal to accept second-tier status to any other emperor, and his willingness to continue the long-standing collaboration between the empire's senatorial and military aristocracies. It also tied his success to that of the Senate, whose support he would need in his advance on Rome.\nDiocletian was not the only challenger to Carinus' rule; the usurper Julianus, Carinus' \"corrector Venetiae\", took control of northern Italy and Pannonia after Diocletian's accession. Julianus minted coins from Siscia (Sisak, Croatia) declaring himself emperor and promising freedom. This aided Diocletian in his portrayal of Carinus as a cruel and oppressive tyrant. Julianus' forces were weak, and were handily dispersed when Carinus' armies moved from Britain to northern Italy. As the leader of the united East, Diocletian was clearly the greater threat. Over the winter of 284\u201385, Diocletian advanced west across the Balkans. In the spring, some time before the end of May, his armies met Carinus' across the river Margus (Great Morava) in Moesia. In modern accounts, the site has been located between the Mons Aureus (Seone, west of Smederevo) and Viminacium, near modern Belgrade, Serbia.\nDespite having a stronger, more powerful army, Carinus held the weaker position. His rule was unpopular, and it was later alleged that he had mistreated the Senate and seduced his officers' wives. It is possible that Flavius Constantius, the governor of Dalmatia and Diocletian's associate in the household guard, had already defected to Diocletian in the early spring. When the Battle of the Margus began, Carinus' prefect Aristobulus also defected. In the course of the battle, Carinus was killed by his own men. Following Diocletian's victory, both the western and the eastern armies acclaimed him as Emperor. Diocletian exacted an oath of allegiance from the defeated army and departed for Italy.\nEarly rule.\nDiocletian may have become involved in battles against the Quadi and Marcomanni immediately after the Battle of the Margus. He eventually made his way to northern Italy and made an imperial government, but it is not known whether he visited Rome at this time. There is a contemporary issue of coins suggestive of an imperial \"adventus\" (arrival) for the city, but some modern historians state that Diocletian avoided the city, to demonstrate that the city and its Senate were no longer politically relevant to the affairs of the empire. Diocletian dated his reign from his elevation by the army, not his ratification by the Senate, following the practice established by Carus, who had declared the Senate's ratification a useless formality. Diocletian offered proof of his deference towards the Senate by retaining Aristobulus as ordinary consul and colleague for 285 (one of the few instances during the Late Empire in which an emperor admitted a \"privatus\" as his colleague) and by creating senior senators Vettius Aquilinus and Junius Maximus ordinary consuls for the following year\u00a0\u2013 for Maximus, it was his second consulship.\nIf Diocletian did enter Rome shortly after his accession, he did not stay long; he is attested back in the Balkans by 2 November 285, on campaign against the Sarmatians.\nDiocletian replaced the prefect of Rome with his consular colleague Bassus. Most officials who had served under Carinus retained their offices under Diocletian. In an act of \"clementia\" denoted by the epitomator of Aurelius Victor as unusual, Diocletian did not kill or depose Carinus's traitorous praetorian prefect and consul Aristobulus, but confirmed him in both roles. He later gave him the proconsulate of Africa and the post of urban prefect for 295. The other figures who retained their offices might have also betrayed Carinus.\nMaximian made Caesar.\nThe assassinations of Aurelian and Probus demonstrated that sole rulership was dangerous to the stability of the empire. Conflict boiled in every province, from Gaul to Syria, Egypt to the lower Danube. It was too much for one person to control, and Diocletian needed a lieutenant. According to Eutropius, Diocletian raised his fellow-officer Maximian to the office of \"Caesar\", making him his heir and effective co-ruler.\nThe concept of dual rulership was not new to the Roman Empire. Augustus, the first emperor, had nominally shared power with his colleagues, and a formal office of co-emperor (co-\"Augustus\") had existed from Marcus Aurelius onward. Most recently, Carus and his sons had ruled together, albeit unsuccessfully. Dividing the empire in two halves was not new either. An informal division was first tested by Marcus Aurelius and his brother Lucius Verus, who spent most of his reign campaigning in Persia, although he returned West shortly before his death. A more formal division occurred in the joint rule of Valerian/Gallienus and Carus/Carinus. Diocletian would go on to establish new imperial capitals in both West and East; both halves would become independent of each other in the following decades, with only brief moments of unity. Theodosius I, the last sole emperor, only ruled alone for a few months before his death in 395 and the permanent split of the empire.\nDiocletian was in a less comfortable position than most of his predecessors, as he had a daughter, Valeria, but no sons. His co-ruler had to be from outside his family, raising the question of trust. Some historians state that Diocletian adopted Maximian as his \"filius Augusti\", his \"Augustan son\", upon his appointment to the throne, following the precedent of some previous Emperors. This argument has not been universally accepted. Diocletian and Maximian added each other's \"nomina\" (their family name, \"Valerius\" and \"Aurelius\", respectively) to their own, thus creating an artificial family link and becoming part of the \"Aurelius Valerius\" family.\nThe relationship between Diocletian and Maximian was quickly couched in religious terms. Around 287 Diocletian assumed the title \"Iovius\" (Jovius), and Maximian assumed the title \"Herculius\" (Hercules). The titles were probably meant to convey certain characteristics of their associated leaders. Diocletian, in Jovian style, would take on the dominating roles of planning and commanding; Maximian, in Herculian mode, would act as Jupiter's heroic subordinate. For all their religious connotations, the emperors were not \"gods\" in the tradition of the Imperial cult\u00a0\u2013 although they may have been hailed as such in Imperial panegyrics. Instead, they were seen as the gods' representatives, effecting their will on earth. The shift from military acclamation to divine sanctification took the power to appoint emperors away from the army. Religious legitimization elevated Diocletian and Maximian above potential rivals in a way military power and dynastic claims could not.\nConflict with Sarmatia and Persia.\nAfter his acclamation, Maximian was dispatched to fight the rebel Bagaudae, insurgent peasants of Gaul. Diocletian returned to the East, progressing slowly. By 2 November, he had only reached Civitas Iovia (Botivo, near Ptuj, Slovenia). In the Balkans during the autumn of 285, he encountered a tribe of Sarmatians who demanded assistance. The Sarmatians requested that Diocletian either help them recover their lost lands or grant them pasturage rights within the empire. Diocletian refused and fought a battle with them, but was unable to secure a complete victory. The nomadic pressures of the European Plain remained and could not be solved by a single war; soon the Sarmatians would have to be fought again.\nDiocletian wintered in Nicomedia. There may have been a revolt in the eastern provinces at this time, as he brought settlers from Asia to populate emptied farmlands in Thrace. He visited Syria Palaestina the following spring, His stay in the East saw diplomatic success in the conflict with Persia: in 287, Bahram II granted him precious gifts, declared open friendship with the Empire, and invited Diocletian to visit him. Roman sources insist that the act was entirely voluntary.\nAround the same time, perhaps in 287, Persia relinquished claims on Armenia and recognized Roman authority over territory to the west and south of the Tigris. The western portion of Armenia was incorporated into the empire and made a province. Tiridates III, the Arsacid claimant to the Armenian throne and a Roman client, had been disinherited and forced to take refuge in the empire after the Persian conquest of 252\u201353. In 287, he returned to lay claim to the eastern half of his ancestral domain and encountered no opposition. Diocletian was hailed as the \"founder of eternal peace\". The events might have represented a formal end to Carus's eastern campaign, which probably ended without an acknowledged peace. At the conclusion of discussions with the Persians, Diocletian re-organized the Mesopotamian frontier and fortified the city of Circesium (Buseire, Syria) on the Euphrates.\nMaximian made Augustus.\nMaximian's campaigns were not proceeding as smoothly. The Bagaudae had been easily suppressed, but Carausius, the man he had put in charge of operations against Saxon and Frankish pirates on the Saxon Shore, had, according to literary sources, begun keeping the goods seized from the pirates for himself. Maximian issued a death warrant for his larcenous subordinate. Carausius fled the Continent, proclaimed himself emperor, and agitated Britain and northwestern Gaul into open revolt against Maximian and Diocletian.\nFar more probable, according to the archaeological evidence, is that Carausius had held some important military post in Britain, already had a firm basis of power in Britain and Northern Gaul, and profited from the lack of legitimacy of the central government. Carausius strove to have his legitimacy as a junior emperor acknowledged by Diocletian: in his coinage, he extolled the \"concord\" between him and the central power. One bronze piece from 290 read PAX AVGGG, \"the Peace of the three Augusti\"; on the other side, it showed Carausius together with Diocletian and Maximian, with the caption CARAVSIVS ET FRATRES SVI, \"Carausius &amp; his brothers\". Diocletian could not allow a breakaway regional usurper following in Postumus's footprints to enter, of his own accord, the imperial college.\nSpurred by the crisis, on 1 April 286, Maximian took up the title of \"Augustus\" (emperor). Unusually, Diocletian could not have been present to witness it. It has even been suggested that Maximian usurped the title and was only later recognized by Diocletian in hopes of avoiding civil war. This suggestion is unpopular, as it is clear that Diocletian meant for Maximian to act with a certain amount of independence. It may be posited that Diocletian felt the need to bind Maximian closer to him, by making him his empowered associate, to avoid the possibility of him striking some sort of deal with Carausius.\nMaximian realized that he could not immediately suppress the rogue commander, so in 287 he campaigned against tribes beyond the Rhine instead. As Carausius was allied to the Franks, Maximian's campaigns could be seen as an effort to deny him a basis of support on the mainland. The following spring, as Maximian prepared a fleet for an expedition against Carausius, Diocletian returned from the East to meet Maximian. The two emperors agreed on a joint campaign against the Alamanni. Diocletian invaded Germania through Raetia while Maximian progressed from Mainz. Each burned crops and food supplies as he went, destroying the Germans' means of sustenance. The two men added territory to the empire and allowed Maximian to continue preparations against Carausius without further disturbance. On his return to the East, Diocletian managed what was probably another rapid campaign against the resurgent Sarmatians. No details survive, but surviving inscriptions indicate that Diocletian took the title \"Sarmaticus Maximus\" after 289, suggesting a successful campaign against the Sarmatians.\nIn the East, Diocletian engaged in diplomacy with desert tribes in the regions between Rome and Persia. He might have been attempting to persuade them to ally themselves with Rome, thus reviving the old, Rome-friendly, Palmyrene sphere of influence, or to reduce the frequency of their incursions. No details survive for these events. Some of the princes of these states were Persian client kings, a disturbing fact for the Romans in light of increasing tensions with the Sassanids. In the West, Maximian lost the fleet built in 288 and 289, probably in the early spring of 290. The panegyrist who refers to the loss suggests that its cause was a storm, but this might have been an attempt to conceal an embarrassing military defeat. Diocletian broke off his tour of the Eastern provinces soon thereafter. He returned with haste to the West, reaching Emesa by 10 May 290, and Sirmium on the Danube by 1 July 290.\nDiocletian met Maximian in Milan either in late December 290 or January 291. The meeting was undertaken with a sense of solemn pageantry. The emperors spent most of their time in public appearances. It has been surmised that the ceremonies were arranged to demonstrate Diocletian's continuing support for his faltering colleague. A deputation from the Roman Senate met with the emperors, renewing its infrequent contact with the Imperial office. The choice of Milan over Rome further snubbed the capital's pride. But then it was already a long-established practice that Rome itself was only a ceremonial capital, as the actual seat of the Imperial administration was determined by the needs of defense. Long before Diocletian, Gallienus (r. 253\u201368) had chosen Milan for his headquarters. If the panegyric detailing the ceremony implied that the true center of the empire was not Rome, but where the emperor sat (\"...the capital of the empire appeared to be there, where the two emperors met\"), it simply echoed what had already been stated by the historian Herodian in the early third century: \"Rome is where the emperor is\". During the meeting, decisions on matters of politics and war were probably made in secret. The \"Augusti\" would not meet again until 303.\nTetrarchy.\nFoundation of the Tetrarchy.\nSome time after his return, and before 293, Diocletian transferred command of the war against Carausius from Maximian to Flavius Constantius, who concluded it successfully in 296. Constantius was a former governor of Dalmatia and a man of military experience stretching back to Aurelian's campaigns against Zenobia (272\u201373). He was Maximian's praetorian prefect in Gaul, and the husband to Maximian's daughter, Theodora. On 1 March 293 at Milan, Maximian gave Constantius the office of \"Caesar\". The same day, in either Philippopolis (Plovdiv, Bulgaria) or Sirmium, Diocletian did the same for Galerius Maximianus, husband to Diocletian's daughter Valeria, and perhaps Diocletian's praetorian prefect. Constantius was assigned Gaul and Britain. Galerius was initially assigned Syria, Palestine, Egypt, and responsibility for the eastern borderlands.\nThis arrangement is called the Tetrarchy, from a Greek term meaning \"rulership by four\". The Tetrarchs were more or less sovereign in their own lands, and they travelled with their own imperial courts, administrators, secretaries, and armies. They were joined by blood and marriage; Diocletian and Maximian now styled themselves as brothers, and formally adopted Galerius and Constantius as sons. These relationships implied a line of succession. Galerius and Constantius would become \"Augusti\" after the departure of Diocletian and Maximian. Maximian's son Maxentius and Constantius's son Constantine would then become \"caesares\". In preparation for their future roles, Constantine and Maxentius were taken to Diocletian's court in Nicomedia.\nConflict in the Balkans and Egypt.\nDiocletian spent the spring of 293 travelling with Galerius from Sirmium (Sremska Mitrovica, Serbia) to Byzantium (Istanbul, Turkey). Diocletian then returned to Sirmium, where he remained for the following winter and spring. He campaigned successfully against the Sarmatians in 294, probably in the autumn. The Sarmatians' defeat kept them from the Danube provinces for a long time. Meanwhile, Diocletian built forts north of the Danube, part of a new defensive line called the \"Ripa Sarmatica\", at Aquincum (Budapest, Hungary), Bononia (Vidin, Bulgaria), Ulcisia Vetera, Castra Florentium, Intercisa (Duna\u00fajv\u00e1ros, Hungary), and Onagrinum (Bege\u010d, Serbia). In 295 and 296 Diocletian campaigned in the region again, and won a victory over the Carpi in the summer of 296. Later during both 299 and 302, as Diocletian was residing in the East, it was Galerius's turn to campaign victoriously on the Danube. By the end of his reign, Diocletian had secured the entire length of the Danube, provided it with forts, bridgeheads, highways, and walled towns, and sent fifteen or more legions to patrol the region; an inscription at Sexaginta Prista on the Lower Danube extolled restored tranquility to the region. The defense came at a heavy cost but was a significant achievement in an area difficult to defend.\nGalerius, meanwhile, was engaged during 291\u2013293 in disputes in Upper Egypt, where he suppressed a regional uprising. He returned to Syria in 295 to fight the revanchist Persian empire. Diocletian's attempts to bring the Egyptian tax system in line with Imperial standards stirred discontent, and a revolt swept the region after Galerius's departure. The usurper Domitius Domitianus declared himself \"Augustus\" in July or August 297. Much of Egypt, including Alexandria, recognized his rule. Diocletian moved into Egypt to suppress him, first putting down rebels in the Thebaid in the autumn of 297, then moving on to besiege Alexandria. Domitianus died in December 297, by which time Diocletian had secured control of the Egyptian countryside. Alexandria, whose defense was organized under Domitianus's former \"corrector\" Aurelius Achilleus, held out probably until March 298. Later in 298, the triumphal column now known as Pompey's Pillar was erected in Alexandria to honor Diocletian.\nBureaucratic affairs were completed during Diocletian's stay: a census took place, and Alexandria, in punishment for its rebellion, lost the ability to mint independently. Diocletian's reforms in the region, combined with those of Septimius Severus, brought Egyptian administrative practices much closer to Roman standards. Diocletian travelled south along the Nile the following summer, where he visited Oxyrhynchus and Elephantine. In Nubia, he made peace with the Nobatae and Blemmyes tribes. Under the terms of the peace treaty Rome's borders moved north to Philae and the two tribes received an annual gold stipend. Diocletian left Africa quickly after the treaty, moving from Upper Egypt in September 298 to Syria in February 299. He met with Galerius in Mesopotamia.\nWar with Persia.\nInvasion, counterinvasion.\nIn 294, Narseh, a son of Shapur who had been passed over for the Sassanid succession, came to power in Persia. In early 294, Narseh sent Diocletian the customary package of gifts between the empires, and Diocletian responded with an exchange of ambassadors. Within Persia, Narseh was destroying every trace of his immediate predecessors from public monuments. He sought to identify himself with the warlike kings Ardashir I (r. 226\u2013241) and Shapur I (r. 241\u2013272), who had defeated and imprisoned Emperor Valerian (r. 253\u2013260) following his failed invasion of the Sasanian Empire.\nNarseh declared war on Rome in 295 or 296. He appears to have first invaded western Armenia, where he seized the lands delivered to Tiridates in the peace of 287. He moved south into Roman Mesopotamia in 297, where he inflicted a severe defeat on Galerius in the region between Carrhae (Harran, Turkey) and Callinicum (Raqqa, Syria), suggested by the historian Fergus Millar to have been somewhere on the Balikh River. Diocletian may or may not have been present at the battle, but he quickly divested himself of all responsibility. In a public ceremony at Antioch, the official version of events was clear: Galerius was responsible for the defeat; Diocletian was not. Diocletian publicly humiliated Galerius, forcing him to walk for a mile at the head of the Imperial caravan, still clad in the purple robes of the Emperor.\nGalerius was reinforced, probably in the spring of 298, by a new contingent collected from the empire's Danubian holdings. Narseh did not advance from Armenia and Mesopotamia, leaving Galerius to lead the offensive in 298 with an attack on northern Mesopotamia via Armenia. It is unclear if Diocletian was present to assist the campaign; he might have returned to Egypt or Syria. Narseh retreated to Armenia to fight Galerius's force, putting himself at a disadvantage; the rugged Armenian terrain was favorable to Roman infantry, but not to Sassanid cavalry. In two battles, Galerius won major victories over Narseh. During the second encounter, Roman forces seized Narseh's camp, his treasury, his harem, and his wife. Galerius continued down the Tigris, and took the Persian capital Ctesiphon before returning to Roman territory along the Euphrates.\nPeace negotiations.\nNarseh sent an ambassador to Galerius to plead for the return of his wives and children in the course of the war, but Galerius dismissed him. Serious peace negotiations began in the spring of 299. The \"magister memoriae\" (secretary) of Diocletian and Galerius, Sicorius Probus, was sent to Narseh to present terms. The conditions of the resulting Peace of Nisibis were heavy: Armenia returned to Roman domination, with the fort of Ziatha as its border; Caucasian Iberia would pay allegiance to Rome under a Roman appointee; Nisibis, now under Roman rule, would become the sole conduit for trade between Persia and Rome; and Rome would exercise control over the five satrapies between the Tigris and Armenia: Ingilene, Sophanene (Sophene), Arzanene (Aghdznik), Corduene (Carduene), and Zabdicene (near modern Hakk\u00e2ri, Turkey). These regions included the passage of the Tigris through the Anti-Taurus range; the Bitlis pass, the quickest southerly route into Persian Armenia; and access to the Tur Abdin plateau.\nA stretch of land containing the later strategic strongholds of Amida (Diyarbak\u0131r, Turkey) and Bezabde came under firm Roman military occupation. With these territories, Rome would have an advance station north of Ctesiphon, and would be able to slow any future advance of Persian forces through the region. Many cities east of the Tigris came under Roman control, including Tigranokert, Saird, Martyropolis, Balalesa, Moxos, Daudia, and Arzan\u00a0\u2013 though under what status is unclear. At the conclusion of the peace, Tiridates regained both his throne and the entirety of his ancestral claim. Rome secured a wide zone of cultural influence, which led to a wide diffusion of Syriac Christianity from a center at Nisibis in later decades, and the eventual Christianization of Armenia. \nTo strengthen the defence of the east Diocletian had a fortified road constructed at the southern border, where the empire bordered the Arabs, in the year 300. This road would remain in use for centuries but proved ineffective in defending the border as conventional armies could not operate in the region.\nReligious persecutions.\nEarly persecutions.\nAt the conclusion of the Peace of Nisibis, Diocletian and Galerius returned to Antioch. At some time in 299, the emperors took part in a ceremony of sacrifice and divination in an attempt to predict the future. The haruspices were unable to read the entrails of the sacrificed animals and blamed Christians in the Imperial household. The emperors ordered all members of the court to perform a sacrifice to purify the palace. The emperors sent letters to the military command, demanding the entire army perform the required sacrifices or face discharge. Diocletian was conservative in matters of religion, faithful to the traditional Roman pantheon and understanding of demands for religious purification, but Eusebius, Lactantius and Constantine state that it was Galerius, not Diocletian, who was the prime supporter of the purge. Galerius, even more devoted and passionate than Diocletian, saw political advantage in the persecution. He was willing to break with a government policy of inaction on the issue.\nAntioch was Diocletian's primary residence from 299 to 302, while Galerius swapped places with his Augustus on the Middle and Lower Danube. Diocletian visited Egypt once, over the winter of 301\u20132, and issued a grain dole in Alexandria. Following some public disputes with Manicheans, Diocletian ordered that the leading followers of Mani be burnt alive along with their scriptures. In a 31 March 302 rescript from Alexandria, he declared that low-status Manicheans must be executed by the blade, and high-status Manicheans must be sent to work in the quarries of Proconnesus (Marmara Island, Turkey) or the mines of Phaeno in southern Palestine. All Manichean property was to be seized and deposited in the imperial treasury. Diocletian found much to be offended by in Manichean religion: its novelty, its alien origins, its perceived corruption of Roman morals, and its inherent opposition to long-standing religious traditions. His reasons for opposing Manichaeanism were also applied to his next target, Christianity.\nGreat Persecution.\nDiocletian returned to Antioch in the autumn of 302. He ordered that the deacon Romanus of Caesarea have his tongue removed for defying the order of the courts and interrupting official sacrifices. Romanus was then sent to prison, where he was executed on 17 November 303. Diocletian left the city for Nicomedia in the winter, accompanied by Galerius. According to Lactantius, Diocletian and Galerius argued over imperial policy towards Christians while wintering at Nicomedia in 302. Diocletian believed that forbidding Christians from the bureaucracy and military would be sufficient to appease the gods, but Galerius pushed for extermination. The two men sought the advice of the oracle of Apollo at Didyma. The oracle responded that the impious on Earth hindered Apollo's ability to provide advice. Rhetorically Eusebius records the Oracle as saying \"The just on Earth...\" These impious, Diocletian was informed by members of the court, could only refer to the Christians of the empire. At the behest of his court, Diocletian acceded to demands for universal persecution.\nOn 23 February 303, Diocletian ordered that the newly built church at Nicomedia be razed. He demanded that its scriptures be burned, and seized its precious stores for the treasury. The next day, Diocletian's first \"Edict against the Christians\" was published. The edict ordered the destruction of Christian scriptures and places of worship across the empire, and prohibited Christians from assembling for worship. Before the end of February, a fire destroyed part of the Imperial palace. Galerius convinced Diocletian that the culprits were Christians, conspirators who had plotted with the eunuchs of the palace. An investigation was commissioned, but no responsible party was found. Executions followed anyway, and the palace eunuchs Dorotheus and Gorgonius were executed. One individual, Peter Cubicularius, was stripped, raised high, and scourged. Salt and vinegar were poured in his wounds, and he was slowly boiled over an open flame. The executions continued until at least 24 April 303, when six individuals, including the bishop Anthimus, were decapitated. A second fire occurred sixteen days after the first. Galerius left the city for Rome, declaring Nicomedia unsafe. Diocletian would soon follow.\nAlthough further persecutory edicts followed, compelling the arrest of the Christian clergy and universal acts of sacrifice, they were ultimately unsuccessful; most Christians escaped punishment, and pagans too were generally unsympathetic to the persecution. The martyrs' sufferings strengthened the resolve of their fellow Christians. Constantius and Maximian did not apply the later edicts, and left the Christians of the West unharmed. Galerius rescinded the edict in 311, announcing that the persecution had failed to bring Christians back to traditional religion. The temporary apostasy of some Christians, and the surrendering of scriptures, during the persecution played a major role in the subsequent Donatist controversy. Within twenty-five years of the persecution's inauguration, the Christian emperor Constantine would rule the empire alone. He would reverse the consequences of the edicts, and return all confiscated property to Christians. Under Constantine's rule, Christianity would become the empire's preferred religion. Diocletian was demonized by his Christian successors: Lactantius intimated that Diocletian's ascendancy heralded the apocalypse.\nLater life.\nIllness and abdication.\nDiocletian entered the city of Rome in the early winter of 303. On 20 November, he celebrated, with Maximian, the twentieth anniversary of his reign (), the tenth anniversary of the Tetrarchy (\"decennalia\"), and a triumph for the war with Persia. Diocletian soon grew impatient with the city, as the Romans acted towards him with what Edward Gibbon, following Lactantius, calls \"licentious familiarity\". The Roman people did not give enough deference to his supreme authority; they expected him to act the part of an aristocratic ruler, not a monarchic one. On 20 December 303, Diocletian cut short his stay in Rome and left for the north. He did not even perform the ceremonies investing him with his ninth consulate; he did them in Ravenna on 1 January 304 instead. There are suggestions in the \"Panegyrici Latini\" and Lactantius's account that Diocletian arranged plans for his and Maximian's future retirement of power in Rome. Maximian, according to these accounts, swore to uphold Diocletian's plan in a ceremony in the Temple of Jupiter.\nFrom Ravenna, Diocletian left for the Danube. There, possibly in Galerius's company, he took part in a campaign against the Carpi. He contracted a minor illness while on campaign, but his condition quickly worsened and he chose to travel in a litter. In the late summer, he left for Nicomedia. On 20 November 304, he appeared in public to dedicate the opening of the circus beside his palace. He collapsed soon after the ceremonies. Over the winter of 304\u201305 he kept within his palace at all times. Rumors spread through the city that Diocletian's death was being kept secret until Galerius could assume power. On 13 December, it was falsely announced that Diocletian had killed himself. The city was sent into mourning from which it recovered after public declarations that Diocletian was still alive. When Diocletian reappeared in public on 1 March 305, he was emaciated and barely recognizable.\nGalerius arrived in the city later in March. According to Lactantius, he came armed with plans to reconstitute the Tetrarchy, force Diocletian to step down, and fill the Imperial office with men compliant to his will. Through coercion and threats, he eventually convinced Diocletian to comply with his plan. Lactantius also claims that he had done the same to Maximian at Sirmium. Scholars doubt Lactantius' account, since he had a strong bias against Galerius and probably attempted to villainize him. On 1 May 305, Diocletian called an assembly of his generals, traditional companion troops, and representatives from distant legions. They met at the same hill, out of Nicomedia, where Diocletian had been proclaimed emperor. In front of a statue of Jupiter, his patron deity, Diocletian addressed the crowd. With tears in his eyes, he told them of his weakness, his need for rest, and his will to resign. He declared that he needed to pass the duty of empire on to someone stronger. He thus became the first (and arguably only) Roman emperor to voluntarily abdicate his title.\nMost in the crowd believed that Constantine and Maxentius, the only adult sons of reigning emperors, who had long been preparing to succeed their fathers, would be granted the title of \"Caesar\". Constantine had travelled through Palestine at the right hand of Diocletian, and was present at the palace in Nicomedia in 303 and 305. It is likely that Maxentius received the same treatment. In Lactantius's account, when Diocletian announced that he was to resign, the entire crowd turned to face Constantine. It was not to be: Severus II and Maximinus II were declared caesars. Maximinus appeared and took Diocletian's robes. On the same day, Severus received his robes from Maximian in Milan. Constantius succeeded Maximian as \"Augustus\" of the West, but Constantine and Maxentius were entirely ignored in the transition of power. This did not bode well for the future security of the tetrarchic system.\nRetirement and death.\nDiocletian retired to his homeland, Dalmatia. He moved into the expansive Diocletian's Palace, a heavily fortified compound located by the small town of Spalatum on the shores of the Adriatic Sea, and near the large provincial administrative center of Salona. The palace is preserved in great part to this day and forms the historic core of Split, modern-day Croatia, where it was designated a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1979.\nMaximian retired to villas in Campania or Lucania. Their homes were distant from political life, but Diocletian and Maximian were close enough to remain in regular contact with each other. Galerius assumed the consular \"fasces\" in 308 with Diocletian as his colleague. In the autumn of 308, Galerius again conferred with Diocletian at Carnuntum (Petronell-Carnuntum, Austria). Diocletian and Maximian were both present on 11 November 308, to see Galerius appoint Licinius to be Augustus in place of Severus, who had died at the hands of Maxentius. He ordered Maximian, who had attempted to return to power after his retirement, to step down permanently. At Carnuntum people begged Diocletian to return to the throne, to resolve the conflicts that had arisen through Constantine's rise to power and Maxentius's usurpation. Diocletian's reply: \"If you could see the cabbages I have planted here with my own hands, you surely would never have thought to request this.\"\nDiocletian lived for four more years, spending his days in his palace gardens. He saw his tetrarchic system fail, torn apart by the civil wars of his successors. He heard of Maximian's third claim to the throne, his forced suicide, and his \"damnatio memoriae\". In his own palace, statues and portraits of his former companion emperor were torn down and destroyed. After an illness, Diocletian died on 3 December 311 (or 312), with some proposing that he took his own life in despair.\nReforms.\nTetrarchic and ideological.\nDiocletian saw his work as that of a restorer, a figure of authority whose duty it was to return the empire to peace, to recreate stability and justice where barbarian hordes had destroyed it. He arrogated, regimented and centralized political authority on a massive scale. In his policies, he enforced an Imperial system of values on diverse and often unreceptive provincial audiences. In the Imperial propaganda from the period, recent history was perverted and minimized in the service of the theme of the tetrarchs as \"restorers\". Aurelian's achievements were ignored, the revolt of Carausius was backdated to the reign of Gallienus, and it was implied that the tetrarchs engineered Aurelian's defeat of the Palmyrenes; the period between Gallienus and Diocletian was effectively erased. The history of the empire before the tetrarchy was portrayed as a time of civil war, savage despotism, and imperial collapse. In those inscriptions that bear their names, Diocletian, the \"founder of eternal peace\", and his companions are referred to as \"restorers of the whole world\", men who succeeded in \"defeating the nations of the barbarians, and confirming the tranquility of their world\". The theme of restoration was conjoined to an emphasis on the uniqueness and accomplishments of the tetrarchs themselves.\nThe cities where emperors lived frequently in this period\u00a0\u2013 Milan, Trier, Arles, Sirmium, Serdica, Thessaloniki, Nicomedia and Antioch\u00a0\u2013 were treated as alternate imperial seats, to the exclusion of Rome and its senatorial elite. A new style of ceremony was developed, emphasizing the distinction of the emperor from all other persons. The quasi-republican ideals of Augustus's \"primus inter pares\" were abandoned for all but the tetrarchs themselves. Diocletian took to wearing a gold crown and jewels, and forbade the use of purple cloth to all but the emperors. His subjects were required to prostrate themselves in his presence (\"adoratio\"); the most fortunate were allowed the privilege of kissing the hem of his robe (\"proskynesis\", \u03c0\u03c1\u03bf\u03c3\u03ba\u03cd\u03bd\u03b7\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2). Circuses and basilicas were designed to keep the face of the emperor perpetually in view, and always in a seat of authority. The emperor became a figure of transcendent authority, a man beyond the grip of the masses. His every appearance was stage-managed. This style of presentation was not new\u00a0\u2013 many of its elements were first seen in the reigns of Aurelian and Severus\u00a0\u2013 but it was only under the tetrarchs that it was refined into an explicit system.\nAdministrative.\nIn keeping with his move from an ideology of republicanism to one of autocracy, Diocletian's council of advisers, his , differed from those of earlier emperors. He destroyed the Augustan illusion of imperial government as a cooperative affair among emperor, army, and senate. In its place he established an effectively autocratic structure, a shift later epitomized in the institution's name: it would be called a , not a council. Diocletian regulated his court by distinguishing separate departments () for different tasks. From this structure came the offices of different , like the (\"Master of Offices\"), and associated secretariats. These were men suited to dealing with petitions, requests, correspondence, legal affairs, and foreign embassies. Within his court Diocletian maintained a permanent body of legal advisers, men with significant influence on his re-ordering of juridical affairs. There were also two finance ministers, dealing with the separate bodies of the public treasury and the private domains of the emperor, and the praetorian prefect, the most significant person of the whole. Diocletian's reduction of the Praetorian Guards to the level of a simple city garrison for Rome lessened the military powers of the prefect\u00a0\u2013 although a prefect like Asclepiodotus was still a trained general\u00a0\u2013 but the office retained much civil authority. The prefect kept a staff of hundreds and managed affairs in all segments of government: in taxation, administration, jurisprudence, and minor military commands, the praetorian prefect was often second only to the emperor himself.\nAltogether, Diocletian greatly increased the number of bureaucrats at the government's command; Lactantius claimed that there were now more men using tax money than there were paying it. The historian Warren Treadgold estimates that under Diocletian the number of men in the civil service doubled from 15,000 to 30,000. The classicist Roger S. Bagnall estimates that there was one bureaucrat for every 5\u201310,000 people in Egypt based on 400 or 800 bureaucrats for 4\u00a0million inhabitants. Jones estimated 30,000 bureaucrats, which he remarks is \"not an extravagant number\" given the size of the empire. He breaks down the bureaucracy as less than 12,000 provincial officials, and roughly 6,000 diocesan officials. For the military, he estimates a modest 300 officials per , and 40 per , for a total of about 5,000 military officials. For the praetorian prefect and urban prefect, he estimates approximately 5,000 clerks. He comments that the expense the empire paid for these was not high, as many lower-level clerks were not paid, and the wage of higher officials was generally modest. \nTo avoid the possibility of local usurpations, to facilitate a more efficient collection of taxes and supplies, and to ease the enforcement of the law, Diocletian doubled the number of provinces from fifty to almost one hundred. The provinces were grouped into twelve dioceses, each governed by an appointed official called a , or \"deputy of the praetorian prefects\". Some of the provincial divisions required revision, and were modified either soon after 293 or early in the fourth century. Rome herself (including her environs, as defined by a -radius perimeter around the city itself) was not under the authority of the praetorian prefect, as she was to be administered by a city prefect of senatorial rank\u00a0\u2013 the sole prestigious post with actual power reserved exclusively for senators, except for some governors in Italy with the titles of corrector and the proconsuls of Asia and Africa. \nThe dissemination of imperial law to the provinces was facilitated by Diocletian's reform of the Empire's provincial structure, which meant that there were now more governors () ruling over smaller regions and smaller populations. Diocletian's reforms shifted the governors' main function to that of the presiding official in the lower courts: whereas in the early Empire military and judicial functions were the function of the governor, and procurators had supervised taxation, under the new system and governors were responsible for justice and taxation, and a new class of (\"dukes\"), acting independently of the civil service, had military command. These dukes sometimes administered two or three of the new provinces created by Diocletian, and had forces ranging from two thousand to more than twenty thousand men. In addition to their roles as judges and tax collectors, governors were expected to maintain the postal service () and ensure that town councils fulfilled their duties.\nThis curtailment of governors' powers as the Emperors' representatives may have lessened the political dangers of an all-too-powerful class of Imperial delegates, but it also severely limited governors' ability to oppose local landed elites, especially those of senatorial status, which, although with reduced opportunities for office holding, retained wealth, social prestige, and personal connections, particularly in relatively peaceful regions without a great military presence. On one occasion, Diocletian had to exhort a proconsul of Africa not to fear the consequences of treading on the toes of the local magnates of senatorial rank. If a governor of senatorial rank himself felt these pressures, the difficulties faced by a mere praeses were likely greater. This led to a strained relationship between the central power and local elites: sometime during 303, attempted military sedition in Seleucia Pieria and Antioch prompted Diocletian to extract bloody retribution on both cities by putting to death a number of their council members for failing in their duties of keeping order in their jurisdiction.\nDuring his reign, a series of inscribed boundary stones were erected in the Levant to mark village lands and clarify fiscal responsibilities as part of his administrative reforms. These so-called \"Diocletian boundary stones\" are concentrated in the Hula Valley and Golan regions and preserve otherwise unattested village names, providing rare evidence for the local impact of imperial taxation policies.\nLegal.\nAs with most emperors, much of Diocletian's daily routine rotated around legal affairs\u00a0\u2013 responding to appeals and petitions, and delivering decisions on disputed matters. Rescripts, authoritative interpretations issued by the emperor in response to demands from disputants in both public and private cases, were a common duty of second- and third-century emperors. In the \"nomadic\" imperial courts of the later Empire, one can track the progress of the imperial retinue through the locations from whence particular rescripts were issued\u00a0\u2013 the presence of the Emperor was what allowed the system to function. Whenever the imperial court would settle in one of the capitals, there was a glut in petitions, as in late 294 in Nicomedia, where Diocletian kept winter quarters.\nAdmittedly, Diocletian's praetorian prefects\u00a0\u2013 Afranius Hannibalianus, Julius Asclepiodotus, and Aurelius Hermogenianus\u00a0\u2013 aided in regulating the flow and presentation of such paperwork, but the deep legalism of Roman culture kept the workload heavy. Emperors in the forty years preceding Diocletian's reign had not managed these duties so effectively, and their output in attested rescripts is low. Diocletian, by contrast, was prodigious in his affairs: there are around 1,200 rescripts in his name still surviving, and these probably represent only a small portion of the total issue. The sharp increase in the number of edicts and rescripts produced under Diocletian's rule has been read as evidence of an ongoing effort to realign the whole Empire on terms dictated by the imperial center.\nUnder the governance of the jurists Gregorius, Aurelius Arcadius Charisius, and Hermogenianus, the imperial government began issuing official books of precedent, collecting and listing all the rescripts that had been issued since the reign of Hadrian (r. 117\u2013138). The Codex Gregorianus includes rescripts up to 292, which the Codex Hermogenianus updated with a comprehensive collection of rescripts issued by Diocletian in 293 and 294. Although the very act of codification was a radical innovation, given the precedent-based design of the Roman legal system, the jurists were generally conservative, and constantly looked to past Roman practice and theory for guidance. They were probably given more free rein over their codes than the later compilers of the \"Codex Theodosianus\" (438) and \"Codex Justinianus\" (529) would have. Gregorius and Hermogenianus's codices lack the rigid structuring of later codes, and were not published in the name of the emperor, but in the names of their compilers. Their official character was clear in that both collections were acknowledged by courts as authoritative records of imperial legislation up to the date of their publication and regularly updated.\nAfter Diocletian's reform of the provinces, governors were called \"iudex\", or judge. The governor became responsible for his decisions first to his immediate superiors, as well as to the more distant office of the emperor. It was most likely at this time that judicial records became verbatim accounts of what was said in trial, making it easier to determine bias or improper conduct on the part of the governor. With these records and the Empire's universal right of appeal, Imperial authorities probably had a great deal of power to enforce behavior standards for their judges. In spite of Diocletian's attempts at reform, the provincial restructuring was far from clear, especially when citizens appealed the decisions of their governors. Proconsuls, for example, were often both judges of first instance and appeal, and the governors of some provinces took appellant cases from their neighbors. It soon became impossible to avoid taking some cases to the emperor for arbitration and judgment. Diocletian's reign marks the end of the classical period of Roman law. Where Diocletian's system of rescripts shows adherence to classical tradition, Constantine's law is full of Greek and eastern influences.\nPartly in response to economic pressures and in order to protect the vital functions of the state, Diocletian restricted social and professional mobility. Peasants became tied to the land in a way that presaged later systems of land tenure and workers such as bakers, armorers, public entertainers and workers in the mint had their occupations made hereditary. Soldiers' children were also forcibly enrolled, something that followed spontaneous tendencies among the rank-and-file, but also expressed increasing difficulties in recruitment.\nMilitary.\nIt is archaeologically difficult to distinguish Diocletian's fortifications from those of his successors and predecessors. The Devil's Dykes, for example\u2014the Danubian earthworks traditionally attributed to Diocletian\u2014cannot even be securely dated to a particular century. The most that can be said about built structures under Diocletian's reign is that he rebuilt and strengthened forts at the Upper Rhine frontier (where he followed the works built under Probus along the Lake Constance-Basel and the Rhine\u2013Iller\u2013Danube line), on the Danube (where a new line of forts on the far side of the river, the \"Ripa Sarmatica\", was added to older, rehabilitated fortresses), in Egypt and on the frontier with Persia. Beyond that, much discussion is speculative and reliant on the broad generalizations of written sources. Diocletian and the tetrarchs had no consistent plan for frontier advancement, and records of raids and forts built across the frontier are likely to indicate only temporary claims. The \"Strata Diocletiana\", built after the Persian Wars, which ran from the Euphrates North of Palmyra and South towards northeast Arabia in the general vicinity of Bostra, is the classic Diocletianic frontier system, consisting of an outer road followed by tightly spaced forts\u00a0\u2013 defensible hard-points manned by small garrisons\u00a0\u2013 followed by further fortifications in the rear. In an attempt to resolve the difficulty and slowness of transmitting orders to the frontier, the new capitals of the tetrarchic era were all much closer to the empire's frontiers than Rome had been: Trier sat on the Moselle, a tributary of the Rhine, Sirmium and Serdica were close to the Danube, Thessaloniki was on the route leading eastward, and Nicomedia and Antioch were important points in dealings with Persia.\nLactantius criticized Diocletian for an excessive increase in troop sizes, declaring that \"each of the four princes strove to maintain a much more considerable military force than any sole emperor had done in times past. There began to be fewer men who paid taxes than there were who received wages; so that the means of the husbandmen being exhausted by enormous impositions, the farms were abandoned, cultivated grounds became woodland, and universal dismay prevailed\". The fifth-century pagan Zosimus, by contrast, praised Diocletian for keeping troops on the borders, rather than keeping them in the cities, as Constantine was held to have done. Both these views had some truth to them, despite the biases of their authors: Diocletian and the tetrarchs did greatly expand the army, and the growth was mostly in frontier regions, where the increased effectiveness of the new Diocletianic legions seem to have been mostly spread across a network of strongholds. Nevertheless, it is difficult to establish the precise details of these shifts given the weakness of the sources. The army expanded to about 580,000 men from a 285 strength of 390,000, of which 310,000 men were stationed in the East, most of whom manned the Persian frontier. The navy increased from approximately 45,000 to approximately 65,000 men.\nDiocletian's expansion of the army and civil service meant that the empire's tax burden grew. Since military upkeep took the largest portion of the imperial budget, any reforms here would be especially costly. The proportion of the adult male population, excluding slaves, serving in the army increased from roughly 1 in 25 to 1 in 15, an increase judged excessive by some modern commentators. Official troop allowances were kept to low levels, and the mass of troops often resorted to extortion or the taking of civilian jobs. Arrears became the norm for most troops. Many were even given payment in kind in place of their salaries. Were he unable to pay for his enlarged army, there would likely be civil conflict, potentially open revolt. Diocletian was led to devise a new system of taxation.\nEconomic.\nTaxation.\nIn the early empire (30 BC\u00a0\u2013 AD 235) the Roman government paid for what it needed in gold and silver. The coinage was stable. Requisition, forced purchase, was used to supply armies on the march. During the third-century crisis (235\u2013285), the government resorted to requisition rather than payment in debased coinage, since it could never be sure of the value of money. Requisition was nothing more or less than seizure. Diocletian made requisition into tax. He introduced an extensive new tax system based on heads (\"capita\") and land (\"iugera\")\u00a0\u2013 with one iugerum equal to approximately 0.65 acres\u00a0\u2013 and tied to a new, regular census of the empire's population and wealth. Census officials traveled throughout the empire, assessed the value of labor and land for each landowner, and joined the landowners' totals together to make citywide totals of \"capita\" and \"iuga\". The \"iugum\" was not a consistent measure of land, but varied according to the type of land and crop, and the amount of labor necessary for sustenance. The \"caput\" was not consistent either: women, for instance, were often valued at half a \"caput\", and sometimes at other values. Cities provided animals, money, and manpower in proportion to its \"capita\", and grain in proportion to its \"iuga\".\nMost taxes were due each year on 1 September, and levied from individual landowners by \"decuriones\" (decurions). These decurions, analogous to city councilors, were responsible for paying from their own pocket what they failed to collect. Diocletian's reforms also increased the number of financial officials in the provinces: more \"rationales\" and \"magistri privatae\" are attested under Diocletian's reign than before. These officials represented the interests of the fisc, which collected taxes in gold, and the Imperial properties. Fluctuations in the value of the currency made collection of taxes in kind the norm, although these could be converted into coin. Rates shifted to take inflation into account. In 296, Diocletian issued an edict reforming census procedures. This edict introduced a general five-year census for the whole empire, replacing prior censuses that had operated at different speeds throughout the empire. The new censuses would keep up with changes in the values of \"capita\" and \"iuga\".\nItaly, which had long been exempt from taxes, was included in the tax system from 290/291 as a diocesis. The city of Rome remained exempt; the \"regions\" (i.e., provinces) South of Rome (generally called \"suburbicarian\", as opposed to the Northern, \"annonaria\" region) seem to have been relatively less taxed, in what probably was a sop offered to the great senatorial families and their landed properties.\nDiocletian's edicts emphasized the common liability of all taxpayers. Public records of all taxes were made public. The position of \"decurion\", member of the city council, had been an honor sought by wealthy aristocrats and the middle classes who displayed their wealth by paying for city amenities and public works. Decurions were made liable for any shortfall in the amount of tax collected. Many tried to find ways to escape the obligation. By 300, civilians across the empire complained that there were more tax collectors than there were people to pay taxes.\nCurrency and inflation.\nAurelian's attempt to reform the currency had failed; the denarius was dead. Diocletian restored the three-metal coinage and issued better quality pieces. The new system consisted of five coins: the \"aureus\"/\"solidus\", a gold coin weighing, like its predecessors, one-sixtieth of a pound; the \"argenteus\", a coin weighing one ninety-sixth of a pound and containing ninety-five percent pure silver; the \"follis\", sometimes referred to as the \"laureatus\" A, which is a copper coin with added silver struck at the rate of thirty-two to the pound; the \"radiatus\", a small copper coin struck at the rate of 108 to the pound, with no added silver; and a coin known today as the \"laureatus\" B, a smaller copper coin struck at the rate of 192 to the pound. Since the nominal values of these new issues were lower than their intrinsic worth as metals, the state was minting these coins at a loss. This practice could be sustained only by requisitioning precious metals from private citizens in exchange for state-minted coin (of a far lower value than the price of the precious metals requisitioned).\nBy 301, the system was in trouble, strained by a new bout of inflation. Diocletian, therefore, issued his \"Edict on Coinage\", an act re-tariffing all debts so that the \"nummus\", the most common coin in circulation, would be worth half as much. In the edict, preserved in an inscription from the city of Aphrodisias in Caria (near Geyre, Turkey), it was declared that all debts contracted before 1 September 301 must be repaid at the old standards, while all debts contracted after that date would be repaid at the new standards. It appears that the edict was made in an attempt to preserve the current price of gold and to keep the Empire's coinage on silver, Rome's traditional metal currency. This edict risked giving further momentum to inflationary trends, as had happened after Aurelian's currency reforms. The government's response was to issue a price freeze.\nThe Edict on Maximum Prices (\"Edictum De Pretiis Rerum Venalium\") was issued two to three months after the coinage edict, somewhere between 20 November and 10 December 301. The best-preserved Latin inscription surviving from the Greek East, the edict survives in many versions, on materials as varied as wood, papyrus, and stone. In the edict, Diocletian declared that the current pricing crisis resulted from the unchecked greed of merchants, and had resulted in turmoil for the mass of common citizens. The language of the edict calls on the people's memory of their benevolent leaders, and exhorts them to enforce the provisions of the edict, thereby restoring perfection to the world. The edict goes on to list in detail over one thousand goods and accompanying retail prices not to be exceeded. Penalties are laid out for various pricing transgressions.\nIn the most basic terms, the edict was ignorant of the law of supply and demand: it ignored the fact that prices might vary from region to region according to product availability, and it ignored the impact of transportation costs in the retail price of goods. In the judgment of the historian David Potter, the edict was \"an act of economic lunacy\". The fact that the edict began with a long rhetorical preamble betrays at the same time a moralizing stance as well as a weak grasp of economics\u00a0\u2013 perhaps simply the wishful thinking that criminalizing a practice was enough to stop it. There is no consensus about how effectively the edict was enforced.\nSupposedly, inflation, speculation, and monetary instability continued, and a black market arose to trade in goods forced out of official markets. The edict's penalties were applied unevenly across the empire (some scholars believe they were applied only in Diocletian's domains), widely resisted, and eventually dropped, perhaps within a year of the edict's issue. Lactantius has written of the perverse accompaniments to the edict; of goods withdrawn from the market, of brawls over minute variations in price, of the deaths that came when its provisions were enforced. His account may be true, but it seems to modern historians exaggerated and hyperbolic, and the impact of the law is recorded in no other ancient source.\nLegacy.\nThe historian A.H.M. Jones observed that \"It is perhaps Diocletian's greatest achievement that he reigned twenty-one years and then abdicated voluntarily, and spent the remaining years of his life in peaceful retirement.\" Diocletian was one of the few emperors of the third and fourth centuries to die naturally, and the first in the history of the empire to retire voluntarily. Once he retired, his tetrarchic system collapsed. Without the guiding hand of Diocletian, the empire fell into civil wars. Stability emerged after the defeat of Licinius by Constantine in 324. Under the Christian Constantine, Diocletian was maligned. Constantine's rule demonstrated the benefits of Diocletian's achievements and the autocratic principle he represented: the borders remained secure, in spite of Constantine's large expenditure of forces during his civil wars; the bureaucratic transformation of the Roman government was completed; and Constantine took Diocletian's court ceremonies and made them even more extravagant.\nConstantine ignored those aspects of Diocletian's reign that did not suit him. Diocletian's policy of preserving a stable silver coinage was abandoned, and the gold \"solidus\" became the empire's primary currency instead. Diocletian's persecution of Christians was repudiated and changed to a policy of toleration and then favoritism. Christianity eventually became the official religion in 380. Most importantly, Diocletian's tax system and administrative reforms lasted, with some modifications, until the advent of the Muslims in the 630s. The combination of state autocracy and state religion was instilled in much of Europe, particularly in the lands which adopted Orthodox Christianity.\nThe \"Era of Martyrs\" (Latin: \"anno martyrum\" or AM), also known as the \"Diocletian era\" (Latin: \"anno Diocletiani\"), is a method of numbering years used by the Church of Alexandria beginning in the 4th century \"anno Domini\" and by the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria from the 5th century to the present. In this system of counting, the beginning of Diocletian's reign in 284 was used as the epoch, making Diocletian's first year in power into the Year 1 of that calendar. Western Christians were aware of this count but did not use it; Dionysius Exiguus replaced the \"anno Diocletiani\" era with his anno Domini era because he did not wish to continue the memory of a tyrant who persecuted Christians.\n\"Dukljan\", a major villain in Serbian mythology who is presented as the adversary of God, is considered to be a mythological reflection of the historical Diocletian.\nThe Talmud includes several semi-legendary accounts of Diocletian. One of them recounts that Diocletian was originally a swineherd, and that in this part of his life, he was teased and abused by young Jews. When he became the Emperor he called up the leaders of the Jews, who were fearful, saying \"We have teased Diocletian the Swineherd but we respect Diocletian the Emperor\" \u2013 to which Diocletian responded, \"You must show respect even to the smallest and lowest of the Romans, because you can never know which one of us will rise to greatness.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nAncient sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nModern sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Titles and succession"}
{"id": "8582", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8582", "title": "Deism", "text": "Belief in a God based on rational thought\nDeism ( \u200a or ; derived from the Latin term \"deus\", meaning \"god\") is the philosophical position and rationalistic theology that generally rejects revelation as a source of divine knowledge and asserts that empirical reason and observation of the natural world are exclusively logical, reliable, and sufficient to determine the existence of a Supreme Being as the creator of the universe. More simply stated, Deism is the belief in the existence of God\u2014often, but not necessarily, an impersonal and incomprehensible God who does not intervene in the universe after creating it, solely based on rational thought without any reliance on revealed religions or religious authority. Deism emphasizes the concept of natural theology\u2014that is, God's existence is revealed through nature.\nSince the 17th century and during the Age of Enlightenment, especially in 18th-century England, France, and North America, various Western philosophers and theologians formulated a critical rejection of the several religious texts belonging to the many organized religions, and began to appeal only to truths that they felt could be established by reason as the exclusive source of divine knowledge. Such philosophers and theologians were called \"Deists\", and the philosophical/theological position they advocated is called \"Deism\".\nDeism as a distinct philosophical and intellectual movement declined toward the end of the 18th century but had a revival in the early 19th century. Some of its tenets continued as part of other intellectual and spiritual movements, like Unitarianism, and Deism continues to have advocates today, including with modern variants such as Christian deism and pandeism.\nEarly developments.\nAncient history.\nDeistical thinking has existed since ancient times; the roots of Deism can be traced back to the philosophical tradition of Ancient Greece. The 3rd-century Christian theologian and philosopher Clement of Alexandria explicitly mentioned persons who believed that God was not involved in human affairs, and therefore led what he considered a licentious life. However, Deism did not develop as a religio-philosophical movement until after the Scientific Revolution, which began in the mid-16th century in early modern Europe.\nDivinity schools in Islamic theology.\nIn the history of Islam, one of the earliest systematic schools of Islamic theology to develop was the Mu\u02bftazila in the mid-8th century CE. Mu\u02bftazilite theologians emphasized the use of reason and rational thought, positing that the injunctions of God are accessible through rational thought and inquiry, and affirmed that the Quran was created (\"makhl\u016bq\") rather than co-eternal with God, an affirmation that would develop into one of the most contentious questions in the history of Islamic theology.\nIn the 9th\u201310th century CE, the Ash\u02bfar\u012b school developed as a response to the Mu\u02bftazila, founded by the 10th-century Muslim scholar and theologian Ab\u016b al-\u1e24asan al-Ash\u02bfar\u012b. Ash\u02bfar\u012btes still taught the use of reason in understanding the Quran, but denied the possibility to deduce moral truths by reasoning. This position was opposed by the M\u0101tur\u012bd\u012b school; according to its founder, the 10th-century Muslim scholar and theologian Ab\u016b Man\u1e63\u016br al-M\u0101tur\u012bd\u012b, human reason is supposed to acknowledge the existence of a creator deity (\"b\u0101ri\u02be\") solely based on rational thought and independently from divine revelation. He shared this conviction with his teacher and predecessor Ab\u016b \u1e24an\u012bfa al-Nu\u02bfm\u0101n (8th century CE), whereas al-Ash\u02bfar\u012b never held such a view.\nAccording to the Afghan-American philosopher Sayed Hassan Hussaini, the early schools of Islamic theology and theological beliefs among classical Muslim philosophers are characterized by \"a rich color of Deism with a slight disposition toward theism\".\nOrigins of \"Deism\".\nThe terms \"deism\" and \"theism\" are both derived from words meaning \"god\": the Latin term \"deus\" and the Ancient Greek term \"the\u00f3s\" (\u03b8\u03b5\u03cc\u03c2), respectively. The word \"d\u00e9iste\" first appeared in French in 1563 in a theological treatise written by the Swiss Calvinist theologian named Pierre Viret, but Deism was generally unknown in the Kingdom of France until the 1690s when Pierre Bayle published his famous \"Dictionnaire Historique et Critique\", which contained an article on Viret.\nIn English, the words \"deist\" and \"theist\" were originally synonymous, but by the 17th century the terms started to diverge in meaning. The term \"deist\" with its current meaning first appears in English in Robert Burton's \"The Anatomy of Melancholy\" (1621).\nHerbert of Cherbury and early English Deism.\nThe first major statement of Deism in English literature is Lord Herbert of Cherbury's book \"De Veritate\" (1624). Lord Herbert, like his contemporary Descartes, searched for the foundations of knowledge. The first two-thirds of his book \"De Veritate\" (\"On Truth, as It Is Distinguished from Revelation, the Probable, the Possible, and the False\") are devoted to an exposition of Herbert's theory of knowledge. Herbert distinguished truths from experience and distinguished reasoning about experience from innate and revealed truths. Innate truths are imprinted on our minds, as evidenced by their universal acceptance. Herbert referred to universally accepted truths as \"notitiae communes\u2014\"Common Notions. Herbert believed there were five Common Notions that unify all religious beliefs.\nHerbert himself had relatively few followers, and it was not until the 1680s that Herbert found a true successor in Charles Blount (1654 \u2013 1693).\nThe peak of Deism (1696\u20131801).\nThe appearance of John Locke's \"Essay Concerning Human Understanding\" (1690) marks an important turning-point and new phase in the history of English Deism. Lord Herbert's epistemology was based on the idea of \"common notions\" (or innate ideas). Locke's \"Essay\" was an attack on the foundation of innate ideas. After Locke, deists could no longer appeal to innate ideas as Herbert had done. Instead, deists were forced to turn to arguments based on experience and nature. Under the influence of Newton, they turned to the argument from design as the principal argument for the existence of God.\nPeter Gay identifies John Toland's \"Christianity Not Mysterious\" (1696), and the \"vehement response\" it provoked, as the beginning of post-Lockian Deism. Among the notable figures, Gay describes Toland and Matthew Tindal as the best known; however, Gay considered them to be talented publicists rather than philosophers or scholars. He regards Conyers Middleton and Anthony Collins as contributing more to the substance of debate, in contrast with fringe writers such as Thomas Chubb and Thomas Woolston.\nOther English Deists prominent during the period include William Wollaston, Charles Blount, Henry St John, 1st Viscount Bolingbroke, and, in the latter part, Peter Annet, Thomas Chubb, and Thomas Morgan. Anthony Ashley-Cooper, 3rd Earl of Shaftesbury was also influential; though not presenting himself as a Deist, he shared many of the deists' key attitudes and is now usually regarded as a Deist.\nEspecially noteworthy is Matthew Tindal's \"Christianity as Old as the Creation\" (1730), which became, very soon after its publication, the focal center of the Deist controversy. Because almost every argument, quotation, and issue raised for decades can be found here, the work is often termed \"the Deist's Bible\". Following Locke's successful attack on innate ideas, Tindal's \"Bible\" redefined the foundation of Deist epistemology as knowledge based on experience or human reason. This effectively widened the gap between traditional Christians and what he called \"Christian Deists\", since this new foundation required that \"revealed\" truth be validated through human reason.\nEnlightenment Deism.\nAspects of Deism in Enlightenment philosophy.\nEnlightenment Deism consisted of two philosophical assertions: (1) reason, along with features of the natural world, is a valid source of religious knowledge, and (2) revelation is not a valid source of religious knowledge. Different Deist philosophers expanded on these two assertions to create what Leslie Stephen later termed the \"constructive\" and \"critical\" aspects of Deism. \"Constructive\" assertions\u2014assertions that deist writers felt were justified by appeals to reason and features of the natural world (or perhaps were intuitively obvious or common notions)\u2014included: \n\"Critical\" assertions\u2014assertions that followed from the denial of revelation as a valid source of religious knowledge\u2014were much more numerous, and included:\nThe origins of religion.\nA central premise of Deism was that the organized religions of their day were corruptions of an original religion that was pure, natural, simple, and rational. Humanity lost this original religion when it was subsequently corrupted by priests who manipulated it for personal gain and for the class interests of the priesthood, and encrusted it with superstitions and \"mysteries\"\u2014irrational theological doctrines. Deists referred to this manipulation of religious doctrine as \"priestcraft\", a derogatory term. For Deists, this corruption of natural religion was designed to keep laypeople baffled by \"mysteries\" and dependent on the priesthood for information about the requirements for salvation. This gave the priesthood a great deal of power, which the Deists believed the priesthood worked to maintain and increase. Deists saw it as their mission to strip away \"priestcraft\" and \"mysteries\". Matthew Tindal, perhaps the most prominent Deist writer in early modern Europe, claimed that this was the proper, original role of the Christian Church.\nOne implication of this premise was that current-day primitive societies, or societies that existed in the distant past, should have religious beliefs less infused with superstitions and closer to those of natural theology. This position became less and less plausible as Enlightenment philosophers such as David Hume began studying the natural history of religion and suggested that the origin of religion was not in reason but in emotions, such as the fear of the unknown.\nImmortality of the soul.\nDifferent Deists had different beliefs about the immortality of the soul, about the existence of Hell and damnation to punish the wicked, and the existence of Heaven to reward the virtuous. Anthony Collins, Bolingbroke, Thomas Chubb, and Peter Annet were materialists and either denied or doubted the immortality of the soul. Benjamin Franklin believed in reincarnation or resurrection. Lord Herbert of Cherbury and William Wollaston held that souls exist, survive death, and in the afterlife are rewarded or punished by God for their behavior in life. Thomas Paine believed in the \"probability\" of the immortality of the soul.\nMiracles and divine providence.\nThe most natural position for Deists was to reject all forms of supernaturalism, including the miracle stories in the Bible. The problem was that the rejection of miracles also seemed to entail the rejection of divine providence (that is, God taking a hand in human affairs), something that many Deists were inclined to accept. Those who believed in a watch-maker God rejected the possibility of miracles and divine providence. They believed that God, after establishing natural laws and setting the cosmos in motion, stepped away. He did not need to keep tinkering with his creation, and the suggestion that he did was insulting. Others, however, firmly believed in divine providence, and so, were reluctantly forced to accept at least the possibility of miracles. God was, after all, all-powerful and could do whatever he wanted including temporarily suspending his own natural laws.\nFreedom and necessity.\nEnlightenment philosophers under the influence of Newtonian science tended to view the universe as a vast machine, created and set in motion by a creator being, that continues to operate according to natural law without any divine intervention. This view naturally led to what was then called \"necessitarianism\" (the modern term is \"determinism\"): the view that everything in the universe\u2014including human behavior\u2014is completely, causally determined by antecedent circumstances and natural law. (See, for example, La Mettrie's http://.) As a consequence, debates about freedom versus \"necessity\" were a regular feature of Enlightenment religious and philosophical discussions. Reflecting the intellectual climate of the time, there were differences among Deists about freedom and determinism. Some, such as Anthony Collins, were actually necessitarians.\nDavid Hume.\nViews differ on whether David Hume was a Deist, an atheist, or something else. Like the Deists, Hume rejected revelation, and his famous essay \"On Miracles\" provided a powerful argument against belief in miracles. On the other hand, he did not believe that an appeal to Reason could provide any justification for religion. In the essay \"Natural History of Religion\" (1757), he contended that polytheism, not monotheism, was \"the first and most ancient religion of mankind\" and that the psychological basis of religion is not reason, but fear of the unknown. In Waring's words: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The clear reasonableness of natural religion disappeared before a semi-historical look at what can be known about uncivilized man\u2014 \"a barbarous, necessitous animal,\" as Hume termed him. Natural religion, if by that term one means the actual religious beliefs and practices of uncivilized peoples, was seen to be a fabric of superstitions. Primitive man was no unspoiled philosopher, clearly seeing the truth of one God. And the history of religion was not, as the deists had implied, retrograde; the widespread phenomenon of superstition was caused less by priestly malice than by man's unreason as he confronted his experience.\nDeism in the United States.\nThe Thirteen Colonies of North America \u2013 which became the United States of America after the American Revolution in 1776 \u2013 were part of the British Empire, and Americans, as British subjects, were influenced by and participated in the intellectual life of the Kingdom of Great Britain. English Deism was an important influence on the thinking of Thomas Jefferson and the principles of religious freedom asserted in the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. Other Founding Fathers who were influenced to various degrees by Deism were Ethan Allen, Benjamin Franklin, Cornelius Harnett, Gouverneur Morris, Hugh Williamson, James Madison, and possibly Alexander Hamilton.\nIn the United States, there is a great deal of controversy over whether the Founding Fathers were Christians, Deists, or something in between. Particularly heated is the debate over the beliefs of Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, and George Washington.\nIn his \"Autobiography\", Franklin wrote that as a young man \"Some books against Deism fell into my hands; they were said to be the substance of sermons preached at Boyle's lectures. It happened that they wrought an effect on me quite contrary to what was intended by them; for the arguments of the Deists, which were quoted to be refuted, appeared to me much stronger than the refutations; in short, I soon became a thorough Deist.\" Like some other Deists, Franklin believed that, \"The Deity sometimes interferes by his particular Providence, and sets aside the Events which would otherwise have been produc'd in the Course of Nature, or by the Free Agency of Man,\" and at the Constitutional Convention stated that \"the longer I live, the more convincing proofs I see of this truth\u2014that God governs in the affairs of men.\"\nThomas Jefferson is perhaps the Founding Father who most clearly exhibits Deistic tendencies, although he generally referred to himself as a Unitarian rather than a Deist. His excerpts of the canonical gospels (now commonly known as the \"Jefferson Bible\") strip all supernatural and dogmatic references from the narrative on Jesus' life. Like Franklin, Jefferson believed in God's continuing activity in human affairs.\nThomas Paine is especially noteworthy both for his contributions to the cause of the American Revolution and for his writings in defense of Deism, alongside the criticism of Abrahamic religions. In \"The Age of Reason\" (1793\u20131794) and other writings, he advocated Deism, promoted reason and freethought, and argued against institutionalized religions in general and the Christian doctrine in particular. \"The Age of Reason\" was short, readable, and probably the only Deistic treatise that continues to be read and influential today. Historian Mitch Horowitz noted that, \"Colonials, at least those of means, had the capacity to participate in a fraternal order that enshrined and protected the individual spiritual search\u2014and believed that the search belonged to no single congregation, doctrine, or dogma.\"\nThe last contributor to American Deism was Elihu Palmer (1764\u20131806), who wrote the \"Bible of American Deism\", \"Principles of Nature\", in 1801. Palmer is noteworthy for attempting to bring some organization to Deism by founding the \"Deistical Society of New York\" and other Deistic societies from Maine to Georgia.\nDeism in France and continental Europe.\nFrance had its own tradition of religious skepticism and natural theology in the works of Montaigne, Pierre Bayle, and Montesquieu. The most famous of the French Deists was Voltaire, who was exposed to Newtonian science and English Deism during his two-year period of exile in England (1726\u20131728). When he returned to France, he brought both back with him, and exposed the French reading public (i.e., the aristocracy) to them, in a number of books.\nFrench Deists also included Maximilien Robespierre and Jean-Jacques Rousseau. During the French Revolution (1789\u20131799), the Deistic Cult of the Supreme Being\u2014a direct expression of Robespierre's theological views\u2014was established briefly (just under three months) as the new state religion of France, replacing the deposed Catholic Church and the rival atheistic Cult of Reason.\nThere were over five hundred French Revolutionaries who were deists. These deists do not fit the stereotype of deists because they believed in miracles and often prayed to God. In fact, over seventy of them thought that God miraculously helped the French Revolution win victories over their enemies. Furthermore, over a hundred French Revolutionary deists also wrote prayers and hymns to God. Citizen Devillere was one of the many French Revolutionary deists who believed God did miracles. Devillere said, \"God, who conducts our destiny, deigned to concern himself with our dangers. He commanded the spirit of victory to direct the hand of the faithful French, and in a few hours the aristocrats received the attack which we prepared, the wicked ones were destroyed and liberty was avenged.\"\nDeism in Germany is not well documented. We know from correspondence with Voltaire that Frederick the Great was a Deist. Immanuel Kant's identification with Deism is controversial.\nDecline of Enlightenment Deism.\nPeter Gay describes Enlightenment Deism as entering slow decline as a recognizable movement in the 1730s. A number of reasons have been suggested for this decline, including: \nAlthough Deism has declined in popularity over time, scholars believe that these ideas still have a lingering influence on modern society. One of the major activities of the Deists, biblical criticism, evolved into its own highly technical discipline. Deist rejection of revealed religion evolved into, and contributed to, 19th-century liberal British theology and the rise of Unitarianism.\nContemporary Deism.\nContemporary Deism attempts to integrate classical Deism with modern philosophy and the current state of scientific knowledge. This attempt has produced a wide variety of personal beliefs under the broad classification of belief of \"deism.\"\nThere are a number of subcategories of modern Deism, including monodeism (the default, standard concept of deism), pandeism, panendeism, spiritual deism, process deism, Christian deism, polydeism, scientific deism, and humanistic deism. Some deists see design in nature and purpose in the universe and in their lives. Others see God and the universe in a co-creative process. Some deists view God in classical terms as observing humanity but not directly intervening in our lives, while others see God as a subtle and persuasive spirit who created the world, and then stepped back to observe.\nRecent philosophical discussions of Deism.\nIn the 1960s, theologian Charles Hartshorne scrupulously examined and rejected both deism and pandeism (as well as pantheism) in favor of a conception of God whose characteristics included \"absolute perfection in some respects, relative perfection in all others\" or \"AR,\" writing that this theory \"is able consistently to embrace all that is positive in either deism or pandeism,\" concluding that \"panentheistic doctrine contains all of deism and pandeism except their arbitrary negations.\"\nCharles Taylor, in his 2007 book \"A Secular Age\", showed the historical role of Deism, leading to what he calls an \"exclusive humanism\". This humanism invokes a moral order whose ontic commitment is wholly intra-human with no reference to transcendence. One of the special achievements of such deism-based humanism is that it discloses new, anthropocentric moral sources by which human beings are motivated and empowered to accomplish acts of mutual benefit. This is the province of a buffered, disengaged self, which is the locus of dignity, freedom, and discipline, and is endowed with a sense of human capability. According to Taylor, by the early 19th century this Deism-mediated exclusive humanism developed as an alternative to Christian faith in a personal God and an order of miracles and mystery. Some critics of Deism have accused adherents of facilitating the rise of nihilism.\nDeism in Nazi Germany.\nIn Nazi Germany, \"Gottgl\u00e4ubig\" (literally: \"believing in God\") was a Nazi religious term for a form of non-denominationalism practised by those German citizens who had officially left Christian churches but professed faith in some higher power or divine creator. Such people were called \"Gottgl\u00e4ubige\" (\"believers in God\"), and the term for the overall movement was \"Gottgl\u00e4ubigkeit\" (\"belief in God\"); the term denotes someone who still believes in a God, although without having any institutional religious affiliation. These National Socialists were not favourable towards religious institutions of their time, nor did they tolerate atheism of any type within their ranks. The 1943 \"Philosophical Dictionary\" defined \"Gottgl\u00e4ubig\" as: \"official designation for those who profess a specific kind of piety and morality, without being bound to a church denomination, whilst however also rejecting irreligion and godlessness.\" The \"Gottgl\u00e4ubigkeit\" is considered a form of deism, and was \"predominantly based on creationist and deistic views\".\nIn the 1920 National Socialist Programme of the National Socialist German Workers' Party (NSDAP), Adolf Hitler first mentioned the phrase \"Positive Christianity\". The Nazi Party did not wish to tie itself to a particular Christian denomination, but with Christianity in general, and sought freedom of religion for all denominations \"so long as they do not endanger its existence or oppose the moral senses of the Germanic race\" (point 24). When Hitler and the NSDAP got into power in 1933, they sought to assert state control over the churches, on the one hand through the \"Reichskonkordat\" with the Roman Catholic Church, and the forced merger of the German Evangelical Church Confederation into the Protestant Reich Church on the other. This policy seems to have gone relatively well until late 1936, when a \"gradual worsening of relations\" between the Nazi Party and the churches saw the rise of \"Kirchenaustritt\" (\"leaving the Church\"). Although there was no top-down official directive to revoke church membership, some Nazi Party members started doing so voluntarily and put other members under pressure to follow their example. Those who left the churches were designated as \"Gottgl\u00e4ubige\" (\"believers in God\"), a term officially recognised by the Interior Minister Wilhelm Frick on 26 November 1936. He stressed that the term signified political disassociation from the churches, not an act of religious apostasy. The term \"dissident\", which some church leavers had used up until then, was associated with being \"without belief\" (\"glaubenslos\"), whilst most of them emphasized that they still believed in a God, and thus required a different word.\nA census in May 1939, six years into the Nazi era, and after the annexation of the mostly Catholic Federal State of Austria and mostly Catholic German-occupied Czechoslovakia into German-occupied Europe, indicates that 54% of the population considered itself Protestant, 41% considered itself Catholic, 3.5% self-identified as \"Gottgl\u00e4ubig\", and 1.5% as \"atheist\".\nDeism in Turkey.\nAn early April 2018 report of the Turkish Ministry of Education, titled \"The Youth is Sliding towards Deism\", observed that an increasing number of pupils in \u0130mam Hatip schools was repudiating Islam in favour of Deism (irreligious belief in a creator god). The report's publication generated large-scale controversy in the Turkish press and society at large, as well as amongst conservative Islamic sects, Muslim clerics, and Islamist parties in Turkey.\nThe progressive Muslim theologian Mustafa \u00d6zt\u00fcrk noted the Deistic trend among Turkish people a year earlier, arguing that the \"very archaic, dogmatic notion of religion\" held by the majority of those claiming to represent Islam was causing \"the new generations [to become] indifferent, even distant, to the Islamic worldview.\" Despite a lack of reliable statistical data, numerous anecdotes and independent surveys appear to point in this direction. Although some commentators claim that the secularization of Turkey is merely a result of Western influence or even an alleged \"conspiracy\", other commentators, even some pro-government ones, have come to the conclusion that \"the real reason for the loss of faith in Islam is not the West but Turkey itself\".\nDeism in the United States.\nThough Deism subsided in the United States post-Enlightenment, it never died out entirely. Thomas Edison, for example, was heavily influenced by Thomas Paine's \"The Age of Reason\". Edison defended Paine's \"scientific deism\", saying, \"He has been called an atheist, but atheist he was not. Paine believed in a supreme intelligence, as representing the idea which other men often express by the name of deity.\" In 1878, Edison joined the Theosophical Society in New Jersey, but according to its founder, Helena Blavatsky, he was not a very active member. In an October 2, 1910, interview in the \"New York Times Magazine\", Edison stated:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nature is what we know. We do not know the gods of religions. And nature is not kind, or merciful, or loving. If God made me\u2014the fabled God of the three qualities of which I spoke: mercy, kindness, love\u2014He also made the fish I catch and eat. And where do His mercy, kindness, and love for that fish come in? No; nature made us\u2014nature did it all\u2014not the gods of the religions.\nEdison was labeled an atheist for those remarks, and although he did not allow himself to be drawn into the controversy publicly, he clarified himself in a private letter:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHe also stated, \"I do not believe in the God of the theologians; but that there is a Supreme Intelligence I do not doubt.\"\nThe 2001 American Religious Identification Survey (ARIS) report estimated that between 1990 and 2001 the number of self-identifying Deists grew from 6,000 to 49,000, representing about 0.02% of the U.S. population at the time. The 2008 ARIS survey found, based on their stated beliefs rather than their religious identification, that 70% of Americans believe in a personal God: roughly 12% are atheists or agnostics, and 12% believe in \"a deist or paganistic concept of the Divine as a higher power\" rather than a personal God.\nThe term \"ceremonial deism\" was coined in 1962 and has been used since 1984 by the Supreme Court of the United States to assess exemptions from the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, thought to be expressions of cultural tradition and not earnest invocations of a deity. It has been noted that the term does not describe any school of thought within Deism itself.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8584", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8584", "title": "Dramaturge", "text": "Literary adviser for drama productions\nA dramaturge or dramaturg (from Ancient Greek \u03b4\u03c1\u03b1\u03bc\u03b1\u03c4\u03bf\u03c5\u03c1\u03b3\u03cc\u03c2 \u2013 dramatourg\u00f3s) is a literary adviser or editor in a theatre, opera, or film company who researches, selects, adapts, edits, and interprets scripts, libretti, texts, and printed programmes (or helps others with these tasks), consults authors, and does public relations work. Its modern-day function was originated by the innovations of Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, an 18th-century German playwright, philosopher, and theatre theorist.\nResponsibilities.\nOne of the dramaturge's contributions is to categorise and discuss the various types of plays or operas, their interconnectedness and their styles. The responsibilities of a dramaturge vary from one theatre or opera company to the next. They might include the hiring of actors, the development of a season of plays or operas with a sense of coherence among them, assistance with and editing of new plays or operas by resident or guest playwrights or composers/librettists, the creation of programs or accompanying educational services, and helping the director with rehearsals. At larger theatres or opera houses, the dramaturge works on the historical and cultural research into the play or opera and its setting.\nIn theatre companies, a dramaturge will create a workbook for the director and actors and work extensively with the director prior to the first rehearsal.\nHistory.\nGotthold Ephraim Lessing was hired by the Hamburg National Theatre in 1767, to serve as the theatre's critic of plays and acting, a position which would later be named dramaturge. This position grew over time to what it is today, encompassing the wide variety of tasks seen by modern dramaturges.\nDiscrepancies with definition.\nThe modern definition of 'dramaturge' is often debated as to what specific tasks this job does, some define it as the bridge between the director and the actors, while others define it as one who determines the meaning of plays and shows for the actors, and also another group that claim that even they don't quite have a complete definition for their job. This discrepancy between dramaturges is likely due to the lack of an official historical definition, and the wide variety of tasks that dramaturges could be asked to work on, depending on the theatre, director, the show being produced, and the actors. Since Lessing did not create an official definition for his own position at the Hamburg National Theatre, modern dramaturges have to infer their tasks based on what Lessing did during his career, and adapt to the current needs of modern theatre.\nRecent growth.\nSince the year 2000, the number of dramaturges working around the world has increased. In 2000, 400 active dramaturges were recorded in the United States, with that number growing. There are various possible causes of this growth, but some dramaturges attribute the growth to the fact that dramaturgy combines two popular studies for young students: the liberal arts and theatre. Some dramaturges are worried, however, that this growth may slow down, due to a decrease in the number of modern plays being written.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8585", "revid": "252195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8585", "title": "Dispersion", "text": "Dispersion may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
