{"id": "3873", "revid": "50956511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3873", "title": "Bernard Montgomery", "text": "British Army officer (1887\u20131976)\nField Marshal Bernard Law Montgomery, 1st Viscount Montgomery of Alamein, (17 November 1887 \u2013 24 March 1976), nicknamed \"Monty\", was a senior British Army officer who served in the First World War, the Irish War of Independence and the Second World War.\nMontgomery first saw action in the First World War as a junior officer of the Royal Warwickshire Regiment. At M\u00e9teren, near the Belgian border at Bailleul, he was shot through the right lung by a sniper during the First Battle of Ypres. On returning to the Western Front as a general staff officer, he took part in the Battle of Arras in April\u2013May 1917. He also took part in the Battle of Passchendaele in late 1917 before finishing the war as chief of staff of the 47th (2nd London) Division. In the inter-war years he commanded the 17th (Service) Battalion, Royal Fusiliers and, later, the 1st Battalion, Royal Warwickshire Regiment before becoming commander of the 9th Infantry Brigade and then general officer commanding (GOC), 8th Infantry Division.\nDuring the Western Desert campaign of the Second World War, Montgomery commanded the Eighth Army from August 1942. He subsequently commanded the Eighth Army during the Allied invasion of Sicily and the Allied invasion of Italy and was in command of all Allied ground forces during the Battle of Normandy (Operation Overlord), from D-Day on 6 June 1944 until 1 September 1944. He then continued in command of the 21st Army Group for the rest of the , including the failed attempt to cross the Rhine during Operation Market Garden.\nWhen German armoured forces broke through the US lines in Belgium during the Battle of the Bulge, Montgomery received command of the northern shoulder of the Bulge. Montgomery's 21st Army Group, including the US Ninth Army and the First Allied Airborne Army, crossed the Rhine in Operation Plunder in March 1945. By the end of the war, troops under Montgomery's command had taken part in the encirclement of the Ruhr Pocket, liberated the Netherlands, and captured much of north-west Germany. On 4 May 1945, Montgomery accepted the surrender of the German forces in north-western Europe at L\u00fcneburg Heath, south of Hamburg, after the surrender of Berlin to the USSR on 2 May.\nAfter the war he became Commander-in-Chief of the British Army of the Rhine (BAOR) in Germany and then Chief of the Imperial General Staff (1946\u20131948). From 1948 to 1951, he served as Chairman of the Commanders-in-Chief Committee of the Western Union. He then served as NATO's Deputy Supreme Allied Commander Europe until his retirement in 1958.\nEarly life.\nMontgomery was born in Kennington, Surrey, in 1887, the fourth child of nine, to a Church of Ireland priest, Henry Montgomery, and his wife Maud (\"n\u00e9e\" Farrar). The Montgomerys, an Ulster Scots 'Ascendancy' gentry family, were the County Donegal branch of the Clan Montgomery. Henry Montgomery, at that time Vicar of St Mark's Church, Kennington, was the second son of Sir Robert Montgomery, a native of Inishowen in County Donegal in the north-west of Ulster, and a noted colonial administrator in British India. Sir Robert died a month after his grandson's birth. He was probably a descendant of Colonel Alexander Montgomery. Bernard's mother, Maud, was the daughter of Frederic William Farrar, the famous preacher, and was 18 years younger than her husband.\nAfter the death of Sir Robert Montgomery, Henry inherited the Montgomery ancestral estate of New Park in Moville, a small town in Inishowen in the north of County Donegal in Ulster, the northern province in Ireland. There was still \u00a313,000 to pay on a mortgage, a large debt in the 1880s (equivalent to \u00a3 in 2023), and Henry was at the time still only an Anglican vicar. Despite selling off all the farms that were in the townland of Ballynally, on the north-western shores of Lough Foyle, \"there was barely enough to keep up New Park and pay for the blasted summer holiday\" (i.e., at New Park).\nIt was a financial relief of some magnitude when, in 1889, Henry was made Bishop of Tasmania, then still a British colony, and Bernard spent his formative years there. Bishop Montgomery considered it his duty to spend as much time as possible in the rural areas of Tasmania and was away for up to six months at a time. While he was away, his wife, still in her mid-20s, gave her children \"constant\" beatings, then ignored them most of the time. Of Bernard's siblings, Sibyl died prematurely in Tasmania, and Harold, Donald and Una all emigrated. Maud Montgomery took little active interest in the education of her young children other than to have them taught by tutors brought from Britain, although Bernard briefly attended the then coeducational St Michael's Collegiate School. The loveless environment made Bernard something of a bully, as he himself recalled: \"I was a dreadful little boy. I don't suppose anybody would put up with my sort of behaviour these days.\" Later in life Montgomery refused to allow his son David to have anything to do with his grandmother, and refused to attend her funeral in 1949.\nThe family returned to England once for a Lambeth Conference in 1897, and Bernard and his brother Harold were educated at The King's School, Canterbury. In 1901, Bishop Montgomery became secretary of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, and the family returned to London. Montgomery attended St Paul's School and then the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, from which he was almost expelled for rowdiness and violence. On graduation in September 1908 he was commissioned into the 1st Battalion the Royal Warwickshire Regiment as a second lieutenant, and first saw overseas service later that year in India. He was promoted to lieutenant in 1910, and in 1912 became adjutant of the 1st Battalion of his regiment at Shorncliffe Army Camp.\nFirst World War.\nThe Great War began in August 1914 and Montgomery moved to France with his battalion that month, which was at the time part of the 10th Infantry Brigade of the 4th Division of the British Expeditionary Force (BEF). He was promoted to temporary captain on 14 September. He saw action at the Battle of Le Cateau that month and during the retreat from Mons. At M\u00e9teren, near the Belgian border at Bailleul on 13 October 1914, during an Allied counter-offensive, he was shot through the right lung by a sniper. Lying in the open, he remained still and pretended to be dead, in the hope that he would not receive any more enemy attention. One of his men did attempt to rescue him but was shot dead by a hidden enemy sniper and collapsed over Montgomery. The sniper continued to fire and Montgomery was hit once more, in the knee, but the dead soldier, in Montgomery's words, \"received many bullets meant for me.\" Assuming them to both be dead, the officers and men of Montgomery's battalion chose to leave them where they were until darkness arrived and stretcher bearers managed to recover the two bodies, with Montgomery by this time barely clinging on to life. The doctors at the advanced dressing station (ADS), too, had no hope for him and ordered a grave to be dug. Miraculously, however, Montgomery was still alive and, after being placed in an ambulance and then being sent to a hospital, was treated and eventually evacuated to England, where he would remain for well over a year. He was appointed a Companion of the Distinguished Service Order (DSO), for his gallant leadership during this period: the citation for this award, published in \"The London Gazette\" in December 1914 reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAfter recovering in early 1915, he was appointed brigade major, first of the 112th Infantry Brigade, and then with 104th Infantry Brigade, then training in Lancashire. He returned to the Western Front in early 1916 with his brigade, seeing service with it during the Battle of the Somme later in the year. In January 1917 he was assigned as a general staff officer, grade 2 (GSO2) with the 33rd Division and took part in the Battle of Arras in April\u2013May. In July he transferred over as a GSO2 to IX Corps, part of General Sir Herbert Plumer's Second Army.\nIt was in this role that Montgomery served at the Battle of Passchendaele which began in late July 1917. He was promoted to the temporary rank of major in February 1918, and brevet major in June. He finished the war in November 1918 as GSO1 (effectively chief of staff) of the 47th (2nd London) Division, with the temporary rank of lieutenant colonel, to which appointment and rank he had been assigned on 16 July. A photograph from October 1918, reproduced in many biographies, shows the then unknown Lieutenant-Colonel Montgomery standing in front of Winston Churchill (then the Minister of Munitions) at the parade following the liberation of Lille.\nMontgomery was profoundly influenced by his experiences during the war, in particular by the leadership, or rather the lack of it, being displayed by the senior commanders. He later wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There was little contact between the generals and the soldiers. I went through the whole war on the Western Front, except during the period I was in England after being wounded; I never once saw the British Commander-in-Chief, neither French nor Haig, and only twice did I see an Army Commander.\nThe higher staffs were out of touch with the regimental officers and with the troops. The former lived in comfort, which became greater as the distance of their headquarters behind the lines increased. There was no harm in this provided there was touch and sympathy between the staff and the troops. This was often lacking. At most large headquarters in back areas the doctrine seemed to me to be that the troops existed for the benefit of the staff. My war experience led me to believe that the staff must be the servant of the troops, and that a good staff officer must serve his commander and the troops but himself be anonymous.\nThe frightful casualties appalled me. The so-called \"good fighting generals\" of the war appeared to me to be those who had a complete disregard for human life. There were of course exceptions and I suppose one such was Plumer; I had only once seen him and had never spoken to him.\nBetween the world wars.\n1920s and Ireland.\nAfter the First World War, Montgomery commanded the 17th (Service) Battalion of the Royal Fusiliers, a battalion in the British Army of the Rhine, before reverting to his substantive rank of captain (brevet major) in November 1919. He had not at first been selected for the Staff College, Camberley, Surrey (his only hope of ever achieving high command). But at a tennis party in Cologne, he was able to persuade the Commander-in-chief (C-in-C) of the British Army of Occupation, Field Marshal Sir William Robertson, to add his name to the list.\nAfter graduating from the Staff College, he was appointed brigade major in the 17th Infantry Brigade in January 1921. The brigade was stationed in County Cork, Ireland, carrying out counter-guerilla operations during the final stages of the Irish War of Independence.\nMontgomery came to the conclusion that the conflict could not be won without harsh measures, and that self-government for Ireland was the only feasible solution; in 1923, after the establishment of the Irish Free State and during the Irish Civil War, Montgomery wrote to Colonel Arthur Percival of the Essex Regiment:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Personally, my whole attention was given to defeating the rebels but it never bothered me a bit how many houses were burnt. I think I regarded all civilians as 'Shinners' and I never had any dealings with any of them. My own view is that to win a war of this sort, you must be ruthless. Oliver Cromwell, or the Germans, would have settled it in a very short time. Nowadays public opinion precludes such methods, the nation would never allow it, and the politicians would lose their jobs if they sanctioned it. That being so, I consider that Lloyd George was right in what he did, if we had gone on we could probably have squashed the rebellion as a temporary measure, but it would have broken out again like an ulcer the moment we removed the troops. I think the rebels would probably have refused battles, and hidden their arms etc. until we had gone. The only way therefore was to give them some form of self government, and let them squash the rebellion themselves, they are the only people who could really stamp it out.\nIn one noteworthy incident on 2 May 1922, Montgomery led a force of 60 soldiers and four armoured cars to the town of Macroom to search for four British officers who were missing in the area. While he had hoped the show of force would assist in finding the men, he was under strict orders not to attack the IRA. On arriving in the town square in front of Macroom Castle, he summoned the IRA commander, Charlie Browne, to parley. At the castle gates Montgomery spoke to Browne, explaining what would happen should the officers not be released. Once finished, Browne responded with his own ultimatum to Montgomery to \"leave town within 10 minutes\". Browne then turned heels and returned to the Castle. At this point another IRA officer, Pat O'Sullivan, whistled to Montgomery drawing his attention to scores of IRA volunteers who had quietly taken up firing positions all around the square\u2014surrounding Montgomery's forces. Realising his precarious position, Montgomery led his troops out of the town, a decision which raised hostile questions in the House of Commons but was later approved by Montgomery's own superiors. Unknown to Montgomery at this time, the four missing officers had already been executed.\nIn May 1923, Montgomery was posted to the 49th (West Riding) Infantry Division, a Territorial Army (TA) formation. He returned to the 1st Battalion, Royal Warwickshire Regiment in 1925 as a company commander and was promoted to major in July 1925. From January 1926 to January 1929 he served as Deputy Assistant Adjutant General at the Staff College, Camberley, in the temporary rank of lieutenant-colonel.\nMarriage and family.\nIn 1925, in his first known courtship of a woman, Montgomery, then in his late thirties, proposed to a 17-year-old girl, Betty Anderson. His approach included drawing diagrams in the sand of how he would deploy his tanks and infantry in a future war, a contingency which seemed very remote at that time. She respected his ambition and single-mindedness but declined his proposal.\nIn 1927, he met and married Elizabeth (Betty) Carver, \"n\u00e9e\" Hobart. She was the sister of the future Second World War commander Sir Percy Hobart. Betty Carver had two sons in their early teens, John and Dick, from her first marriage to Oswald Carver. Dick Carver later wrote that it had been \"a very brave thing\" for Montgomery to take on a widow with two children. Montgomery's son, David, was born in August 1928.\nWhile on holiday in Burnham-on-Sea in Somerset in 1937, Betty suffered an insect bite which became infected, and she died in her husband's arms from septicaemia following amputation of her leg. The loss devastated Montgomery, who was then serving as a brigadier, but he insisted on throwing himself back into his work immediately after the funeral. Montgomery's marriage had been extremely happy. Much of his correspondence with his wife was destroyed when his quarters at Portsmouth were bombed during the Second World War. After Montgomery's death, John Carver wrote that his mother had arguably done the country a favour by keeping his personal oddities\u2014his extreme single-mindedness, and his intolerance of and suspicion of the motives of others\u2014within reasonable bounds long enough for him to have a chance of attaining high command.\nBoth of Montgomery's stepsons became army officers in the 1930s (both were serving in India at the time of their mother's death), and both served in the Second World War, each eventually attaining the rank of colonel. While serving as a GSO2 with Eighth Army, Dick Carver was sent forward during the pursuit after El Alamein to help identify a new site for Eighth Army HQ. He was taken prisoner at Mersa Matruh on 7 November 1942. Montgomery wrote to his contacts in England asking that inquiries be made via the Red Cross as to where his stepson was being held, and that parcels be sent to him. Like many British POWs, the most famous being General Richard O'Connor, Dick Carver escaped in September 1943 during the brief hiatus between Italy's departure from the war and the German seizure of the country. He eventually reached British lines on 5 December 1943, to the delight of his stepfather, who sent him home to Britain to recuperate.\n1930s.\nIn January 1929, Montgomery was promoted to brevet lieutenant-colonel. That month he returned to the 1st Battalion, Royal Warwickshire Regiment again, as Commander of Headquarters Company; he went to the War Office to help write the Infantry Training Manual in mid-1929. In 1931 Montgomery was promoted to substantive lieutenant-colonel and became the Commanding officer (CO) of the 1st Battalion, Royal Warwickshire Regiment and saw service in Palestine and British India. He was promoted to colonel in June 1934 (seniority from January 1932). He attended and was then recommended to become an instructor at the Indian Army Staff College (now the Pakistan Command and Staff College) in Quetta, British India.\nOn completion of his tour of duty in India, Montgomery returned to Britain in June 1937 where he took command of the 9th Infantry Brigade with the temporary rank of brigadier. His wife died that year.\nIn 1938, he organised an amphibious combined operations landing exercise that impressed the new C-in-C of Southern Command, General Sir Archibald Wavell. He was promoted to major-general on 14 October 1938 and took command of the 8th Infantry Division in the British mandate of Palestine. In Palestine, Montgomery was involved in suppressing an Arab revolt which had broken out over opposition to Jewish emigration. He returned in July 1939 to Britain, suffering a serious illness on the way, to command the 3rd Infantry Division. Reporting the suppression of the revolt in April 1939, Montgomery wrote, \"I shall be sorry to leave Palestine in many ways, as I have enjoyed the war out here\".\nSecond World War.\nBritish Expeditionary Force.\nPhoney war.\nBritain declared war on Germany on 3 September 1939 and the 3rd Division, together with its new General Officer Commanding (GOC), was deployed to France as part of the British Expeditionary Force (BEF), commanded by General Lord Gort. Shortly after the division's arrival overseas, Montgomery faced serious trouble from his military superiors and the clergy for his frank attitude regarding the sexual health of his soldiers, but was defended from dismissal by his superior Alan Brooke, commander of II Corps, of which Montgomery's division formed a part. Montgomery had issued a circular on the prevention of venereal disease, worded in such \"obscene language\" that both the Church of England and Roman Catholic senior chaplains objected; Brooke told Monty that he did not want any further errors of this kind, though deciding not to get him to formally withdraw it as it would remove any \"vestige of respect\" left for him.\nAlthough Montgomery's new command was a Regular Army formation, comprising the 7th (Guards), and the 8th and 9th Infantry Brigades along with supporting units, he was not impressed with its readiness for battle. As a result, while most of the rest of the BEF set about preparing defences for an expected German attack sometime in the future, Montgomery began training his 3rd Division in offensive tactics, organising several exercises, each of which lasted for several days at a time. Mostly they revolved around the division advancing towards an objective, often a river line, only to come under attack and forced to withdraw to another position, usually behind another river. These exercises usually occurred at night with only very minimal lighting being allowed. By the spring of 1940 Montgomery's division had gained a reputation of being a very agile and flexible formation. By then the Allies had agreed to Plan D, where they would advance deep into Belgium and take up positions on the River Dyle by the time the German forces attacked. Brooke, Montgomery's corps commander, was pessimistic about the plan but Montgomery, in contrast, was not concerned, believing that he and his division would perform well regardless of the circumstances, particularly in a war of movement.\nBattle of France.\nMontgomery's training paid off when the Germans began their invasion of the Low Countries on 10 May 1940 and the 3rd Division advanced to its planned position, near the Belgian city of Louvain. Soon after arrival, the division was fired on by members of the Belgian 10th Infantry Division who mistook them for German paratroopers; Montgomery resolved the incident by approaching them and offering to place himself under Belgian command, although Montgomery himself took control when the Germans arrived. During this time he began to develop a particular habit, which he would keep throughout the war, of going to bed at 21:30 every night without fail and giving only a single order\u2014that he was not to be disturbed\u2014which was only very rarely disobeyed.\nThe 3rd Division saw comparatively little action but, owing to the strict training methods of Montgomery, the division always managed to be in the right place at the right time, especially so during the retreat into France. By 27 May, when the Belgian Army on the left flank of the BEF began to disintegrate, the 3rd Division achieved something very difficult, the movement at night from the right to the left of another division and only 2,000 yards behind it. This was performed with great professionalism and occurred without any incidents and thereby filled a very vulnerable gap in the BEF's defensive line. On 29/30 May, Montgomery temporarily took over from Brooke, who received orders to return to the United Kingdom, as GOC of II Corps for the final stages of the Dunkirk evacuation.\nThe 3rd Division, temporarily commanded by Kenneth Anderson in Montgomery's absence, returned to Britain intact with minimal casualties. Operation Dynamo\u2014codename for the Dunkirk evacuation\u2014saw 330,000 Allied military personnel, including most of the BEF, to Britain, although the BEF was forced to leave behind a significant amount of equipment.\nService in the United Kingdom 1940\u22121942.\nOn his return Montgomery antagonised the War Office with trenchant criticisms of the command of the BEF and was briefly relegated to divisional command of 3rd Division, which was the only fully equipped division in Britain. He was made a Companion of the Order of the Bath.\nMontgomery was ordered to make ready the 3rd Division to invade the neutral Portuguese Azores. Models of the islands were prepared and detailed plans worked out for the invasion. The invasion plans did not go ahead and plans switched to invading the Cape Verde islands also belonging to neutral Portugal. These invasion plans also did not go ahead. Montgomery was then ordered to prepare plans for the invasion of neutral Ireland and to seize Cork, Cobh and Cork harbour. These invasion plans, like those of the Portuguese islands, also did not go ahead and in July 1940, Montgomery was appointed acting lieutenant-general and after handing over command of his division to James Gammell, he was placed in command of V Corps, responsible for the defence of Hampshire and Dorset and started a long-running feud with the new Commander-in-chief (C-in-C) of Southern Command, Lieutenant-General Claude Auchinleck.\nIn April 1941, he became commander of XII Corps responsible for the defence of Kent. During this period he instituted a regime of continuous training and insisted on high levels of physical fitness for both officers and other ranks. He was ruthless in sacking officers he considered unfit for command in action. He was promoted to temporary lieutenant-general in July, overseeing the defence of Kent, Sussex and Surrey. In December Montgomery was given command of South-Eastern Command. He renamed his command the South-Eastern Army to promote offensive spirit. During this time he further developed and rehearsed his ideas and trained his soldiers, culminating in Exercise Tiger in May 1942, a combined forces exercise involving 100,000 troops.\nNorth Africa and Italy.\nMontgomery's early command.\nIn 1942, a new field commander was required in the Middle East, where Auchinleck was fulfilling both the role of C-in-C of Middle East Command and commander Eighth Army. He had stabilised the Allied position at the First Battle of El Alamein, but after a visit in August 1942, the Prime Minister, Winston Churchill, replaced him as C-in-C with General Sir Harold Alexander and William Gott as commander of the Eighth Army in the Western Desert. However, after Gott was killed flying back to Cairo, Churchill was persuaded by Brooke, who by this time was Chief of the Imperial General Staff (CIGS), to appoint Montgomery, who had only just been nominated to replace Alexander, as commander of the British First Army for Operation Torch, the invasion of French North Africa.\nA story, probably apocryphal but popular at the time, is that the appointment caused Montgomery to remark that \"After having an easy war, things have now got much more difficult.\" A colleague is supposed to have told him to cheer up\u2014at which point Montgomery said \"I'm not talking about me, I'm talking about Rommel!\"\nHe ordered the creation of the X Corps, which contained all armoured divisions, to fight alongside his XXX Corps, which was all infantry divisions. This arrangement differed from the German Panzer Corps: one of Rommel's Panzer Corps combined infantry, armour and artillery units under one corps commander. The only common commander for Montgomery's all-infantry and all-armour corps was the Eighth Army Commander himself. Writing post-war the English historian Correlli Barnett commented that Montgomery's solution \"was in every way opposite to Auchinleck's and in every way wrong, for it carried the existing dangerous separatism still further.\" \nMontgomery reinforced the long front line at El Alamein, something that would take two months to accomplish. He asked Alexander to send him two new British divisions (51st Highland and 44th Home Counties) that were then arriving in Egypt and were scheduled to be deployed in defence of the Nile Delta. He moved his field HQ to Burg al Arab, close to the Air Force command post in order to better coordinate combined operations.\nMontgomery was determined that the army, navy and air forces should fight their battles in a unified, focused manner according to a detailed plan. He ordered immediate reinforcement of the vital heights of Alam Halfa, just behind his own lines, expecting the German commander, Erwin Rommel, to attack with the heights as his objective, something that Rommel soon did. Montgomery ordered all contingency plans for retreat to be destroyed. \"I have cancelled the plan for withdrawal. If we are attacked, then there will be no retreat. If we cannot stay here alive, then we will stay here dead\", he told his officers at the first meeting he held with them in the desert, though, in fact, Auchinleck had no plans to withdraw from the strong defensive position he had chosen and established at El Alamein.\nMontgomery made a great effort to appear before troops as often as possible, frequently visiting various units and making himself known to the men, often arranging for cigarettes to be distributed. Although he still wore a standard British officer's cap on arrival in the desert, he briefly wore an Australian broad-brimmed hat before switching to wearing the black beret (with the badge of the Royal Tank Regiment and the British General Officer's cap badge) for which he became notable. The black beret was offered to him by Jim Fraser while the latter was driving him on an inspection tour. Both Brooke and Alexander were astonished by the transformation in atmosphere when they visited on 19 August, less than a week after Montgomery had taken command.\nAlan Brooke said that Churchill was always impatient for his generals to attack at once, and he wrote that Montgomery was always \"my Monty\" when Montgomery was out of favour with Churchill. Anthony Eden had some late night drinks with Churchill, and Eden said at a meeting of the Chiefs of Staff the next day (29 October 1942) that the Middle East offensive was \"petering out\". Alanbrooke had told Churchill \"fairly plainly\" what he thought of Eden's ability to judge the tactical situation from a distance, and was supported at the Chiefs of Staff meeting by Jan Smuts.\nFirst battles with Rommel.\nRommel attempted to turn the left flank of the Eighth Army at the Battle of Alam el Halfa from 31 August 1942. The German/Italian armoured corps infantry attack was stopped in very heavy fighting. Rommel's forces had to withdraw urgently lest their retreat through the British minefields be cut off. Montgomery was criticised for not counter-attacking the retreating forces immediately, but he felt strongly that his methodical build-up of British forces was not yet ready. A hasty counter-attack risked ruining his strategy for an offensive on his own terms in late October, planning for which had begun soon after he took command. He was confirmed in the permanent rank of lieutenant-general in mid-October.\nThe conquest of Libya was essential for airfields to support Malta and to threaten the rear of Axis forces opposing Operation Torch. Montgomery prepared meticulously for the new offensive after convincing Churchill that the time was not being wasted. (Churchill sent a telegram to Alexander on 23 September 1942 which began, \"We are in your hands and of course a victorious battle makes amends for much delay.\") He was determined not to fight until he thought there had been sufficient preparation for a decisive victory, and put into action his beliefs with the gathering of resources, detailed planning, the training of troops\u2014especially in clearing minefields and fighting at night\u2014and in the use of 252 of the latest American-built Sherman tanks, 90 M7 Priest self-propelled howitzers, and making a personal visit to every unit involved in the offensive. By the time the offensive was ready in late October, Eighth Army had 231,000 men on its ration strength.\nEl Alamein.\nThe Second Battle of El Alamein began on 23 October 1942, and ended 12 days later with one of the first large-scale, decisive Allied land victories of the war. Montgomery correctly predicted both the length of the battle and the number of casualties (13,500).\nHistorian Correlli Barnett has pointed out that the rain also fell on the Germans, and that the weather is therefore an inadequate explanation for the failure to exploit the breakthrough, but nevertheless the Battle of El Alamein had been a great success. Over 30,000 prisoners of war were taken, including the German second-in-command, General Ritter von Thoma, as well as eight other general officers.\nTunisia.\nMontgomery was advanced to KCB and promoted to full general. He kept the initiative, applying superior strength when it suited him, forcing Rommel out of each successive defensive position. On 6 March 1943, Rommel's attack on the over-extended Eighth Army at Medenine (Operation Capri) with the largest concentration of German armour in North Africa was successfully repulsed. At the Mareth Line, 20 to 27 March, when Montgomery encountered fiercer frontal opposition than he had anticipated, he switched his major effort into an outflanking inland pincer, backed by low-flying RAF fighter-bomber support. For his role in North Africa he was awarded the Legion of Merit by the United States government in the rank of Chief Commander.\nSicily.\nThe next major Allied attack was the Allied invasion of Sicily (Operation Husky). Montgomery considered the initial plans for the Allied invasion, which had been agreed in principle by General Dwight D. Eisenhower, the Supreme Allied Commander Allied Forces Headquarters, and General Alexander, the 15th Army Group commander, to be unworkable because of the dispersion of effort. He managed to have the plans recast to concentrate the Allied forces, having Lieutenant General George Patton's US Seventh Army land in the Gulf of Gela (on the Eighth Army's left flank, which landed around Syracuse in the south-east of Sicily) rather than near Palermo in the west and north of Sicily. Inter-Allied tensions grew as the American commanders, Patton and Omar Bradley (then commanding US II Corps under Patton), took umbrage at what they saw as Montgomery's attitudes and boastfulness. However, while they were considered three of the greatest soldiers of their time, due to their competitiveness they were renowned for \"squabbling like three schoolgirls\" thanks to their \"bitchiness\", \"whining to their superiors\" and \"showing off\".\nItaly.\nMontgomery's Eighth Army was then fully involved in the Allied invasion of Italy in early September 1943, becoming the first of the Allied forces to land in Western Europe. Led by Lieutenant General Sir Miles Dempsey's XIII Corps, the Eighth Army landed on the toe of Italy in Operation Baytown on 3 September, four years to the day after Britain declared war on Germany. They encountered little enemy resistance. The Germans had made the decision to fall back and did what they could to stall the Eighth Army's advance, including blowing up bridges, laying mines, and setting up booby-traps. All of these slowed the Army's advance north on the awful Italian roads, although it was Montgomery who was later much criticised for the lack of progress. On 9 September the British 1st Airborne Division landed at the key port of Taranto in the heel of Italy as part of Operation Slapstick, capturing the port unopposed. On the same day the U.S. Fifth Army under Lieutenant General Mark W. Clark (which actually contained a large number of British troops) landed at Salerno, near Naples, as part of Operation Avalanche but soon found itself fighting for its very existence with the Germans launching several determined counterattacks to try and push the Allies back into the sea, with Montgomery's men being too far away to provide any real assistance. The situation was tense over the next few days but the two armies (both of which formed the 15th Army Group under General Alexander) finally began to meet on 16 September, by which time the crisis at Salerno was virtually over.\nClark's Fifth Army then began to advance to the west of the Apennine Mountains while Montgomery, with Lieutenant General Charles Allfrey's V Corps having arrived to reinforce Dempsey's XIII Corps, advanced to the east. The Foggia airfields soon fell to Allfrey's V Corps, but the Germans fought hard in the defence of Termoli and Biferno. Movement soon came to an almost complete halt in the early part of November when the Eighth Army came up against a new defensive line established by the Germans on the River Sangro, which was to be the scene of much bitter and heavy fighting for the next month. While some ground was gained, it was often at the expense of heavy casualties and the Germans always managed to retreat to new defensive positions.\nMontgomery abhorred what he considered to be a lack of coordination, a dispersion of effort, a strategic muddle and a lack of opportunism in the Allied campaign in Italy, describing the whole affair as a \"dog's breakfast\".\nReturn to France.\nNormandy.\nAs a result of his dissatisfaction with Italy, he was delighted to receive the news that he was to return to Britain in January 1944. He was assigned to command the 21st Army Group consisting of all Allied ground forces participating in Operation Overlord, codename for the Allied invasion of Normandy. Overall direction was assigned to the Supreme Allied Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Forces, American General Dwight D. Eisenhower. Both Churchill and Eisenhower had found Montgomery difficult to work with in the past and wanted the position to go to the more affable General Sir Harold Alexander. However Montgomery's patron, General Sir Alan Brooke, firmly argued that Montgomery was a much superior general to Alexander and ensured his appointment. Without Brooke's support, Montgomery would have remained in Italy. At his headquarters St Paul's School on 7 April and 15 May Montgomery presented his strategy for the invasion. He envisaged a ninety-day battle, with all forces reaching the Seine. The campaign would pivot on an Allied-held Caen in the east of the Normandy bridgehead, with relatively static British and Canadian armies forming a shoulder to attract and defeat German counter-attacks, relieving the US armies who would move and seize the Cotentin Peninsula and Brittany, wheeling south and then east on the right forming a pincer.\nDuring the ten weeks of the Battle of Normandy, unfavourable autumnal weather conditions disrupted the Normandy landing areas. Montgomery's initial plan was for the Anglo-Canadian troops under his command to break out immediately from their beachheads on the Calvados coast towards Caen with the aim of taking the city on either D Day or two days later. Montgomery attempted to take Caen with the 3rd Infantry Division, the 50th (Northumbrian) Infantry Division and the 3rd Canadian Division, but was stopped from 6\u20138 June by the 21st Panzer Division and 12th SS Panzer Division \"Hitlerjugend\", who hit the advancing Anglo-Canadian troops very hard. The 12th Waffen SS Division \"Hitlerjugend\", as its name implies, was drawn entirely from the more fanatical elements of the Hitler Youth, and commanded by the ruthless SS-\"Brigadef\u00fchrer\" Kurt Meyer, aka \"Panzer Meyer\". Rommel followed up this success by ordering the 2nd Panzer Division to Caen while Field Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt received permission from Hitler to have the elite 1st SS Panzer Division \"Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler\" and 2nd SS Panzer Division \"Das Reich\" sent to Caen as well. Montgomery thus had to face what Stephen Badsey called the \"most formidable\" of all the German divisions in France.\nThe failure to take Caen immediately has been the source of an immense historiographical dispute with bitter nationalist overtones. Broadly, there has been a \"British school\" which accepts Montgomery's post-war claim that he never intended to take Caen at once, and instead the Anglo-Canadian operations around Caen were a \"holding operation\" intended to attract the bulk of the German forces towards the Caen sector to allow the Americans to stage the \"break out operation\" on the left flank of the German positions, which was all part of Montgomery's \"Master Plan\" that he had conceived long before the Normandy campaign. By contrast, the \"American school\" argued that Montgomery's initial \"master plan\" was for the 21st Army Group to take Caen at once and move his tank divisions into the plains south of Caen, to then stage a breakout that would lead the 21st Army Group into the plains of northern France and hence into Antwerp and finally the Ruhr. Letters written by Eisenhower at the time of the battle make it clear that Eisenhower was expecting from Montgomery \"the early capture of the important focal point of Caen\". Later, when this plan had clearly failed, Eisenhower wrote that Montgomery had \"evolved\" the plan to have the US forces achieve the break-out instead.\nAs the campaign progressed, Montgomery altered his initial plan for the invasion and continued the strategy of attracting and holding German counter-attacks in the area north of Caen rather than to the south, to allow the U.S. First Army in the west to take Cherbourg. A memo summarising Montgomery's operations written by Eisenhower's chief of staff, General Walter Bedell Smith, who met with Montgomery in late June 1944 says nothing about Montgomery conducting a \"holding operation\" in the Caen sector, and instead speaks of him seeking a \"breakout\" into the plains south of the Seine. On 12 June, Montgomery ordered the 7th Armoured Division into an attack against the Panzer Lehr Division that made good progress at first, but ended when the Panzer Lehr was joined by the 2nd Panzer Division. At the Battle of Villers-Bocage on 13 June, the British lost twenty Cromwell tanks to five Tiger tanks led by SS \"Obersturmf\u00fchrer\" Michael Wittmann, in about five minutes. Despite the setback at Villers Bocage, Montgomery was still optimistic as the Allies were landing more troops and supplies than they were losing in battle, and though the German lines were holding, the \"Wehrmacht\" and \"Waffen SS\" were suffering considerable attrition. Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur Tedder complained that it was impossible to move fighter squadrons to France until Montgomery had captured some airfields, something he asserted that Montgomery appeared incapable of doing. The first V-1 flying bomb attacks on London, which started on 13 June, further increased the pressure on Montgomery from Whitehall to speed up his advance.\nOn 18 June, Montgomery ordered Bradley to take Cherbourg while the British were to take Caen by 23 June. In Operation Epsom, the British VII Corps commanded by Sir Richard O'Connor attempted to outflank Caen from the west by breaking through the dividing line between the Panzer Lehr and the 12th SS to take the strategic Hill 112. Epsom began well with O'Connor's assault force (the British 15th Scottish Division) breaking through and with the 11th Armoured Division stopping the counter-attacks of the 12th SS Division. General Friedrich Dollmann of Seventh Army had to commit the newly arrived II SS Panzer Corps to stop the British offensive. Dollmann, fearing that Epsom would be a success, committed suicide and was replaced by SS \"Oberstegruppenf\u00fchrer\" Paul Hausser. O'Connor, at the cost of about 4,000 men, had won a salient only deep and wide, but placed the Germans in an unviable long-term position. There was a strong sense of crisis in the Allied command, as the Allies had advanced only about inland, at a time when their plans called for them to have already taken Rennes, Alen\u00e7on and St. Malo. After Epsom, Montgomery had to tell General Harry Crerar that the activation of the First Canadian Army would have to wait as there was only room at present, in the Caen sector, for the newly arrived XII Corps under Lieutenant-General Neil Ritchie, which caused some tension with Crerar, who was anxious to get into the field. Epsom had forced further German forces into Caen but all through June and the first half of July Rommel, Rundstedt, and Hitler were engaged in planning for a great offensive to drive the British into the sea; it was never launched and would have required the commitment of a large number of German forces to the Caen sector.\nIt was only after several failed attempts to break out in the Caen sector that Montgomery devised what he later called his \"master plan\" of having the 21st Army Group hold the bulk of the German forces, thus allowing the Americans to break out. The Canadian historians Terry Copp and Robert Vogel wrote about the dispute between the \"American school\" and \"British school\" after having suffered several setbacks in June 1944:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Montgomery drew what was the indisputably correct conclusion from these events. If the British and Canadians could continue to hold the bulk of the German armoured divisions on their front through a series of limited attacks, they could wear down the Germans and create the conditions for an American breakout on the right.\nThis is what Montgomery proposed in his Directive of June 30th and, if he and his admirers had let the record speak for itself, there would be little debate about his conduct of the first stages of the Normandy campaign. Instead, Montgomery insisted that this Directive was a consistent part of a master plan that he had devised long before the invasion. Curiously, this view does a great disservice to 'Monty' for any rigid planning of operations before the German response was known would have been bad generalship indeed!\"\nHampered by stormy weather and the bocage terrain, Montgomery had to ensure that Rommel focused on the British in the east rather than the Americans in the west, who had to take the Cotentin Peninsula and Brittany before the Germans could be trapped by a general swing east. Montgomery told General Sir Miles Dempsey, the commander of Second British Army: \"Go on hitting, drawing the German strength, especially some of the armour, onto yourself\u2014so as to ease the way for Brad [Bradley].\" The Germans had deployed twelve divisions, of which six were Panzer divisions, against the British while deploying eight divisions, of which three were Panzer divisions, against the Americans. By the middle of July Caen had not been taken, as Rommel continued to prioritise prevention of the break-out by British forces rather than the western territories being taken by the Americans. This was broadly as Montgomery had planned, albeit not with the same speed as he outlined at St Paul's, although as the American historian Carlo D'Este pointed out the actual situation in Normandy was \"vastly different\" from what was envisioned at the St. Paul's conference, as only one of four goals outlined in May had been achieved by 10 July.\nOn 7 July, Montgomery began Operation Charnwood with a carpet bombing offensive that turned much of the French countryside and the city of Caen into a wasteland. The British and Canadians succeeded in advancing into northern Caen before the Germans, who used the ruins to their advantage and stopped the offensive. On 10 July, Montgomery ordered Bradley to take Avranches, after which U.S. Third Army would be activated to drive towards Le Mans and Alen\u00e7on. On 14 July 1944, Montgomery wrote to his patron Brooke, saying he had chosen on a \"real show down on the eastern flanks, and to loose a Corps of three armoured divisions in the open country about the Caen-Falaise road\u00a0... The possibilities are immense; with seven hundred tanks loosed to the South-east of Caen, and the armoured cars operating far ahead, anything can happen.\" The French Resistance had launched Plan Violet in June 1944 to systematically destroy the telephone system of France, which forced the Germans to use their radios more and more to communicate, and as the code-breakers of Bletchley Park had broken many of the German codes, Montgomery had, thanks to \"Ultra\" intelligence, a good idea of the German situation. Montgomery thus knew German Army Group B had lost 96,400 men while receiving 5,200 replacements and the Panzer Lehr Division now based at Saint-L\u00f4 was down to only 40 tanks. Montgomery later wrote that he knew he had the Normandy campaign won at this point as the Germans had almost no reserves while he had three armoured divisions in reserve.\nAn American break-out was achieved with Operation Cobra and the encirclement of German forces in the Falaise pocket at the cost of British losses with the diversionary Operation Goodwood. On the early morning of 18 July 1944, Operation Goodwood began with British heavy bombers beginning carpet bombing attacks that further devastated what was left of Caen and the surrounding countryside. A British tank crewman from the Guards Armoured Division later recalled: \"At 0500 hours a distant thunder in the air brought all the sleepy-eyed tank crews out of their blankets. 1,000 Lancasters were flying from the sea in groups of three or four at . Ahead of them the pathfinders were scattering their flares and before long the first bombs were dropping.\" A German tankman from the 21st Panzer Division at the receiving end of this bombardment remembered: \"We saw little dots detach themselves from the planes, so many of them that the crazy thought occurred to us: are those leaflets?\u00a0... Among the thunder of the explosions, we could hear the wounded scream and the insane howling of men who had [been] driven mad.\" The British bombing had badly smashed the German front-line units. Initially, the three British armoured divisions assigned to lead the offensive, the 7th, 11th and the Guards, made rapid progress and were soon approaching the Borguebus ridge, which dominated the landscape south of Caen, by noon.\nIf the British could take the Borguebus Ridge, the way to the plains of northern France would be wide open, and potentially Paris could be taken, which explains the ferocity with which the Germans defended the ridge. One German officer, Lieutenant Baron von Rosen, recalled that to motivate a Luftwaffe officer commanding a battery of four 88\u00a0mm guns to fight against the British tanks, he had to hold his handgun to the officer's head \"and asked him whether he would like to be killed immediately or get a high decoration. He decided for the latter.\" The well dug-in 88\u00a0mm guns around the Borguebus Ridge began taking a toll on the British Sherman tanks, and the countryside was soon dotted with dozens of burning Shermans. One British officer reported with worry: \"I see palls of smoke and tanks brewing up with flames belching forth from their turrets. I see men climbing out, on fire like torches, rolling on the ground to try and douse the flames.\" Despite Montgomery's orders to try to press on, fierce German counter-attacks stopped the British offensive.\nThe objectives of Operation Goodwood were all achieved except the complete capture of the Bourgebus Ridge, which was only partially taken. The operation was a strategic Allied success in drawing in the last German reserves in Normandy towards the Caen sector away from the American sector, greatly assisting the American breakout in Operation Cobra. By the end of Goodwood on 25 July 1944, the Canadians had finally taken Caen while the British tanks had reached the plains south of Caen, giving Montgomery the \"hinge\" he had been seeking, while forcing the Germans to commit the last of their reserves to stop the Anglo-Canadian offensive. \"Ultra\" decrypts indicated that the Germans now facing Bradley were seriously understrength, with Operation Cobra about to commence. During Operation Goodwood, the British had 400 tanks knocked out, with many recovered returning to service. The casualties were 5,500 with of ground gained. Bradley recognised Montgomery's plan to pin down German armour and allow U.S. forces to break out:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The British and Canadian armies were to decoy the enemy reserves and draw them to their front on the extreme eastern edge of the Allied beachhead. Thus, while Monty taunted the enemy at Caen, we [the Americans] were to make our break on the long roundabout road to Paris. When reckoned in terms of national pride, this British decoy mission became a sacrificial one, for while we tramped around the outside flank, the British were to sit in place and pin down the Germans. Yet strategically it fitted into a logical division of labors, for it was towards Caen that the enemy reserves would race once the alarm was sounded.\nThe long-running dispute over what Montgomery's \"master plan\" in Normandy led historians to differ greatly about the purpose of Goodwood. The British journalist Mark Urban wrote that the purpose of Goodwood was to draw German troops to their left flank to allow the American forces to break out on the right flank, arguing that Montgomery had to lie to his soldiers about the purpose of Goodwood, as the average British soldier would not have understood why they were being asked to create a diversion to allow the Americans to have the glory of staging the breakout with Operation Cobra. By contrast, the American historian Stephen Power argued that Goodwood was intended to be the \"breakout\" offensive and not a \"holding operation\", writing: \"It is unrealistic to assert that an operation which called for the use of 4,500 Allied aircraft, 700 artillery pieces and over 8,000 armored vehicles and trucks and that cost the British over 5,500 casualties was conceived and executed for so limited an objective.\" Power noted that Goodwood and Cobra were supposed to take effect on the same day, 18 July 1944, but Cobra was cancelled owing to heavy rain in the American sector, and argued that both operations were meant to be breakout operations to trap the German armies in Normandy. American military writer Drew Middleton wrote that there is no doubt that Montgomery wanted Goodwood to provide a \"shield\" for Bradley, but at the same time Montgomery was clearly hoping for more than merely diverting German attention away from the American sector. British historian John Keegan pointed out that Montgomery made differing statements before Goodwood about the purpose of the operation. Keegan wrote that Montgomery engaged in what he called a \"hedging of his bets\" when drafting his plans for Goodwood, with a plan for a \"break out if the front collapsed, if not, sound documentary evidence that all he had intended in the first place was a battle of attrition\". Again Bradley confirmed Montgomery's plan and that the capture of Caen was only incidental to his mission, not critical. The American magazine \"LIFE\" quoted Bradley in 1951:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;While Collins was hoisting his VII Corps flag over Cherbourg, Montgomery was spending his reputation in a bitter siege against the old university city of Caen. For three weeks he had rammed his troops against those panzer divisions he had deliberately drawn towards that city as part of our Allied strategy of diversion in the Normandy Campaign. Although Caen contained an important road junction that Montgomery would eventually need, for the moment the capture of that city was only incidental to his mission. For Monty's primary task was to attract German troops to the British front that we might more easily secure Cherbourg and get into position for the breakout.\nWhile this diversion of Montgomery's was brilliantly achieved, he nevertheless left himself open to criticism by overemphasising the importance of his thrust toward Caen. Had he limited himself simply to the containment without making Caen a symbol of it, he would have been credited with success instead of being charged, as he was, with failure. With Goodwood drawing the Wehrmacht towards the British sector, U.S. First Army enjoyed a two-to-one numerical superiority. Bradley accepted Montgomery's advice to begin the offensive by concentrating at one point instead of a \"broad front\" as Eisenhower would have preferred.\nOperation Goodwood almost cost Montgomery his job, as Eisenhower seriously considered sacking him and only chose not to do so because to sack the popular \"Monty\" would have caused such a political backlash in Britain against the Americans at a critical moment in the war that the resulting strains in the Atlantic alliance were not considered worth it. Montgomery expressed his satisfaction at the results of Goodwood when calling the operation off. Eisenhower was under the impression that Goodwood was to be a break-out operation. Either there was a miscommunication between the two men or Eisenhower did not understand the strategy. Bradley fully understood Montgomery's intentions. Both men would not give away to the press the true intentions of their strategy.\nMany American officers had found Montgomery a difficult man to work with, and after Goodwood, pressured Eisenhower to fire Montgomery. Although the Eisenhower\u2013Montgomery dispute is sometimes depicted in nationalist terms as being an Anglo-American struggle, it was the British Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur Tedder who was pressing Eisenhower most strongly after Goodwood to fire Montgomery. An American officer wrote in his diary that Tedder had come to see Eisenhower to \"pursue his current favourite subject, the sacking of Monty\". With Tedder leading the \"sack Monty\" campaign, it encouraged Montgomery's American enemies to press Eisenhower to fire Montgomery. Brooke was sufficiently worried about the \"sack Monty\" campaign to visit Montgomery at his Tactical Headquarters (TAC) in France and as he wrote in his diary; \"warned [Montgomery] of a tendency in the PM [Churchill] to listen to suggestions that Monty played for safety and was not prepared to take risks\". Brooke advised Montgomery to invite Churchill to Normandy, arguing that if the \"sack Monty\" campaign had won the Prime Minister over, then his career would be over, as having Churchill's backing would give Eisenhower the political \"cover\" to fire Montgomery. On 20 July, Montgomery met Eisenhower and on 21 July, Churchill, at the TAC in France. One of Montgomery's staff officers wrote afterwards that it was \"common knowledge at Tac that Churchill had come to sack Monty\". No notes were taken at the Eisenhower\u2013Montgomery and Churchill\u2013Montgomery meetings, but Montgomery was able to persuade both men not to sack him.\nWith the success of Cobra, which was soon followed by unleashing Patton's Third Army, Eisenhower wrote to Montgomery: \"Am delighted that your basic plan has begun brilliantly to unfold with Bradley's initial success.\" The success of Cobra was aided by Operation Spring, when the II Canadian Corps under General Guy Simonds (the only Canadian general whose skill Montgomery respected) began an offensive south of Caen that made little headway, but which the Germans regarded as the main offensive. Once Third Army arrived, Bradley was promoted to take command of the newly created 12th Army Group, consisting of U.S. First and Third Armies. Following the American breakout, there followed the Battle of Falaise Gap. British, Canadian, and Polish soldiers of 21st Army Group commanded by Montgomery advanced south, while the American and French soldiers of Bradley's 12th Army Group advanced north to encircle the German Army Group B at Falaise, as Montgomery waged what Urban called \"a huge battle of annihilation\" in August 1944. Montgomery began his offensive into the \"Suisse Normande\" region with Operation Bluecoat, with Sir Richard O'Connor's VIII Corps and Gerard Bucknall's XXX Corps heading south. A dissatisfied Montgomery sacked Bucknall for being insufficiently aggressive and replaced him with General Brian Horrocks. At the same time, Montgomery ordered Patton\u2014whose Third Army was supposed to advance into Brittany\u2014to instead capture Nantes, which was soon taken.\nHitler waited too long to order his soldiers to retreat from Normandy, leading Montgomery to write: \"He [Hitler] refused to face the only sound military course. As a result the Allies caused the enemy staggering losses in men and materials.\" Knowing via \"Ultra\" that Hitler was not planning to retreat from Normandy, Montgomery, on 6 August 1944, ordered an envelopment operation against Army Group B\u2014with the First Canadian Army under Harry Crerar to advance towards Falaise, British Second Army under Miles Dempsey to advance towards Argentan, and Patton's Third Army to advance to Alen\u00e7on. On 11 August, Montgomery changed his plan, with the Canadians to take Falaise and to meet the Americans at Argentan. The First Canadian Army launched two operations, Operation Totalize on 7 August, which advanced only in four days in the face of fierce German resistance, and Operation Tractable on 14 August, which finally took Falaise on 17 August. In view of the slow Canadian advance, Patton requested permission to take Falaise, but was refused by Bradley on 13 August. This prompted much controversy, many historians arguing that Bradley lacked aggression and that Montgomery should have overruled Bradley.\nThe so-called Falaise Gap was closed on 22 August 1944, but several American generals, most notably Patton, accused Montgomery of being insufficiently aggressive in closing it. About 60,000 German soldiers were trapped in Normandy, but before 22 August, about 20,000 Germans had escaped through the Falaise Gap. About 10,000 Germans had been killed in the Battle of the Falaise Gap, which led a stunned Eisenhower, who viewed the battlefield on 24 August, to comment with horror that it was impossible to walk without stepping on corpses. The successful conclusion of the Normandy campaign saw the beginning of the debate between the \"American school\" and \"British school\" as both American and British generals started to advance claims about who was most responsible for this victory. Brooke wrote in defence of his prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Montgomery: \"Ike knows nothing about strategy and is 'quite' unsuited to the post of Supreme Commander. It is no wonder that Monty's real high ability is not always realised. Especially so when 'national' spectacles pervert the perspective of the strategic landscape.\" About Montgomery's conduct of the Normandy campaign, Badsey wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Too much discussion on Normandy has centered on the controversial decisions of the Allied commanders. It was not good enough, apparently, to win such a complete and spectacular victory over an enemy that had conquered most of Europe unless it was done perfectly. Most of the blame for this lies with Montgomery, who was foolish enough to insist that it \"had\" been done perfectly, that Normandy\u2014and all his other battles\u2014had been fought accordingly to a precise master plan drawn up beforehand, from which he never deviated. It says much for his personality that Montgomery found others to agree with him, despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary. His handling of the Battle of Normandy was of a very high order, and as the person who would certainly have been blamed for losing the battle, he deserves the credit for winning it.\nReplaced as Ground Forces Commander.\nEisenhower took over Ground Forces Command on 1 September, while continuing as Supreme Commander, with Montgomery continuing to command the 21st Army Group, now consisting mainly of British and Canadian units. Montgomery vehemently opposed this change, although it had been agreed before the D-Day invasion, instead proposing that either he or Bradley should remain in the job of Ground Forces command. He argued that the two roles were fundamentally different and that Eisenhower possessed the skillset for the former but not the latter; as such, he was liable to neglect the duties of one or the other, rendering the force off-balance. Instead, there was a need for a single decisive master plan under a leader free from the more administrative and political duties of the Supreme Commander - Montgomery felt he was the best equipped to deliver this, but was clear that he would also have been willing to work under Bradley.\nEisenhower and many others failed to grasp this however, and would misinterpret this as Montgomery's pride being wounded at having command removed. As such, they would attempt to placate him by reassuring him of the areas remaining under his command, and Winston Churchill had Montgomery promoted to Field Marshal by way of compensation. In addition, the British journalist Mark Urban points out that Montgomery seemed unable to grasp however that as the majority of the 2.2\u00a0million Allied soldiers fighting against Germany on the Western Front were now American (the ratio was 3:1) that it was politically unacceptable to American public opinion to have Montgomery remain as Land Forces Commander as: \"Politics would not allow him to carry on giving orders to great armies of Americans simply because, in his view, [he was the best man for the job]\".\nAdvance to the Rhine.\nBy September, ports like Cherbourg were too far away from the front line, causing the Allies great logistical problems. Antwerp was the third largest port in Europe. It was a deep water inland port connected to the North Sea via the river Scheldt. The Scheldt was wide enough and dredged deep enough to allow the passage of ocean-going ships.\nOn 3 September 1944 Hitler ordered Fifteenth Army, which had been stationed in the Pas de Calais region and was withdrawing north into the Low Countries, to hold the mouth of the river Scheldt to deprive the Allies of the use of Antwerp. Von Rundstedt, the German commander of the Western Front, ordered General Gustav-Adolf von Zangen, the commander of 15th Army, that: \"The attempt of the enemy to occupy the West Scheldt in order to obtain the free use of the harbor of Antwerp must be \"resisted to the utmost\"\" (emphasis in the original). Rundstedt argued with Hitler that as long as the Allies could not use the port of Antwerp, the Allies would lack the logistical capacity for an invasion of Germany.\nThe \"Witte Brigade\" (White Brigade) of the Belgian resistance had captured the Port of Antwerp before the Germans could destroy key port facilities, and on 4 September, Antwerp was captured by Horrocks with its harbour mostly intact. The British declined to immediately advance over the Albert Canal, and an opportunity to destroy the German Fifteenth Army was lost. The Germans had mined the river Scheldt, the mouth of the Scheldt was still in German hands making it impossible for the Royal Navy to clear the mines in the river, and therefore the port of Antwerp was still useless to the Allies.\nOn 5 September, SHAEF's naval commander, Admiral Sir Bertram Ramsay, had urged Montgomery to make clearing the mouth of the Scheldt his number-one priority. Alone among the senior commanders, only Ramsay saw opening Antwerp as crucial. Thanks to \"Ultra,\" Montgomery was aware of Hitler's order by 5 September.\nOn 9 September, Montgomery wrote to Brooke that \"one good Pas de Calais port\" would be sufficient to meet all the logistical needs of the 21st Army Group, but only the supply needs of the same formation. At the same time, Montgomery noted that \"one good Pas de Calais port\" would be insufficient for the American armies in France, which would thus force Eisenhower, if for no other reasons than logistics, to favour Montgomery's plans for an invasion of northern Germany by the 21st Army Group, whereas if Antwerp were opened up, then all of the Allied armies could be supplied.\nThe importance of ports closer to Germany was highlighted with the liberation of the city of Le Havre, which was assigned to John Crocker's I Corps. To take Le Havre, two infantry divisions, two tank brigades, most of the artillery of the British Second Army, the specialised armoured \"gadgets\" of Percy Hobart's 79th Armoured Division, the battleship and the monitor were all committed. On 10 September 1944, RAF Bomber Command dropped 4,719 tons of bombs on Le Havre, which was the prelude to Operation Astonia, the assault on Le Havre by Crocker's men, which was taken two days later. The Canadian historian Terry Copp wrote that the commitment of this much firepower and men to take only one French city might \"seem excessive\", but by this point, the Allies desperately needed ports closer to the front line to sustain their advance.\nIn September 1944, Montgomery ordered Crerar and his First Canadian Army to take the French ports on the English Channel, namely Calais, Boulogne and Dunkirk, and to clear the Scheldt, a task that Crerar stated was impossible as he lacked enough troops to perform both operations at once. Montgomery refused Crerar's request to have British XII Corps under Neil Ritchie assigned to help clear the Scheldt as Montgomery stated he needed XII Corps for Operation Market Garden. On 6 September 1944, Montgomery told Crerar that \"I want Boulogne badly\" and that city should be taken no matter what the cost. On 22 September 1944, Simonds's II Canadian Corps took Boulogne, followed up by taking Calais on 1 October 1944. Montgomery was highly impatient with Simonds, complaining that it had taken Crocker's I Corps only two days to take Le Havre while it took Simonds two weeks to take Boulogne and Calais, but Simonds noted that at Le Havre, three divisions and two brigades had been employed, whereas at both Boulogne and Calais, only two brigades were sent in to take both cities. After an attempt to storm the Leopold Canal by the 4th Canadian Division had been badly smashed by the German defenders, Simonds ordered a stop to further attempts to clear the river Scheldt until his mission of capturing the French ports on the English Channel had been accomplished; this allowed the German Fifteenth Army ample time to dig into its new home on the Scheldt. The only port that was not captured by the Canadians was Dunkirk, as Montgomery ordered the 2nd Canadian Division on 15 September to hold his flank at Antwerp as a prelude for an advance up the Scheldt.\nMontgomery pulled away from the First Canadian Army (temporarily commanded now by Simonds as Crerar was ill), the British 51st Highland Division, 1st Polish Division, British 49th (West Riding) Infantry Division and 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade, and sent all of these formations to help the Second British Army to expand the Market Garden salient with Operations Constellation, Aintree, and towards the end of October Pheasant. However, Simonds seems to have regarded the Scheldt campaign as a test of his ability, and he felt he could clear the Scheldt with only three Canadian divisions, despite having to take on the entire Fifteenth Army, which held strongly fortified positions in a landscape that favoured the defence. Simonds never complained about the lack of air support (made worse by the cloudy October weather), shortages of ammunition or having insufficient troops, regarding these problems as challenges for him to overcome, rather than a cause for complaint. As it was, Simonds made only slow progress in October 1944 during the fighting in the Battle of the Scheldt, although he was praised by Copp for imaginative and aggressive leadership who managed to achieve much, despite all of the odds against him. Montgomery had little respect for the Canadian generals, whom he dismissed as mediocre, with the exception of Simonds, whom he consistently praised as Canada's only \"first-rate\" general in the entire war.\nAdmiral Ramsay, who proved to be a far more articulate and forceful champion of the Canadians than their own generals, starting on 9 October demanded of Eisenhower in a meeting that he either order Montgomery to make supporting the First Canadian Army in the Scheldt fighting his number one priority or sack him. Ramsay in very strong language argued to Eisenhower that the Allies could only invade Germany if Antwerp was opened, and that as long as the three Canadian divisions fighting in the Scheldt had shortages of ammunition and artillery shells because Montgomery made the Arnhem salient his first priority, then Antwerp would not be opened anytime soon. Even Brooke wrote in his diary: \"I feel that Monty's strategy for once is at fault. Instead of carrying out the advance to Arnhem he ought to have made certain of Antwerp\". On 9 October 1944, at Ramsay's urging, Eisenhower sent Montgomery a cable that emphasised the \"supreme importance of Antwerp\", that \"the Canadian Army will not, repeat not, be able to attack until November unless immediately supplied with adequate ammunition\", and warned that the Allied advance into Germany would totally stop by mid-November unless Antwerp was opened by October. Montgomery replied by accusing Ramsay of making \"wild statements\" unsupported by the facts, denying the Canadians were having to ration ammunition, and claimed that he would soon take the Ruhr thereby making the Scheldt campaign a sideshow. Montgomery further issued a memo entitled \"Notes on Command in Western Europe\" demanding that he once again be made Land Forces Commander. This led to an exasperated Eisenhower telling Montgomery that the question was not the command arrangement but rather his (Montgomery's) ability and willingness to obey orders. Eisenhower further told Montgomery to either obey orders to immediately clear the mouth of the Scheldt or be sacked.\nA chastised Montgomery told Eisenhower on 15 October 1944 that he was now making clearing the Scheldt his \"top priority\", and the ammunition shortages in the First Canadian Army, a problem which he denied even existed five days earlier, were now over as supplying the Canadians was henceforth his first concern. Simonds, now reinforced with British troops and Royal Marines, cleared the Scheldt by taking Walcheren island, the last of the German \"fortresses\" on the Scheldt, on 8 November 1944. With the Scheldt in Allied hands, Royal Navy minesweepers removed the German mines in the river, and Antwerp was finally opened to shipping on 28 November 1944. Reflecting Antwerp's importance, the Germans spent the winter of 1944\u201345 firing V-1 flying bombs and V-2 rockets at it in an attempt to shut down the port, and the German offensive in December 1944 in the Ardennes had as its ultimate objective the capture of Antwerp. Urban wrote that Montgomery's most \"serious failure\" in the entire war was not the well publicised Battle of Arnhem, but rather his lack of interest in opening up Antwerp, as without it the entire Allied advance from the North Sea to the Swiss Alps stalled in the autumn of 1944 for logistical reasons.\nOperation Market Garden.\nMontgomery was able to persuade Eisenhower to allow him to test his strategy of a single thrust to the Ruhr with Operation Market Garden in September 1944. The offensive was strategically bold, although Lieutenant General Humfrey Gale, the \"senior administrative and logistics officer\" for SHAEF (Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force) considered Montgomery's narrow-thrust strategy to be \"logistically unrealistic\", and in his opinion \"a ruse merely to demonstrate later that he had been prevented from winning the war quickly by Eisenhower's caution.\" At a strategy meeting on 10 September 1944, Montgomery became so belligerent that Eisenhower was prompted into saying \"Steady, Monty! You can't speak to me like that. I'm your boss.\" Following the Allied breakout from Normandy, Eisenhower favored pursuing the German armies northwards and eastwards to the Rhine on a broad front. Eisenhower relied on speed, which in turn depended on logistics, which were \"stretched to the limit\". SHAEF did provide Montgomery with additional resources, principally additional locomotives and rolling stock, and priority for air supply. Eisenhower's decision to launch Market Garden was influenced by his desire to keep the retreating Germans under pressure, and by the pressure from the United States to use the First Allied Airborne Army as soon as possible.\nMontgomery's plan for Operation Market Garden (17\u201325 September 1944) was to outflank the Siegfried Line and cross the Rhine, setting the stage for later offensives into the Ruhr region. The 21st Army Group would attack north from Belgium, through the Netherlands, across the Rhine and consolidate north of Arnhem on the far side of the Rhine. The risky plan required three Airborne Divisions to capture numerous intact bridges along a single-lane road, on which an entire Corps had to attack and use as its main supply route. The offensive failed to achieve its objectives.\nBoth Churchill and Montgomery claimed that the operation was nearly or 90% successful, \"since they had got nine-tenths of the way to Arnhem\", prompting Air Chief Marshal Tedder to derisively comment that \"one jumps off a cliff with an even higher success rate, until the last few inches.\" However, in Montgomery's equivocal acceptance of responsibility he blames lack of support, and also refers to the Battle of the Scheldt, which was undertaken by Canadian troops not involved in Market Garden. Montgomery later said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was a bad mistake on my part\u2014I underestimated the difficulties of opening up the approaches to Antwerp ... I reckoned the Canadian Army could do it while we were going for the Ruhr. I was wrong ... In my\u2014prejudiced\u2014view, if the operation had been properly backed from its inception, and given the aircraft, ground forces, and administrative resources necessary for the job, it would have succeeded \"in spite of\" my mistakes, or the adverse weather, or the presence of the 2nd SS Panzer Corps in the Arnhem area. I remain Market Garden's unrepentant advocate.\nIn the aftermath of Market Garden, Montgomery made holding the Arnhem salient his first priority, arguing that the British Second Army might still be able to break through and reach the wide open plains of northern Germany, and that he might be able to take the Ruhr by the end of October. The Germans under \"Generalfeldmarschall\" Walther Model attempted to retake the Nijmegen salient in early October, but were beaten back. In the meantime, the First Canadian Army finally achieved the task of clearing the mouth of the river Scheldt, despite the fact that, in the words of Copp and Vogel, \"Montgomery's Directive required the Canadians to continue to fight alone for almost two weeks in a battle which everyone agreed could only be won with the aid of additional divisions\".\nBattle of the Bulge.\nOn 16 December 1944, at the start of the Battle of the Bulge, Montgomery's 21st Army Group was on the northern flank of the allied lines. Bradley's US 12th Army Group was to Montgomery's south, with William Simpson's U.S. Ninth Army adjacent to 21st Army Group, Courtney Hodges' U.S. First Army holding the Ardennes and Patton's U.S. Third Army further south.\nSHAEF believed the Wehrmacht was no longer capable of launching a major offensive, and that no offensive could be launched through such rugged terrain as the Ardennes Forest. Because of this, the area was held by refitting and newly arrived American formations. The Wehrmacht planned to exploit this by making a surprise attack through the Ardennes Forest whilst bad weather grounded Allied air power, splitting the Allied Armies in two. They would then turn north to recapture the port of Antwerp. If the attack were to succeed in capturing Antwerp, the whole of 21st Army Group, along with U.S. Ninth Army and most of U.S. First Army would be trapped without supplies behind German lines.\nThe attack initially advanced rapidly, splitting U.S. 12th Army Group in two, with all of U.S. Ninth Army and the bulk of U.S. First Army on the northern shoulder of the German 'bulge'. The 12th Army Group commander, Bradley, was located in Luxembourg, making command of the U.S. forces north of the bulge problematic. As Montgomery was the nearest army group commander on the ground, on 20 December, Eisenhower temporarily transferred command of U.S. Ninth Army and U.S. First Army to Montgomery's 21st Army Group. Bradley was \"concerned because it might discredit the American command\" but that it might mean Montgomery would commit more of his reserves to the battle. In practice the change led to \"great resentment on the part of many Americans, particularly at Headquarters, 12th Army Group, and Third Army\".\nWith the British and American forces under Montgomery's command holding the northern flank of the German assault, General Patton's Third Army, which was to the south, turned north and fought its way through the severe weather and German opposition to relieve the besieged American forces in Bastogne. Four days after Montgomery took command of the northern flank, the bad weather cleared and the USAAF and RAF resumed operations, inflicting heavy casualties on German troops and vehicles. Six days after Montgomery took command of the northern flank, Patton's Third Army relieved the besieged American forces in Bastogne. Unable to advance further, and running out of fuel, the Wehrmacht abandoned the offensive.\nMorelock states that Montgomery was preoccupied with leading a \"single thrust offensive\" to Berlin as the overall commander of Allied ground forces, and that he accordingly treated the Ardennes counteroffensive \"as a sideshow, to be finished with the least possible effort and expenditure of resources.\"\nMontgomery subsequently wrote of his actions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The first thing to do was to see the battle on the northern flank as one whole, to ensure the vital areas were held securely, and to create reserves for counter-attack. I embarked on these measures: I put British troops under command of the Ninth Army to fight alongside American soldiers, and made that Army take over some of the First Army Front. I positioned British troops as reserves behind the First and Ninth Armies until such time as American reserves could be created.\nAfter the war Hasso von Manteuffel, who commanded the 5th Panzer Army in the Ardennes, was imprisoned awaiting trial for war crimes. During this period he was interviewed by B. H. Liddell Hart, a British author who has since been accused of putting words in the mouths of German generals, and attempting to \"rewrite the historical record\". After conducting several interviews via an interpreter, Liddell Hart in a subsequent book attributed to Manteuffel the following statement about Montgomery's contribution to the battle in the Ardennes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The operations of the American 1st Army had developed into a series of individual holding actions. Montgomery's contribution to restoring the situation was that he turned a series of isolated actions into a coherent battle fought according to a clear and definite plan. It was his refusal to engage in premature and piecemeal counter-attacks which enabled the Americans to gather their reserves and frustrate the German attempts to extend their breakthrough.\nHowever, American historian Stephen Ambrose, writing in 1997, maintained that \"Putting Monty in command of the northern flank had no effect on the battle\". Ambrose wrote that: \"Far from directing the victory, Montgomery had gotten in everyone's way, and had botched the counter-attack.\" General Omar Bradley blamed Montgomery's \"stagnating conservatism\" for his failure to counter-attack when ordered to do so by Eisenhower.\nCommand of U.S. First Army reverted to 12th Army Group on 17 January 1945, whilst command of U.S. Ninth Army remained with 21st Army Group for the coming operations to cross the Rhine.\nCrossing the Rhine.\nIn February 1945, Montgomery's 21st Army Group advanced to the Rhine in Operation Veritable and Operation Grenade. It crossed the Rhine on 24 March 1945, in Operation Plunder, which took place two weeks after U.S. First Army had crossed the Rhine after capturing the Ludendorff Bridge during the Battle of Remagen.\n21st Army Group's river crossing was followed by the encirclement of the Ruhr Pocket. During this battle, U.S. Ninth Army, which had remained part of 21st Army Group after the Battle of the Bulge, formed the northern arm of the envelopment of German Army Group B, with U.S. First Army forming the southern arm. The two armies linked up on 1 April 1945, encircling 370,000 German troops, and on 4 April 1945, Ninth Army reverted to Omar Bradley's 12th Army Group.\nBy the war's end, the remaining formations of 21st Army group, First Canadian Army and British Second Army, had liberated the northern part of the Netherlands and captured much of north-west Germany, occupied Hamburg and Rostock and sealed off the Jutland peninsula.\nOn 4 May 1945, on L\u00fcneburg Heath, Montgomery accepted the surrender of German forces in north-west Germany, Denmark and the Netherlands.\nLater life.\nPost-war military career.\nAfter the war, Montgomery became the C-in-C of the British Army of the Rhine (BAOR), the name given to the British Occupation Forces, and was the British member of the Allied Control Council.\nChief of the Imperial General Staff.\nMontgomery was Chief of the Imperial General Staff (CIGS) from 1946 to 1948, succeeding Alan Brooke.\nAs CIGS, Montgomery toured Africa in 1947 and in a secret 1948 report to Prime Minister Clement Attlee's government proposed a \"master plan\" to amalgamate British Africa territories and to exploit the raw materials of Africa, thereby counteracting the loss of British influence in Asia. Montgomery sought to strengthen white rule to serve as a bulwark against communism. He described Africans as uncivilized, stating \"he is a complete savage and is quite incapable of developing the country himself.\" His statements were publicized in 1999. After learning of Montgomery's remarks, one of his biographers, Lord Chalfont, said his reputation had been \"irredeemably damaged... I find it very disappointing and depressing.\"\nHowever, Montgomery was barely on speaking terms with his fellow service chiefs, sending his deputy Kenneth Crawford to attend their meetings and he clashed particularly with Sir Arthur Tedder, who was by now Chief of the Air Staff (CAS).\nWhen Montgomery's term of office expired, Prime Minister Attlee appointed Sir William Slim from retirement with the rank of field marshal as his successor. When Montgomery protested that he had told his prot\u00e9g\u00e9, General Sir John Crocker, former commander of I Corps in the 1944\u201345 North-West Europe Campaign, that the job was to be his, Attlee is said to have retorted \"Untell him.\"\nWestern Union Defence Organization.\nMontgomery was then appointed Chairman of the Western Union Defence Organization's C-in-C committee. Volume 3 of Nigel Hamilton's \"Life of Montgomery of Alamein\" gives an account of the bickering between Montgomery and his land forces chief, French General Jean de Lattre de Tassigny, which created splits through the Union headquarters.\nNATO.\nOn the creation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation's Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe in 1951, Montgomery became Eisenhower's deputy. He would continue to serve under Eisenhower's successors, Generals Matthew Ridgway and Alfred Gruenther, until his retirement, aged nearly 71, in 1958.\nPersonal.\nMontgomery was created 1st Viscount Montgomery of Alamein in the 1946 New Year Honours.\nMontgomery's mother, Maude Montgomery, died in 1949. Montgomery did not attend the funeral, claiming he was \"too busy\".\nMontgomery was an Honorary Member of the Winkle Club, a charity in Hastings, East Sussex, and introduced Winston Churchill to the club in 1955.\nHe was chairman of the governing body of St. John's School, Leatherhead, Surrey, from 1951 to 1966, and a generous supporter.\nHe was also President of Portsmouth Football Club between 1944 and 1961.\nIn the mid-1950s, the \"Illustrated London News\" published sets of photographs taken by Montgomery while flying over the Swiss Alps. In February 1957, views of Mount T\u00f6di taken with a Rolleiflex camera were reproduced.\nOn Saturday 20 December 1969, Montgomery was Roy Plomley's thousandth 'castaway' on the BBC Radio Show \"Desert Island Discs\". The seven discs Montgomery chose to accompany him on the imaginary deserted island were: \"Battle Hymn of the Republic\" (sung by The Tabernacle Choir at Temple Square), \"My Love is Like A Red, Red Rose\" (sung by Kenneth McKellar), \"You are my heart's delight\" (from Franz Leh\u00e1r's \"The Land of Smiles\"), \"Invitation to the Dance\" (by Carl Maria von Weber), \"Sei nicht B\u00f6s\" (from Carl Zeller's \"Der Obersteiger)\", \"All Through the Night\" (sung by Treorchy Male Choir), \"Cockles and Mussels\" (sung by William Clauson) and Felix Mendelssohn's \"O, for the wings of a dove\". He chose a piano (with playing instructions) as his luxury item and for his book he chose his own book \"The History of Warfare\" (1968). His favourite disc was \"Sei nict B\u00f6s\" (Don't Be Cross) sung by Elisabeth Schwarzkopf.\nOpinions.\nMemoirs.\nMontgomery's memoirs (1958) criticised many of his wartime comrades in harsh terms, including Eisenhower. Montgomery was stripped of his honorary citizenship of Montgomery, Alabama, and was challenged to a duel by an Italian lawyer.\nHe was threatened with legal action by Field Marshal Auchinleck for suggesting that Auchinleck had intended to retreat from the Alamein position if attacked again, and had to give a radio broadcast (20 November 1958) expressing his gratitude to Auchinleck for having stabilised the front at the First Battle of Alamein. The 1960 paperback edition of Montgomery's memoirs contains a publisher's note drawing attention to that broadcast, and stating that although the reader might assume from Montgomery's text that Auchinleck had been planning to retreat \"into the Nile Delta or beyond\" in the publisher's view it had been Auchinleck's intention to launch an offensive as soon as the Eighth Army was \"rested and regrouped\".\nMontgomery mentioned to the American journalist John Gunther in April 1944 that (like Alanbrooke) he kept a secret diary. Gunther remarked that it would surely be an essential source for historians. When Montgomery asked whether it would be worth money one day, Gunther suggested \"at least $100,000.\" This was converted into pounds sterling, and he is supposed to have grinned and said \"Well, I guess I won't die in the poor house after all.\"\nMilitary opinions.\nMontgomery twice met Israeli general Moshe Dayan. After an initial meeting in the early 1950s, Montgomery met Dayan again in the 1960s to discuss the Vietnam War, which Dayan was studying. Montgomery was harshly critical of US strategy in Vietnam, which involved deploying large numbers of combat troops, aggressive bombing attacks, and uprooting entire village populations and forcing them into strategic hamlets. Montgomery said that the Americans' most important problem was that they had no clear objective, and allowed local commanders to set military policy. At the end of their meeting, Montgomery asked Dayan to tell the Americans, in his name, that they were \"insane\". In a 1968 interview, he expressed the opinion that the United States should give up its efforts and accept a Communist-dominated Vietnam, remarking \"you have got to stop this war. You can't win. What is the point of all these casualties?\" He argued that the war was unwinnable and making the United States internationally unpopular. He expressed the opinion that China would eventually dominate Asia, with all countries bordering China except for India eventually come under Chinese influence and that the United States should focus on maintaining dominance of the oceans rather than committing land forces to Asia.\nDuring a visit to the Alamein battlefields in May 1967, he bluntly told high-ranking Egyptian Army officers that they would lose any war with Israel, a warning that was shown to be justified only a few weeks later in the Six-Day War.\nSocial opinions.\nIn retirement, Montgomery publicly supported apartheid after a visit to South Africa in 1962, and after a visit to China declared himself impressed by the Chinese leadership led by Chairman Mao Tse-tung. He spoke out against the legalisation of homosexuality in the United Kingdom, arguing that the Sexual Offences Act 1967 was a \"charter for buggery\" and that \"this sort of thing may be tolerated by the French, but we're British\u2014thank God\".\nMontgomery was a non-smoking teetotaller, a vegetarian, and a Christian.\nDeath.\nMontgomery died in 1976 at his home Isington Mill in Isington, Hampshire, aged 88. After a funeral at St George's Chapel, Windsor, his body was buried in Holy Cross churchyard, in Binsted, Hampshire.\nCasualty conservation policy.\nThe British high command were not only concerned with winning the war and defeating Germany, but also with ensuring that it retained sufficient influence in the post-war world to govern global policy. Suffering heavy losses in Normandy would diminish British leadership and prestige within its empire and in post-war Europe in particular. Many of Montgomery's clashes with Eisenhower were based on his determination to pursue the war \"on lines most suitable to Britain\".\nThe smaller the number of combat-experienced divisions the British had left at the end of the war, the smaller Britain's influence in Europe was likely to be, compared to the emerging superpowers of the United States and the Soviet Union. Montgomery was thus caught in a dilemma\u2014the British Army needed to be seen to be pulling at least half the weight in the liberation of Europe, but without incurring the heavy casualties that such a role would inevitably produce. 21st Army Group scarcely possessed sufficient forces to achieve such a military prominence, and the remaining divisions had to be expended sparingly.\nIn 1944, Britain did not possess the manpower to rebuild shattered divisions and it was imperative for Montgomery to protect the viability of the British Army. It was reported to the War Office that \"Montgomery has to be very careful of what he does on his eastern flank because on that flank is the only British Army there is left in this part of the world\". The context of British casualties and the shortage of reinforcements, prompted Montgomery to \"excessive caution\". Dempsey wrote on 13 June, that Caen could only be taken by a \"set piece assault and we did not have the men or the ammunition for that at the time\".\nMontgomery's solution to the dilemma was to attempt to remain Commander of All Land Forces until the end of the war, so that any victory attained on the Western front\u2014although achieved primarily by American formations\u2014would accrue in part to him and thus to Britain. He would also be able to ensure that British units were spared some of the high-attrition actions, but would be most prominent when the final blows were struck. When that strategy failed, he persuaded Eisenhower to occasionally put some American formations under the control of the 21st Army Group, so as to bolster his resources while still maintaining the outward appearance of successful British effort.\nMontgomery initially remained prepared to push Second (British) Army hard to capture the vital strategic town of Caen, and consequently incur heavy losses. In the original Overlord plan, Montgomery was determined to push past Caen to Falaise as quickly as possible. However, after the heavy casualties incurred in capturing Caen, he changed his mind.\nOther academic commentators have also suggested that the British strategy was \"to avoid the heavy casualties of the major battles of the First World War\".\nPersonality.\nThroughout the war, Montgomery was notorious for his lack of tact and diplomacy. Even his \"patron\", the Chief of the Imperial General Staff, General Sir Alan Brooke, frequently mentions it in his war diaries: \"he is liable to commit untold errors in lack of tact\" and \"I had to haul him over the coals for his usual lack of tact and egotistical outlook which prevented him from appreciating other people's feelings\". Montgomery suffered from \"an overbearing conceit and an uncontrollable urge for self-promotion.\" General Hastings Ismay, who was at the time Winston Churchill's chief staff officer and trusted military adviser, once said of him: \"I have come to the conclusion that his love of publicity is a disease, like alcoholism or taking drugs, and that it sends him equally mad.\" The psychiatrist Michael Fitzgerald has argued that Montgomery was likely autistic, and it has been speculated that this was the cause of many of apparent behaviours and eccentricities.\nA notorious instance of Montgomery's behaviour occurred during the North African campaign when he bet Walter Bedell Smith that he could capture Sfax by the middle of April 1943. Smith jokingly replied that if Montgomery could do it he would give him a Flying Fortress complete with crew. Smith promptly forgot all about it, but Montgomery did not, and when Sfax was taken on 10 April, he sent a message to Smith \"claiming his winnings\". Smith tried to laugh it off, but Montgomery insisted on his aircraft. The incident was finally resolved by Eisenhower who, with his renowned skill in diplomacy, ensured Montgomery did get his Flying Fortress, though at a great cost in ill feeling.\nAntony Beevor, in discussing Montgomery's counterproductive lack of tact in the final months of the war, described him as \"insufferable\". Beevor says that in January 1945 Montgomery had tried to claim far too much credit for the British (and for himself) in defeating the German counter-attack in the Ardennes in December 1944. This \"crass and unpleasant blunder\" helped make it impossible for Churchill and Alan Brooke to persuade Eisenhower of the need for an immediate thrust\u2014to be led by Montgomery\u2014through Germany to Berlin. Eisenhower did not accept the viability of the \"dagger thrust\" approach, it had already been agreed that Berlin would fall into the future Soviet occupation zone, and he was not willing to accept heavy casualties for no gain, so Eisenhower disregarded the British suggestions and continued with his conservative broad front strategy, and the Red Army reached Berlin well ahead of the Western Allies.\nIn August 1945, while Brooke, Sir Andrew Cunningham and Sir Charles Portal were discussing their possible successors as \"Chiefs of Staff\", they concluded that Montgomery would be very efficient as CIGS from the Army's point of view but that he was also very unpopular with a large proportion of the Army. Despite this, Cunningham and Portal were strongly in favour of Montgomery succeeding Brooke after his retirement. Churchill, by all accounts a faithful friend, is quoted as saying of Montgomery, \"In defeat, unbeatable; in victory, unbearable.\"\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3874", "revid": "1305025946", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3874", "title": "Herman Boerhaave", "text": "Dutch botanist, chemist, humanist, and physician (1668\u20131738)\nHerman Boerhaave (, 31 December 1668 \u2013 23 September 1738) was a Dutch chemist, botanist, Christian humanist, and physician. He is sometimes regarded as the founder of clinical teaching and of the modern academic hospital along with Venetian physician Santorio Santorio (1561\u20131636). Boerhaave introduced the quantitative approach into medicine, along with his pupil Albrecht von Haller (1708\u20131777). He was the first to isolate the chemical urea from urine. He was the first physician to put thermometer measurements to clinical practice. His motto was \"Simplex veri sigillum\": 'Simplicity is the sign of the truth'. He is often hailed as the \"Dutch Hippocrates\".\nBiography.\nBoerhaave was born at Voorhout near Leiden. The son of a Protestant pastor, in his youth Boerhaave studied for a divinity degree and wanted to become a preacher. After the death of his father, however, he was offered a scholarship and he entered the University of Leiden, where he took his master's degree in philosophy in 1690, with a dissertation titled \"De distinctione mentis a corpore\" (\"On the Difference of the Mind from the Body\"). There he attacked the doctrines of Epicurus, Thomas Hobbes and Baruch Spinoza. He then turned to the study of medicine. He earned his medical doctorate from the University of Harderwijk (present-day Gelderland) in 1693, with a dissertation titled \"De utilitate explorandorum in aegris excrementorum ut signorum\" (\"The Utility of Examining Signs of Disease in the Excrement of the Sick\").\nIn 1701 he was appointed lecturer on the institutes of medicine at Leiden; in his inaugural discourse, \"De commendando Hippocratis studio\", he recommended to his pupils that great physician as their model. In 1709 he became professor of botany and medicine, and in that capacity he did good service, not only to his own university, but also to botanical science, by his improvements and additions to the botanic garden of Leiden, and by the publication of numerous works descriptive of new species of plants.\nOn 14 September 1710, Boerhaave married Maria Drolenvaux (1686\u20131746), the daughter of the rich merchant, Alderman Abraham Drolenvaux. They had four children, of whom one daughter, Maria Johanna (1712\u20131791) \u2013 wife of German art collector with various influential political ties Frederic Count de Thoms (1696\u20131746), lived to adulthood. In 1722, he began to suffer from an extreme case of gout, recovering the next year.\nIn 1714, when he was appointed rector of the university, he succeeded Govert Bidloo in the chair of practical medicine, and in this capacity he introduced the modern system of clinical instruction. Whether he was the first to do so is contested; in the words of one medical historian, Boerhaave \"was neither an innovator of this practice, nor an especially energetic practitioner of it\", though he did help to popularize the method. Four years later he was appointed to the chair of chemistry as well. In 1728 he was elected into the French Academy of Sciences, and two years later into the Royal Society of London. In 1729 declining health obliged him to resign the chairs of chemistry and botany; and he died, after a lingering and painful illness, at Leiden.\nLegacy.\nHis reputation so increased the fame of the University of Leiden, especially as a school of medicine, that it became popular with visitors from every part of Europe. All the princes of Europe sent him pupils, who found in this skilful professor not only an indefatigable teacher, but an affectionate guardian. When Peter the Great went to Holland in 1716 (he had been in Holland before in 1697 to instruct himself in maritime affairs), he also took lessons from Boerhaave. Voltaire travelled to see him, as did Carl Linnaeus, who became a close friend and named the genus \"Boerhavia\" for him. In one probably apocryphal story to show the reach of Boerhaave's fame, a man from China sent him a letter addressed only \"to Mr. Boerhaave, physician in Europe,\" and it reached him in due course.\nThe operating theatre of the University of Leiden in which he once worked as an anatomist is now at the centre of a museum named after him; the Boerhaave Museum. Asteroid 8175 Boerhaave is named after Boerhaave. From 1955 to 1961 Boerhaave's image was printed on Dutch 20-guilder banknotes. The Leiden University Medical Centre organises medical trainings called \"Boerhaave-courses\".\nHe had a prodigious influence on the development of medicine and chemistry in Scotland. British medical schools credit Boerhaave for developing the system of medical education upon which their current institutions are based. Every founding member of the Edinburgh Medical School had studied at Leyden and attended Boerhaave's lectures on chemistry including John Rutherford and Francis Home. Boerhaave's \"Elementa Chemiae (1732)\" is recognised as the first text on chemistry. \nBoerhaave first described Boerhaave syndrome, which involves tearing of the oesophagus, usually a consequence of vigorous vomiting. Notoriously, in 1724 he described the case of Baron Jan van Wassenaer, a Dutch admiral who died of this condition following a gluttonous feast and subsequent regurgitation. The condition was uniformly fatal prior to modern surgical techniques allowing repair of the oesophagus.\nBoerhaave was critical of his Dutch contemporary Baruch Spinoza, attacking him in his 1688 dissertation. At the same time, he admired Isaac Newton and was a devout Christian who often wrote about God in his works. A collection of his religious thoughts on medicine, translated from Latin to English, has been compiled by the \"Sir Thomas Browne Instituut Leiden\" under the name \"Boerhaave's Orations\" (meaning \"Boerhaave's Prayers\"). Among other things, he considered nature as God's Creation, and he used to say that the poor were his best patients because God was their paymaster.\nMedical contributions.\nBoerhaave devoted himself intensively to the study of the human body. He was strongly influenced by the mechanistic theories of Ren\u00e9 Descartes, and those of the 17th-century astronomer and mathematician Giovanni Borelli, who described animal movements in terms of mechanical motion. On such premises Boerhaave proposed a hydraulic model of human physiology. His writings refer to simple machines such as levers and pulleys and similar mechanisms, and he saw the bodily organs and members as being assembled from pipe-like structures. The physiology of veins, for example, he compared to the operation of pipes. He asserted the importance of a proper balance of fluid pressure, noting that fluids should be able to move around the body freely, without obstacles. For its well-being the body needed to be self-regulating, so as to maintain a healthy state of equilibrium. Boerhaave's concept of the body as apparatus centred his medical attention on material problems rather than upon ontological or esoteric explanations of illness.\nBoerhaave's teaching of his knowledge and philosophy drew many students to the University of Leiden. He emphasised the importance of anatomical research based on practical observation and scientific experiment. His concept of the bodily system took hold throughout Europe, and helped to transform medical education in the European schools. His insights aroused great interest among other critical medical thinkers, not least in Friedrich Hoffmann, who strongly advocated the importance of physico-mechanical principles for the preservation or indeed the restoration of health. As a professor at Leiden, Boerhaave influenced many students. Some in their experiments upheld and furthered his philosophy, while others rejected it and proposed alternative theories of human physiology. He produced a great many textbooks and writings through which the digested brilliance of his lectures at Leiden was circulated widely in Europe. In 1708 his publication of the \"Institutiones Medicae\" was issued in over five languages, and went into approximately ten editions. His \"Elementa Chemia\", a world-renowned chemistry textbook, was published in 1732.\nThe mechanistic concept of the human body departed from the age-old precepts laid down by Galen and Aristotle. In place of a servile dependence upon teachings handed down from antiquity, Boerhaave understood the importance of establishing definitive findings through his own investigation, and by the direct application of his own methods of testing. This new reasoning expanded the field of Renaissance anatomy: it opened the way to reforms of medical practice and understanding in the field of iatrochemistry.\nWorks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Botanist/styles.css\"/&gt;The standard author abbreviation Boerh. is used to indicate this person as the author when citing a botanical name.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3875", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3875", "title": "Benjamin Disraeli", "text": "Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (1868; 1874\u20131880)\nBenjamin Disraeli, 1st Earl of Beaconsfield (21 December 1804\u00a0\u2013 19 April 1881), was a British statesman, Conservative politician and writer who twice served as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. He played a central role in the creation of the modern Conservative Party, defining its policies and its broad outreach. Disraeli is remembered for his influential voice in world affairs, his political battles with the Liberal Party leader William Ewart Gladstone, and his one-nation conservatism or \"Tory democracy\". He made the Conservatives the party most identified with the British Empire and military action to expand it, both of which were popular among British voters. He is the only British prime minister to have been born Jewish.\nDisraeli was born in Bloomsbury, at that time a part of Middlesex. His father left Judaism after a dispute at his synagogue; Benjamin became an Anglican at the age of 12. After several unsuccessful attempts, Disraeli entered the House of Commons in 1837. In 1846, Prime Minister Robert Peel split the party over his proposal to repeal the Corn Laws, which involved ending the tariff on imported grain. Disraeli clashed with Peel in the House of Commons, becoming a major figure in the party. When Lord Derby, the party leader, thrice formed governments in the 1850s and 1860s, Disraeli served as Chancellor of the Exchequer and Leader of the House of Commons.\nUpon Derby's retirement in 1868, Disraeli became prime minister briefly before losing that year's general election. He returned to the Opposition before leading the party to a majority in the 1874 general election. He maintained a close friendship with Queen Victoria who, in 1876, elevated him to the peerage as Earl of Beaconsfield. Disraeli's second term was dominated by the Eastern question\u2014the slow decay of the Ottoman Empire and the desire of other European powers, such as Russia, to gain at its expense. Disraeli arranged for the British to purchase a major interest in the Suez Canal Company in Egypt. In 1878, faced with Russian victories against the Ottomans, he worked at the Congress of Berlin to obtain peace in the Balkans at terms favourable to Britain and unfavourable to Russia, its longstanding enemy. This diplomatic victory established Disraeli as one of Europe's leading statesmen.\nWorld events thereafter moved against the Conservatives. Controversial wars in Afghanistan and South Africa undermined his public support. He angered farmers by refusing to reinstitute the Corn Laws in response to poor harvests and cheap imported grain. With Gladstone conducting a massive speaking campaign, the Liberals defeated Disraeli's Conservatives at the 1880 general election. In his final months, Disraeli led the Conservatives in Opposition. Disraeli wrote novels throughout his career, beginning in 1826, and published his last completed novel, \"Endymion\", shortly before he died at the age of 76.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life.\nChildhood.\nBenjamin Disraeli was born on 21 December 1804 at 6 King's Road, Bedford Row, Bloomsbury, London, the second child and eldest son of Isaac D'Israeli, a literary critic and historian, and Maria (Miriam), \"n\u00e9e\" Basevi. The family was of Sephardic Jewish mercantile background. He also had some Ashkenazi Jewish ancestors. He later romanticised his origins, claiming his father's family was of grand Spanish and Venetian descent; in fact, Isaac's family was of no great distinction, but on Disraeli's mother's side, in which he took no interest, there were some distinguished forebears, including Isaac Cardoso, as well as members of the Goldsmids, the Mocattas and the Montefiores. Historians differ on Disraeli's motives for rewriting his family history: Bernard Glassman argues that it was intended to give him status comparable to that of England's ruling elite; Sarah Bradford believes \"his dislike of the commonplace would not allow him to accept the facts of his birth as being as middle-class and undramatic as they really were\".\nDisraeli's siblings were Sarah, Naphtali (born and died 1807), Ralph and James (\"Jem\"). He was close to his sister and on affectionate but more distant terms with his surviving brothers. Details of his schooling are sketchy. From the age of about six he was a day boy at a dame school in Islington, which one of his biographers described as \"for those days a very high-class establishment\". Two years later or so\u2014the exact date has not been ascertained\u2014he was sent as a boarder to Rev John Potticary's school at Blackheath (now St Piran's, Maidenhead, Berkshire).\nFollowing a quarrel in 1813 with the Bevis Marks Synagogue, his father renounced Judaism and had the four children baptised into the Church of England in July and August 1817. Isaac D'Israeli had never taken religion very seriously but had remained a conforming member of the synagogue. Isaac's father, Benjamin, was a prominent and devout member; it was probably out of respect for him that Isaac did not leave when he fell out with the synagogue authorities in 1813. After Benjamin senior died in 1816, Isaac felt free to leave the congregation following a second dispute. Isaac's friend Sharon Turner, a solicitor, convinced him that although he could comfortably remain unattached to any formal religion it would be disadvantageous to the children if they did so. Turner stood as godfather when Benjamin was baptised, aged twelve, on 31 July 1817.\nConversion enabled Disraeli to contemplate a career in politics. There had been Members of Parliament (MPs) from Jewish families since Sampson Gideon in 1770. However, until the Jews Relief Act 1858, MPs were required to take the oath of allegiance \"on the true faith of a Christian\", necessitating at least nominal conversion. It is not known whether Disraeli formed any ambition for a parliamentary career at the time of his baptism, but there is no doubt that he bitterly regretted his parents' decision not to send him to Winchester College, one of the great public schools which consistently provided recruits to the political elite. His two younger brothers were sent there, and it is not clear why Isaac chose to send his eldest son to a much less prestigious school. The boy evidently held his mother responsible for the decision; Bradford speculates that \"Benjamin's delicate health and his obviously Jewish appearance may have had something to do with it.\" The school chosen for him was run by Eliezer Cogan at Higham Hill in Walthamstow. He began there in the autumn term of 1817; he later recalled his education:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I was at school for two or three years under the Revd. Dr Cogan, a Greek scholar of eminence, who had contributed notes to the A[e]schylus of Bishop Blomfield, &amp; was himself the Editor of the Greek Gnostic poets. After this I was with a private tutor for two years in my own County, &amp; my education was severely classical. Too much so; in the pride of boyish erudition, I edited the Idonisian Eclogue of Theocritus, wh. was privately printed. This was my first production: puerile pedantry.\n1820s.\nIn November 1821, shortly before his seventeenth birthday, Disraeli was articled as a clerk to a firm of solicitors\u2014Swain, Stevens, Maples, Pearse and Hunt\u2014in the City of London. T. F. Maples was not only the young Disraeli's employer and a friend of his father, but also his prospective father-in-law: Isaac and Maples considered that the latter's only daughter might be a suitable match for Benjamin. A friendship developed, but there was no romance. The firm had a large and profitable business, and as the biographer R. W. Davis observes, the clerkship was \"the kind of secure, respectable position that many fathers dream of for their children\". Although biographers including Robert Blake and Bradford comment that such a post was incompatible with Disraeli's romantic and ambitious nature, he reportedly gave his employers satisfactory service, and later professed to have learned much there. He recalled: I had some scruples, for even then I dreamed of Parliament. My father's refrain always was 'Philip Carteret Webb', who was the most eminent solicitor of his boyhood and who was an MP. It would be a mistake to suppose that the two years and more that I was in the office of our friend were wasted. I have often thought, though I have often regretted the University, that it was much the reverse.\nThe year after joining Maples' firm, Benjamin changed his surname from D'Israeli to Disraeli. His reasons are unknown, but the biographer Bernard Glassman surmises that it was to avoid being confused with his father. Disraeli's sister and brothers adopted the new version of the name; Isaac and his wife retained the older form.\nDisraeli toured Belgium and the Rhine Valley with his father in the summer of 1824. He later wrote that while travelling on the Rhine he decided to abandon his position: \"I determined when descending those magical waters that I would not be a lawyer.\" On their return to England he left the solicitors, at the suggestion of Maples, with the aim of qualifying as a barrister. He enrolled as a student at Lincoln's Inn and joined the chambers of his uncle, Nathaniel Basevy, and then those of Benjamin Austen, who persuaded Isaac that Disraeli would never make a barrister and should be allowed to pursue a literary career. He had made a tentative start: in May 1824 he submitted a manuscript to his father's friend, the publisher John Murray, but withdrew it before Murray could decide whether to publish it.\nReleased from the law, Disraeli did some work for Murray, but turned most of his attention to speculative dealing on the stock exchange. There was at the time a boom in shares in South American mining companies. Spain was losing its South American colonies in the face of rebellions. At the urging of George Canning the British government recognised the new independent governments of Argentina (1824), Colombia and Mexico (both 1825). With no money of his own, Disraeli borrowed money to invest. He became involved with the financier J. D. Powles, who was prominent among those encouraging the mining boom. In 1825, Disraeli wrote three anonymous pamphlets for Powles, promoting the companies. The pamphlets were published by John Murray, who invested heavily in the boom.\nMurray had ambitions to establish a new morning paper to compete with \"The Times\". In 1825 Disraeli convinced him that he should proceed. The new paper, \"The Representative\", promoted the mines and those politicians who supported them, particularly Canning. Disraeli impressed Murray with his energy and commitment to the project, but he failed in his key task of persuading the eminent writer John Gibson Lockhart to edit the paper. After that, Disraeli's influence on Murray waned, and to his resentment he was sidelined in the affairs of \"The Representative\". The paper survived only six months, partly because the mining bubble burst in late 1825, and partly because, according to Blake, the paper was \"atrociously edited\".\nThe bursting of the mining bubble was ruinous for Disraeli. By June 1825 he and his business partners had lost \u00a37,000. Disraeli could not pay off the last of his debts from this debacle until 1849. He turned to writing, motivated partly by his desperate need for money, and partly by a wish for revenge on Murray and others by whom he felt slighted. There was a vogue for what was called \"silver-fork fiction\"\u2014novels depicting aristocratic life, usually by anonymous authors, read by the aspirational middle classes. Disraeli's first novel, \"Vivian Grey\", published anonymously in four volumes in 1826\u201327, was a thinly veiled re-telling of the affair of \"The Representative\". It sold well, but caused much offence in influential circles when the authorship was discovered. Disraeli, then just 23, did not move in high society, as the numerous solecisms in his book made obvious. Reviewers were sharply critical on these grounds of both the author and the book. Murray and Lockhart, men of great influence in literary circles, believed that Disraeli had caricatured them and abused their confidence\u2014an accusation denied by the author but repeated by many of his biographers. In later editions Disraeli made many changes, softening his satire, but the damage to his reputation proved long-lasting.\nDisraeli's biographer Jonathan Parry writes that the financial failure and personal criticism that Disraeli suffered in 1825 and 1826 were probably the trigger for a serious nervous crisis affecting him over the next four years: \"He had always been moody, sensitive, and solitary by nature, but now became seriously depressed and lethargic.\" He was still living with his parents in London, but in search of the \"change of air\" recommended by the family's doctors, Isaac took a succession of houses in the country and on the coast, before Disraeli sought wider horizons.\n1830\u20131837.\nTogether with his sister's fianc\u00e9, William Meredith, Disraeli travelled widely in southern Europe and beyond in 1830\u201331. The trip was financed partly by another high society novel, \"The Young Duke\", written in 1829\u201330. The tour was cut short suddenly by Meredith's death from smallpox in Cairo in July 1831. Despite this tragedy, and the need for treatment for a sexually transmitted disease on his return, Disraeli felt enriched by his experiences. He became, in Parry's words, \"aware of values that seemed denied to his insular countrymen. The journey encouraged his self-consciousness, his moral relativism, and his interest in Eastern racial and religious attitudes.\" Blake regards the tour as one of the formative experiences of Disraeli's career: \"[T]he impressions that it made on him were life-lasting. They conditioned his attitude toward some of the most important political problems which faced him in his later years\u2014especially the Eastern Question; they also coloured many of his novels.\"\nDisraeli wrote two novels in the aftermath of the tour. \"Contarini Fleming\" (1832) was avowedly a self-portrait. It is subtitled \"a psychological autobiography\" and depicts the conflicting elements of its hero's character: the duality of northern and Mediterranean ancestry, the dreaming artist and the bold man of action. As Parry observes, the book ends on a political note, setting out Europe's progress \"from feudal to federal principles\". \"The Wondrous Tale of Alroy\" the following year portrayed the problems of a medieval Jew in deciding between a small, exclusively Jewish state and a large empire embracing all.\nAfter these novels were published, Disraeli declared that he would \"write no more about myself\". He had already turned his attention to politics in 1832, during the great crisis over the Reform Bill. He contributed to an anti-Whig pamphlet edited by John Wilson Croker and published by Murray entitled \"England and France: or a cure for Ministerial Gallomania\". The choice of a Tory publication was regarded as strange by Disraeli's friends and relatives, who thought him more of a Radical. Indeed, he had objected to Murray about Croker's inserting \"high Tory\" sentiment: Disraeli remarked, \"it is quite impossible that anything adverse to the general measure of Reform can issue from my pen.\" Moreover, at the time \"Gallomania\" was published, Disraeli was electioneering in High Wycombe in the Radical interest.\nDisraeli's politics at the time were influenced both by his rebellious streak and his desire to make his mark. At that time, British politics were dominated by the aristocracy, with a few powerful commoners. The Whigs derived from the coalition of Lords who had forced through the Bill of Rights 1689 and in some cases were their descendants. The Tories tended to support King and Church and sought to thwart political change. A small number of Radicals, generally from northern constituencies, were the strongest advocates of continuing reform. In the early 1830s the Tories and the interests they represented appeared to be a lost cause. The other great party, the Whigs, were anathema to Disraeli: \"Toryism is worn out &amp; I cannot condescend to be a Whig.\" There was a by-election and a general election in 1832; Disraeli unsuccessfully stood as a Radical at High Wycombe in each.\nDisraeli's political views embraced certain Radical policies, particularly electoral reform, and also some Tory ones, including protectionism. He began to move in Tory circles. In 1834 he was introduced to the former Lord Chancellor, Lord Lyndhurst, by Henrietta Sykes, wife of Sir Francis Sykes. She was having an affair with Lyndhurst and began another with Disraeli. Disraeli and Lyndhurst took an immediate liking to each other. Lyndhurst was an indiscreet gossip with a fondness for intrigue; this appealed greatly to Disraeli, who became his secretary and go-between. In 1835 Disraeli stood for the last time as a Radical, again unsuccessfully contesting High Wycombe.\nIn April 1835, Disraeli fought a by-election at Taunton as a Tory candidate. The Irish MP Daniel O'Connell, misled by inaccurate press reports, thought Disraeli had slandered him while electioneering at Taunton; he launched an outspoken attack, referring to Disraeli as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;a reptile\u00a0... just fit now, after being twice discarded by the people, to become a Conservative. He possesses all the necessary requisites of perfidy, selfishness, depravity, want of principle, etc., which would qualify him for the change. His name shows that he is of Jewish origin. I do not use it as a term of reproach; there are many most respectable Jews. But there are, as in every other people, some of the lowest and most disgusting grade of moral turpitude; and of those I look upon Mr. Disraeli as the worst.\nDisraeli's public exchanges with O'Connell, extensively reproduced in \"The Times\", included a demand for a duel with the 60-year-old O'Connell's son (which resulted in Disraeli's temporary detention by the authorities), a reference to \"the inextinguishable hatred with which [he] shall pursue [O'Connell's] existence\", and the accusation that O'Connell's supporters had a \"princely revenue wrung from a starving race of fanatical slaves\". Disraeli was highly gratified by the dispute, which propelled him to general public notice for the first time. He did not defeat the incumbent Whig member, Henry Labouchere, but the Taunton constituency was regarded as unwinnable by the Tories. Disraeli kept Labouchere's majority down to 170, a good showing that put him in line for a winnable seat in the near future.\nWith Lyndhurst's encouragement Disraeli turned to writing propaganda for his newly adopted party. His \"Vindication of the English Constitution\", was published in December 1835. It was couched in the form of an open letter to Lyndhurst, and in Bradford's view encapsulates a political philosophy that Disraeli adhered to for the rest of his life: the value of benevolent aristocratic government, a loathing of political dogma, and the modernisation of Tory policies. The following year he wrote a series of satires on politicians of the day, which he published in \"The Times\" under the pen-name \"Runnymede\". His targets included the Whigs, collectively and individually, Irish nationalists, and political corruption. One essay ended:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The English nation, therefore, rallies for rescue from the degrading plots of a profligate oligarchy, a barbarizing sectarianism, and a boroughmongering Papacy, round their hereditary leaders\u2014the Peers. The House of Lords, therefore, at this moment represents everything in the realm except the Whig oligarchs, their tools the Dissenters, and their masters the Irish priests. In the mean time, the Whigs bawl that there is a \"collision!\" It is true there is a collision, but it is not a collision between the Lords and the People, but between the Ministers and the Constitution.\nDisraeli was elected to the exclusively Tory Carlton Club in 1836, and was also taken up by the party's leading hostess, Lady Londonderry. In June 1837 William IV died, the young Queen Victoria succeeded him, and parliament was dissolved. On the recommendation of the Carlton Club, Disraeli was adopted as a Tory parliamentary candidate at the ensuing general election.\nParliament.\nBack-bencher.\nIn the election in July 1837, Disraeli won a seat in the House of Commons as one of two members, both Tory, for the constituency of Maidstone. The other was Wyndham Lewis, who helped finance Disraeli's election campaign, and who died the following year. In the same year Disraeli published a novel, \"Henrietta Temple\", which was a love story and social comedy, drawing on his affair with Henrietta Sykes. He had broken off the relationship in late 1836, distraught that she had taken yet another lover. His other novel of this period is \"Venetia\", a romance based on the characters of Shelley and Byron, written quickly to raise much-needed money.\nDisraeli made his maiden speech in Parliament on 7 December 1837. He followed O'Connell, whom he sharply criticised for the latter's \"long, rambling, jumbling, speech\". He was shouted down by O'Connell's supporters. After this unpromising start Disraeli kept a low profile for the rest of the parliamentary session. He was a loyal supporter of the party leader Sir Robert Peel and his policies, with the exception of a personal sympathy for the Chartist movement that most Tories did not share.\nIn 1839 Disraeli married Mary Anne Lewis, the widow of Wyndham Lewis. Twelve years Disraeli's senior, Mary Lewis had a substantial income of \u00a35,000 a year. His motives were generally assumed to be mercenary, but the couple came to cherish one another, remaining close until she died more than three decades later. \"Dizzy married me for my money\", his wife said later, \"But, if he had the chance again, he would marry me for love.\"\nFinding the financial demands of his Maidstone seat too much, Disraeli secured a Tory nomination for Shrewsbury, winning one of the constituency's two seats at the 1841 general election, despite serious opposition, and heavy debts which opponents seized on. The election was a massive defeat for the Whigs across the country, and Peel became prime minister. Disraeli hoped, unrealistically, for ministerial office. Though disappointed at being left on the back benches, he continued his support for Peel in 1842 and 1843, seeking to establish himself as an expert on foreign affairs and international trade.\nAlthough a Tory (or Conservative, as some in the party now called themselves) Disraeli was sympathetic to some of the aims of Chartism, and argued for an alliance between the landed aristocracy and the working class against the increasing power of the merchants and new industrialists in the middle class. After Disraeli won widespread acclaim in March 1842 for worsting Lord Palmerston in debate, he was taken up by a small group of idealistic new Tory MPs, with whom he formed the Young England group. They held that the landed interests should use their power to protect the poor from exploitation by middle-class businessmen.\nDisraeli hoped to forge a paternalistic Tory-Radical alliance, but he was unsuccessful. Before the Reform Act 1867, the working class did not possess the vote and therefore had little political power. Although Disraeli forged a personal friendship with John Bright, a leading Radical, Disraeli was unable to persuade Bright to sacrifice his distinct position for parliamentary advancement. When Disraeli attempted to secure a Tory-Radical cabinet in 1852, Bright refused.\nDisraeli gradually became a sharp critic of Peel's government, often deliberately taking contrary positions. The young MP attacked his leader as early as 1843. However, the best known of these stances were over the Maynooth Grant in 1845 and the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846. The president of the Board of Trade, William Gladstone, resigned from the cabinet over the Maynooth Grant. The Corn Laws imposed a tariff on imported wheat, protecting British farmers from foreign competition, but making the cost of bread artificially high. Peel hoped that the repeal of the Corn Laws and the resultant influx of cheaper wheat into Britain would relieve the condition of the poor, and in particular the Great Famine caused by successive failure of potato crops in Ireland.\nThe first months of 1846 were dominated by a battle in Parliament between the free traders and the protectionists over the repeal of the Corn Laws, with the latter rallying around Disraeli and Lord George Bentinck. An alliance of free-trade Conservatives (the \"Peelites\"), Radicals, and Whigs carried repeal, and the Conservative Party split: the Peelites moved towards the Whigs, while a \"new\" Conservative Party formed around the protectionists, led by Disraeli, Bentinck, and Lord Stanley (later Lord Derby).\nThe split in the Tory party over the repeal of the Corn Laws had profound implications for Disraeli's political career: almost every Tory politician with experience of office followed Peel, leaving the rump bereft of leadership. In Blake's words, \"[Disraeli] found himself almost the only figure on his side capable of putting up the oratorical display essential for a parliamentary leader.\" The Duke of Argyll wrote that Disraeli \"was like a subaltern in a great battle where every superior officer was killed or wounded\". If the Tory Party could muster the electoral support necessary to form a government, then Disraeli now seemed to be guaranteed high office, but with a group of men who possessed little or no official experience and who, as a group, remained personally hostile to Disraeli. In the event the Tory split soon had the party out of office, not regaining power until 1852. The Conservatives would not again have a majority in the House of Commons until 1874.\nBentinck and the leadership.\nPeel successfully steered the repeal of the Corn Laws through Parliament and was then defeated by an alliance of his enemies on the issue of Irish law and order; he resigned in June 1846. The Tories remained split, and the Queen sent for Lord John Russell, the Whig leader. In the 1847 general election, Disraeli stood, successfully, for the Buckinghamshire constituency. The new House of Commons had more Conservative than Whig members, but the depth of the Tory schism enabled Russell to continue to govern. The Conservatives were led by Bentinck in the Commons and Stanley in the Lords.\nIn 1847 a small political crisis removed Bentinck from the leadership and highlighted Disraeli's differences with his own party. In that year's general election, Lionel de Rothschild had been returned for the City of London. As a practising Jew he could not take the oath of allegiance in the prescribed Christian form, and therefore could not take his seat. Lord John Russell, the Whig leader who had succeeded Peel as prime minister, proposed in the Commons that the oath should be amended to permit Jews to enter Parliament.\nDisraeli spoke in favour of the measure, arguing that Christianity was \"completed Judaism\", and asking the House of Commons \"Where is your Christianity if you do not believe in their Judaism?\" Russell and Disraeli's future rival Gladstone thought this brave; the speech was badly received by his own party. The Tories and the Anglican establishment were hostile to the bill. With the exception of Disraeli, every member of the future protectionist cabinet then in Parliament voted against the measure. The measure was voted down. In the aftermath of the debate Bentinck resigned the leadership and was succeeded by Lord Granby; Disraeli's speech, thought by many of his own party to be blasphemous, ruled him out for the time being.\nWhile these intrigues played out, Disraeli was working with the Bentinck family to secure the necessary financing to purchase Hughenden Manor, in Buckinghamshire. The possession of a country house and incumbency of a county constituency were regarded as essential for a Tory with leadership ambitions. Disraeli and his wife alternated between Hughenden and several homes in London for the rest of their marriage. The negotiations were complicated by Bentinck's sudden death on 21 September 1848, but Disraeli obtained a loan of \u00a325,000 from Bentinck's brothers Lord Henry Bentinck and Lord Titchfield.\nWithin a month of his appointment Granby resigned the leadership in the Commons and the party functioned without a leader in the Commons for the rest of the session. At the start of the next session, affairs were handled by a triumvirate of Granby, Disraeli, and John Charles Herries\u2014indicative of the tension between Disraeli and the rest of the party, who needed his talents but mistrusted him. This confused arrangement ended with Granby's resignation in 1851; Disraeli effectively ignored the two men regardless.\nChancellor of the Exchequer.\nFirst Derby government.\nIn March 1851, Lord John Russell's government was defeated over a bill to equalise the county and borough franchises, mostly because of divisions among his supporters. He resigned, and the Queen sent for Stanley, who felt that a minority government could do little and would not last long, so Russell remained in office. Disraeli regretted this, hoping for an opportunity, however brief, to show himself capable in office. Stanley, in contrast, deprecated his inexperienced followers as a reason for not assuming office: \"These are not names I can put before the Queen.\"\nAt the end of June 1851, Stanley succeeded to the title of Earl of Derby. The Whigs were wracked by internal dissensions during the second half of 1851, much of which Parliament spent in recess. Russell dismissed Lord Palmerston from the cabinet, leaving the latter determined to deprive the prime minister of office. Palmerston did so within weeks of Parliament's reassembly on 4 February 1852, his followers combining with Disraeli's Tories to defeat the government on a Militia Bill, and Russell resigned. Derby had either to take office or risk damage to his reputation, and he accepted the Queen's commission as prime minister. Palmerston declined any office; Derby had hoped to have him as Chancellor of the Exchequer. Disraeli, his closest ally, was his second choice and accepted, though disclaiming any great knowledge in the financial field. Gladstone refused to join the government. Disraeli may have been attracted to the office by the \u00a35,000 annual salary, which would help pay his debts. Few of the new cabinet had held office before; when Derby tried to inform the Duke of Wellington of the names of the ministers, the old Duke, who was somewhat deaf, inadvertently branded the new government by incredulously repeating \"Who? Who?\"\nIn the following weeks, Disraeli served as Leader of the House (with Derby as prime minister in the Lords) and as chancellor. He wrote regular reports on proceedings in the Commons to Victoria, who described them as \"very curious\" and \"much in the style of his books\". Parliament was prorogued on 1 July 1852 as the Tories could not govern for long as a minority; Disraeli hoped that they would gain a majority of about 40. Instead, the election later that month had no clear winner, and the Derby government held to power pending the meeting of Parliament.\nBudget.\nDisraeli's task as chancellor was to devise a budget which would satisfy the protectionist elements who supported the Tories, without uniting the free-traders against it. His proposed budget, which he presented to the Commons on 3 December, lowered the taxes on malt and tea, provisions designed to appeal to the working class. To make his budget revenue-neutral, as funds were needed to provide defences against the French, he doubled the house tax and continued the income tax. Disraeli's overall purpose was to enact policies which would benefit the working classes, making his party more attractive to them. Although the budget did not contain protectionist features, the Opposition was prepared to destroy it\u2014and Disraeli's career as Chancellor\u2014in part out of revenge for his actions against Peel in 1846. MP Sidney Herbert predicted that the budget would fail because \"Jews make no converts\".\nDisraeli delivered the budget on 3 December 1852, and prepared to wind up the debate for the government on 16 December\u2014it was customary for the Chancellor to have the last word. A massive defeat for the government was predicted. Disraeli attacked his opponents individually, and then as a force: \"I face a Coalition\u00a0... This, too, I know, that England does not love coalitions.\" His speech of three hours was quickly seen as a parliamentary masterpiece. As MPs prepared to divide, Gladstone rose to his feet and began an angry speech, despite the efforts of Tory MPs to shout him down. The interruptions were fewer, as Gladstone gained control of the House, and in the next two hours painted a picture of Disraeli as frivolous and his budget as subversive. The government was defeated by 19 votes, and Derby resigned four days later. He was replaced by the Peelite Earl of Aberdeen, with Gladstone as his Chancellor. Because of Disraeli's unpopularity among the Peelites, no party reconciliation was possible while he remained Tory leader in the Commons.\nOpposition.\nWith the fall of the government, Disraeli and the Conservatives returned to the Opposition benches. Disraeli would spend three-quarters of his 44-year parliamentary career in Opposition. Derby was reluctant to seek to unseat the government, fearing a repetition of the Who? Who? Ministry and knowing that shared dislike of Disraeli was part of what had formed the governing coalition. Disraeli, on the other hand, was anxious to return to office. In the interim, Disraeli, as Conservative leader in the Commons, opposed the government on all major measures.\nIn June 1853 Disraeli was awarded an honorary degree by the University of Oxford. He had been recommended for it by Lord Derby, the university's Chancellor. The start of the Crimean War in 1854 caused a lull in party politics; Disraeli spoke patriotically in support. The British military efforts were marked by bungling, and in 1855 a restive Parliament considered a resolution to establish a committee on the conduct of the war. The Aberdeen government made this a motion of confidence; Disraeli led the Opposition to defeat the government, 305 to 148. Aberdeen resigned, and the Queen sent for Derby, who to Disraeli's frustration refused to take office. Palmerston was deemed essential to any Whig ministry, and he would not join any he did not head. The Queen reluctantly asked Palmerston to form a government. Under Palmerston, the war went better, and was ended by the Treaty of Paris in early 1856. Disraeli was early to call for peace but had little influence on events.\nWhen a rebellion broke out in India in 1857, Disraeli took a keen interest, having been a member of a select committee in 1852 which considered how best to rule the subcontinent, and had proposed eliminating the governing role of the British East India Company. After peace was restored, and Palmerston in early 1858 brought in legislation for direct rule of India by the Crown, Disraeli opposed it. Many Conservative MPs refused to follow him, and the bill passed the Commons easily.\nPalmerston's grip on the premiership was weakened by his response to the Orsini affair, in which an attempt was made to assassinate the French Emperor Napoleon III by an Italian revolutionary with a bomb made in Birmingham. At the request of the French ambassador, Palmerston proposed amending the conspiracy to murder statute to make creating an infernal device a felony. He was defeated by 19 votes on the second reading, with many Liberals crossing the aisle against him. He immediately resigned, and Lord Derby returned to office.\nSecond Derby government.\nDerby took office at the head of a purely \"Conservative\" administration, not in coalition. He again offered a place to Gladstone, who declined. Disraeli was once more leader of the House of Commons and returned to the Exchequer. As in 1852, Derby led a minority government, dependent on the division of its opponents for survival. As Leader of the House, Disraeli resumed his regular reports to Queen Victoria, who had requested that he include what she \"could not meet in newspapers\".\nDuring its brief life of just over a year, the Derby government proved moderately progressive. The Government of India Act 1858 ended the role of the East India Company in governing the subcontinent. The Thames Purification Bill funded the construction of much larger sewers for London. Disraeli had supported efforts to allow Jews to sit in Parliament with a bill passed through the Commons allowing each house of Parliament to determine what oaths its members should take. This was grudgingly agreed to by the House of Lords, with a minority of Conservatives joining with the Opposition to pass it. In 1858, Baron Lionel de Rothschild became the first MP to profess the Jewish faith.\nFaced with a vacancy, Disraeli and Derby tried yet again to bring Gladstone, still nominally a Conservative MP, into the government, hoping to strengthen it. Disraeli wrote a personal letter to Gladstone, asking him to place the good of the party above personal animosity: \"Every man performs his office, and there is a Power, greater than ourselves, that disposes of all this.\" In response, Gladstone denied that personal feelings played any role in his decisions then and previously whether to accept office, while acknowledging that there were differences between him and Derby \"broader than you may have supposed\".\nThe Tories pursued a Reform Bill in 1859, which would have resulted in a modest increase to the franchise. The Liberals were healing the breaches between those who favoured Russell and the Palmerston loyalists, and in late March 1859, the government was defeated on a Russell-sponsored amendment. Derby dissolved Parliament, and the ensuing general election resulted in modest Tory gains, but not enough to control the Commons. When Parliament assembled, Derby's government was defeated by 13 votes on an amendment to the Address from the Throne. He resigned, and the Queen reluctantly sent for Palmerston again.\nOpposition and third term as Chancellor.\nAfter Derby's second ejection from office, Disraeli faced dissension within Conservative ranks from those who blamed him for the defeat, or who felt he was disloyal to Derby\u2014the former prime minister warned Disraeli of some MPs seeking his removal from the front bench. Among the conspirators were Lord Robert Cecil, a Conservative MP who would a quarter century later become prime minister as Lord Salisbury; he wrote that having Disraeli as leader in the Commons decreased the Conservatives' chance of holding office. When Cecil's father objected, Lord Robert stated, \"I have merely put into print what all the country gentlemen were saying in private.\"\nDisraeli led a toothless Opposition in the Commons\u2014seeing no way of unseating Palmerston, Derby privately agreed not to seek the government's defeat. Disraeli kept himself informed on foreign affairs, and on what was going on in cabinet, thanks to a source within it. When the American Civil War began in 1861, Disraeli said little publicly, but like most Englishmen expected the South to win. Less reticent were Palmerston, Gladstone, and Russell, whose statements in support of the South contributed to years of hard feelings in the United States. In 1862, Disraeli met Prussian Count Otto von Bismarck and said of him, \"be careful about that man, he means what he says\".\nThe party truce ended in 1864, with Tories outraged over Palmerston's handling of the territorial dispute between the German Confederation and Denmark known as the Schleswig-Holstein Question. Disraeli had little help from Derby, who was ill, but he united the party enough on a no-confidence vote to limit the government to a majority of 18\u2014Tory defections and absentees kept Palmerston in office. Despite rumours about Palmerston's health as he turned 80, he remained personally popular, and the Liberals increased their margin in the July 1865 general election. In the wake of the poor election results, Derby predicted to Disraeli that neither of them would ever hold office again.\nPolitical plans were thrown into disarray by Palmerston's death on 18 October 1865. Russell became prime minister again, with Gladstone clearly the Liberal Party's leader-in-waiting, and as Leader of the House Disraeli's direct opponent. One of Russell's early priorities was a Reform Bill, but the proposed legislation that Gladstone announced on 12 March 1866 divided his party. The Conservatives and the dissident Liberals repeatedly attacked Gladstone's bill, and in June finally defeated the government; Russell resigned on 26 June. The dissidents were unwilling to serve under Disraeli in the House of Commons, and Derby formed a third Conservative minority government, with Disraeli again as chancellor.\nTory Democrat: the 1867 Reform Act.\nIt was Disraeli's belief that if given the vote British people would use it instinctively to put their natural and traditional rulers, the gentlemen of the Conservative Party, into power. Responding to renewed agitation for popular suffrage, Disraeli persuaded a majority of the cabinet to agree to a Reform bill. With what Derby cautioned was \"a leap in the dark\", Disraeli had outflanked the Liberals who, as the supposed champions of Reform, dared not oppose him. In the absence of a credible party rival and for fear of having an election called on the issue, Conservatives felt obliged to support Disraeli despite their misgivings.\nThere were Tory dissenters, most notably Lord Cranborne (as Robert Cecil was by then known) who resigned from the government and spoke against the bill, accusing Disraeli of \"a political betrayal which has no parallel in our Parliamentary annals\". Even as Disraeli accepted Liberal amendments (although pointedly refusing those moved by Gladstone) that further lowered the property qualification, Cranborne was unable to lead an effective rebellion. Disraeli gained wide acclaim and became a hero to his party for the \"marvellous parliamentary skill\" with which he secured the passage of Reform in the Commons.\nFrom the Liberal benches too there was admiration. MP for Nottingham Bernal Ostborne declared:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have always thought the Chancellor of Exchequer was the greatest Radical in the House. He has achieved what no other man in the country could have done. He has lugged up that great omnibus full of stupid, heavy, country gentlemen--I only say 'stupid' in the parliamentary sense--and has converted these Conservative into Radical Reformers.\nThe Reform Act 1867 passed that August. It extended the franchise by 938,427 men\u2014an increase of 88%\u2014by giving the vote to male householders and male lodgers paying at least \u00a310 for rooms. It eliminated rotten boroughs with fewer than 10,000 inhabitants, and granted constituencies to 15 unrepresented towns, with extra representation to large municipalities such as Liverpool and Manchester.\nPrime Minister (1868).\nFirst term.\nDerby had long had attacks of gout which left him bedbound, unable to deal with politics. As the new session of Parliament approached in February 1868, he was unable to leave his home but was reluctant to resign, as at 68 he was much younger than either Palmerston or Russell at the end of their premierships. Derby knew that his \"attacks of illness would, at no distant period, incapacitate me from the discharge of my public duties\"; doctors had warned him that his health required his resignation. In late February, with Parliament in session and Derby absent, he wrote to Disraeli asking for confirmation that \"you will not shrink from the additional heavy responsibility\". Reassured, he wrote to the Queen, resigning and recommending Disraeli as \"only he could command the cordial support, en masse, of his present colleagues\". Disraeli went to Osborne House on the Isle of Wight, where the Queen asked him to form a government. The monarch wrote to her daughter, Prussian Crown Princess Victoria, \"Mr. Disraeli is Prime Minister! A proud thing for a man 'risen from the people' to have obtained!\" The new prime minister told those who came to congratulate him, \"I have climbed to the top of the greasy pole.\"\nFirst government, February\u2013December 1868.\nThe Conservatives remained a minority in the House of Commons and the passage of the Reform Bill required the calling of a new election once the new voting register had been compiled. Disraeli's term as prime minister, which began in February 1868, would therefore be short unless the Conservatives won the general election. He made only two major changes in the cabinet: he replaced Lord Chelmsford as Lord Chancellor with Lord Cairns and brought in George Ward Hunt as Chancellor of the Exchequer. Derby had intended to replace Chelmsford once a vacancy in a suitable sinecure developed. Disraeli was unwilling to wait, and Cairns, in his view, was a far stronger minister.\nDisraeli's first premiership was dominated by the heated debate over the Church of Ireland. Although Ireland was largely Roman Catholic, the Church of England represented most landowners. It remained the established church and was funded by direct taxation, which was greatly resented by the Catholics and Presbyterians. An initial attempt by Disraeli to negotiate with Archbishop Manning the establishment of a Catholic university in Dublin foundered in March when Gladstone moved resolutions to disestablish the Irish Church altogether. The proposal united the Liberals under Gladstone's leadership, while causing divisions among the Conservatives.\nThe Conservatives remained in office because the new electoral register was not yet ready; neither party wished a poll under the old roll. Gladstone began using the Liberal majority in the Commons to push through resolutions and legislation. Disraeli's government survived until the December general election, at which the Liberals were returned to power with a majority.\nIn its short life, the first Disraeli government passed noncontroversial laws. It ended public executions, and the Corrupt Practices Act did much to end electoral bribery. It authorised an early version of nationalisation, having the Post Office buy up the telegraph companies. Amendments to the school law, the Scottish legal system, and the railway laws were passed. In addition, the Public Health (Scotland) Act instituted sanitary inspectors and medical officers. According to one study, \"better sanitation was enforced throughout Scotland.\" Disraeli sent the successful expedition against Tewodros II of Ethiopia under Sir Robert Napier.\nOpposition leader; 1874 election.\nGiven Gladstone's majority in the Commons, Disraeli could do little but protest as the government advanced legislation; he chose to await Liberal mistakes. He used this leisure time to write a new novel, \"Lothair\" (1870). A work of fiction by a former prime minister was a novelty for Britain, and the book became a bestseller.\nBy 1872 there was dissent in the Conservative ranks over the failure to challenge Gladstone. This was quieted as Disraeli took steps to assert his leadership, and as divisions among the Liberals became clear. Public support for Disraeli was shown by cheering at a thanksgiving service in 1872 on the recovery of the Prince of Wales from illness, while Gladstone was met with silence. Disraeli had supported the efforts of party manager John Eldon Gorst to put the administration of the Conservative Party on a modern basis. On Gorst's advice, Disraeli gave a speech to a mass meeting in Manchester that year. To roaring approval, he compared the Liberal front bench to \"a range of exhausted volcanoes... But the situation is still dangerous. There are occasional earthquakes and ever and again the dark rumbling of the sea.\" Gladstone, Disraeli stated, dominated the scene and \"alternated between a menace and a sigh\".\nAt his first departure from 10 Downing Street in 1868, Disraeli had Victoria make his wife Mary Anne Viscountess Beaconsfield in her own right in lieu of a peerage for himself. Through 1872 the eighty-year-old peeress had stomach cancer. She died on 15 December. Urged by a clergyman to turn her thoughts to Jesus Christ in her final days, she said she could not: \"You know Dizzy is my J.C.\"\nIn 1873, Gladstone brought forward legislation to establish a Catholic university in Dublin. This divided the Liberals, and on 12 March an alliance of Conservatives and Irish Catholics defeated the government by three votes. Gladstone resigned, and the Queen sent for Disraeli, who refused to take office. Without a general election, a Conservative government would be another minority; Disraeli wanted the power a majority would bring and felt he could gain it later by leaving the Liberals in office now. Gladstone's government struggled on, beset by scandal and unimproved by a reshuffle. As part of that change, Gladstone took on the office of Chancellor, leading to questions as to whether he had to stand for re-election on taking on a second ministry\u2014until the 1920s, MPs becoming ministers had to seek re-election.\nIn January 1874, Gladstone called a general election, convinced that if he waited longer, he would do worse at the polls. Balloting was spread over two weeks, beginning on 1 February. As the constituencies voted, it became clear that the result would be a Conservative majority, the first since 1841. In Scotland, where the Conservatives were perennially weak, they increased from seven seats to nineteen. Overall, they won 350 seats to 245 for the Liberals and 57 for the Irish Home Rule League. Disraeli became prime minister for the second time.\nPrime Minister (1874\u20131880).\nSecond term.\nDisraeli's cabinet of twelve, with six peers and six commoners, was the smallest since Reform. Of the peers, five of them had been in Disraeli's 1868 cabinet; the sixth, Lord Salisbury, was reconciled to Disraeli after negotiation and became Secretary of State for India. Lord Stanley (who had succeeded his father, the former prime minister, as Earl of Derby) became Foreign Secretary and Sir Stafford Northcote the Chancellor.\nIn August 1876, Disraeli was elevated to the House of Lords as Earl of Beaconsfield and Viscount Hughenden. The Queen had offered to ennoble him as early as 1868; he had then declined. She did so again in 1874, when he fell ill at Balmoral, but he was reluctant to leave the Commons for a house in which he had no experience. Continued ill health during his second premiership caused him to contemplate resignation, but his lieutenant, Derby, was unwilling, feeling that he could not manage the Queen. For Disraeli, the Lords, where the debate was less intense, was the alternative to resignation. Five days before the end of the 1876 session of Parliament, on 11 August, Disraeli was seen to linger and look around the chamber before departing. Newspapers reported his ennoblement the following morning.\nIn addition to the viscounty bestowed on Mary Anne Disraeli, the earldom of Beaconsfield was to have been bestowed on Edmund Burke in 1797, but he had died before receiving it. The name Beaconsfield, a town near Hughenden, was given to a minor character in \"Vivian Grey\". Disraeli made various statements about his elevation, writing to Selina, Lady Bradford on 8 August 1876, \"I am quite tired of that place [the Commons]\" but when asked by a friend how he liked the Lords, replied, \"I am dead; dead but in the Elysian fields.\"\nDomestic policy.\nLegislation.\nUnder the stewardship of Richard Assheton Cross, the Home Secretary, Disraeli's new government enacted many reforms, including the Artisans' and Labourers' Dwellings Improvement Act 1875 (38 &amp; 39 Vict. c. 36), which made inexpensive loans available to towns and cities to construct working-class housing. Also enacted were the Public Health Act 1875 (38 &amp; 39 Vict. c. 55), modernising sanitary codes, the Sale of Food and Drugs Act 1875 (38 &amp; 39 Vict. c. 63), and the Elementary Education Act 1876 (39 &amp; 40 Vict. c. 70). Disraeli's government introduced a new Factory Act meant to protect workers, the Conspiracy, and Protection of Property Act 1875 (38 &amp; 39 Vict. c. 86), which allowed peaceful picketing, and the Employers and Workmen Act 1875 (38 &amp; 39 Vict. c. 90) to enable workers to sue employers in the civil courts if they broke legal contracts.\nThe Sale of Food and Drugs Act 1875 prohibited the mixing of injurious ingredients with articles of food or with drugs, and provision was made for the appointment of analysts; all tea \"had to be examined by a customs official on importation, and when in the opinion of the analyst it was unfit for food, the tea had to be destroyed\". The Employers and Workmen Act 1875, according to one study, \"finally placed employers and employed on an equal footing before the law\". The Conspiracy, and Protection of Property Act 1875 established the right to strike by providing that \"an agreement or combination by one or more persons to do, or procure to be done, any act in contemplation or furtherance of a trade dispute between employers and workmen, shall not be indictable as a conspiracy if such act committed by one person would not be punishable as a crime\".\nAs a result of these social reforms the Liberal-Labour MP Alexander Macdonald told his constituents in 1879, \"The Conservative party have done more for the working classes in five years than the Liberals have in fifty.\"\nCivil Service.\nGladstone in 1870 had sponsored an Order in Council, introducing competitive examination into the Civil Service, diminishing the political aspects of government hiring. Disraeli did not agree, and while he did not seek to reverse the order, his actions often frustrated its intent. For example, Disraeli made political appointments to positions previously given to career civil servants. He was backed by his party, hungry for office and its emoluments after almost thirty years with only brief spells in government. Disraeli gave positions to hard-up Conservative leaders, even\u2014to Gladstone's outrage\u2014creating one office at \u00a32,000 per year. Nevertheless, Disraeli made fewer peers (only 22, including one of Victoria's sons) than had Gladstone (37 during his just over five years in office).\nAs he had in government posts, Disraeli rewarded old friends with clerical positions, making Sydney Turner, son of a good friend of Isaac D'Israeli, Dean of Ripon. He favoured Low church clergymen in promotion, disliking other movements in Anglicanism for political reasons. In this, he came into disagreement with the Queen, who out of loyalty to her late husband Albert preferred Broad church teachings. One controversial appointment had occurred shortly before the 1868 election. When the position of Archbishop of Canterbury fell vacant, Disraeli reluctantly agreed to the Queen's preferred candidate, Archibald Tait, the Bishop of London. To fill Tait's vacant see, Disraeli was urged by many people to appoint Samuel Wilberforce, the former Bishop of Winchester. Disraeli disliked Wilberforce and instead appointed John Jackson, the Bishop of Lincoln. Blake suggested that, on balance, these appointments cost Disraeli more votes than they gained him.\nForeign policy.\nDisraeli always considered foreign affairs to be the most critical and interesting part of statesmanship. Nevertheless, his biographer Robert Blake doubts that his subject had specific ideas about foreign policy when he took office in 1874. He had rarely travelled abroad; since his youthful tour of the Middle East in 1830\u20131831, he had left Britain only for his honeymoon and three visits to Paris, the last of which was in 1856. As he had criticised Gladstone for a do-nothing foreign policy, he most probably contemplated what actions would reassert Britain's place in Europe. His brief first premiership, and the first year of his second, gave him little opportunity to make his mark in foreign affairs.\nSuez.\nThe Suez Canal, opened in 1869, cut weeks and thousands of miles off the sea journey between Britain and India; in 1875, approximately 80% of the ships using the canal were British. In the event of another rebellion in India or a Russian invasion, the time saved at Suez might be crucial. Built by French interests, 56% of the stocks in the canal remained in their hands, while 44% of the stock belonged to Isma'il Pasha, the Khedive of Egypt. He was notorious for his profligate spending. The canal was losing money, and an attempt by Ferdinand de Lesseps, builder of the canal, to raise the tolls had fallen through when the Khedive had threatened military force to prevent it, and had also attracted Disraeli's attention. The Khedive governed Egypt under the Ottoman Empire; as in the Crimea, the issue of the Canal raised the Eastern Question of what to do about the decaying empire governed from Constantinople. With much of the pre-canal trade and communications between Britain and India passing through the Ottoman Empire, Britain had done its best to prop up the Ottomans against the threat that Russia would take Constantinople, cutting those communications, and giving Russian ships unfettered access to the Mediterranean. The French might also threaten those lines. Britain had had the opportunity to purchase shares in the canal but had declined to do so.\nDisraeli sent the Liberal MP Nathan Rothschild to Paris to enquire about buying de Lesseps's shares. On 14 November 1875, the editor of the \"Pall Mall Gazette\", Frederick Greenwood, learned from London banker Henry Oppenheim that the Khedive was seeking to sell his shares in the Suez Canal Company to a French firm. Greenwood quickly told Lord Derby, the Foreign Secretary, who notified Disraeli. The Prime Minister moved immediately to secure the shares. On 23 November, the Khedive offered to sell the shares for 100,000,000 francs. Rather than seek the aid of the Bank of England, Disraeli borrowed funds from Lionel de Rothschild, who took a commission on the deal. The banker's capital was at risk as Parliament could have refused to ratify the transaction. The contract for purchase was signed at Cairo on 25 November and the shares deposited at the British consulate the following day.\nDisraeli told the Queen, \"it is settled; you have it, madam!\" The public saw the venture as a daring statement of British dominance of the seas. Sir Ian Malcolm described the Suez Canal share purchase as \"the greatest romance of Mr. Disraeli's romantic career\". In the following decades, the security of the Suez Canal became a major concern of British foreign policy. Under Gladstone, Britain took control of Egypt in 1882. A later Foreign Secretary, Lord Curzon, described the canal in 1909 as \"the determining influence of every considerable movement of British power to the east and south of the Mediterranean\".\nRoyal Titles Act.\nAlthough initially curious about Disraeli when he entered Parliament in 1837, Victoria came to detest him over his treatment of Peel. Over time, her dislike softened, especially as Disraeli took pains to cultivate her. He told Matthew Arnold, \"Everybody likes flattery; and, when you come to royalty, you should lay it on with a trowel\". Disraeli's biographer, Adam Kirsch, suggests that Disraeli's obsequious treatment of his queen was part flattery, part belief that this was how a queen should be addressed by a loyal subject, and part awe that a middle-class man of Jewish birth should be the companion of a monarch. By the time of his second premiership, Disraeli had built a strong relationship with Victoria, probably closer to her than any of her prime ministers except her first, Lord Melbourne. When Disraeli returned as prime minister in 1874 and went to kiss hands, he did so literally, on one knee; according to Richard Aldous in his book on the rivalry between Disraeli and Gladstone, \"Victoria and Disraeli would exploit their closeness for mutual advantage.\"\nVictoria had long wished to have an imperial title, reflecting Britain's expanding domain. She was irked when Tsar Alexander II held a higher rank than her as an emperor, and was appalled that her daughter, the Prussian Crown Princess, would outrank her when her husband came to the throne. She also saw an imperial title as proclaiming Britain's increased stature in the world. The title \"Empress of India\" had been used informally for some time and she wished to have that title formally bestowed on her. The Queen prevailed upon Disraeli to introduce a Royal Titles Bill, and also told of her intent to open Parliament in person, which during this time she did only when she wanted something from legislators. Disraeli was cautious in response, as careful soundings of MPs brought a negative reaction, and he declined to place such a proposal in the Queen's Speech.\nOnce the desired bill was finally prepared, Disraeli's handling of it was not adept. He neglected to notify either the Prince of Wales or the Opposition and was met by irritation from the prince and a full-scale attack from the Liberals. An old enemy of Disraeli, former Liberal Chancellor Robert Lowe, alleged during the debate in the Commons that two previous prime ministers had refused to introduce such legislation for the Queen. Gladstone immediately stated that he was not one of them, and the Queen gave Disraeli leave to quote her saying she had never approached a prime minister with such a proposal. According to Blake, Disraeli \"in a brilliant oration of withering invective proceeded to destroy Lowe\", who apologised and never held office again. Disraeli said of Lowe that he was the only person in London with whom he would not shake hands: \"he is in the mud and there I leave him.\"\nFearful of losing, Disraeli was reluctant to bring the bill to a vote in the Commons, but when he did it passed with a majority of 75. Once the bill was formally enacted, Victoria began signing her letters \"Victoria R &amp; I\" (, Queen and Empress). According to Aldous, the bill \"shattered Disraeli's authority in the House of Commons\".\nBalkans and Bulgaria.\nIn July 1875 Serb populations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, then provinces of the Ottoman Empire, revolted against the Turks, alleging religious persecution and poor administration. The following January, Sultan Abd\u00fclaziz agreed to reforms proposed by Hungarian statesman Julius Andr\u00e1ssy, but the rebels, suspecting they might win their freedom, continued their uprising, joined by militants in Serbia and Bulgaria. The Turks suppressed the Bulgarian uprising harshly, and when reports of these actions escaped, Disraeli and Derby stated in Parliament that they did not believe them. Disraeli called them \"coffee-house babble\" and dismissed allegations of torture by the Ottomans since \"Oriental people usually terminate their connections with culprits in a more expeditious fashion\".\nGladstone, who had left the Liberal leadership and retired from public life, was appalled by reports of atrocities in Bulgaria, and in August 1876, penned a hastily written pamphlet arguing that the Turks should be deprived of Bulgaria because of what they had done there. He sent a copy to Disraeli, who called it \"vindictive and ill-written\u00a0... of all the Bulgarian horrors perhaps the greatest\". Gladstone's pamphlet became an immense best-seller and rallied the Liberals to urge that the Ottoman Empire should no longer be a British ally. Disraeli wrote to Lord Salisbury on 3 September, \"Had it not been for these unhappy 'atrocities', we should have settled a peace very honourable to England and satisfactory to Europe. Now we are obliged to work from a new point of departure, and dictate to Turkey, who has forfeited all sympathy.\" In spite of this, Disraeli's policy favoured Constantinople and Ottoman territorial integrity.\nDisraeli and the cabinet sent Salisbury as lead British representative to the Constantinople Conference, which met in December 1876 and January 1877. In advance of the conference, Disraeli sent Salisbury private word to seek British military occupation of Bulgaria and Bosnia, and British control of the Ottoman Army. Salisbury ignored these instructions, which his biographer, Andrew Roberts deemed \"ludicrous\". The conference failed to reach agreement with the Turks.\nParliament opened in February 1877, with Disraeli now in the Lords as Earl of Beaconsfield. He spoke only once there in the 1877 session on the Eastern Question, stating on 20 February that there was a need for stability in the Balkans, and that forcing Turkey into territorial concessions would not secure it. The Prime Minister wanted a deal with the Ottomans whereby Britain would temporarily occupy strategic areas to deter the Russians from war, to be returned on the signing of a peace treaty, but found little support in his cabinet, which favoured partition of the Ottoman Empire. As Disraeli, by then in poor health, continued to battle within the cabinet, Russia invaded Turkey on 21 April, beginning the Russo-Turkish War.\nCongress of Berlin.\nThe Russians pushed through Ottoman territory and by December 1877 had captured the strategic Bulgarian town of Plevna. The war divided the British, but the Russian success caused some to forget the atrocities and call for intervention on the Turkish side. Others hoped for further Russian successes. The fall of Plevna was a major story for weeks, and Disraeli's warnings that Russia was a threat to British interests in the eastern Mediterranean were deemed prophetic. The jingoistic attitude of many Britons increased Disraeli's political support, and the Queen showed her favour by visiting him at Hughenden\u2014the first time she had visited the country home of her prime minister since the Melbourne ministry. At the end of January 1878, the Ottoman Sultan appealed to Britain to save Constantinople. Amid war fever in Britain, the government asked Parliament to vote \u00a36,000,000 to prepare the Army and Navy for war. Gladstone opposed the measure, but less than half his party voted with him. Popular opinion was with Disraeli, though some thought him too soft for not immediately declaring war on Russia.\nWith the Russians close to Constantinople, the Turks yielded and in March 1878, signed the Treaty of San Stefano, conceding a Bulgarian state covering a large part of the Balkans. It would be initially Russian-occupied and many feared that it would give them a client state close to Constantinople. Other Ottoman possessions in Europe would become independent; additional territory was to be ceded directly to Russia. This was unacceptable to the British, who protested, hoping to get the Russians to agree to attend an international conference which German chancellor Bismarck proposed to hold at Berlin. The cabinet discussed Disraeli's proposal to position Indian troops at Malta for possible transit to the Balkans and call out reserves. Derby resigned in protest, and Disraeli appointed Salisbury as Foreign Secretary. Amid British preparations for war, the Russians and Turks agreed to discussions at Berlin.\nIn advance of the meeting, confidential negotiations took place between Britain and Russia in April and May 1878. The Russians were willing to make changes to the big Bulgaria, but were determined to retain their new possessions, Bessarabia in Europe and Batum and Kars on the east coast of the Black Sea. To counterbalance this, Britain required a possession in the Eastern Mediterranean where it might base ships and troops and negotiated with the Ottomans for the cession of Cyprus. Once this was secretly agreed, Disraeli was prepared to allow Russia's territorial gains.\nThe Congress of Berlin was held in June and July 1878, the central relationship in it that between Disraeli and Bismarck. In later years, the German chancellor would show visitors to his office three pictures on the wall: \"the portrait of my Sovereign, there on the right that of my wife, and on the left, there, that of Lord Beaconsfield\". Disraeli caused an uproar in the congress by making his opening address in English, rather than in French, hitherto accepted as the international language of diplomacy. By one account, the British ambassador in Berlin, Lord Odo Russell, hoping to spare the delegates Disraeli's very poor French accent, told Disraeli that the congress was hoping to hear a speech in English by one of its masters.\nDisraeli left much of the detailed work to Salisbury, concentrating his efforts on making it as difficult as possible for the broken-up big Bulgaria to reunite. Disraeli intended that Batum be demilitarised, but the Russians obtained their preferred language, and in 1886, fortified the town. Nevertheless, the Cyprus Convention ceding the island to Britain was announced during the congress, and again made Disraeli a sensation.\nDisraeli gained agreement that Turkey should retain enough of its European possessions to safeguard the Dardanelles. By one account, when met with Russian intransigence, Disraeli told his secretary to order a special train to return them home to begin the war. Czar Alexander II later described the congress as \"a European coalition against Russia, under Bismarck\".\nThe Treaty of Berlin was signed on 13 July 1878 at the Radziwill Palace in Berlin. Disraeli and Salisbury returned home to heroes' receptions. At the door of 10 Downing Street, Disraeli received flowers sent by the Queen. There, he told the gathered crowd, \"Lord Salisbury and I have brought you back peace\u2014but a peace I hope with honour.\" The Queen offered him a dukedom, which he declined, though accepting the Garter, as long as Salisbury also received it. In Berlin, word spread of Bismarck's admiring description of Disraeli, \"\"Der alte Jude, das ist der Mann!\"\u00a0\"\nIn the weeks after Berlin, Disraeli and the cabinet considered calling a general election to capitalise on the public applause he and Salisbury had received. Parliaments were then for a seven-year term, and it was the custom not to go to the country until the sixth year unless forced to by events. Only four and a half years had passed and they did not see any clouds on the horizon that might forecast Conservative defeat if they waited. This decision not to seek re-election has often been cited as a great mistake by Disraeli. Blake, however, pointed out that results in local elections had been moving against the Conservatives, and doubted if Disraeli missed any great opportunity by waiting.\nAfghanistan to Zululand.\nAs successful invasions of India generally came through Afghanistan, the British had observed and sometimes intervened there since the 1830s, hoping to keep the Russians out. In 1878 the Russians sent a mission to Kabul; it was not rejected by the Afghans, as the British had hoped. The British proposed to send their own mission, insisting that the Russians be sent away. The Viceroy of India Lord Lytton concealed his plans to issue this ultimatum from Disraeli, and when the Prime Minister insisted he take no action, went ahead anyway. When the Afghans made no answer, Lord Cranbrook as Secretary of State for War, ordered the advance against them in the Second Anglo-Afghan War. Under Lord Roberts, the British easily defeated them and installed a new ruler, leaving a mission and garrison in Kabul.\nBritish policy in South Africa was to encourage federation between the British-run Cape Colony and Natal, and the Boer republics, the Transvaal (annexed by Britain in 1877) and the Orange Free State. The governor of Cape Colony, Sir Bartle Frere, believing that the federation could not be accomplished until the native tribes acknowledged British rule, made demands on the Zulu and their king, Cetewayo, which they were certain to reject. As Zulu troops could not marry until they had washed their spears in blood, they were eager for combat. Frere did not send word to the cabinet of what he had done until the ultimatum was about to expire. Disraeli and the cabinet reluctantly backed him, and in early January 1879 resolved to send reinforcements. Before they could arrive, on 22 January, a Zulu \"impi\" (army), moving with great speed and endurance, destroyed a British encampment in South Africa in the Battle of Isandlwana. Over a thousand British and colonial troops were killed. Word of the defeat did not reach London until 12 February. Disraeli wrote the next day, \"the terrible disaster has shaken me to the centre\". He reprimanded Frere, but left him in charge, attracting fire from all sides. Disraeli sent General Sir Garnet Wolseley as High Commissioner and Commander in Chief, and Cetewayo and the Zulus were crushed at the Battle of Ulundi on 4 July 1879.\nOn 8 September 1879 Sir Louis Cavagnari, in charge of the mission in Kabul, was killed with his entire staff by rebelling Afghan soldiers. Roberts undertook a successful punitive expedition against the Afghans over the next six weeks.\n1880 election.\nIn December 1878, Gladstone was offered the Liberal nomination for Edinburghshire, a constituency popularly known as Midlothian. The small Scottish electorate was dominated by two noblemen, the Conservative Duke of Buccleuch and the Liberal Earl of Rosebery. The Earl, a friend of both Disraeli and Gladstone who would succeed the latter after his final term as prime minister, had journeyed to the United States to view politics there, and was convinced that aspects of American electioneering techniques could be translated to Britain. On his advice, Gladstone accepted the offer in January 1879, and later that year began his Midlothian campaign, speaking not only in Edinburgh, but across Britain, attacking Disraeli, to huge crowds.\nConservative chances of re-election were damaged by the poor weather, and consequent effects on agriculture. Four consecutive wet summers through 1879 had led to poor harvests. In the past, the farmer had the consolation of higher prices at such times, but with bumper crops cheaply transported from the United States, grain prices remained low. Other European nations, faced with similar circumstances, opted for protection, and Disraeli was urged to reinstitute the Corn Laws. He declined, stating that he regarded the matter as settled. Protection would have been highly unpopular among the newly enfranchised urban working classes, as it would raise their cost of living. Amid an economic slump generally, the Conservatives lost support among farmers.\nDisraeli's health continued to fail through 1879. Owing to his infirmities, Disraeli was 45 minutes late for the Lord Mayor's Dinner at the Guildhall in November, at which it is customary that the Prime Minister speaks. Though many commented on how healthy he looked, it took him great effort to appear so, and when he told the audience he expected to speak to the dinner again the following year, attendees chuckled. Gladstone was then in the midst of his campaign. Despite his public confidence, Disraeli recognised that the Conservatives would probably lose the next election and was already contemplating his Resignation Honours.\nDespite this pessimism, Conservatives' hopes were buoyed in early 1880 with successes in by-elections the Liberals had expected to win, concluding with victory in Southwark, normally a Liberal stronghold. The cabinet had resolved to wait before dissolving Parliament; in early March they reconsidered, agreeing to go to the country as soon as possible. Parliament was dissolved on 24 March; the first borough constituencies began voting a week later.\nDisraeli took no public part in the electioneering, it being deemed improper for peers to make speeches to influence Commons elections. This meant that the chief Conservatives\u2014Disraeli, Salisbury, and India Secretary Lord Cranbrook\u2014would not be heard from. The election was thought likely to be close. Once returns began to be announced, it became clear that the Conservatives were decisively beaten. The final result gave the Liberals an absolute majority of about 50.\nFinal months, death, and memorials.\nDisraeli refused to cast blame for the defeat, which he understood was likely to be final for him. He wrote to Lady Bradford that it was just as much work to end a government as to form one, without any of the fun. Queen Victoria was bitter at his departure. Among the honours he arranged before resigning as prime minister on 21 April 1880 was one for his private secretary, Montagu Corry, who became Baron Rowton.\nReturning to Hughenden, Disraeli brooded over his electoral dismissal, but also resumed work on \"Endymion\", which he had begun in 1872 and laid aside before the 1874 election. The work was rapidly completed and published by November 1880. He carried on a correspondence with Victoria, with letters passed through intermediaries. When Parliament met in January 1881, he served as Conservative leader in the Lords, attempting to serve as a moderating influence on Gladstone's legislation.\nBecause of his asthma and gout, Disraeli went out as little as possible, fearing more serious episodes of illness. In March, he fell ill with bronchitis, and emerged from bed only for a meeting with Salisbury and other Conservative leaders on the 26th. As it became clear that this might be his final sickness, friends and opponents alike came to call. Disraeli declined a visit from the Queen, saying, \"She would only ask me to take a message to Albert.\" Almost blind, when he received the last letter from Victoria of which he was aware on 5 April, he held it momentarily, then had it read to him by Lord Barrington, a Privy Councillor. One card, signed \"A Workman\", delighted its recipient: \"Don't die yet, we can't do without you.\"\nDespite the gravity of Disraeli's condition, the doctors concocted optimistic bulletins for public consumption. Prime Minister Gladstone called several times to enquire about his rival's condition, and wrote in his diary, \"May the Almighty be near his pillow.\" There was intense public interest in Disraeli's struggles for life. Disraeli had customarily taken the sacrament at Easter; when this day was observed on 17 April, there was discussion among his friends and family if he should be given the opportunity, but those against, fearing that he would lose hope, prevailed. On the morning of the following day, Easter Monday, he became incoherent, then comatose. Disraeli's last confirmed words before dying at his home at 19 Curzon Street in the early morning of 19 April were \"I had rather live but I am not afraid to die\". The anniversary of Disraeli's death was for some years commemorated in the United Kingdom as Primrose Day.\nDespite having been offered a state funeral by Queen Victoria, Disraeli's executors decided against a public procession and funeral, fearing that too large crowds would gather to do him honour. The chief mourners at the service at Hughenden on 26 April were his brother Ralph and nephew Coningsby, to whom Hughenden would eventually pass; Gathorne Gathorne-Hardy, Viscount Cranbrook, despite most of Disraeli's former cabinet being present, was notably absent in Italy. Queen Victoria was prostrated with grief, and considered ennobling Ralph or Coningsby as a memorial to Disraeli (without children, his titles became extinct with his death), but decided against it on the ground that their means were too small for a peerage. Protocol forbade her attending Disraeli's funeral (this would not be changed until 1965, when Elizabeth II attended the rites for the former prime minister Sir Winston Churchill) but she sent primroses (\"his favourite flowers\") to the funeral and visited the burial vault to place a wreath four days later.\nDisraeli is buried with his wife in a vault beneath the Church of St Michael and All Angels which stands in the grounds of his home, Hughenden Manor. There is also a memorial to him in the chancel in the church, erected in his honour by Queen Victoria. His literary executor was his private secretary, Lord Rowton. The Disraeli vault also contains the body of Sarah Brydges Willyams, the wife of James Brydges Willyams of St Mawgan. Disraeli carried on a long correspondence with Mrs. Willyams, writing frankly about political affairs. At her death in 1863, she left him a large legacy, which helped clear his debts. His will was proved in April 1882 at \u00a384,019 18 s. 7 d. (roughly equivalent to \u00a3 in 2023).\nDisraeli has a memorial in Westminster Abbey, erected by the nation on the motion of Gladstone in his memorial speech on Disraeli in the House of Commons. Gladstone had absented himself from the funeral, with his plea of the press of public business met with public mockery. His speech was widely anticipated, if only because his dislike for Disraeli was well known. In the event, the speech was a model of its kind, in which he avoided comment on Disraeli's politics while praising his personal qualities.\nLegacy.\nDisraeli's literary and political career interacted over his lifetime and fascinated Victorian Britain, making him \"one of the most eminent figures in Victorian public life\", and occasioned a large output of commentary. Critic Shane Leslie noted three decades after his death that \"Disraeli's career was a romance such as no Eastern vizier or Western plutocrat could tell. He began as a pioneer in dress and an aesthete of words\u00a0... Disraeli actually made his novels come true.\"\nLiterary.\nDisraeli's novels are his main literary achievement. They have from the outset divided critical opinion. The writer R. W. Stewart observed that there have always been two criteria for judging Disraeli's novels\u2014political and artistic. The critic Robert O'Kell, concurring, writes, \"It is after all, even if you are a Tory of the staunchest blue, impossible to make Disraeli into a first-rate novelist. And it is equally impossible, no matter how much you deplore the extravagances and improprieties of his works, to make him into an insignificant one.\"\nDisraeli's early \"silver fork\" novels \"Vivian Grey\" (1826) and \"The Young Duke\" (1831) featured romanticised depictions of aristocratic life (despite his ignorance of it) with character sketches of well-known public figures lightly disguised. In some of his early fiction Disraeli also portrayed himself and what he felt to be his Byronic dual nature: the poet and the man of action. His most autobiographical novel was \"Contarini Fleming\" (1832), an avowedly serious work that did not sell well. The critic William Kuhn suggests that Disraeli's fiction can be read as \"the memoirs he never wrote\", revealing the inner life of a politician for whom the norms of Victorian public life appeared to represent a social straitjacket\u2014particularly with regard to what Kuhn sees as the author's \"ambiguous sexuality\".\nOf the other novels of the early 1830s, \"Alroy\" is described by Blake as \"profitable but unreadable\", and \"The Rise of Iskander\" (1833) and \"The Infernal Marriage\" and \"Ixion in Heaven\" (1834) made little impact. \"Henrietta Temple\" (1837) was Disraeli's next major success. It draws on the events of his affair with Henrietta Sykes to tell the story of a debt-ridden young man torn between a mercenary loveless marriage and a passionate love at first sight for the eponymous heroine. \"Venetia\" (1837) was a minor work, written to raise much-needed cash.\nIn the 1840s Disraeli wrote a trilogy of novels with political themes. \"Coningsby\" attacks the evils of the Whig Reform Bill of 1832 and castigates the leaderless conservatives for not responding. \"Sybil; or, The Two Nations\" (1845) reveals Peel's betrayal over the Corn Laws. These themes are expanded in \"Tancred\" (1847). With \"Coningsby; or, The New Generation\" (1844), Disraeli, in Blake's view, \"infused the novel genre with political sensibility, espousing the belief that England's future as a world power depended not on the complacent old guard, but on youthful, idealistic politicians.\" \"Sybil; or, The Two Nations\" was less idealistic than \"Coningsby\"; the \"two nations\" of its sub-title referred to the huge economic and social gap between the privileged few and the deprived working classes. The last was \"Tancred; or, The New Crusade\" (1847), promoting the Church of England's role in reviving Britain's flagging spirituality. Disraeli often wrote about religion, for he was a strong promoter of the Church of England. He was troubled by the growth of elaborate rituals in the late 19th century, such as the use of incense and vestments, and heard warnings to the effect that the ritualists were going to turn control of the Church of England over to the Pope. He consequently was a strong supporter of the Public Worship Regulation Act 1874 which allowed the archbishops to go to court to stop the ritualists.\n\"Lothair\" was \"Disraeli's ideological \"Pilgrim's Progress\"\"; it tells a story of political life with particular regard to the roles of the Anglican and Roman Catholic churches. It reflected anti-Catholicism of the sort that was popular in Britain, and which fueled support for Italian unification (\"Risorgimento\"). \"Endymion\", despite having a Whig as hero, is a last exposition of the author's economic policies and political beliefs. Disraeli continued to the last to pillory his enemies in barely disguised caricatures: the character St Barbe in \"Endymion\" is widely seen as a parody of Thackeray, who had offended Disraeli more than thirty years earlier by lampooning him in \"Punch\" as \"Codlingsby\". Disraeli left an unfinished novel in which the priggish central character, Falconet, is unmistakably a caricature of Gladstone.\nBlake commented that Disraeli \"produced an epic poem, unbelievably bad, and a five-act blank verse tragedy, if possible worse. Further he wrote a discourse on political theory and a political biography, the \"Life of Lord George Bentinck\", which is excellent\u00a0... remarkably fair and accurate.\"\nPolitical.\nIn the years after Disraeli's death, as Salisbury began his reign of more than twenty years over the Conservatives, the party emphasised the late leader's \"One Nation\" views, that the Conservatives at root shared the beliefs of the working classes, with the Liberals the party of the urban \u00e9lite. The memory of Disraeli was used by the Conservatives to appeal to the working classes, with whom he was said to have had a rapport. This aspect of his policies has been re-evaluated by historians in the 20th and 21st centuries. In 1972 B. H. Abbott stressed that it was not Disraeli but Lord Randolph Churchill who invented the term \"Tory democracy\", though it was Disraeli who made it an essential part of Conservative policy and philosophy. In 2007 Parry wrote, \"The tory democrat myth did not survive detailed scrutiny by professional historical writing of the 1960s [which] demonstrated that Disraeli had very little interest in a programme of social legislation and was very flexible in handling parliamentary reform in 1867.\" Despite this, Parry sees Disraeli, rather than Peel, as the founder of the modern Conservative party. The Conservative politician and writer Douglas Hurd wrote in 2013, \"[Disraeli] was not a one-nation Conservative\u2014and this was not simply because he never used the phrase. He rejected the concept in its entirety.\"\nDisraeli's enthusiastic propagation of the British Empire has also been seen as appealing to working-class voters. Before his leadership of the Conservative Party, imperialism was the province of the Liberals, most notably Palmerston. Disraeli made the Conservatives the party that most loudly supported both the Empire and military action to assert its primacy. This came about in part because Disraeli's own views stemmed that way, in part because he saw advantage for the Conservatives, and partially in reaction against Gladstone, who disliked the expense of empire. Blake argued that Disraeli's imperialism \"decisively orientated the Conservative party for many years to come, and the tradition which he started was probably a bigger electoral asset in winning working-class support during the last quarter of the century than anything else\". Some historians have commented on a romantic impulse behind Disraeli's approach to Empire and foreign affairs: Abbott writes, \"To the mystical Tory concepts of Throne, Church, Aristocracy and People, Disraeli added Empire.\" Others have identified a strongly pragmatic aspect to his policies. Gladstone's biographer Philip Magnus contrasted Disraeli's grasp of foreign affairs with that of Gladstone, who \"never understood that high moral principles, in their application to foreign policy, are more often destructive of political stability than motives of national self-interest.\" In Parry's view, Disraeli's foreign policy \"can be seen as a gigantic castle in the air (as it was by Gladstone), or as an overdue attempt to force the British commercial classes to awaken to the realities of European politics.\"\nDuring his lifetime, Disraeli's opponents, and sometimes even his friends and allies, questioned whether he sincerely held the views he propounded, or whether they were adopted by him as politically essential and lacked conviction. Lord John Manners, in 1843 at the time of Young England, wrote, \"could I only satisfy myself that D'Israeli believed all that he said, I should be more happy: his historical views are quite mine, but does he believe them?\" Paul Smith, in his journal article on Disraeli's politics, argues that Disraeli's ideas were coherently argued over a political career of nearly half a century, and \"it is impossible to sweep them aside as a mere bag of burglar's tools for effecting felonious entry to the British political pantheon.\"\nStanley Weintraub, in his biography of Disraeli, points out that his subject did much to advance Britain towards the 20th century, carrying one of the two great Reform Acts of the 19th despite the opposition of his Liberal rival, Gladstone. He helped preserve constitutional monarchy by drawing the Queen out of mourning into a new symbolic national role and created the climate for what became 'Tory democracy'. He articulated an imperial role for Britain that would last into World War II and brought an intermittently self-isolated Britain into the concert of Europe.\nFrances Walsh comments on Disraeli's multifaceted public life:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The debate about his place in the Conservative pantheon has continued since his death. Disraeli fascinated and divided contemporary opinion; he was seen by many, including some members of his own party, as an adventurer and a charlatan and by others as a far-sighted and patriotic statesman. As an actor on the political stage he played many roles: Byronic hero, man of letters, social critic, parliamentary virtuoso, squire of Hughenden, royal companion, European statesman. His singular and complex personality has provided historians and biographers with a particularly stiff challenge.\nHistorian Llewellyn Woodward has evaluated Disraeli:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Disraeli's political ideas have not stood the test of time...His detachment from English prejudices did not give him any particular insight into foreign affairs; as a young man he accepted the platitudes of Metternich and failed to understand the meaning of the nationalist movements in Europe. The imperialism of his later years was equally superficial: an interpretation of politics without economics. Disraeli liked to think of himself in terms of pure intellect, but his politics were more personal than intellectual in character. He had far-reaching schemes but little administrative ability, and there was some foundation for Napoleon Ill's judgement that he was 'like all literary men, from Chateaubriand to Guizot, ignorant of the world'... In spite of these faults...Disraeli's courage, quickness of wit, capacity for affection, and freedom from sordid motives earned him his position. His ambition was of the nobler sort . He brought politics nearer to poetry, or, at all events, to poetical prose, than any English politician since Burke.\nHistorical writers have often played Disraeli and Gladstone against each other as great rivals. Roland Quinault, however, cautions not to exaggerate the confrontation:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;they were not direct antagonists for most of their political careers. Indeed initially they were both loyal to the Tory party, the Church and the landed interest. Although their paths diverged over the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846 and later over fiscal policy more generally, it was not until the later 1860s that their differences over parliamentary reform, Irish and Church policy assumed great partisan significance. Even then their personal relations remained fairly cordial until their dispute over the Eastern Question in the later 1870s.\nRole of his Jewishness.\nBy 1882, 46,000 Jews lived in England, and by 1890, Jewish emancipation was complete. Since 1858, Parliament has never been without practicing Jewish members. The first Jewish Lord Mayor of London, Sir David Salomons, was elected in 1855, followed by the 1858 emancipation of the Jews. On 26 July 1858, Lionel de Rothschild was allowed to sit in the House of Commons when the hitherto specifically Christian oath of office was changed. Disraeli, a baptised Christian of Jewish parentage, was already an MP, as the mandated oath of office presented no barrier to him. In 1884 Nathan Mayer Rothschild, 1st Baron Rothschild, became the first Jewish member of the British House of Lords; Disraeli was already a member.\nAs a leader of the Conservative Party, which had ties to the landed aristocracy, Disraeli used his Jewish ancestry to claim an aristocratic heritage of his own. His biographer Jonathan Parry argues:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Disraeli convinced himself (wrongly) that he derived from the Sephardi aristocracy of Iberian Jews driven from Spain at the end of the fifteenth century...Presenting himself as Jewish symbolized Disraeli's uniqueness when he was fighting for respect, and explained his set-backs. Presenting Jewishness as aristocratic and religious legitimized his claim to understand the perils facing modern England and to offer 'national' solutions to them. English toryism was 'copied from the mighty [Jewish] prototype' (\"Coningsby\", bk 4, chap. 15). Disraeli was thus able to square his Jewishness with his equally deep attachment to England and her history.\nTodd Endelman points out that \"The link between Jews and old clothes was so fixed in the popular imagination that Victorian political cartoonists regularly drew Benjamin Disraeli as an old clothes man in order to stress his Jewishness.\" He adds, \"Before the 1990s...few biographers of Disraeli or historians of Victorian politics acknowledged the prominence of the antisemitism that accompanied his climb up the greasy pole or its role in shaping his own singular sense of Jewishness.\"\nAccording to Michael Ragussis: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What began in the 1830s as scattered anti-Semitic remarks aimed at him [Disraeli] by the crowds in his early electioneering became in the 1870s a kind of national scrutiny of his Jewishness \u2014 a scrutiny that erupted into a kind of anti-Semitic attack led by some of the most prominent intellectuals and politicians of the time and anchored in the charge that Disraeli was a crypto-Jew.\nPopular culture.\nHistorian Michael Diamond asserts that for British music hall patrons in the 1880s and 1890s, \"xenophobia and pride in empire\" were reflected in the halls' most popular political heroes: all were Conservatives and Disraeli stood out above all, even decades after his death, while Gladstone was used as a villain. Film historian Roy Armes has argued that historical films helped maintain the political status quo in Britain in the 1920s and 1930s by imposing an establishment viewpoint that emphasized the greatness of monarchy, empire, and tradition. The films created \"a facsimile world where existing values were invariably validated by events in the film and where all discord could be turned into harmony by an acceptance of the status quo\".\nSteven Fielding has argued that Disraeli was an especially popular film hero: \"historical dramas favoured Disraeli over Gladstone and, more substantively, promulgated an essentially deferential view of democratic leadership.\" Stage and screen actor George Arliss was known for his portrayals of Disraeli, winning the Academy Award for Best Actor for 1929's \"Disraeli\". Fielding says Arliss \"personified the kind of paternalistic, kindly, homely statesmanship that appealed to a significant proportion of the cinema audience\u00a0... Even workers attending Labour party meetings deferred to leaders with an elevated social background who showed they cared.\"\nJohn Gielgud portrayed Disraeli in 1941, in Thorold Dickinson's morale-boosting film \"The Prime Minister\", which followed the politician from the age of 30 to that of 70.\nAlec Guinness portrayed him in \"The Mudlark\" (1950).\nIan McShane starred in the four-part 1978 ATV miniseries \"\", written by David Butler. Presented in the U.S. on PBS's \"Masterpiece Theatre\" in 1980, it was nominated for the Emmy Award for Outstanding Limited Series.\nRichard Pasco played Disraeli in the ITV series \"Number 10\" in 1983.\nIn the 1997 film \"Mrs Brown\", Disraeli was played by Antony Sher.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nElectronic editions.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "3876", "revid": "1319370153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3876", "title": "Binomial distribution", "text": "Probability distribution\n&lt;/math&gt;\n | kurtosis = formula_1\n | entropy = formula_2 in shannons. For nats, use the natural log in the log.\n | mgf = formula_3\n | char = formula_4\n | pgf = formula_5\n | fisher = formula_6(for fixed formula_7)\nIn probability theory and statistics, the binomial distribution with parameters n and p is the discrete probability distribution of the number of successes in a sequence of n independent experiments, each asking a yes\u2013no question, and each with its own Boolean-valued outcome: \"success\" (with probability p) or \"failure\" (with probability \"q\" \n 1 \u2212 \"p\"). A single success/failure experiment is also called a Bernoulli trial or Bernoulli experiment, and a sequence of outcomes is called a Bernoulli process. For a single trial, that is, when \"n\" \n 1, the binomial distribution is a Bernoulli distribution. The binomial distribution is the basis for the binomial test of statistical significance.\nThe binomial distribution is frequently used to model the number of successes in a sample of size n drawn with replacement from a population of size N. If the sampling is carried out without replacement, the draws are not independent and so the resulting distribution is a hypergeometric distribution, not a binomial one. However, for N much larger than n, the binomial distribution remains a good approximation, and is widely used.\nDefinitions.\nProbability mass function.\nIf the random variable X follows the binomial distribution with parameters formula_8 (a natural number) and \"p\" \u2208 [0, 1], we write \"X\" ~ \"B\"(\"n\", \"p\"). The probability of getting exactly k successes in n independent Bernoulli trials (with the same rate p) is given by the probability mass function:\nformula_9\nfor \"k\" \n 0, 1, 2, ..., \"n\", where\nformula_10\nis the binomial coefficient. The formula can be understood as follows: \"p\"\"k\" \"q\"\"n\"\u2212\"k\" is the probability of obtaining the sequence of n independent Bernoulli trials in which k trials are \"successes\" and the remaining \"n\" \u2212 \"k\" trials are \"failures\". Since the trials are independent with probabilities remaining constant between them, any sequence of n trials with k successes (and \"n\" \u2212 \"k\" failures) has the same probability of being achieved (regardless of positions of successes within the sequence). There are formula_11 such sequences, since the binomial coefficient formula_11 counts the number of ways to choose the positions of the k successes among the n trials. The binomial distribution is concerned with the probability of obtaining \"any\" of these sequences, meaning the probability of obtaining one of them (\"p\"\"k\" \"q\"\"n\"\u2212\"k\") must be added formula_11 times, hence formula_14.\nIn creating reference tables for binomial distribution probability, usually, the table is filled in up to \"n\" / 2 values. This is because for \"k\" &gt; \"n\"/2, the probability can be calculated by its complement as\nformula_15\nLooking at the expression \"f\"(\"k\", \"n\", \"p\") as a function of k, there is a k value that maximizes it. This k value can be found by calculating\nformula_16\nand comparing it to 1. There is always an integer M that satisfies\nformula_17\n\"f\"(\"k\", \"n\", \"p\") is monotone increasing for \"k\" &lt; \"M\" and monotone decreasing for \"k\" &gt; \"M\", with the exception of the case where (\"n\" + 1)\"p\" is an integer. In this case, there are two values for which f is maximal: (\"n\" + 1)\"p\" and (\"n\" + 1)\"p\" \u2212 1. M is the \"most probable\" outcome (that is, the most likely, although this can still be unlikely overall) of the Bernoulli trials and is called the mode.\nEquivalently, \"M\" \u2212 \"p\" &lt; \"np\" \u2264 \"M\" + 1 \u2212 \"p\". Taking the floor function, we obtain \"M\" \n floor(\"np\").\nExample.\nSuppose a biased coin comes up heads with probability 0.3 when tossed. The probability of seeing exactly 4 heads in 6 tosses is\nformula_18\nCumulative distribution function.\nThe cumulative distribution function can be expressed as:\nformula_19\nwhere formula_20 is the \"floor\" under k; that is, the greatest integer less than or equal to k.\nIt can also be represented in terms of the regularized incomplete beta function, as follows:\nformula_21\nwhich is equivalent to the cumulative distribution functions of the beta distribution and of the F-distribution:\nformula_22\nformula_23\nSome closed-form bounds for the cumulative distribution function are given below.\nProperties.\nExpected value and variance.\nIf \"X\" ~ \"B\"(\"n\", \"p\"), that is, X is a binomially distributed random variable, n being the total number of experiments and p the probability of each experiment yielding a successful result, then the expected value of X is:\nformula_24\nThis follows from the linearity of the expected value along with the fact that X is the sum of n identical Bernoulli random variables, each with expected value p. In other words, if formula_25 are identical (and independent) Bernoulli random variables with parameter p, then \"X\" = \"X\"1 + ... + \"X\"\"n\" and\nformula_26\nThe variance is:\nformula_27\nThis similarly follows from the fact that the variance of a sum of independent random variables is the sum of the variances.\nHigher moments.\nThe first 6 central moments, defined as formula_28, are given by \nformula_29\nThe non-central moments satisfy\nformula_30\nand in general\nformula_31\nwhere formula_32 is the formula_33-th falling power of formula_7.\nA simple bound\n follows by bounding the Binomial moments via the higher Poisson moments: \nformula_35\nThis shows that if formula_36, then formula_37 is at most a constant factor away from formula_38.\nThe moment-generating function is formula_39.\nMode.\nUsually the mode of a binomial \"B\"(\"n\", \"p\") distribution is equal to formula_40, where formula_41 is the floor function. However, when (\"n\" + 1)\"p\" is an integer and p is neither 0 nor 1, then the distribution has two modes: (\"n\" + 1)\"p\" and (\"n\" + 1)\"p\" \u2212 1. When p is equal to 0 or 1, the mode will be 0 and n correspondingly. These cases can be summarized as follows:\nformula_42\nProof: Let\nformula_43\nFor formula_44 only formula_45 has a nonzero value with formula_46. For formula_47 we find formula_48 and formula_49 for formula_50. This proves that the mode is 0 for formula_44 and formula_7 for formula_47.\nLet formula_54. We find\nformula_55\nFrom this follows\nformula_56\nSo when formula_57 is an integer, then formula_57 and formula_59 is a mode. In the case that formula_60, then only formula_61 is a mode.\nMedian.\nIn general, there is no single formula to find the median for a binomial distribution, and it may even be non-unique. However, several special results have been established:\nwhich implies the simpler but looser bound\nformula_64\nFor \"p\" = 1/2 and \"k\" \u2265 3\"n\"/8 for even n, it is possible to make the denominator constant:\nformula_65\nStatistical inference.\nEstimation of parameters.\nWhen n is known, the parameter p can be estimated using the proportion of successes:\nformula_66\nThis estimator is found using maximum likelihood estimator and also the method of moments. This estimator is unbiased and uniformly with minimum variance, proven using Lehmann\u2013Scheff\u00e9 theorem, since it is based on a minimal sufficient and complete statistic (that is, x). It is also consistent both in probability and in MSE. This statistic is asymptotically normal thanks to the central limit theorem, because it is the same as taking the mean over Bernoulli samples. It has a variance of formula_67, a property which is used in various ways, such as in Wald's confidence intervals.\nA closed form Bayes estimator for p also exists when using the Beta distribution as a conjugate prior distribution. When using a general formula_68 as a prior, the posterior mean estimator is:\nformula_69\nThe Bayes estimator is asymptotically efficient and as the sample size approaches infinity (\"n\" \u2192 \u221e), it approaches the MLE solution. The Bayes estimator is biased (how much depends on the priors), admissible and consistent in probability. Using the Bayesian estimator with the Beta distribution can be used with Thompson sampling.\nFor the special case of using the standard uniform distribution as a non-informative prior, formula_70, the posterior mean estimator becomes:\nformula_71\n(A posterior mode should just lead to the standard estimator.) This method is called the rule of succession, which was introduced in the 18th century by Pierre-Simon Laplace.\nWhen relying on Jeffreys prior, the prior is formula_72, which leads to the estimator:\nformula_73\nWhen estimating p with very rare events and a small n (for example, if \"x\" = 0), then using the standard estimator leads to formula_74 which sometimes is unrealistic and undesirable. In such cases there are various alternative estimators. One way is to use the Bayes estimator formula_75, leading to:\nformula_76\nAnother method is to use the upper bound of the confidence interval obtained using the rule of three:\nformula_77\nConfidence intervals for the parameter p.\nEven for quite large values of n, the actual distribution of the mean is significantly nonnormal. Because of this problem several methods to estimate confidence intervals have been proposed.\nIn the equations for confidence intervals below, the variables have the following meaning:\nWald method.\nformula_85\nA continuity correction of 0.5 / \"n\" may be added.\nAgresti\u2013Coull method.\nformula_86\nHere the estimate of p is modified to\nformula_87\nThis method works well for \"n\" &gt; 10 and \"n\"1 \u2260 0, \"n\". See here for formula_88. For \"n\"1 = 0, \"n\" use the Wilson (score) method below.\nArcsine method.\nformula_89\nWilson (score) method.\nThe notation in the formula below differs from the previous formulas in two respects:\nformula_95\nComparison.\nThe so-called \"exact\" (Clopper\u2013Pearson) method is the most conservative. (\"Exact\" does not mean perfectly accurate; rather, it indicates that the estimates will not be less conservative than the true value.)\nThe Wald method, although commonly recommended in textbooks, is the most biased.\nRelated distributions.\nSums of binomials.\nIf \"X\" ~ B(\"n\", \"p\") and \"Y\" ~ B(\"m\", \"p\") are independent binomial variables with the same probability p, then \"X\" + \"Y\" is again a binomial variable; its distribution is \"Z\" = \"X\" + \"Y\" ~ B(\"n\" + \"m\", \"p\"):\nformula_96\nA Binomial distributed random variable \"X\" ~ B(\"n\", \"p\") can be considered as the sum of n Bernoulli distributed random variables. So the sum of two Binomial distributed random variables \"X\" ~ B(\"n\", \"p\") and \"Y\" ~ B(\"m\", \"p\") is equivalent to the sum of \"n\" + \"m\" Bernoulli distributed random variables, which means \"Z\" = \"X\" + \"Y\" ~ B(\"n\" + \"m\", \"p\"). This can also be proven directly using the addition rule.\nHowever, if X and Y do not have the same probability p, then the variance of the sum will be smaller than the variance of a binomial variable distributed as B(\"n\" + \"m\", \"p\").\nPoisson binomial distribution.\nThe binomial distribution is a special case of the Poisson binomial distribution, which is the distribution of a sum of n independent non-identical Bernoulli trials B(\"p\"\"i\").\nRatio of two binomial distributions.\nThis result was first derived by Katz and coauthors in 1978.\nLet \"X\" ~ B(\"n\", \"p\"1) and \"Y\" ~ B(\"m\", \"p\"2) be independent. Let \"T\" = (\"X\"/\"n\") / (\"Y\"/\"m\").\nThen log(\"T\") is approximately normally distributed with mean log(\"p\"1/\"p\"2) and variance ((1/\"p\"1) \u2212 1)/\"n\" + ((1/\"p\"2) \u2212 1)/\"m\".\nConditional binomials.\nIf \"X\" ~ B(\"n\", \"p\") and \"Y\" | \"X\" ~ B(\"X\", \"q\") (the conditional distribution of Y, given\u00a0X), then Y is a simple binomial random variable with distribution \"Y\" ~ B(\"n\", \"pq\").\nFor example, imagine throwing n balls to a basket \"U\"\"X\" and taking the balls that hit and throwing them to another basket \"U\"\"Y\". If p is the probability to hit \"U\"\"X\" then \"X\" ~ B(\"n\", \"p\") is the number of balls that hit \"U\"\"X\". If q is the probability to hit \"U\"\"Y\" then the number of balls that hit \"U\"\"Y\" is \"Y\" ~ B(\"X\", \"q\") and therefore \"Y\" ~ B(\"n\", \"pq\").\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;[Proof]\nSince formula_97 and formula_98, by the law of total probability,\nformula_99\nSince formula_100 the equation above can be expressed as\nformula_101\nFactoring formula_102 and pulling all the terms that don't depend on formula_103 out of the sum now yields\nformula_104\nAfter substituting formula_105 in the expression above, we get\nformula_106\nNotice that the sum (in the parentheses) above equals formula_107 by the binomial theorem. Substituting this in finally yields\nformula_108\nand thus formula_109 as desired.\nBernoulli distribution.\nThe Bernoulli distribution is a special case of the binomial distribution, where \"n\" = 1. Symbolically, \"X\" ~ B(1, \"p\") has the same meaning as \"X\" ~ Bernoulli(\"p\"). Conversely, any binomial distribution, B(\"n\", \"p\"), is the distribution of the sum of n independent Bernoulli trials, Bernoulli(\"p\"), each with the same probability p.\nNormal approximation.\nIf n is large enough, then the skew of the distribution is not too great. In this case a reasonable approximation to B(\"n\", \"p\") is given by the normal distribution\nformula_110\nand this basic approximation can be improved in a simple way by using a suitable continuity correction.\nThe basic approximation generally improves as n increases (at least 20) and is better when p is not near to 0 or 1. Various rules of thumb may be used to decide whether n is large enough, and p is far enough from the extremes of zero or one:\nThis can be made precise using the Berry\u2013Esseen theorem.\n This 3-standard-deviation rule is equivalent to the following conditions, which also imply the first rule above. formula_113\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;[Proof]\nThe rule formula_114 is totally equivalent to request that\nformula_115\nMoving terms around yields:\nformula_116\nSince formula_117 and formula_118, to obtain the desired conditions:\nformula_119\nNotice that these conditions automatically imply that formula_120. On the other hand, apply again the square root and divide by 3,\nformula_121\nSubtracting the second set of inequalities from the first one yields:\nformula_122\nand so, the desired first rule is satisfied,\nformula_123\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;[Proof]\nAssume that both values formula_124 and formula_125 are greater than\u00a09. Since formula_126, we easily have that \nformula_127\nWe only have to divide now by the respective factors formula_128 and formula_129, to deduce the alternative form of the 3-standard-deviation rule:\nformula_119\nThe following is an example of applying a continuity correction. Suppose one wishes to calculate Pr(\"X\" \u2264 8) for a binomial random variable X. If Y has a distribution given by the normal approximation, then Pr(\"X\" \u2264 8) is approximated by Pr(\"Y\" \u2264 8.5). The addition of 0.5 is the continuity correction; the uncorrected normal approximation gives considerably less accurate results.\nThis approximation, known as de Moivre\u2013Laplace theorem, is a huge time-saver when undertaking calculations by hand (exact calculations with large n are very onerous); historically, it was the first use of the normal distribution, introduced in Abraham de Moivre's book \"The Doctrine of Chances\" in 1738. Nowadays, it can be seen as a consequence of the central limit theorem since B(\"n\", \"p\") is a sum of n independent, identically distributed Bernoulli variables with parameter\u00a0p. This fact is the basis of a hypothesis test, a \"proportion z-test\", for the value of p using \"x\" / \"n\", the sample proportion and estimator of p, in a common test statistic.\nFor example, suppose one randomly samples n people out of a large population and ask them whether they agree with a certain statement. The proportion of people who agree will of course depend on the sample. If groups of n people were sampled repeatedly and truly randomly, the proportions would follow an approximate normal distribution with mean equal to the true proportion p of agreement in the population and with standard deviation\nformula_131\nPoisson approximation.\nThe binomial distribution converges towards the Poisson distribution as the number of trials goes to infinity while the product \"np\" converges to a finite limit. Therefore, the Poisson distribution with parameter \"\u03bb\" = \"np\" can be used as an approximation to B(\"n\", \"p\") of the binomial distribution if n is sufficiently large and p is sufficiently small. According to rules of thumb, this approximation is good if \"n\" \u2265 20 and \"p\" \u2264 0.05 such that \"np\" \u2264 1, or if \"n\" &gt; 50 and \"p\" &lt; 0.1 such that \"np\" &lt; 5, or if \"n\" \u2265 100 and \"np\" \u2264 10.\nConcerning the accuracy of Poisson approximation, see Novak, ch. 4, and references therein.\nBeta distribution.\nThe binomial distribution and beta distribution are different views of the same model of repeated Bernoulli trials. The binomial distribution is the PMF of k successes given n independent events each with a probability p of success. \nMathematically, when \"\u03b1\" = \"k\" + 1 and \"\u03b2\" = \"n\" \u2212 \"k\" + 1, the beta distribution and the binomial distribution are related by a factor of \"n\" + 1:\nformula_133\nBeta distributions also provide a family of prior probability distributions for binomial distributions in Bayesian inference: \nformula_134\nGiven a uniform prior, the posterior distribution for the probability of success p given n independent events with k observed successes is a beta distribution.\nComputational methods.\nRandom number generation.\nMethods for random number generation where the marginal distribution is a binomial distribution are well-established.\nOne way to generate random variates samples from a binomial distribution is to use an inversion algorithm. To do so, one must calculate the probability that Pr(\"X\" = \"k\") for all values k from 0 through n. (These probabilities should sum to a value close to one, in order to encompass the entire sample space.) Then by using a pseudorandom number generator to generate samples uniformly between 0 and 1, one can transform the calculated samples into discrete numbers by using the probabilities calculated in the first step.\nHistory.\nThis distribution was derived by Jacob Bernoulli. He considered the case where \"p\" = \"r\"/(\"r\" + \"s\") where p is the probability of success and r and s are positive integers. Blaise Pascal had earlier considered the case where \"p\" = 1/2, tabulating the corresponding binomial coefficients in what is now recognized as Pascal's triangle.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3878", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3878", "title": "Biostatistics", "text": "Application of statistical techniques to biological systems\nBiostatistics (sometimes referred to as biometry) is a branch of statistics that applies statistical methods to a wide range of topics in the biological sciences, with a focus on clinical medicine and public health applications\nThe field encompasses the design of experiments, the collection and analysis of experimental and observational data, and the interpretation of the results.\nHistory.\nBiostatistics and genetics.\nBiostatistical modeling forms an important part of numerous modern biological theories. Genetics studies, since its beginning, used statistical concepts to understand observed experimental results. Some genetics scientists even contributed with statistical advances with the development of methods and tools. Gregor Mendel started the genetics studies investigating genetics segregation patterns in families of peas and used statistics to explain the collected data. In the early 1900s, after the rediscovery of Mendel's Mendelian inheritance work, there were gaps in understanding between genetics and evolutionary Darwinism. Francis Galton tried to expand Mendel's discoveries with human data and proposed a different model with fractions of the heredity coming from each ancestral composing an infinite series. He called this the theory of \"Law of Ancestral Heredity\". His ideas were strongly disagreed by William Bateson, who followed Mendel's conclusions, that genetic inheritance were exclusively from the parents, half from each of them. This led to a vigorous debate between the biometricians, who supported Galton's ideas, as Raphael Weldon, Arthur Dukinfield Darbishire and Karl Pearson, and Mendelians, who supported Bateson's (and Mendel's) ideas, such as Charles Davenport and Wilhelm Johannsen. Later, biometricians could not reproduce Galton conclusions in different experiments, and Mendel's ideas prevailed. By the 1930s, models built on statistical reasoning had helped to resolve these differences and to produce the neo-Darwinian modern evolutionary synthesis.\nSolving these differences also allowed to define the concept of population genetics and brought together genetics and evolution. The three leading figures in the establishment of population genetics and this synthesis all relied on statistics and developed its use in biology.\nThese and other biostatisticians, mathematical biologists, and statistically inclined geneticists helped bring together evolutionary biology and genetics into a consistent, coherent whole that could begin to be quantitatively modeled.\nIn parallel to this overall development, the pioneering work of D'Arcy Thompson in \"On Growth and Form\" also helped to add quantitative discipline to biological study.\nDespite the fundamental importance and frequent necessity of statistical reasoning, there may nonetheless have been a tendency among biologists to distrust or deprecate results which are not qualitatively apparent. One anecdote describes Thomas Hunt Morgan banning the Friden calculator from his department at Caltech, saying \"Well, I am like a guy who is prospecting for gold along the banks of the Sacramento River in 1849. With a little intelligence, I can reach down and pick up big nuggets of gold. And as long as I can do that, I'm not going to let any people in my department waste scarce resources in placer mining.\"\nResearch planning.\nAny research in life sciences is proposed to answer a scientific question we might have. To answer this question with a high certainty, we need accurate results. The correct definition of the main hypothesis and the research plan will reduce errors while taking a decision in understanding a phenomenon. The research plan might include the research question, the hypothesis to be tested, the experimental design, data collection methods, data analysis perspectives and costs involved. It is essential to carry the study based on the three basic principles of experimental statistics: randomization, replication, and local control.\nResearch question.\nThe research question will define the objective of a study. The research will be headed by the question, so it needs to be concise, at the same time it is focused on interesting and novel topics that may improve science and knowledge and that field. To define the way to ask the scientific question, an exhaustive literature review might be necessary. So the research can be useful to add value to the scientific community.\nHypothesis definition.\nOnce the aim of the study is defined, the possible answers to the research question can be proposed, transforming this question into a hypothesis. The main propose is called null hypothesis (H0) and is usually based on a permanent knowledge about the topic or an obvious occurrence of the phenomena, sustained by a deep literature review. We can say it is the standard expected answer for the data under the situation in test. In general, HO assumes no association between treatments. On the other hand, the alternative hypothesis is the denial of HO. It assumes some degree of association between the treatment and the outcome. Although, the hypothesis is sustained by question research and its expected and unexpected answers.\nAs an example, consider groups of similar animals (mice, for example) under two different diet systems. The research question would be: what is the best diet? In this case, H0 would be that there is no difference between the two diets in mice metabolism (H0: \u03bc1 = \u03bc2) and the alternative hypothesis would be that the diets have different effects over animals metabolism (H1: \u03bc1 \u2260 \u03bc2).\nThe hypothesis is defined by the researcher, according to his/her interests in answering the main question. Besides that, the alternative hypothesis can be more than one hypothesis. It can assume not only differences across observed parameters, but their degree of differences (\"i.e.\" higher or shorter).\nSampling.\nUsually, a study aims to understand an effect of a phenomenon over a population. In biology, a population is defined as all the individuals of a given species, in a specific area at a given time. In biostatistics, this concept is extended to a variety of collections possible of study. Although, in biostatistics, a population is not only the individuals, but the total of one specific component of their organisms, as the whole genome, or all the sperm cells, for animals, or the total leaf area, for a plant, for example.\nIt is not possible to take the measures from all the elements of a population. Because of that, the sampling process is very important for statistical inference. Sampling is defined as to randomly get a representative part of the entire population, to make posterior inferences about the population. So, the sample might catch the most variability across a population. The sample size is determined by several things, since the scope of the research to the resources available. In clinical research, the trial type, as inferiority, equivalence, and superiority is a key in determining sample size.\nExperimental design.\nExperimental designs sustain those basic principles of experimental statistics. There are three basic experimental designs to randomly allocate treatments in all plots of the experiment. They are completely randomized design, randomized block design, and factorial designs. Treatments can be arranged in many ways inside the experiment. In agriculture, the correct experimental design is the root of a good study and the arrangement of treatments within the study is essential because environment largely affects the plots (plants, livestock, microorganisms). These main arrangements can be found in the literature under the names of \"lattices\", \"incomplete blocks\", \"split plot\", \"augmented blocks\", and many others. All of the designs might include control plots, determined by the researcher, to provide an error estimation during inference.\nIn clinical studies, the samples are usually smaller than in other biological studies, and in most cases, the environment effect can be controlled or measured. It is common to use randomized controlled clinical trials, where results are usually compared with observational study designs such as case\u2013control or cohort.\nData collection.\nData collection methods must be considered in research planning, because it highly influences the sample size and experimental design.\nData collection varies according to the type of data. For qualitative data, collection can be done with structured questionnaires or by observation, considering presence or intensity of disease, using score criterion to categorize levels of occurrence. For quantitative data, collection is done by measuring numerical information using instruments.\nIn agriculture and biology studies, yield data and its components can be obtained by metric measures. However, pest and disease injuries in plants are obtained by observation, considering score scales for levels of damage. Especially, in genetic studies, modern methods for data collection in field and laboratory should be considered, as high-throughput platforms for phenotyping and genotyping. These tools allow bigger experiments, while turn possible evaluate many plots in lower time than a human-based only method for data collection.\nFinally, all data collected of interest must be stored in an organized data frame for further analysis.\nAnalysis and data interpretation.\nDescriptive tools.\nData can be represented through tables or graphical representation, such as line charts, bar charts, histograms, scatter plot. Also, measures of central tendency and variability can be very useful to describe an overview of the data. Follow some examples:\nFrequency tables.\nOne type of table is the frequency table, which consists of data arranged in rows and columns, where the frequency is the number of occurrences or repetitions of data. Frequency can be:\nAbsolute: represents the number of times that a determined value appear;\nformula_1\nRelative: obtained by the division of the absolute frequency by the total number;\nformula_2\nIn the next example, we have the number of genes in ten operons of the same organism.\n Genes = {2,3,3,4,5,3,3,3,3,4}\nLine graph.\nLine graphs represent the variation of a value over another metric, such as time. In general, values are represented in the vertical axis, while the time variation is represented in the horizontal axis.\nBar chart.\nA bar chart is a graph that shows categorical data as bars presenting heights (vertical bar) or widths (horizontal bar) proportional to represent values. Bar charts provide an image that could also be represented in a tabular format.\nIn the bar chart example, we have the birth rate in Brazil for the December months from 2010 to 2016. The sharp fall in December 2016 reflects the outbreak of Zika virus in the birth rate in Brazil.\nHistograms.\nThe histogram (or frequency distribution) is a graphical representation of a dataset tabulated and divided into uniform or non-uniform classes. It was first introduced by Karl Pearson.\nScatter plot.\nA scatter plot is a mathematical diagram that uses Cartesian coordinates to display values of a dataset. A scatter plot shows the data as a set of points, each one presenting the value of one variable determining the position on the horizontal axis and another variable on the vertical axis. They are also called scatter graph, scatter chart, scattergram, or scatter diagram.\nMean.\nThe arithmetic mean is the sum of a collection of values (formula_3) divided by the number of items of this collection (formula_4).\n formula_5\nMedian.\nThe median is the value in the middle of a dataset.\nMode.\nThe mode is the value of a set of data that appears most often.\nBox plot.\nBox plot is a method for graphically depicting groups of numerical data. The maximum and minimum values are represented by the lines, and the interquartile range (IQR) represent 25\u201375% of the data. Outliers may be plotted as circles.\nCorrelation coefficients.\nAlthough correlations between two different kinds of data could be inferred by graphs, such as scatter plot, it is necessary validate this though numerical information. For this reason, correlation coefficients are required. They provide a numerical value that reflects the strength of an association.\nPearson correlation coefficient.\n Pearson correlation coefficient is a measure of association between two variables, X and Y. This coefficient, usually represented by \"\u03c1\" (rho) for the population and \"r\" for the sample, assumes values between \u22121 and 1, where \"\u03c1\" = 1 represents a perfect positive correlation, \"\u03c1\" = \u22121 represents a perfect negative correlation, and \"\u03c1\" = 0 is no linear correlation.\nInferential statistics.\nIt is used to make inferences about an unknown population, by estimation and/or hypothesis testing. In other words, it is desirable to obtain parameters to describe the population of interest, but since the data is limited, it is necessary to make use of a representative sample in order to estimate them. With that, it is possible to test previously defined hypotheses and apply the conclusions to the entire population. The standard error of the mean is a measure of variability that is crucial to do inferences.\nHypothesis testing is essential to make inferences about populations aiming to answer research questions, as settled in \"Research planning\" section. Authors defined four steps to be set:\nA confidence interval is a range of values that can contain the true real parameter value in given a certain level of confidence. The first step is to estimate the best-unbiased estimate of the population parameter. The upper value of the interval is obtained by the sum of this estimate with the multiplication between the standard error of the mean and the confidence level. The calculation of lower value is similar, but instead of a sum, a subtraction must be applied.\nStatistical considerations.\nPower and statistical error.\nWhen testing a hypothesis, there are two types of statistic errors possible: Type I error and Type II error.\nThe significance level denoted by \u03b1 is the type I error rate and should be chosen before performing the test. The type II error rate is denoted by \u03b2 and statistical power of the test is 1 \u2212 \u03b2.\np-value.\nThe p-value is the probability of obtaining results as extreme as or more extreme than those observed, assuming the null hypothesis (H0) is true. It is also called the calculated probability. It is common to confuse the p-value with the significance level (\u03b1), but, the \u03b1 is a predefined threshold for calling significant results. If p is less than \u03b1, the null hypothesis (H0) is rejected.\nMultiple testing.\nIn multiple tests of the same hypothesis, the probability of the occurrence of false positives (familywise error rate) increase and a strategy is needed to account for this occurrence. This is commonly achieved by using a more stringent threshold to reject null hypotheses. The Bonferroni correction defines an acceptable global significance level, denoted by \u03b1* and each test is individually compared with a value of \u03b1 = \u03b1*/m. This ensures that the familywise error rate in all m tests, is less than or equal to \u03b1*. When m is large, the Bonferroni correction may be overly conservative. An alternative to the Bonferroni correction is to control the false discovery rate (FDR). The FDR controls the expected proportion of the rejected null hypotheses (the so-called discoveries) that are false (incorrect rejections). This procedure ensures that, for independent tests, the false discovery rate is at most q*. Thus, the FDR is less conservative than the Bonferroni correction and have more power, at the cost of more false positives.\nMis-specification and robustness checks.\nThe main hypothesis being tested (e.g., no association between treatments and outcomes) is often accompanied by other technical assumptions (e.g., about the form of the probability distribution of the outcomes) that are also part of the null hypothesis. When the technical assumptions are violated in practice, then the null may be frequently rejected even if the main hypothesis is true. Such rejections are said to be due to model mis-specification. Verifying whether the outcome of a statistical test does not change when the technical assumptions are slightly altered (so-called robustness checks) is the main way of combating mis-specification.\nModel selection criteria.\nModel criteria selection will select or model that more approximate true model. The Akaike's Information Criterion (AIC) and The Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) are examples of asymptotically efficient criteria.\nDevelopments and big data.\nRecent developments have made a large impact on biostatistics. Two important changes have been the ability to collect data on a high-throughput scale, and the ability to perform much more complex analysis using computational techniques. This comes from the development in areas as sequencing technologies, Bioinformatics and Machine learning (Machine learning in bioinformatics).\nUse in high-throughput data.\nNew biomedical technologies like microarrays, next-generation sequencers (for genomics) and mass spectrometry (for proteomics) generate enormous amounts of data, allowing many tests to be performed simultaneously. Careful analysis with biostatistical methods is required to separate the signal from the noise. For example, a microarray could be used to measure many thousands of genes simultaneously, determining which of them have different expression in diseased cells compared to normal cells. However, only a fraction of genes will be differentially expressed.\nMulticollinearity often occurs in high-throughput biostatistical settings. Due to high intercorrelation between the predictors (such as gene expression levels), the information of one predictor might be contained in another one. It could be that only 5% of the predictors are responsible for 90% of the variability of the response. In such a case, one could apply the biostatistical technique of dimension reduction (for example via principal component analysis). Classical statistical techniques like linear or logistic regression and linear discriminant analysis do not work well for high dimensional data (i.e. when the number of observations n is smaller than the number of features or predictors p: n &lt; p). As a matter of fact, one can get quite high R2-values despite very low predictive power of the statistical model. These classical statistical techniques (esp. least squares linear regression) were developed for low dimensional data (i.e. where the number of observations n is much larger than the number of predictors p: n \u00bb p). In cases of high dimensionality, one should always consider an independent validation test set and the corresponding residual sum of squares (RSS) and R2 of the validation test set, not those of the training set.\nOften, it is useful to pool information from multiple predictors together. For example, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) considers the perturbation of whole (functionally related) gene sets rather than of single genes. These gene sets might be known biochemical pathways or otherwise functionally related genes. The advantage of this approach is that it is more robust: It is more likely that a single gene is found to be falsely perturbed than it is that a whole pathway is falsely perturbed. Furthermore, one can integrate the accumulated knowledge about biochemical pathways (like the JAK-STAT signaling pathway) using this approach.\nBioinformatics advances in databases, data mining, and biological interpretation.\nThe development of biological databases enables storage and management of biological data with the possibility of ensuring access for users around the world. They are useful for researchers depositing data, retrieve information and files (raw or processed) originated from other experiments or indexing scientific articles, as PubMed. Another possibility is search for the desired term (a gene, a protein, a disease, an organism, and so on) and check all results related to this search. There are databases dedicated to SNPs (dbSNP), the knowledge on genes characterization and their pathways (KEGG) and the description of gene function classifying it by cellular component, molecular function and biological process (Gene Ontology). In addition to databases that contain specific molecular information, there are others that are ample in the sense that they store information about an organism or group of organisms. As an example of a database directed towards just one organism, but that contains much data about it, is the \"Arabidopsis thaliana\" genetic and molecular database \u2013 TAIR. Phytozome, in turn, stores the assemblies and annotation files of dozen of plant genomes, also containing visualization and analysis tools. Moreover, there is an interconnection between some databases in the information exchange/sharing and a major initiative was the International Nucleotide Sequence Database Collaboration (INSDC) which relates data from DDBJ, EMBL-EBI, and NCBI.\nNowadays, increase in size and complexity of molecular datasets leads to use of powerful statistical methods provided by computer science algorithms which are developed by machine learning area. Therefore, data mining and machine learning allow detection of patterns in data with a complex structure, as biological ones, by using methods of supervised and unsupervised learning, regression, detection of clusters and association rule mining, among others. To indicate some of them, self-organizing maps and \"k\"-means are examples of cluster algorithms; neural networks implementation and support vector machines models are examples of common machine learning algorithms.\nCollaborative work among molecular biologists, bioinformaticians, statisticians and computer scientists is important to perform an experiment correctly, going from planning, passing through data generation and analysis, and ending with biological interpretation of the results.\nUse of computationally intensive methods.\nOn the other hand, the advent of modern computer technology and relatively cheap computing resources have enabled computer-intensive biostatistical methods like bootstrapping and re-sampling methods.\nIn recent times, random forests have gained popularity as a method for performing statistical classification. Random forest techniques generate a panel of decision trees. Decision trees have the advantage that you can draw them and interpret them (even with a basic understanding of mathematics and statistics). Random Forests have thus been used for clinical decision support systems.\nApplications.\nPublic health.\nPublic health, including epidemiology, health services research, nutrition, environmental health and health care policy &amp; management. In these medicine contents, it's important to consider the design and analysis of the clinical trials. As one example, there is the assessment of severity state of a patient with a prognosis of an outcome of a disease.\nWith new technologies and genetics knowledge, biostatistics are now also used for Systems medicine, which consists in a more personalized medicine. For this, is made an integration of data from different sources, including conventional patient data, clinico-pathological parameters, molecular and genetic data as well as data generated by additional new-omics technologies.\nQuantitative genetics.\nThe study of population genetics and statistical genetics in order to link variation in genotype with a variation in phenotype. In other words, it is desirable to discover the genetic basis of a measurable trait, a quantitative trait, that is under polygenic control. A genome region that is responsible for a continuous trait is called a quantitative trait locus (QTL). The study of QTLs become feasible by using molecular markers and measuring traits in populations, but their mapping needs the obtaining of a population from an experimental crossing, like an F2 or recombinant inbred strains/lines (RILs). To scan for QTLs regions in a genome, a gene map based on linkage have to be built. Some of the best-known QTL mapping algorithms are Interval Mapping, Composite Interval Mapping, and Multiple Interval Mapping.\nHowever, QTL mapping resolution is impaired by the amount of recombination assayed, a problem for species in which it is difficult to obtain large offspring. Furthermore, allele diversity is restricted to individuals originated from contrasting parents, which limit studies of allele diversity when we have a panel of individuals representing a natural population. For this reason, the genome-wide association study was proposed in order to identify QTLs based on linkage disequilibrium, that is the non-random association between traits and molecular markers. It was leveraged by the development of high-throughput SNP genotyping.\nIn animal and plant breeding, the use of markers in selection aiming for breeding, mainly the molecular ones, collaborated to the development of marker-assisted selection. While QTL mapping is limited due resolution, GWAS does not have enough power when rare variants of small effect that are also influenced by environment. So, the concept of Genomic Selection (GS) arises in order to use all molecular markers in the selection and allow the prediction of the performance of candidates in this selection. The proposal is to genotype and phenotype a training population, develop a model that can obtain the genomic estimated breeding values (GEBVs) of individuals belonging to a genotype and but not phenotype population, called testing population. This kind of study could also include a validation population, thinking in the concept of cross-validation, in which the real phenotype results measured in this population are compared with the phenotype results based on the prediction, what used to check the accuracy of the model.\nAs a summary, some points about the application of quantitative genetics are:\nExpression data.\nStudies for differential expression of genes from RNA-Seq data, as for RT-qPCR and microarrays, demands comparison of conditions. The goal is to identify genes which have a significant change in abundance between different conditions. Then, experiments are designed appropriately, with replicates for each condition/treatment, randomization and blocking, when necessary. In RNA-Seq, the quantification of expression uses the information of mapped reads that are summarized in some genetic unit, as exons that are part of a gene sequence. As microarray results can be approximated by a normal distribution, RNA-Seq counts data are better explained by other distributions. The first used distribution was the Poisson one, but it underestimate the sample error, leading to false positives. Currently, biological variation is considered by methods that estimate a dispersion parameter of a negative binomial distribution. Generalized linear models are used to perform the tests for statistical significance and as the number of genes is high, multiple tests correction have to be considered. Some examples of other analysis on genomics data comes from microarray or proteomics experiments. Often concerning diseases or disease stages.\nTools.\nThere are a lot of tools that can be used to do statistical analysis in biological data. Most of them are useful in other areas of knowledge, covering a large number of applications (alphabetical). Here are brief descriptions of some of them:\nScope and training programs.\nAlmost all educational programmes in biostatistics are at postgraduate level. They are most often found in schools of public health, affiliated with schools of medicine, forestry, or agriculture, or as a focus of application in departments of statistics.\nIn the United States, where several universities have dedicated biostatistics departments, many other top-tier universities integrate biostatistics faculty into statistics or other departments, such as epidemiology. Thus, departments carrying the name \"biostatistics\" may exist under quite different structures. For instance, relatively new biostatistics departments have been founded with a focus on bioinformatics and computational biology, whereas older departments, typically affiliated with schools of public health, will have more traditional lines of research involving epidemiological studies and clinical trials as well as bioinformatics. In larger universities around the world, where both a statistics and a biostatistics department exist, the degree of integration between the two departments may range from the bare minimum to very close collaboration. In general, the difference between a statistics program and a biostatistics program is twofold: (i) statistics departments will often host theoretical/methodological research which are less common in biostatistics programs and (ii) statistics departments have lines of research that may include biomedical applications but also other areas such as industry (quality control), business and economics and biological areas other than medicine.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3879", "revid": "44473045", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3879", "title": "Business statistics", "text": ""}
{"id": "3912", "revid": "48626325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3912", "title": "List of major biblical figures", "text": "The Bible is a collection of canonical sacred texts of Judaism and Christianity. Different religious groups include different books within their canons, in different orders, and sometimes divide or combine books, or incorporate additional material into canonical books. Christian Bibles range from the sixty-six books of the Protestant canon to the eighty-one books of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church canon.\nHebrew Bible.\nTribes of Israel.\nAccording to the Book of Genesis, the Israelites were descendants of the sons of Jacob, who was renamed Israel after wrestling with an angel. His twelve male children become the ancestors of the Twelve Tribes of Israel.\nNew Testament.\nApostles of Jesus.\nThe Thirteen:\nOthers:"}
{"id": "3913", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3913", "title": "BinaryOperation", "text": ""}
{"id": "3914", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3914", "title": "British &amp; Irish Lions", "text": "British and Irish rugby union team\nThe British &amp; Irish Lions is a rugby union team selected from players eligible for the national teams of England, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales. The Lions are a test side and most often select players who have already played for their national team, although they can pick uncapped players who are eligible for any of the four unions. Since 1989, the team has toured every four years, with these rotating between Australia, New Zealand and South Africa in order. The Lions most recently toured Australia in 2025 and won the test series 2\u20131.\nFrom 1888 onwards, combined British rugby sides visited countries in the Southern Hemisphere. The first tour was a commercial venture, undertaken without official backing. The next six visits enjoyed a growing degree of support from the rugby authorities, before the 1910 South Africa tour, which was the first tour representative of the four Home Unions. In 1949, the four Home Unions formally created a Tours Committee and for the first time, every player of the 1950 Lions squad had played internationally before the tour. From the 1950s, tours saw the Lions winning many of the provincial games, but the test series were generally lost or drawn. The series wins in 1971 (New Zealand) and 1974 (South Africa) interrupted this pattern. The last tour of the amateur era took place in 1993. The Lions have also played occasional matches in the Northern Hemisphere either as one-off exhibitions or before a tour.\nNaming and symbols.\nName.\nThe Shaw and Shrewsbury team first played in 1888 and is considered the precursor of the British &amp; Irish Lions. It was then primarily English in composition but also contained players from Scotland and Wales. Later the team used the name British Isles. On their 1950 tour of New Zealand and Australia they officially adopted the name British Lions, the nickname first used by British and South African journalists on the 1924 South African tour after the lion emblem on their ties, the emblem on their jerseys having been dropped in favour of the four-quartered badge with the symbols of the four represented unions.\nWhen the team first emerged in the 19th century, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland was one single state. The team continued after the Irish Free State was set up in 1922, but was still known as the British Lions or British Isles. The name \"British &amp; Irish Lions\" has been used since the 2001 tour of Australia. The team is often referred to simply as the Lions.\nAnthem.\nAs the Lions represent four rugby unions, which cover two sovereign states, they do not currently have a national anthem. For the 1989 tour, the British national anthem \"God Save the Queen\" was used. For the 2005 tour to New Zealand, the Lions management commissioned a song, \"The Power of Four\", although it was met with little support among Lions fans at the matches and has not been used since.\nColours and strip.\nFor more than half a century, the Lions have worn a red jersey that sports the amalgamated crests of the four unions. Prior to 1950 the strip went through a number of significantly different formats.\nUnsanctioned tours.\nIn 1888, the promoter of the first expedition to Australia and New Zealand, Arthur Shrewsbury, demanded \"something that would be good material and yet take them by storm out here\". The result was a jersey in thick red, white and blue hoops, worn above white shorts and dark socks. The tours to South Africa in 1891 and 1896 retained the red, white and blue theme but this time as red and white hooped jerseys and dark blue shorts and socks. The 1899 trip to Australia saw a reversion to red, white and blue jerseys, but with the blue used in thick hoops and the red and white in thin bands. The shorts remained blue, as did the socks although a white flash was added to the latter. The one-off test in 1999 between England and Australia that was played to commemorate Australia's first test against Reverend Matthew Mullineux's British side saw England wear an updated version of this jersey. In 1903, the South Africa tour followed on from the 1896 tour, with red and white hooped jerseys. The slight differences were that the red hoops were slightly thicker than the white (the opposite was true in 1896), and the white flash on the socks introduced in 1899 was partially retained. The Australia tour of 1904 saw exactly the same kit as in 1899. In 1908, with the Scottish and Irish unions not taking part, the Anglo-Welsh side sported red jerseys with a thick white band on tour to Australia and New Zealand. Blue shorts were retained, but the socks were for the first time red, with a white flash.\nBlue jerseys, the Lions named and the crest adopted.\nThe Scots were once again involved in Tom Smyth's 1910 team to South Africa. Thus, dark blue jerseys were introduced with white shorts and the red socks of 1908. The jerseys also had a single lion-rampant crest. The 1924 tour returned to South Africa, retaining the blue jerseys but now with shorts to match. It is the 1924 tour that is credited as being the first in which the team were referred to as \"the Lions\", the irony being that it was on this tour that the single lion-rampant crest was replaced with the forerunner of the four-quartered badge with the symbols of the four represented unions, that is still worn today. Although the lion had been dropped from the jersey, the players had worn the lion motif on their ties as they arrived in South Africa, which led the press and public referring to them as \"the Lions\".\nThe unofficial 1927 Argentina tour used the same kit and badge, and three heraldic lions returned as the jersey badge in 1930. This was the tour to New Zealand where the tourists' now standard blue jerseys caused some controversy. The convention in rugby is for the home side to accommodate its guests when there is a clash of kit. The New Zealand side, by then already synonymous with the appellation \"All Blacks\", had an all black kit that clashed with the Lions' blue. After much reluctance and debate New Zealand agreed to change for the Tests and New Zealand played in all white for the first time. On the 1930 tour a delegation led by the Irish lock George Beamish expressed their displeasure at the fact that while the blue of Scotland, white of England and red of Wales were represented in the strip there was no green for Ireland. A green flash was added to the socks, which from 1938 became a green turnover (although on blue socks thus eliminating red from the kit), and that has remained a feature of the strip ever since. In 1936, the four-quartered badge returned for the tour to Argentina and has remained on the kits ever since, but other than that the strip remained the same.\nRed jerseys.\nThe adoption of the red jersey happened in the 1950 tour. A return to New Zealand was accompanied by a desire to avoid the controversy of 1930 and so red replaced blue for the jersey with the resultant kit being that which is still worn today, the combination of red jersey, white shorts and green and blue socks, representing the four unions. The only additions to the strip since 1950 began appearing in 1993, with the addition of kit suppliers logos in prominent positions. Umbro had in 1989 asked for \"maximum brand exposure whenever possible\" but this did not affect the kit's appearance. Since then, Nike, Adidas and Canterbury have had more overt branding on the shirts, with sponsors Scottish Provident (1997), (2001), Zurich (2005), HSBC (2009 and 2013), Standard Life Investments (2017), Vodafone (2021) and Howden (2025).\nHistory.\n1888\u20131909.\nThe earliest tours date back to 1888, when a 21-man squad visited Australia and New Zealand. The squad drew players from England, Scotland and Wales, though English players predominated. The 35-match tour of two host nations included no tests, but the side played provincial, city and academic sides, winning 27 matches. They played 19 games of Australian rules football, against prominent clubs in Victoria and South Australia, winning six and drawing one of these (see Australian rules football in England).\nThe first tour, although unsanctioned by rugby bodies, established the concept of Northern Hemisphere sporting sides touring to the Southern Hemisphere. Three years after the first tour, the Western Province union invited rugby bodies in Britain to tour South Africa. Some saw the 1891 team \u2013 the first sanctioned by the Rugby Football Union \u2013 as the England national team, though others referred to it as \"the British Isles\". The tourists played a total of twenty matches, three of them tests. The team also played the regional side of South Africa (South Africa did not exist as a political unit in 1891), winning all three matches. In a notable event of the tour, the touring side presented the Currie Cup to Griqualand West, the province they thought produced the best performance on the tour.\nFive years later a British Isles side returned to South Africa. They played one extra match on this tour, making the total of 21 games, including four tests against South Africa, with the British Isles winning three of them. The squad had a notable Irish orientation, with the Ireland national team contributing six players to the 21-man squad.\nIn 1899 the British Isles touring side returned to Australia for the first time since the unofficial tour of 1888. The squad of 23 for the first time ever had players from each of the home nations. The team again participated in 21 matches, playing state teams as well as northern Queensland sides and Victorian teams. A four-test series took place against Australia, the tourists winning three out of the four. The team returned via Hawaii and Canada playing additional games en route.\nFour years later, in 1903, the British Isles team returned to South Africa. The opening performance of the side proved disappointing from the tourists' point of view, with defeats in its opening three matches by Western Province sides in Cape Town. From then on the team experienced mixed results, though more wins than losses. The side lost the test series to South Africa, drawing twice, but with the South Africans winning the decider 8 to nil.\nNo more than twelve months passed before the British Isles team ventured to Australia and New Zealand in 1904. The tourists devastated the Australian teams, winning every single game. Australia also lost all three tests to the visitors, even getting held to a standstill in two of the three games. Though the New Zealand leg of the tour did not take long in comparison to the number of Australian games, the British Isles experienced considerable difficulty across the Tasman after whitewashing the Australians. The team managed two early wins before losing the test to New Zealand and only winning one more game as well as drawing once. Despite their difficulties in New Zealand, the tour proved a raging success on-field for the British Isles.\nIn 1908, another tour took place to Australia and New Zealand. In a reversal of previous practice, the planners allocated more matches in New Zealand rather than in Australia: perhaps the strength of the New Zealand teams and the heavy defeats of all Australian teams on the previous tour influenced this decision. Some commentators thought that this tour hoped to reach out to rugby communities in Australia, as rugby league (infamously) started in Australia in 1908. The Anglo-Welsh side (Irish and Scottish unions did not participate) performed well in all the non-test matches, but drew a test against New Zealand and lost the other two.\n1910\u20131949.\nVisits that took place before the 1910 South Africa tour (the first selected by a committee from the four Home Unions) had enjoyed a growing degree of support from the authorities, although only one of these included representatives of all four nations. The 1910 tour to South Africa marked the official beginning of British Isles rugby tours: the inaugural tour operating under all four unions. The team performed moderately against the non-test teams, claiming victories in just over half their matches, and the test series went to South Africa, who won two of the three games. A side managed by Oxford University \u2014 supposedly the England rugby team, but actually including three Scottish players \u2014 toured Argentina at the time: the people of Argentina termed it the \"Combined British\".\nThe next British Isles team tour did not take place until 1924, again in South Africa. The team, led by Ronald Cove-Smith, struggled with injuries and lost three of the four test matches, drawing the other 3\u20133. In total, 21 games were played, with the touring side winning 9, drawing 3 and losing 9.\nIn 1927 a short, nine-game series took place in Argentina, with the British isles winning all nine encounters, and the tour was a financial success for Argentine rugby. The Lions returned to New Zealand in 1930 with some success. The Lions won all of their games that did not have test status except for the matches against Auckland, Wellington and Canterbury, but they lost three of their four test matches against New Zealand, winning the first test 6\u20133. The side also visited Australia, losing a test but winning five out of the six non-test games.\nIn 1936 the British Isles visited Argentina for the third time, winning all ten of their matches and only conceding nine points in the whole tour. Two years later in 1938 the British Isles toured in South Africa, winning more than half of their normal matches. Despite having lost the test series to South Africa by game three, they won the final test. This is when they were named THE LIONS by their then Captain Sam Walker.\n1950\u20131969.\nThe first post-war tour went to New Zealand and Australia in 1950. The Lions, sporting newly redesigned jerseys and displaying a fresh style of play, managed to win 22 and draw one of 29 matches over the two nations. The Lions won the opening four fixtures before losing to Otago and Southland, but succeeded in holding New Zealand to a 9\u20139 draw. The Lions performed well in the remaining All Black tests though they lost all three, the team did not lose another non-test in the New Zealand leg of the tour. The Lions won all their games in Australia except for their final fixture against a New South Wales XV in Newcastle. They won both tests against Australia, in Brisbane, Queensland and in Sydney.\nIn 1955 the Lions toured South Africa and left with another imposing record, one draw and 19 wins from the 25 fixtures. The four-test series against South Africa, a thrilling affair, ended in a drawn series.\nThe 1959 tour to Australia and New Zealand marked once again a very successful tour for the Lions, who only lost six of their 35 fixtures. The Lions easily won both tests against Australia and lost the first three tests against New Zealand, but did find victory (9\u20136) in the final test.\nAfter the glittering decade of the 1950s, the first tour of the 1960s proved not nearly as successful as previous ones. The 1962 tour to South Africa saw the Lions still win 16 of their 25 games, but did not fare well against the Springboks, losing three of the four tests. For the 1966 tour to Australia and New Zealand John Robins became the first Lions coach, and the trip started off very well for the Lions, who stormed through Australia, winning five non-tests and drawing one, and defeating Australia in two tests. The Lions experienced mixed results during the New Zealand leg of the tour, as well as losing all of the tests against New Zealand. The Lions also played a test against Canada on their way home, winning 19 to 8 in Toronto. The 1968 tour of South Africa saw the Lions win 15 of their 16 provincial matches, but the team actually lost three tests against the Springboks and drew one.\n1970\u20131979.\nThe 1970s saw a renaissance for the Lions. The 1971 British Lions tour to New Zealand and Australia, centred around the skilled Welsh half-back pairing of Gareth Edwards and Barry John, secured a series win over New Zealand. The tour started with a loss to Queensland but proceeded to storm through the next provincial fixtures, winning 11 games in a row. The Lions then went on to defeat New Zealand in Dunedin. The Lions only lost one match on the rest of the tour and won the test series against New Zealand, winning and drawing the last two games, to take the series two wins to one.\nThe 1974 British Lions tour to South Africa was one of the best-known and most successful Lions teams. Apartheid concerns meant some players declined the tour. Nonetheless, led by the esteemed Irish forward Willie John McBride, the tour went through 22 games unbeaten and triumphed 3\u20130 (with one drawn) in the test series. The series featured a lot of violence. The management of the Lions concluded that the Springboks dominated their opponents with physical aggression. At that time, test match referees came from the home nation, substitutions took place only if a doctor found a player unable to continue and there were no video cameras or sideline officials to prevent violent play. The Lions decided \"to get their retaliation in first\" with the infamous \"99 call\". The Lions postulated that a South African referee would probably not send off all of the Lions if they all retaliated against \"blatant thuggery\". Famous video footage of the 'battle of Boet Erasmus Stadium' shows J. P. R. Williams running over half of the pitch and launching himself at Van Heerden after such a call.\nThe 1977 British Lions tour to New Zealand saw the Lions drop only one non-test out of 21 games, a loss to a Universities side. The team did not win the test series though, winning one game but losing the other three.\nIn August 1977 the British Lions made a stopover in Fiji on the way home from their tour of New Zealand. Fiji beat them 25\u201321 at Buckhurst Park, Suva.\n1980\u20131989.\nThe Lions toured South Africa in 1980, and completed a flawless non-test record, winning 14 out of 14 matches. The Lions lost the first three tests to South Africa, only winning the last one once the Springboks were guaranteed to win the series.\nThe 1983 tour to New Zealand saw the team successful in the non-test games, winning all but two games, but being whitewashed in the test series against New Zealand.\nA tour to South Africa by the Lions was anticipated in 1986, but the invitation for the Lions to tour was never accepted because of controversy surrounding Apartheid and the tour did not go ahead. The Lions did not return to South Africa until 1997, after the Apartheid era. A Lions team was selected in April 1986 for the International Rugby Board centenary match against 'The Rest'. The team was organised by the Four Home Unions Committee and the players were given the status of official British Lions.\nThe Lions tour to Australia in 1989 was a shorter affair, being only 12 matches in total. The tour was very successful for the Lions, who won all eight non-test matches and won the test series against Australia, two to one.\n1990\u20131999.\nThe tour to New Zealand in 1993 was the last of the amateur era. The Lions won six and lost four non-test matches, and lost the test series 2\u20131. The tour to South Africa in 1997 was a success for the Lions, who completed the tour with only two losses, and won the test series 2\u20131.\n2000\u20132009.\nIn 2001, the ten-game tour to Australia saw the Wallabies win the test series 2\u20131. This series saw the first award of the Tom Richards Trophy. In the Lions' 2005 tour to New Zealand, coached by Clive Woodward, the Lions won seven games against provincial teams, were defeated by the New Zealand Maori team, and suffered heavy defeats in all three tests.\nIn 2009, the Lions toured South Africa. There they faced the World Cup winners South Africa, with Ian McGeechan leading a coaching team including Warren Gatland, Shaun Edwards and Rob Howley. The Lions were captained by Irish lock Paul O'Connell. The initial Lions selection consisted of fourteen Irish players, thirteen Welsh, eight English and two Scots in the 37-man squad. In the first Test on 20 June, they lost 26\u201321, and lost the series in the second 28\u201325 in a tightly fought game at Loftus Versfeld on 27 June. The Lions won the third Test 28\u20139 at Ellis Park, and the series finished 2\u20131 to South Africa.\n2010\u20132019.\nDuring June 2013 the British &amp; Irish Lions toured Australia. Former Scotland and Lions full-back Andy Irvine was appointed as tour manager in 2010. Wales head coach Warren Gatland was the Lions' head coach, and their tour captain was Sam Warburton. The tour started in Hong Kong with a match against the Barbarians before moving on to Australia for the main tour featuring six provincial matches and three tests. The Lions won all but one non-test matches, losing to the Brumbies 14\u201312 on 18 June. The first test was followed shortly after this, which saw the Lions go 1-up over Australia winning 23\u201321. Australia did have a chance to take the win in the final moments of the game, but a missed penalty by Kurtley Beale saw the Lions take the win. The Wallabies drew the series in the second test winning 16\u201315, though the Lions had a chance to steal the win had it not been because of a missed penalty by Leigh Halfpenny. With tour captain Warburton out of the final test due to injury, Alun Wyn Jones took over the captaincy in the final test in Sydney. The final test was won by the Lions in what was a record win, winning 41\u201316 to earn their first series win since 1997 and their first over Australia since 1989.\nFollowing his winning tour of Australia in 2013, Warren Gatland was reappointed as Lions Head Coach for the tour to New Zealand in June and July 2017. In April 2016, it was announced that the side would again be captained again by Sam Warburton. The touring schedule included 10 games: an opening game against the Provincial Barbarians, challenge matches against all five of New Zealand's Super Rugby sides, a match against the M\u0101ori All Blacks and three tests against New Zealand. The Lions defeated the Provincial Barbarians in the first game of the tour, before being beaten by the Blues three days later. The team recovered to beat the Crusaders but this was followed up with another midweek loss, this time against the Highlanders. The Lions then faced the M\u0101ori All Blacks, winning comfortably to restore optimism and followed up with their first midweek victory of the tour against the Chiefs. On 24 June, the Lions, captained by Peter O'Mahony, faced New Zealand in Eden Park in the first Test and were beaten 30\u201315. This was followed by the final midweek game of the tour, a draw against the Hurricanes. For the second Test, Gatland recalled Warburton to the starting team as captain. In Wellington Regional Stadium, the Lions beat a 14-man New Zealand side 24\u201321 after Sonny Bill Williams was red-carded at the 24-minute mark after a shoulder charge on Anthony Watson. This tied the series going into the final game, ending the side's 47-game winning run at home. In the final test at Eden Park the following week, the teams were tied at 15 points apiece with 78 minutes gone. Romain Poite signaled a penalty to New Zealand for an offside infringement after Ken Owens received the ball in front of his teammate Liam Williams, giving New Zealand the opportunity to kick for goal and potentially win the series. Poite, however, decided to downgrade the penalty to a free-kick after discussing with assistant referee J\u00e9r\u00f4me Garc\u00e8s and Lions captain Sam Warburton. The match finished as a draw and the series was tied.\n2020\u2013present.\nWarren Gatland was Lions head coach again for the tour to South Africa in 2021. In December 2019, the Lions' Test venues were announced, but the tour was significantly disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and all the games were played behind closed doors. South Africa won the test series by two games to one. In the deciding third test, Morne Steyn again kicked a late penalty to win the series.\nIn 2021, a new Lions Series trophy was introduced before the Lions' tour to South Africa. The new trophy was manufactured from sterling silver in Thomas Lyte's London workshops, and stands at 60cm tall and 6\u00bdkg weight. The Lions Series Logo features on the main body of the trophy.\nIn 2024, it was announced that Andy Farrell would succeed Gatland as the Lions head coach. A women's Lions team was established in 2024, with their inaugural tour to New Zealand to take place in 2027. For the 2025 tour to Australia, the first test match saw Ireland equal their record for most starters with 8 while Wales did not have a player in the matchday squad for the first time since 1896. They went on to win the first test 27\u201319 and clinched a series a victory in the second test winning 26\u201329, after recovering from 23\u20135 deficit.\n \"As of 3 August 2025\".\nOverall test match record.\nOverall test series results\n \"As of 26 July 2025\".\nTours.\nFormat.\nThe Lions now regularly tour three Southern Hemisphere countries; Australia, South Africa and New Zealand. They also toured Argentina three times before the Second World War. Since 1989 tours have been held every four years. The most recent tour was to Australia in 2025.\nIn a break with tradition, the 2005 tour of New Zealand was preceded by a \"home\" fixture against Argentina at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff on 23 May 2005. It finished in a 25\u201325 draw. A similar fixture was held against Japan before the 2021 tour of South Africa at Murrayfield, with the Lions winning 28\u201310.\nOn tour, games take place against local provinces, clubs or representative sides as well as test matches against the host's national team.\nThe Lions and their predecessor teams have also played games against other nearby countries on tour. For example, they played Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe) in 1910, 1924, 1938, 1955, 1962, 1968 and 1974 during their tours to South Africa. They were also beaten by Fiji on their 1977 tour to New Zealand. In addition, they visited pre-independence Namibia (then South West Africa), in 1955, 1962, 1968 and 1974.\nThere have also been games in other countries on the way home. These include games in Canada in 1959 and 1966, East Africa (then mostly Kenya, and held in Nairobi), and an unofficial game against Ceylon (now Sri Lanka) in 1950.\nLions non-tour and home matches.\nThe Lions have played a number of other matches against international opposition. With the exception of the matches against Argentina in 2005 and 2025, and Japan in 2021, which were preparation matches for Lions tours, these matches have been one-offs to mark special occasions.\nThe Lions played an unofficial international match in 1955 at Cardiff Arms Park against a Welsh XV to mark the 75th anniversary of the Welsh Rugby Union. The Lions won 20\u201317 but did not include all the big names of the 1955 tour, such as Tony O'Reilly, Jeff Butterfield, Phil Davies, Dickie Jeeps, Bryn Meredith and Jim Greenwood.\nIn 1977, the Lions played their first official home game, against the Barbarians as a charity fund-raiser held as part of the Queen's silver jubilee celebrations. The Barbarians line-up featured J. P. R. Williams, Gerald Davies, Gareth Edwards, Jean-Pierre Rives and Jean-Claude Skrela. The Lions included 13 of the team who played in the fourth test against New Zealand three weeks before and won 23\u201314.\nIn 1986, the Lions' planned tour to South Africa was cancelled for political resons, because of Apartheid in South Africa. A match was organised against The Rest as a celebration to mark the International Rugby Board's centenary. The Lions lost 15\u20137.\nIn 1989, the Lions played against France in Paris. The game formed part of the celebrations of the bi-centennial of the French Revolution. The Lions, captained by Rob Andrew, won 29\u201327.\nIn 1990, a Four Home Unions team played against the Rest of Europe in a match to raise money for the rebuilding of Romania following the overthrow of Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu in December 1989. The team used the Lions' logo, while the Rest of Europe played under the symbol of the Romanian Rugby Federation.\n\"Players in bold are still active at international level.\"\n\"Only matches against full international sides are listed.\"\nPlayer records.\nMost caps.\n\"Updated 2 August 2025\"\nMost points.\n\"Updated 2 August 2025\"\nMost tries.\n\"Updated 2 August 2025\"\nPlayer of the Series.\nThe following players have been voted as the British &amp; Irish Lions Player of the Series since 2009, based on their performances in the test series of each tour:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3916", "revid": "24465790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3916", "title": "Bass guitar", "text": "Electric plucked string instrument\nThe bass guitar, also known as the electric bass guitar, is the lowest-pitched member of the guitar family. It is similar in appearance and construction to an electric guitar but with a longer neck and scale length. The electric bass guitar most commonly has four strings, though five-, six-, and seven-stringed models are also built. Since the mid-1950s, the electric bass guitar has often replaced the double bass in popular music due to its lighter weight, smaller size and easier portability, most models' inclusion of frets for easier intonation, and electromagnetic pickups for amplification. \nThe electric bass guitar is usually tuned the same as the double bass, corresponding to pitches one octave lower than the four lowest-pitched strings of a guitar (typically E, A, D, and G). It is played with the fingers and thumb or with a pick. \nBecause the electric bass guitar is acoustically a quiet instrument, it requires external amplification, generally via electromagnetic or piezo-electric pickups. It can also be used with direct input boxes, audio interfaces, mixing consoles, computers, or bass-effects processors which offer headphone jacks.\nTerminology.\nThe \"New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians\" refers to this instrument as an \"Electric bass guitar, usually with four heavy strings tuned E1'\u2013A1'\u2013D2\u2013G2.\" It also defines \"bass\" as \"Bass (iv). A contraction of Double bass or Electric bass guitar.\" \"Mottola's Cyclopedic Dictionary of Lutherie Terms\" begins its definition of the instrument as \"A bass guitar that produces sound primarily with the aid of electronic devices.\" According to some authors the proper term is \"electric bass\". Common names for the instrument are \"bass guitar\", \"electric bass guitar\", \"electric bass\", and simply \"bass\". and some authors claim that they are historically accurate. A bass guitar whose neck lacks frets is termed a fretless bass.\nScale.\nThe scale of a bass is defined as the length of the vibrating strings between the nut and the bridge saddles. On a modern 4-string electric bass guitar, 30\" (76 cm) or less is considered short scale, 32\" (81 cm) medium scale, 34\" (86 cm) standard scale and 35\" (89 cm) long scale.\nThe double bass is \"acoustically imperfect\" like the viola. For a double bass to be acoustically perfect, its body size would have to be twice as that of a cello rendering it practically unplayable, so the double bass is made smaller to make it playable. The electric bass guitar with its pickups and amplifier addresses the compromises of a double bass by allowing the low notes to be amplified electronically.\nPickup.\nBass pickups are attached to the body of the guitar and located beneath the strings. They are responsible for converting the vibrations of the strings into interference of a magnetic field which is converted into analogous electrical voltage sent as input to an instrument amplifier.\nStrings.\nBass guitar strings are composed of a core and winding. The core is a wire which runs through the center of the string and is made of steel, nickel, or an alloy. The winding is a smaller gauge wire wrapped around the core. Bass guitar strings vary by the material and cross-sectional shape of the winding. \nCommon string variants include roundwound, flatwound, halfwound (groundwound), coated, tapewound and taperwound strings. Roundwound and flatwound strings feature windings with circular and rounded-square cross-sections, respectively, with half-round strings being a hybrid between the two. Coated strings have their surface coated with a synthetic layer while tapewound strings feature a metal core with a plastic winding. Taperwound strings have a tapered end where the exposed core sits on the bridge saddle without windings. The choice of winding has considerable impact on the sound of the instrument, with certain winding styles often being preferred for certain musical genres.\nHistory.\n1930s.\nIn the 1930s, musician and inventor Paul Tutmarc of Seattle, Washington, developed the first electric bass guitar in its modern form, a fretted four-string instrument designed to be played horizontally in a position similar to a standard guitar. The 1935 sales catalog for Tutmarc's company Audiovox featured the \"Model 736 Bass Fiddle\", a solid body electric bass guitar with four strings, a scale length, and a single pickup. Around 100 were made during this period.\nAudiovox also sold their \"Model 236\" bass amplifier.\n1950s.\nIn the 1950s, Leo Fender and George Fullerton developed the first mass-produced electric bass guitar. The Fender Electric Instrument Manufacturing Company began producing the Precision Bass, or P-Bass, in October 1951. The design featured a simple uncontoured \"slab\" body design (with no edge contours) and a single coil pickup, both features similar to a Telecaster. By 1957, the Precision Bass began to resemble the Fender Stratocaster with the body edges beveled for comfort and the pickup changed to a separate halves split coil design.\nThe Fender Bass was a revolutionary instrument for working musicians. In comparison to the upright bass, the bass guitar could be easily transported. When amplified, the bass guitar was also much less prone than acoustic basses to audio feedback. The addition of frets enabled bassists to play in tune more easily than on upright basses (the \"precision\" of the Fender model) and allowed guitarists to more easily adapt to the new instrument.\nIn 1953, Monk Montgomery became the first bassist to tour with the Fender bass, in Lionel Hampton's postwar big band. Montgomery was also possibly the first to record with the electric bass, in a session on July 2, 1953, with the Art Farmer Septet. Roy Johnson (with Lionel Hampton), and Shifty Henry (with Louis Jordan and His Tympany Five), were other early Fender bass pioneers. Bill Black, who played with Elvis Presley and James Jamerson switched from upright bass to the Fender Precision Bass around 1957. The bass guitar was intended to appeal to guitarists as well as upright bass players, and many early pioneers of the instrument, such as Joe Osborn, and Paul McCartney were originally guitarists.\nAlso in 1953, Gibson released the first short-scale violin-shaped electric bass, the EB-1, with an extendable end pin so a bassist could play it upright or horizontally. In 1958, Gibson released the maple arched-top EB-2 described in the Gibson catalog as a \"hollow-body electric bass that features a Bass/Baritone pushbutton for two different tonal characteristics\". In 1959, these were followed by the more conventional-looking EB-0 Bass. The EB-0 was very similar to a Gibson SG in appearance (although the earliest examples have a slab-sided body shape closer to that of the double-cutaway Les Paul Special). The Fender and Gibson versions used bolt-on and set necks.\nSeveral other companies also began manufacturing bass guitars during the 1950s. Kay Musical Instrument Company began production of the K162 in 1952. Also in 1956, at the German trade fair \"Musikmesse Frankfurt\", the distinctive H\u00f6fner 500/1 viola-shaped bass first appeared, constructed using violin techniques by Walter H\u00f6fner, a second-generation violin luthier. Due to its use by Paul McCartney, it became known as the \"Beatle bass\". In 1957, Rickenbacker introduced the model 4000, the first bass to feature a neck-through-body design in which the neck is part of the body wood. The Burns London Supersound was introduced in 1958.\n1960s.\nWith the explosion in popularity of rock music in the 1960s, many more manufacturers began making electric basses, including Yamaha, Teisco and Guyatone. Introduced in 1960, the Fender Jazz Bass, initially known as the \"Deluxe Bass\", used a body design known as an offset waist which was first seen on the Jazzmaster guitar in an effort to improve comfort while playing seated. The Jazz bass, or J-Bass, features two single-coil pickups.\nProviding a more \"Gibson-scale\" instrument, rather than the Jazz and Precision, Fender produced the Mustang Bass, a scale-length instrument. The Fender VI, a 6-string bass, was tuned one octave lower than standard guitar tuning. It was released in 1961, and was briefly favored by Jack Bruce of Cream.\nGibson introduced its short-scale EB-3 in 1961, also used by Bruce. The EB-3 had a \"mini-humbucker\" at the bridge position. Gibson basses tended to be instruments with a shorter 30.5\" scale length than the Precision. Gibson did not produce a -scale bass until 1963 with the release of the Thunderbird.\nThe first commercial fretless bass guitar was the Ampeg AUB-1, introduced in 1966. In the late 1960s, eight-string basses, with four octave paired courses (similar to a 12 string guitar), were introduced, such as the Hagstr\u00f6m H8.\n1970s.\nIn 1972, Alembic established what became known as \"boutique\" or \"high-end\" electric bass guitars. These expensive, custom-tailored instruments, as used by Phil Lesh, Jack Casady, and Stanley Clarke, featured unique designs, premium hand-finished wood bodies, and innovative construction techniques such as multi-laminate neck-through-body construction and graphite necks. Alembic also pioneered the use of onboard electronics for pre-amplification and equalization. \nActive electronics increase the output of the instrument, and allow more options for controlling tonal flexibility, giving the player the ability to amplify as well as to attenuate certain frequency ranges while improving the overall frequency response (including more low-register and high-register sounds). 1976 saw the UK company Wal begin production of their own range of active basses. In 1974 Music Man Instruments, founded by Tom Walker, Forrest White and Leo Fender, introduced the StingRay, the first widely produced bass with active (powered) electronics built into the instrument. Basses with active electronics can include a preamplifier and knobs for boosting and cutting the low and high frequencies.\nIn the mid-1970s, five-string basses, with a very low \"B\" string, were introduced. In 1975, bassist Anthony Jackson commissioned luthier Carl Thompson to build a six-string bass tuned (low to high) B0, E1, A1, D2, G2, C3, adding a low B string and a high C string.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3920", "revid": "43676619", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3920", "title": "Beatles", "text": ""}
{"id": "3921", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3921", "title": "Basketball", "text": "Team sport\nBasketball is a team sport in which two teams of five players each (excluding subs), opposing one another on a rectangular court, compete with the primary objective of shooting a basketball (approximately in diameter) through the defender's hoop (a basket in diameter mounted high to a backboard at each end of the court). Teams alternate between offense, when they attempt to score, and defense, when they try to prevent the opposing side from scoring. A field goal is worth two points, unless made from behind the three-point line, when it is worth three. After a foul, timed play stops and the player fouled or designated to shoot a technical foul is given one, two or three one-point free throws. The team with the most points at the end of the game wins, but if regulation play expires with the score tied, an additional period of play (overtime) is mandated. However, if the additional period still results in a tied score, yet another additional period is mandated. This goes on until the score is not tied anymore.\nPlayers advance the ball by bouncing it while walking or running (dribbling) or by passing it to a teammate, both of which require considerable skill. On offense, players may use a variety of shots\u00a0\u2013 the layup, the jump shot, or a dunk; on defense, they may steal the ball from a dribbler, intercept passes, or block shots; either offense or defense may collect a rebound, that is, a missed shot that bounces from rim or backboard. It is a violation to lift or drag one's pivot foot without dribbling the ball, to carry it, or to hold the ball with both hands then resume dribbling.\nThe five players on each side fall into five playing positions. The tallest player is usually the center, the second-tallest and strongest is the power forward, a slightly shorter but more agile player is the small forward, and the shortest players or the best ball handlers are the shooting guard and the point guard, who implement the coach's game plan by managing the execution of offensive and defensive plays (player positioning). Informally, players may play three-on-three, two-on-two, and one-on-one.\nInvented in 1891 by Canadian-American gym teacher James Naismith in Springfield, Massachusetts, in the United States, basketball has evolved to become one of the world's most popular and widely viewed sports. The National Basketball Association (NBA) is the most significant professional basketball league in the world in terms of popularity, salaries, talent, and level of competition (drawing most of its talent from U.S. college basketball). Outside North America, the top clubs from national leagues qualify to continental championships such as the EuroLeague and the Basketball Champions League Americas. The FIBA Basketball World Cup and Men's Olympic Basketball Tournament are the major international events of the sport and attract top national teams from around the world. Each continent hosts regional competitions for national teams, like EuroBasket and FIBA AmeriCup.\nThe FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup and women's Olympic basketball tournament feature top national teams from continental championships. The main North American league is the WNBA (NCAA Women's Division I Basketball Championship is also popular), whereas the strongest European clubs participate in the EuroLeague Women.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nA game similar to basketball is mentioned in a 1591 book published in Frankfurt am Main that reports on the lifestyles and customs of coastal North American residents, (German; translates as \"Truthful Depictions of the Savages\": \"Among other things, a game of skill is described in which balls must be thrown against a target woven from twigs, mounted high on a pole. There's a small reward for the player if the target is being hit.\"\nCreation.\nIn December 1891, James Naismith, a Canadian-American professor of physical education and instructor at the International Young Men's Christian Association Training School (now Springfield College) in Springfield, Massachusetts, was trying to keep his gym class active on a rainy day. He sought a vigorous indoor game to keep his students occupied and at proper levels of fitness during the long New England winters. After rejecting other ideas as either too rough or poorly suited to walled-in gymnasiums, he invented a new game in which players would pass a ball to teammates and try to score points by tossing the ball into a basket mounted on a wall. \nNaismith wrote the basic rules and nailed a peach basket onto an elevated track. Naismith initially set up the peach basket with its bottom intact, which meant that the ball had to be retrieved manually after each \"basket\" or point scored. This quickly proved tedious, so Naismith removed the bottom of the basket to allow the balls to be poked out with a long dowel after each scored basket.\nShortly after, Senda Berenson, instructor of physical culture at the nearby Smith College, went to Naismith to learn more about the game. Fascinated by the new sport and the values it could teach, she started to organize games with her pupils, following adjusted rules. The first official women's interinstitutional game was played barely 11 months later, between the University of California and Miss Head's School. In 1899, a committee was established at the Conference of Physical Training in Springfield to draw up general rules for women's basketball. Thus, the sport quickly spread throughout America's schools, colleges and universities with uniform rules for both sexes.\nBasketball was originally played with a soccer ball. These round balls from \"association football\" were made, at the time, with a set of laces to close off the hole needed for inserting the inflatable bladder after the other sewn-together segments of the ball's cover had been flipped outside-in. These laces could cause bounce passes and dribbling to be unpredictable. Eventually a lace-free ball construction method was invented, and this change to the game was endorsed by Naismith (whereas in American football, the lace construction proved to be advantageous for gripping and remains to this day). The first balls made specifically for basketball were brown, and it was only in the late 1950s that Tony Hinkle, searching for a ball that would be more visible to players and spectators alike, introduced the orange ball that is now in common use. Dribbling was not part of the original game except for the \"bounce pass\" to teammates. Passing the ball was the primary means of ball movement. Dribbling was eventually introduced but limited by the asymmetric shape of early balls. Dribbling was common by 1896, with a rule against the double dribble by 1898.\nThe peach baskets were used until 1906 when they were finally replaced by metal hoops with backboards. A further change was soon made, so the ball merely passed through. Whenever a person got the ball in the basket, their team would gain a point. Whichever team got the most points won the game. The baskets were originally nailed to the mezzanine balcony of the playing court, but this proved impractical when spectators in the balcony began to interfere with shots. The backboard was introduced to prevent this interference; it had the additional effect of allowing rebound shots. Naismith's handwritten diaries, discovered by his granddaughter in early 2006, indicate that he was nervous about the new game he had invented, which incorporated rules from a children's game called duck on a rock, as many had failed before it.\nFrank Mahan, one of the players from the original first game, approached Naismith after the Christmas break, in early 1892, asking him what he intended to call his new game. Naismith replied that he had not thought of it because he had been focused on just getting the game started. Mahan suggested that it be called \"Naismith ball\", at which he laughed, saying that a name like that would kill any game. Mahan then said, \"Why not call it basketball?\" Naismith replied, \"We have a basket and a ball, and it seems to me that would be a good name for it.\" The first official game was played in the YMCA gymnasium in Albany, New York, on January 20, 1892, with nine players. The game ended at 1\u20130; the shot was made from , on a court just half the size of a present-day Streetball or National Basketball Association (NBA) court.\nAt the time, soccer was being played with 10 to a team (which was increased to 11). When winter weather got too icy to play soccer, teams were taken indoors, and it was convenient to have them split in half and play basketball with five on each side. By 1897\u201398, teams of five became standard.\nCollege basketball.\nBasketball's early adherents were dispatched to YMCAs throughout the United States, and it quickly spread through the United States and Canada. By 1895, it was well established at several women's high schools. While YMCA was responsible for initially developing and spreading the game, within a decade it discouraged the new sport, as rough play and rowdy crowds began to detract from YMCA's primary mission. However, other amateur sports clubs, colleges, and professional clubs quickly filled the void. In the years before World War I, the Amateur Athletic Union and the Intercollegiate Athletic Association of the United States (forerunner of the NCAA) vied for control over the rules for the game. The first pro league, the National Basketball League, was formed in 1898 to protect players from exploitation and to promote a less rough game. This league only lasted five years.\nJames Naismith was instrumental in establishing college basketball. His colleague C. O. Beamis fielded the first college basketball team just a year after the Springfield YMCA game at the suburban Pittsburgh Geneva College. Naismith himself later coached at the University of Kansas for six years, before handing the reins to renowned coach Forrest \"Phog\" Allen. Naismith's disciple Amos Alonzo Stagg brought basketball to the University of Chicago, while Adolph Rupp, a student of Naismith's at Kansas, enjoyed great success as coach at the University of Kentucky. On February 9, 1895, the first intercollegiate 5-on-5 game was played at Hamline University between Hamline and the School of Agriculture, which was affiliated with the University of Minnesota. The School of Agriculture won in a 9\u20133 game.\nIn 1901, colleges, including the University of Chicago, Columbia University, Cornell University, Dartmouth College, the University of Minnesota, the U.S. Naval Academy, the University of Colorado and Yale University began sponsoring men's games. In 1905, frequent injuries on the football field prompted President Theodore Roosevelt to suggest that colleges form a governing body, resulting in the creation of the Intercollegiate Athletic Association of the United States (IAAUS). In 1910, that body changed its name to the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA). The first Canadian interuniversity basketball game was played at YMCA in Kingston, Ontario on February 6, 1904, when McGill University\u00a0\u2013 Naismith's alma mater\u00a0\u2013 visited Queen's University. McGill won 9\u20137 in overtime; the score was 7\u20137 at the end of regulation play, and a ten-minute overtime period settled the outcome. A good turnout of spectators watched the game.\nThe first men's national championship tournament, the National Association of Intercollegiate Basketball tournament, which still exists as the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA) tournament, was organized in 1937. The first national championship for NCAA teams, the National Invitation Tournament (NIT) in New York, was organized in 1938; the NCAA national tournament began one year later. College basketball was rocked by gambling scandals from 1948 to 1951, when dozens of players from top teams were implicated in game-fixing and point shaving. Partially spurred by an association with cheating, the NIT lost support to the NCAA tournament.\nHigh school basketball.\nBefore widespread school district consolidation, most American high schools were far smaller than their present-day counterparts. During the first decades of the 20th century, basketball quickly became the ideal interscholastic sport due to its modest equipment and personnel requirements. In the days before widespread television coverage of professional and college sports, the popularity of high school basketball was unrivaled in many parts of America. Perhaps the most legendary of high school teams was Indiana's Franklin Wonder Five, which took the nation by storm during the 1920s, dominating Indiana basketball and earning national recognition.\nToday virtually every high school in the United States fields a basketball team in varsity competition. Basketball's popularity remains high, both in rural areas where they carry the identification of the entire community, as well as at some larger schools known for their basketball teams where many players go on to participate at higher levels of competition after graduation. In the 2016\u201317 season, 980,673 boys and girls represented their schools in interscholastic basketball competition, according to the National Federation of State High School Associations. The states of Illinois, Indiana and Kentucky are particularly well known for their residents' devotion to high school basketball, commonly called Hoosier Hysteria in Indiana; the critically acclaimed film \"Hoosiers\" shows high school basketball's depth of meaning to these communities.\n\u2063There is currently no tournament to determine a national high school champion. The most serious effort was the National Interscholastic Basketball Tournament at the University of Chicago from 1917 to 1930. The event was organized by Amos Alonzo Stagg and sent invitations to state champion teams. The tournament started out as a mostly Midwest affair but grew. In 1929 it had 29 state champions. Faced with opposition from the National Federation of State High School Associations and North Central Association of Colleges and Schools that bore a threat of the schools losing their accreditation the last tournament was in 1930. The organizations said they were concerned that the tournament was being used to recruit professional players from the prep ranks. The tournament did not invite minority schools or private/parochial schools.\nThe National Catholic Interscholastic Basketball Tournament ran from 1924 to 1941 at Loyola University. The National Catholic Invitational Basketball Tournament from 1954 to 1978 played at a series of venues, including Catholic University, Georgetown and George Mason. The National Interscholastic Basketball Tournament for Black High Schools was held from 1929 to 1942 at Hampton Institute. The National Invitational Interscholastic Basketball Tournament was held from 1941 to 1967 starting out at Tuskegee Institute. Following a pause during World War II it resumed at Tennessee State College in Nashville. The basis for the champion dwindled after 1954 when \"Brown v. Board of Education\" began an integration of schools. The last tournaments were held at Alabama State College from 1964 to 1967.\nProfessional basketball.\nTeams abounded throughout the 1920s. There were hundreds of men's professional basketball teams in towns and cities all over the United States, and little organization of the professional game. Players jumped from team to team and teams played in armories and smoky dance halls. Leagues came and went. Barnstorming squads such as the Original Celtics and two all-African American teams, the New York Renaissance Five (\"Rens\") and the (still existing) Harlem Globetrotters played up to two hundred games a year on their national tours.\nIn 1946, the Basketball Association of America (BAA) was formed. The first game was played in Toronto, Ontario, Canada between the Toronto Huskies and New York Knickerbockers on November 1, 1946. Three seasons later, in 1949, the BAA merged with the National Basketball League (NBL) to form the National Basketball Association (NBA). By the 1950s, basketball had become a major college sport, thus paving the way for a growth of interest in professional basketball. In 1959, a basketball hall of fame was founded in Springfield, Massachusetts, site of the first game. Its rosters include the names of great players, coaches, referees and people who have contributed significantly to the development of the game. The hall of fame has people who have accomplished many goals in their career in basketball. An upstart organization, the American Basketball Association, emerged in 1967 and briefly threatened the NBA's dominance until the ABA-NBA merger in 1976. Today the NBA is the top professional basketball league in the world in terms of popularity, salaries, talent, and level of competition.\nThe NBA has featured many famous players, including George Mikan, the first dominating \"big man\"; ball-handling wizard Bob Cousy and defensive genius Bill Russell of the Boston Celtics; charismatic center Wilt Chamberlain, who originally played for the barnstorming Harlem Globetrotters; all-around stars Oscar Robertson and Jerry West; more recent big men Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Shaquille O'Neal, Hakeem Olajuwon and Karl Malone; playmakers John Stockton, Isiah Thomas and Steve Nash; crowd-pleasing forwards Julius Erving and Charles Barkley; European stars Dirk Nowitzki, Pau Gasol, Nikola Joki\u0107 and Tony Parker; Latin American stars Manu Ginobili, more recent superstars, Allen Iverson, Kobe Bryant, Tim Duncan, LeBron James, Stephen Curry, Giannis Antetokounmpo, etc.; and the three players who many credit with ushering the professional game to its highest level of popularity during the 1980s and 1990s: Larry Bird, Earvin \"Magic\" Johnson, and Michael Jordan.\nIn 2001, the NBA formed a developmental league, the National Basketball Development League (later known as the NBA D-League and then the NBA G League after a branding deal with Gatorade). As of the 2023\u201324 season, the G League has 31 teams.\nInternational basketball.\nFIBA (International Basketball Federation) was formed in 1932 by eight founding nations: Argentina, Czechoslovakia, Greece, Italy, Latvia, Portugal, Romania and Switzerland. At this time, the organization only oversaw amateur players. Its acronym, derived from the French \"F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de Basket-ball Amateur\", was thus \"FIBA\". Men's basketball was first included at the Berlin 1936 Summer Olympics, although a demonstration tournament was held in 1904. The United States defeated Canada in the first final, played outdoors. This competition has usually been dominated by the United States, whose team has won all but three titles. The first of these came in a controversial final game in Munich in 1972 against the Soviet Union, in which the ending of the game was replayed three times until the Soviet Union finally came out on top. In 1950 the first FIBA World Championship for men, now known as the FIBA Basketball World Cup, was held in Argentina. Three years later, the first FIBA World Championship for women, now known as the FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup, was held in Chile. Women's basketball was added to the Olympics in 1976, which were held in Montreal, Quebec, Canada with teams such as the Soviet Union, Brazil and Australia rivaling the American squads.\nIn 1989, FIBA allowed professional NBA players to participate in the Olympics for the first time. Prior to the 1992 Summer Olympics, only European and South American teams were allowed to field professionals in the Olympics. The United States' dominance continued with the introduction of the original Dream Team. In the 2004 Athens Olympics, the United States suffered its first Olympic loss while using professional players, falling to Puerto Rico (in a 19-point loss) and Lithuania in group games, and being eliminated in the semifinals by Argentina. It eventually won the bronze medal defeating Lithuania, finishing behind Argentina and Italy. The Redeem Team, won gold at the 2008 Olympics, and the B-Team, won gold at the 2010 FIBA World Championship in Turkey despite featuring no players from the 2008 squad. The United States continued its dominance as they won gold at the 2012 Olympics, 2014 FIBA World Cup and the 2016 Olympics.\nWorldwide, basketball tournaments are held for boys and girls of all age levels. The global popularity of the sport is reflected in the nationalities represented in the NBA. Players from all six inhabited continents currently play in the NBA. Top international players began coming into the NBA in the mid-1990s, including Croatians Dra\u017een Petrovi\u0107 and Toni Kuko\u010d, Serbian Vlade Divac, Lithuanians Arvydas Sabonis and \u0160ar\u016bnas Mar\u010diulionis, Dutchman Rik Smits and German Detlef Schrempf.\nIn the Philippines, the Philippine Basketball Association's first game was played on April 9, 1975, at the Araneta Coliseum in Cubao, Quezon City, Philippines. It was founded as a \"rebellion\" of several teams from the now-defunct Manila Industrial and Commercial Athletic Association, which was tightly controlled by the Basketball Association of the Philippines (now defunct), the then-FIBA recognized national association. Nine teams from the MICAA participated in the league's first season that opened on April 9, 1975. The NBL is Australia's pre-eminent men's professional basketball league. The league commenced in 1979, playing a winter season (April\u2013September) and did so until the completion of the 20th season in 1998. The 1998\u201399 season, which commenced only months later, was the first season after the shift to the current summer season format (October\u2013April). This shift was an attempt to avoid competing directly against Australia's various football codes. It features 8 teams from around Australia and one in New Zealand. A few players including Luc Longley, Andrew Gaze, Shane Heal, Chris Anstey and Andrew Bogut made it big internationally, becoming poster figures for the sport in Australia. The Women's National Basketball League began in 1981.\nWomen's basketball.\nWomen began to play basketball in the fall of 1892 at Smith College through Senda Berenson, substitute director of the newly opened gymnasium and physical education teacher, after having modified the rules for women. Shortly after Berenson was hired at Smith, she visited Naismith to learn more about the game. Fascinated by the new sport and the values it could teach, she instantly introduced the game as a class exercise and soon after teams were organized. The first women's collegiate basketball game was played on March 21, 1893, when her Smith freshmen and sophomores played against one another. The first official women's interinstitutional game was played later that year between the University of California and the Miss Head's School. In 1899, a committee was established at the Conference of Physical Training in Springfield to draw up general rules for women's basketball. These rules, designed by Berenson, were published in 1899. In 1902 Berenson became the editor of A. G. Spalding's first Women's Basketball Guide. The same year women of Mount Holyoke and Sophie Newcomb College (coached by Clara Gregory Baer), began playing basketball. By 1895, the game had spread to colleges across the country, including Wellesley, Vassar, and Bryn Mawr. The first intercollegiate women's game was on April 4, 1896. Stanford women played Berkeley, 9-on-9, ending in a 2\u20131 Stanford victory.\nWomen's basketball development was more structured than that for men in the early years. In 1905, the executive committee on Basket Ball Rules (National Women's Basketball Committee) was created by the American Physical Education Association. These rules called for six to nine players per team and 11 officials. The International Women's Sports Federation (1924) included a women's basketball competition. 37 women's high school varsity basketball or state tournaments were held by 1925. And in 1926, the Amateur Athletic Union backed the first national women's basketball championship, complete with men's rules. The Edmonton Grads, a touring Canadian women's team based in Edmonton, Alberta, operated between 1915 and 1940. The Grads toured all over North America, and were exceptionally successful. They posted a record of 522 wins and only 20 losses over that span, as they met any team that wanted to challenge them, funding their tours from gate receipts. The Grads also shone on several exhibition trips to Europe, and won four consecutive exhibition Olympics tournaments, in 1924, 1928, 1932, and 1936; however, women's basketball was not an official Olympic sport until 1976. The Grads' players were unpaid, and had to remain single. The Grads' style focused on team play, without overly emphasizing skills of individual players. The first women's AAU All-America team was chosen in 1929. Women's industrial leagues sprang up throughout the United States, producing famous athletes, including Babe Didrikson of the Golden Cyclones, and the All American Red Heads Team, which competed against men's teams, using men's rules. By 1938, the women's national championship changed from a three-court game to two-court game with six players per team.\nThe NBA-backed Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA) began in 1997. Though it had shaky attendance figures, several marquee players (Lisa Leslie, Diana Taurasi, and Candace Parker among others) have helped the league's popularity and level of competition. Other professional women's basketball leagues in the United States, such as the American Basketball League (1996\u201398), have folded in part because of the popularity of the WNBA. The WNBA has been looked at by many as a niche league. However, the league has recently taken steps forward. In June 2007, the WNBA signed a contract extension with ESPN. The new television deal ran from 2009 to 2016. Along with this deal, came the first-ever rights fees to be paid to a women's professional sports league. Over the eight years of the contract, \"millions and millions of dollars\" were \"dispersed to the league's teams.\" In a March 12, 2009, article, NBA commissioner David Stern said that in the bad economy, \"the NBA is far less profitable than the WNBA. We're losing a lot of money among a large number of teams. We're budgeting the WNBA to break even this year.\"\nRules and regulations.\nMeasurements and time limits discussed in this section often vary among tournaments and organizations; international and NBA rules are used in this section.\nThe object of the game is to outscore one's opponents by throwing the ball through the opponents' basket from above while preventing the opponents from doing so on their own. An attempt to score in this way is called a shot. A successful shot is worth two points, or three points if it is taken from beyond the three-point arc from the basket in international games and in NBA games. A one-point shot can be earned when shooting from the foul line after a foul is made. After a team has scored from a field goal or free throw, play is resumed with a throw-in awarded to the non-scoring team taken from a point beyond the endline of the court where the points were scored.\nPlaying regulations.\nGames are played in four quarters of 10 (FIBA) or 12 minutes (NBA). College men's games use two 20-minute halves, college women's games use 10-minute quarters, and most United States high school varsity games use 8-minute quarters; however, this varies from state to state. 15 minutes are allowed for a half-time break under FIBA, NBA, and NCAA rules and 10 minutes in United States high schools. Overtime periods are five minutes in length except for high school, which is four minutes in length. Teams exchange baskets for the second half. The time allowed is actual playing time; the clock is stopped while the play is not active. Therefore, games generally take much longer to complete than the allotted game time, typically about two hours.\nFive players from each team may be on the court at one time. Substitutions are unlimited but can only be done when play is stopped. Teams also have a coach, who oversees the development and strategies of the team, and other team personnel such as assistant coaches, managers, statisticians, doctors and trainers.\nFor both men's and women's teams, a standard uniform consists of a pair of shorts and a jersey with a clearly visible number, unique within the team, printed on both the front and back.\nA limited number of time-outs, clock stoppages requested by a coach (or sometimes mandated in the NBA) for a short meeting with the players, are allowed. They generally last no longer than one minute (100 seconds in the NBA) unless, for televised games, a commercial break is needed.\nThe game is controlled by the officials consisting of the referee (referred to as crew chief in the NBA), one or two umpires (referred to as referees in the NBA) and the table officials. For college, the NBA, and many high schools, there are a total of three referees on the court. The table officials are responsible for keeping track of each team's scoring, timekeeping, individual and team fouls, player substitutions, team possession arrow, and the shot clock.\nEquipment.\nThe only essential equipment in a basketball game is the ball and the court: a flat, rectangular surface with baskets at opposite ends. Competitive levels require the use of more equipment such as clocks, score sheets, scoreboards, alternating possession arrows, and whistle-operated stop-clock systems.\nA regulation basketball court in international games is long and wide. In the NBA and NCAA the court is . Most courts have wood flooring, usually constructed from maple planks running in the same direction as the longer court dimension. The name and logo of the home team is usually painted on or around the center circle.\nThe basket is a steel rim diameter with an attached net affixed to a backboard that measures and one basket is at each end of the court. The white outlined box on the backboard is high and wide. At almost all levels of competition, the top of the rim is exactly above the court and inside the baseline. While variation is possible in the dimensions of the court and backboard, it is considered important for the basket to be of the correct height \u2013 a rim that is off by just a few inches can have an adverse effect on shooting. The net must \"check the ball momentarily as it passes through the basket\" to aid the visual confirmation that the ball went through. The act of checking the ball has the further advantage of slowing down the ball so the rebound does not go as far.\nThe size of the basketball is also regulated. For men, the official ball is in circumference (size 7, or a \"295 ball\") and weighs . If women are playing, the official basketball size is in circumference (size 6, or a \"285 ball\") with a weight of . In 3x3, a formalized version of the halfcourt 3-on-3 game, a dedicated ball with the circumference of a size 6 ball but the weight of a size 7 ball is used in all competitions (men's, women's, and mixed teams).\nViolations.\nThe ball may be advanced toward the basket by being shot, passed between players, thrown, tapped, rolled or dribbled (bouncing the ball while running).\nThe ball must stay within the court; the last team to touch the ball before it travels out of bounds forfeits possession. The ball is out of bounds if it touches a boundary line, or touches any player or object that is out of bounds.\nThere are limits placed on the steps a player may take without dribbling, which commonly results in an infraction known as traveling. Nor may a player stop their dribble and then resume dribbling. A dribble that touches both hands is considered stopping the dribble, giving this infraction the name double dribble. Within a dribble, the player cannot carry the ball by placing their hand on the bottom of the ball; doing so is known as carrying the ball. A team, once having established ball control in the front half of their court, may not return the ball to the backcourt and be the first to touch it. A violation of these rules results in loss of possession.\nThe ball may not be kicked, nor be struck with the fist. For the offense, a violation of these rules results in loss of possession; for the defense, most leagues reset the shot clock and the offensive team is given possession of the ball out of bounds.\nThere are limits imposed on the time taken before progressing the ball past halfway (8 seconds in FIBA and the NBA; 10 seconds in NCAA and high school for both sexes), before attempting a shot (24 seconds in FIBA, the NBA, and U Sports (Canadian universities) play for both sexes, and 30 seconds in NCAA play for both sexes), holding the ball while closely guarded (5 seconds), and remaining in the restricted area known as the free-throw lane, (or the \"key\") (3 seconds). These rules are designed to promote more offense.\nThere are also limits on how players may block an opponent's field goal attempt or help a teammate's field goal attempt. Goaltending is a defender's touching of a ball that is on a downward flight toward the basket, while the related violation of basket interference is the touching of a ball that is on the rim or above the basket, or by a player reaching through the basket from below. Goaltending and basket interference committed by a defender result in awarding the basket to the offense, while basket interference committed by an offensive player results in cancelling the basket if one is scored. The defense gains possession in all cases of goaltending or basket interference.\nFouls.\nAn attempt to unfairly disadvantage an opponent through certain types of physical contact is illegal and is called a personal foul. These are most commonly committed by defensive players; however, they can be committed by offensive players as well. Players who are fouled either receive the ball to pass inbounds again, or receive one or more free throws if they are fouled in the act of shooting, depending on whether the shot was successful. One point is awarded for making a free throw, which is attempted from a line from the basket.\nThe referee is responsible for judging whether contact is illegal, sometimes resulting in controversy. The calling of fouls can vary between games, leagues and referees.\nThere is a second category of fouls called technical fouls, which may be charged for various rules violations including failure to properly record a player in the scorebook, or for unsportsmanlike conduct. These infractions result in one or two free throws, which may be taken by any of the five players on the court at the time. Repeated incidents can result in disqualification. A blatant foul involving physical contact that is either excessive or unnecessary is called an intentional foul (flagrant foul in the NBA). In FIBA and NCAA women's basketball, a foul resulting in ejection is called a disqualifying foul, while in leagues other than the NBA, such a foul is referred to as flagrant.\nIf a team exceeds a certain limit of team fouls in a given period (quarter or half) \u2013 four for NBA, NCAA women's, and international games \u2013 the opposing team is awarded one or two free throws on all subsequent non-shooting fouls for that period, the number depending on the league. In the US college men's game and high school games for both sexes, if a team reaches 7 fouls in a half, the opposing team is awarded one free throw, along with a second shot if the first is made. This is called shooting \"one-and-one\". If a team exceeds 10 fouls in the half, the opposing team is awarded two free throws on all subsequent fouls for the half.\nWhen a team shoots foul shots, the opponents may not interfere with the shooter, nor may they try to regain possession until the last or potentially last free throw is in the air.\nAfter a team has committed a specified number of fouls, the other team is said to be \"in the bonus\". On scoreboards, this is usually signified with an indicator light reading \"Bonus\" or \"Penalty\" with an illuminated directional arrow or dot indicating that team is to receive free throws when fouled by the opposing team. (Some scoreboards also indicate the number of fouls committed.)\nIf a team misses the first shot of a two-shot situation, the opposing team must wait for the completion of the second shot before attempting to reclaim possession of the ball and continuing play.\nIf a player is fouled while attempting a shot and the shot is unsuccessful, the player is awarded a number of free throws equal to the value of the attempted shot. A player fouled while attempting a regular two-point shot thus receives two shots, and a player fouled while attempting a three-point shot receives three shots.\nIf a player is fouled while attempting a shot and the shot is successful, typically the player will be awarded one additional free throw for one point. In combination with a regular shot, this is called a \"three-point play\" or \"four-point play\" (or more colloquially, an \"and one\") because of the basket made at the time of the foul (2 or 3 points) and the additional free throw (1 point).\nCommon techniques and practices.\nPositions.\nAlthough the rules do not specify any positions whatsoever, they have evolved as part of basketball. During the early years of basketball's evolution, two guards, two forwards, and one center were used. In more recent times specific positions evolved, but the current trend, advocated by many top coaches including Mike Krzyzewski, is towards positionless basketball, where big players are free to shoot from outside and dribble if their skill allows it. Popular descriptions of positions include:\nPoint guard (often called the \"1\") : usually the fastest player on the team, organizes the team's offense by controlling the ball and making sure that it gets to the right player at the right time.\nShooting guard (the \"2\") : creates a high volume of shots on offense, mainly long-ranged; and guards the opponent's best perimeter player on defense.\nSmall forward (the \"3\") : often primarily responsible for scoring points via cuts to the basket and dribble penetration; on defense seeks rebounds and steals, but sometimes plays more actively.\nPower forward (the \"4\"): plays offensively often with their back to the basket; on defense, plays under the basket (in a zone defense) or against the opposing power forward (in man-to-man defense).\nCenter (the \"5\"): uses height and size to score (on offense), to protect the basket closely (on defense), or to rebound.\nThe above descriptions are flexible. For most teams today, the shooting guard and small forward have very similar responsibilities and are often called the wings, as do the power forward and center, who are often called post players. While most teams describe two players as guards, two as forwards, and one as a center, on some occasions teams choose to call them by different designations.\nStrategy.\nThere are two main defensive strategies: \"zone defense\" and \"man-to-man defense\". In a zone defense, each player is assigned to guard a specific area of the court. Zone defenses often allow the defense to double team the ball, a maneuver known as a trap. In a man-to-man defense, each defensive player guards a specific opponent. \nOffensive plays are more varied, normally involving planned passes and movement by players without the ball. A quick movement by an offensive player without the ball to gain an advantageous position is known as a \"cut\". A legal attempt by an offensive player to stop an opponent from guarding a teammate, by standing in the defender's way such that the teammate cuts next to him, is a \"screen\" or \"pick\". The two plays are combined in the \"pick and roll\", in which a player sets a pick and then \"rolls\" away from the pick towards the basket. Screens and cuts are very important in offensive plays; these allow the quick passes and teamwork, which can lead to a successful basket. Teams almost always have several offensive plays planned to ensure their movement is not predictable. On court, the point guard is usually responsible for indicating which play will occur.\nShooting.\nShooting is the act of attempting to score points by throwing the ball through the basket, methods varying with players and situations.\nTypically, a player faces the basket with both feet facing the basket. A player will rest the ball on the fingertips of the dominant hand (the shooting arm) slightly above the head, with the other hand supporting the side of the ball. The ball is usually shot by jumping (though not always) and extending the shooting arm. The shooting arm, fully extended with the wrist fully bent, is held stationary for a moment following the release of the ball, known as a \"follow-through\". Players often try to put a steady backspin on the ball to absorb its impact with the rim. The ideal trajectory of the shot is somewhat controversial, but generally a proper arc is recommended. Players may shoot directly into the basket or may use the backboard to redirect the ball into the basket.\nThe two most common shots that use the above described setup are the \"set shot\" and the \"jump shot\". Both are preceded by a crouching action which preloads the muscles and increases the power of the shot. In a set shot, the shooter straightens up and throws from a standing position with neither foot leaving the floor; this is typically used for free throws. For a jump shot, the throw is taken in mid-air with the ball being released near the top of the jump. This provides much greater power and range, and it also allows the player to elevate over the defender. Failure to release the ball before the feet return to the floor is considered a traveling violation.\nAnother common shot is called the \"layup\". This shot requires the player to be in motion toward the basket, and to \"lay\" the ball \"up\" and into the basket, typically off the backboard (the backboard-free, underhand version is called a \"finger roll\"). The most crowd-pleasing and typically highest-percentage accuracy shot is the \"slam dunk\", in which the player jumps very high and throws the ball downward, through the basket while touching it.\nAnother shot that is less common than the layup, is the \"circus shot\". The circus shot is a low-percentage shot that is flipped, heaved, scooped, or flung toward the hoop while the shooter is off-balance, airborne, falling down or facing away from the basket. A back-shot is a shot taken when the player is facing away from the basket, and may be shot with the dominant hand, or both; but there is a very low chance that the shot will be successful.\nA shot that misses both the rim and the backboard completely is referred to as an \"air ball\". A particularly bad shot, or one that only hits the backboard, is jocularly called a brick. The \"hang time\" is the length of time a player stays in the air after jumping, either to make a slam dunk, layup or jump shot.\nRebounding.\nThe objective of rebounding is to successfully gain possession of the basketball after a missed field goal or free throw, as it rebounds from the hoop or backboard. This plays a major role in the game, as most possessions end when a team misses a shot. There are two categories of rebounds: offensive rebounds, in which the ball is recovered by the offensive side and does not change possession, and defensive rebounds, in which the defending team gains possession of the loose ball. The majority of rebounds are defensive, as the team on defense tends to be in better position to recover missed shots; for example, about 75% of rebounds in the NBA are defensive.\nPassing.\nA pass is a method of moving the ball between players. Most passes are accompanied by a step forward to increase power and are followed through with the hands to ensure accuracy.\nA staple pass is the \"chest pass\". The ball is passed directly from the passer's chest to the receiver's chest. A proper chest pass involves an outward snap of the thumbs to add velocity and leaves the defence little time to react.\nAnother type of pass is the \"bounce pass\". Here, the passer bounces the ball crisply about two-thirds of the way from his own chest to the receiver. The ball strikes the court and bounces up toward the receiver. The bounce pass takes longer to complete than the chest pass, but it is also harder for the opposing team to intercept (kicking the ball deliberately is a violation). Thus, players often use the bounce pass in crowded moments, or to pass around a defender.\nThe \"overhead pass\" is used to pass the ball over a defender. The ball is released while over the passer's head.\nThe \"outlet pass\" occurs after a team gets a defensive rebound. The next pass after the rebound is the \"outlet pass\".\nThe crucial aspect of any good pass is it being difficult to intercept. Good passers can pass the ball with great accuracy and they know exactly where each of their other teammates prefers to receive the ball. A special way of doing this is passing the ball without looking at the receiving teammate. This is called a \"no-look pass\".\nAnother advanced style of passing is the \"behind-the-back pass\", which, as the description implies, involves throwing the ball behind the passer's back to a teammate. Although some players can perform such a pass effectively, many coaches discourage no-look or behind-the-back passes, believing them to be difficult to control and more likely to result in turnovers or violations.\nDribbling.\nDribbling is the act of bouncing the ball continuously with one hand and is a requirement for a player to take steps with the ball. To dribble, a player pushes the ball down towards the ground with the fingertips rather than patting it; this ensures greater control.\nWhen dribbling past an opponent, the dribbler should dribble with the hand farthest from the opponent, making it more difficult for the defensive player to get to the ball. It is therefore important for a player to be able to dribble competently with both hands.\nGood dribblers (or \"ball handlers\") tend to keep their dribbling hand low to the ground, reducing the distance of travel of the ball from the floor to the hand, making it more difficult for the defender to \"steal\" the ball. Good ball handlers frequently dribble behind their backs, between their legs, and switch directions suddenly, making a less predictable dribbling pattern that is more difficult to defend against. This is called a crossover, which is the most effective way to move past defenders while dribbling.\nA skilled player can dribble without watching the ball, using the dribbling motion or peripheral vision to keep track of the ball's location. By not having to focus on the ball, a player can look for teammates or scoring opportunities, as well as avoid the danger of having someone steal the ball away from him/her.\nBlocking.\nA block is performed when, after a shot is attempted, a defender succeeds in altering the shot by touching the ball. In almost all variants of play, it is illegal to touch the ball after it is in the downward path of its arc; this is known as \"goaltending\". It is also illegal under NBA and Men's NCAA basketball to block a shot after it has touched the backboard, or when any part of the ball is directly above the rim. Under international rules it is illegal to block a shot that is in the downward path of its arc or one that has touched the backboard until the ball has hit the rim. After the ball hits the rim, it is again legal to touch it even though it is no longer considered as a block performed.\nTo block a shot, a player has to be able to reach a point higher than where the shot is released. Thus, height can be an advantage in blocking. Players who are taller and playing the power forward or center positions generally record more blocks than players who are shorter and playing the guard positions. However, with good timing and a sufficiently high vertical leap, even shorter players can be effective shot blockers.\nHeight.\nAt the professional level, most male players are above and most women above . Guards, for whom physical coordination and ball-handling skills are crucial, tend to be the smallest players. Almost all forwards in the top men's pro leagues are or taller. Most centers are over tall. According to a survey given to all NBA teams, the average height of all NBA players is just under , with the average weight being close to . The tallest players ever in the NBA were Manute Bol and Gheorghe Mure\u0219an, who were both tall. At , Margo Dydek was the tallest player in the history of the WNBA.\nThe shortest player ever to play in the NBA is Muggsy Bogues at . Other average-height or relatively short players have thrived at the pro level, including Anthony \"Spud\" Webb, who was tall, but had a vertical leap, giving him significant height when jumping. There was also Yuki Kawamura, who stood at 5 ft 8 in (1.73 m), found success with the Japan men's national basketball team, with him averaging 20 points, 3 rebounds, and 7 assists with his team. His success with his national team led him to sign a two-way deal with the Memphis Grizzlies of the NBA. Lastly, Temeka Johnson, who won the WNBA Rookie of the Year Award and a championship with the Phoenix Mercury while standing only . While shorter players are often at a disadvantage in certain aspects of the game, their ability to navigate quickly through crowded areas of the court and steal the ball by reaching low is a strength.\nPlayers regularly inflate their height in high school or college. Many prospects exaggerate their height while in high school or college to make themselves more appealing to coaches and scouts, who prefer taller players. Charles Barkley stated; \"I've been measured at 6\u20135, 6-&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4+3\u20444. But I started in college at 6\u20136.\" Sam Smith, a former writer from the \"Chicago Tribune\", said: \"We sort of know the heights, because after camp, the sheet comes out. But you use that height, and the player gets mad. And then you hear from his agent. Or you file your story with the right height, and the copy desk changes it because they have the 'official' N.B.A. media guide, which is wrong. So you sort of go along with the joke.\"\nSince the 2019\u201320 NBA season heights of NBA players are recorded definitively by measuring players with their shoes off.\nVariations and similar games.\nVariations of basketball are activities based on the game of basketball, using common basketball skills and equipment (primarily the ball and basket). Some variations only have superficial rule changes, while others are distinct games with varying degrees of influence from basketball. Other variations include children's games, contests or activities meant to help players reinforce skills.\nAn earlier version of basketball, played primarily by women and girls, was six-on-six basketball. Horseball is a game played on horseback where a ball is handled and points are scored by shooting it through a high net (approximately 1.5m\u00d71.5m). The sport is like a combination of polo, rugby, and basketball. There is even a form played on donkeys known as Donkey basketball, which has attracted criticism from animal rights groups.\nHalf-court.\nPerhaps the single most common variation of basketball is the half-court game, played in informal settings without referees or strict rules. Only one basket is used, and the ball must be \"taken back\" or \"cleared\" \u2013 passed or dribbled outside the three-point line each time possession of the ball changes from one team to the other. Half-court games require less cardiovascular stamina, since players need not run back and forth a full court. Half-court raises the number of players that can use a court or, conversely, can be played if there is an insufficient number to form full 5-on-5 teams.\nHalf-court basketball is usually played 1-on-1, 2-on-2 or 3-on-3. The last of these variations is gradually gaining official recognition as 3x3, originally known as FIBA 33. It was first tested at the 2007 Asian Indoor Games in Macau and the first official tournaments were held at the 2009 Asian Youth Games and the 2010 Youth Olympics, both in Singapore. The first FIBA 3x3 Youth World Championships were held in Rimini, Italy in 2011, with the first FIBA 3x3 World Championships for senior teams following a year later in Athens. The sport is highly tipped to become an Olympic sport as early as 2016. In the summer of 2017, the BIG3 basketball league, a professional 3x3 half court basketball league that features former NBA players, began. The BIG3 features several rule variants including a four-point field goal.\nOther variations.\nVariations of basketball with their own page or subsection include:\nSpin-offs from basketball that are now separate sports include:\nSocial forms of basketball.\nBasketball as a social and communal sport features environments, rules and demographics different from those seen in professional and televised basketball.\nRecreational basketball.\nBasketball is played widely as an extracurricular, intramural or amateur sport in schools and colleges. Notable institutions of recreational basketball include:\nFantasy basketball.\nFantasy basketball was popularized during the 1990s by ESPN Fantasy Sports, NBA.com, and Yahoo! Fantasy Sports. On the model of fantasy baseball and football, players create fictional teams, select professional basketball players to \"play\" on these teams through a mock draft or trades, then calculate points based on the players' real-world performance.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3922", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3922", "title": "Bicycling/Road", "text": ""}
{"id": "3926", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3926", "title": "Blowfish (disambiguation)", "text": "Blowfish are species of fish in the family Tetraodontidae.\nBlowfish may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "3928", "revid": "48781923", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3928", "title": "Ball", "text": "Round object\nA ball is a round object (usually spherical, but sometimes ovoid) with several uses. It is used in ball games, where the play of the game follows the state of the ball as it is hit, kicked or thrown by players. Balls can also be used for simpler activities, such as catch or juggling. Balls made from hard-wearing materials are used in engineering applications to provide very low friction bearings, known as ball bearings. Black-powder weapons use stone and metal balls as projectiles.\nAlthough many types of balls are today made from rubber, this form was unknown outside the Americas until after the voyages of Columbus. The Spanish were the first Europeans to see the bouncing rubber balls (although solid and not inflated) which were employed most notably in the Mesoamerican ballgame. Balls used in various sports in other parts of the world prior to Columbus were made from other materials such as animal bladders or skins, stuffed with various materials.\nAs balls are one of the most familiar spherical objects to humans, the word \"ball\" may refer to or describe spherical or near-spherical objects. \"Ball\" is used metaphorically sometimes to denote something spherical or spheroid, e.g., armadillos and human beings curl up into a ball, or making a fist into a ball.\nEtymology.\nThe first known use of the word \"ball\" in English in the sense of a globular body that is played with was in 1205 in \"Layamon's Brut, or Chronicle of Britain\" in the phrase, \"\" (\"Some of them drove balls far across the fields.\") The word came from the Middle English \"bal\" (inflected as \"ball-e, -es\"), in turn from Old Norse \"b\u00f6llr\" (pronounced ; compare Old Swedish \"baller\", and Swedish \"boll\") from Proto-Germanic \"ballu-z\" (whence probably Middle High German \"bal, ball-es\", Middle Dutch \"bal\"), a cognate with Old High German \"ballo, pallo\", Middle High German balle from Proto-Germanic \"*ballon\" (weak masculine), and Old High German \"ball\u00e2, pall\u00e2\", Middle High German \"balle\", Proto-Germanic \"*ball\u00f4n\" (weak feminine). No Old English cognate of any of these is known. (The hypothetical corresponding forms in Old English would have been \"beallu, -a, -e\"\u2014compare \"bealluc, ballock\".) If \"ball-\" was native in Germanic, it may have been a cognate with the Latin \"foll-is\" in sense of a \"thing blown up or inflated.\" In the later Middle English spelling \"balle\" the word coincided graphically with the French \"balle\" \"ball\" and \"bale\" which has hence been erroneously assumed to be its source. French \"balle\" (but not \"boule\") is assumed to be of Germanic origin, itself, however. In Ancient Greek the word \u03c0\u03ac\u03bb\u03bb\u03b1 (\"palla\") for \"ball\" is attested besides the word \u03c3\u03c6\u03b1\u03af\u03c1\u03b1 (\"sfa\u00edra\"), \"sphere\".\nHistory.\nSome form of game with a ball is found portrayed on Egyptian monuments. In Homer, Nausicaa was playing at ball with her maidens when Odysseus first saw her in the land of the Phaeacians (Od. vi. 100). And Halios and Laodamas performed before Alcinous and Odysseus with ball play, accompanied with dancing (Od. viii. 370). The most ancient balls in Eurasia have been discovered in Karasahr, China and are 3000 years old. They were made of hair-filled leather.\nAncient Greeks.\nAmong the ancient Greeks, games with balls (\u03c3\u03c6\u03b1\u1fd6\u03c1\u03b1\u03b9) were regarded as a useful subsidiary to the more violent athletic exercises, as a means of keeping the body supple, and rendering it graceful, but were generally left to boys and girls. Of regular rules for the playing of ball games, little trace remains, if there were any such. The names in Greek for various forms, which have come down to us in such works as the \u1f48\u03bd\u03bf\u03bc\u03b1\u03c3\u03c4\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc\u03bd of Julius Pollux, imply little or nothing of such; thus, \u1f00\u03c0\u03cc\u03c1\u03c1\u03b1\u03be\u03b9\u03c2 (\"aporraxis\") only means the putting of the ball on the ground with the open hand, \u03bf\u1f50\u03c1\u03b1\u03bd\u03af\u03b1 (\"ourania\"), the flinging of the ball in the air to be caught by two or more players; \u03c6\u03b1\u03b9\u03bd\u03af\u03bd\u03b4\u03b1 (\"phaininda\") would seem to be a game of catch played by two or more, where feinting is used as a test of quickness and skill. Pollux (i. x. 104) mentions a game called episkyros (\u1f10\u03c0\u03af\u03c3\u03ba\u03c5\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2), which has often been looked on as the origin of football. It seems to have been played by two sides, arranged in lines; how far there was any form of \"goal\" seems uncertain. It was impossible to produce a ball that was perfectly spherical; children usually made their own balls by inflating pig's bladders and heating them in the ashes of a fire to make them rounder, although Plato (fl. 420s BC \u2013 340s BC) described \"balls which have leather coverings in twelve pieces\".\nAncient Romans.\nAmong the Romans, ball games were looked upon as an adjunct to the bath, and were graduated to the age and health of the bathers, and usually a place (sphaeristerium) was set apart for them in the baths (thermae). There appear to have been three types or sizes of ball, the pila, or small ball, used in catching games, the paganica, a heavy ball stuffed with feathers, and the follis, a leather ball filled with air, the largest of the three. This was struck from player to player, who wore a kind of gauntlet on the arm. There was a game known as trigon, played by three players standing in the form of a triangle, and played with the follis, and also one known as harpastum, which seems to imply a \"scrimmage\" among several players for the ball. These games are known to us through the Romans, though the names are Greek.\nModern ball games.\nThe various modern games played with a ball or balls and subject to rules are treated under their various names, such as polo, cricket, football, etc.\nPhysics.\nIn sports, many modern balls are pressurized. Some are pressurized at the factory (e.g. tennis, squash) and others are pressurized by users (e.g. volleyball, basketball, football). Almost all pressurized balls gradually leak air. If the ball is factory pressurized, there is usually a rule about whether the ball retains sufficient pressure to remain playable. Depressurized balls lack bounce and are often termed \"dead\". In extreme cases, a dead ball becomes flaccid. If the ball is pressured on use, there are generally rules about how the ball is pressurized before the match, and when (or whether) the ball can be repressurized or replaced.\nDue to the ideal gas law, ball pressure is a function of temperature, generally tracking ambient conditions. Softer balls that are struck hard (especially squash balls) increase in temperature due to inelastic collision.\nOn the contrary, in certain sports ball is solid, some with uniform material (e.g. most hockey variations, lacrosse), others with different layered materials (e.g. baseball, cricket). Finally, some sports use hollow ones (e.g. sepaktakraw, pickleball, floorball).\nIn outdoor sports, wet balls play differently than dry balls. In indoor sports, balls may become damp due to hand sweat. Any form of humidity or dampness will affect a ball's surface friction, which will alter a player's ability to impart spin on the ball. The action required to apply spin to a ball is governed by the physics of angular momentum. Spinning balls travelling through air (technically a fluid) will experience the Magnus effect, which can produce lateral deflections in addition to the normal up-down curvature induced by a combination of wind resistance and gravity.\nSpecifications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sticky table start/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; The dictionary definition of \"ball\" at Wiktionary"}
{"id": "3931", "revid": "18779361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3931", "title": "Binary relation", "text": "Relationship between elements of two sets\nIn mathematics, a binary relation associates some elements of one set called the \"domain\" with some elements of another set (possibly the same) called the \"codomain\". Precisely, a binary relation over sets formula_1 and formula_2 is a set of ordered pairs formula_3, where formula_4 is an element of formula_1 and formula_6 is an element of formula_2. It encodes the common concept of relation: an element formula_4 is \"related\" to an element formula_6, if and only if the pair formula_3 belongs to the set of ordered pairs that defines the binary relation.\nAn example of a binary relation is the \"divides\" relation over the set of prime numbers formula_11 and the set of integers formula_12, in which each prime formula_13 is related to each integer formula_14 that is a multiple of formula_13, but not to an integer that is not a multiple of formula_13. In this relation, for instance, the prime number formula_17 is related to numbers such as formula_18, formula_19, formula_20, formula_21, but not to formula_22 or formula_23, just as the prime number formula_24 is related to formula_19, formula_20, and formula_23, but not to formula_28 or formula_29.\nA binary relation is called a homogeneous relation when formula_30. A binary relation is also called a \"heterogeneous relation\" when it is not necessary that formula_30.\nBinary relations, and especially homogeneous relations, are used in many branches of mathematics to model a wide variety of concepts. These include, among others:\nA function may be defined as a binary relation that meets additional constraints. Binary relations are also heavily used in computer science.\nA binary relation over sets formula_1 and formula_2 can be identified with an element of the power set of the Cartesian product formula_34 Since a powerset is a lattice for set inclusion (formula_35), relations can be manipulated using set operations (union, intersection, and complementation) and algebra of sets. \nIn some systems of axiomatic set theory, relations are extended to classes, which are generalizations of sets. This extension is needed for, among other things, modeling the concepts of \"is an element of\" or \"is a subset of\" in set theory, without running into logical inconsistencies such as Russell's paradox.\nA binary relation is the most studied special case formula_36 of an formula_37-ary relation over sets formula_38, which is a subset of the Cartesian product formula_39\nDefinition.\nGiven sets formula_1 and formula_2, the Cartesian product formula_42 is defined as formula_43 and its elements are called \"ordered pairs\".\nA binary relation formula_44 over sets formula_1 and formula_2 is a subset of formula_34 The set formula_1 is called the domain or set of departure of formula_44, and the set formula_2 the codomain or set of destination of formula_44. In order to specify the choices of the sets formula_1 and formula_2, some authors define a binary relation or correspondence as an ordered triple formula_54, where formula_55 is a subset of formula_42 called the graph of the binary relation. The statement formula_57 reads \"formula_4 is formula_44-related to formula_6\" and is denoted by formula_61. The domain of definition or active domain of formula_44 is the set of all formula_4 such that formula_61 for at least one formula_6. The \"codomain of definition\", active codomain, image or range of formula_44 is the set of all formula_6 such that formula_61 for at least one formula_4. The field of formula_44 is the union of its domain of definition and its codomain of definition.\nWhen formula_71 a binary relation is called a homogeneous relation (or endorelation). To emphasize the fact that formula_1 and formula_2 are allowed to be different, a binary relation is also called a heterogeneous relation. The prefix \"hetero\" is from the Greek \u1f15\u03c4\u03b5\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2 (\"heteros\", \"other, another, different\").\nA heterogeneous relation has been called a rectangular relation, suggesting that it does not have the square-like symmetry of a homogeneous relation on a set where formula_74 Commenting on the development of binary relations beyond homogeneous relations, researchers wrote, \"...\u00a0a variant of the theory has evolved that treats relations from the very beginning as heterogeneous or rectangular, i.e. as relations where the normal case is that they are relations between different sets.\"\nThe terms \"correspondence\", dyadic relation and two-place relation are synonyms for binary relation, though some authors use the term \"binary relation\" for any subset of a Cartesian product formula_42 without reference to formula_1 and formula_2, and reserve the term \"correspondence\" for a binary relation with reference to formula_1 and formula_2.\nIn a binary relation, the order of the elements is important; if formula_80 then formula_81 can be true or false independently of formula_61. For example, formula_24 divides formula_23, but formula_23 does not divide formula_24.\nOperations.\nUnion.\nIf formula_44 and formula_88 are binary relations over sets formula_1 and formula_2 then formula_91 is the union relation of formula_44 and formula_88 over formula_1 and formula_2.\nThe identity element is the empty relation. For example, formula_96 is the union of &lt; and =, and formula_97 is the union of &gt; and =.\nIntersection.\nIf formula_44 and formula_88 are binary relations over sets formula_1 and formula_2 then formula_102 is the intersection relation of formula_44 and formula_88 over formula_1 and formula_2.\nThe identity element is the universal relation. For example, the relation \"is divisible by 6\" is the intersection of the relations \"is divisible by 3\" and \"is divisible by 2\".\nComposition.\nIf formula_44 is a binary relation over sets formula_1 and formula_2, and formula_88 is a binary relation over sets formula_2 and formula_112 then formula_113 (also denoted by formula_114) is the composition relation of formula_44 and formula_88 over formula_1 and formula_112.\nThe identity element is the identity relation. The order of formula_44 and formula_88 in the notation formula_121 used here agrees with the standard notational order for composition of functions. For example, the composition (is parent of)formula_122(is mother of) yields (is maternal grandparent of), while the composition (is mother of)formula_122(is parent of) yields (is grandmother of). For the former case, if formula_4 is the parent of formula_6 and formula_6 is the mother of formula_14, then formula_4 is the maternal grandparent of formula_14.\nConverse.\nIf formula_44 is a binary relation over sets formula_1 and formula_2 then formula_133 is the converse relation, also called inverse relation, of formula_44 over formula_2 and formula_1.\nFor example, formula_137 is the converse of itself, as is formula_138, and formula_139 and formula_140 are each other's converse, as are formula_96 and formula_142 A binary relation is equal to its converse if and only if it is symmetric.\nComplement.\nIf formula_44 is a binary relation over sets formula_1 and formula_2 then formula_146 (also denoted by formula_147) is the complementary relation of formula_44 over formula_1 and formula_2.\nFor example, formula_137 and formula_138 are each other's complement, as are formula_35 and formula_154, formula_155 and formula_156, formula_157 and formula_158, and for total orders also formula_139 and formula_97, and formula_140 and formula_96.\nThe complement of the converse relation formula_163 is the converse of the complement: formula_164\nIf formula_71 the complement has the following properties:\nRestriction.\nIf formula_44 is a binary homogeneous relation over a set formula_1 and formula_88 is a subset of formula_1 then formula_170 is the of formula_44 to formula_88 over formula_1.\nIf formula_44 is a binary relation over sets formula_1 and formula_2 and if formula_88 is a subset of formula_1 then formula_179 is the of formula_44 to formula_88 over formula_1 and formula_2.\nIf a relation is reflexive, irreflexive, symmetric, antisymmetric, asymmetric, transitive, total, trichotomous, a partial order, total order, strict weak order, total preorder (weak order), or an equivalence relation, then so too are its restrictions.\nHowever, the transitive closure of a restriction is a subset of the restriction of the transitive closure, i.e., in general not equal. For example, restricting the relation \"formula_4 is parent of formula_6\" to females yields the relation \"formula_4 is mother of the woman formula_6\"; its transitive closure does not relate a woman with her paternal grandmother. On the other hand, the transitive closure of \"is parent of\" is \"is ancestor of\"; its restriction to females does relate a woman with her paternal grandmother.\nAlso, the various concepts of completeness (not to be confused with being \"total\") do not carry over to restrictions. For example, over the real numbers a property of the relation formula_96 is that every non-empty subset formula_189 with an upper bound in formula_190 has a least upper bound (also called supremum) in formula_191 However, for the rational numbers this supremum is not necessarily rational, so the same property does not hold on the restriction of the relation formula_96 to the rational numbers.\nA binary relation formula_44 over sets formula_1 and formula_2 is said to be a relation formula_88 over formula_1 and formula_2, written formula_199 if formula_44 is a subset of formula_88, that is, for all formula_202 and formula_203 if formula_61, then formula_205. If formula_44 is contained in formula_88 and formula_88 is contained in formula_44, then formula_44 and formula_88 are called equal written formula_212. If formula_44 is contained in formula_88 but formula_88 is not contained in formula_44, then formula_44 is said to be than formula_88, written formula_219 For example, on the rational numbers, the relation formula_140 is smaller than formula_97, and equal to the composition formula_222.\nMatrix representation.\nBinary relations over sets formula_1 and formula_2 can be represented algebraically by logical matrices indexed by formula_1 and formula_2 with entries in the Boolean semiring (addition corresponds to OR and multiplication to AND) where matrix addition corresponds to union of relations, matrix multiplication corresponds to composition of relations (of a relation over formula_1 and formula_2 and a relation over formula_2 and formula_112), the Hadamard product corresponds to intersection of relations, the zero matrix corresponds to the empty relation, and the matrix of ones corresponds to the universal relation. Homogeneous relations (when formula_30) form a matrix semiring (indeed, a matrix semialgebra over the Boolean semiring) where the identity matrix corresponds to the identity relation.\nTypes of binary relations.\nSome important types of binary relations formula_44 over sets formula_1 and formula_2 are listed below.\nUniqueness properties:\nTotality properties (only definable if the domain formula_1 and codomain formula_2 are specified):\nUniqueness and totality properties (only definable if the domain formula_1 and codomain formula_2 are specified):\nIf relations over proper classes are allowed:\nSets versus classes.\nCertain mathematical \"relations\", such as \"equal to\", \"subset of\", and \"member of\", cannot be understood to be binary relations as defined above, because their domains and codomains cannot be taken to be sets in the usual systems of axiomatic set theory. For example, to model the general concept of \"equality\" as a binary relation formula_137, take the domain and codomain to be the \"class of all sets\", which is not a set in the usual set theory.\nIn most mathematical contexts, references to the relations of equality, membership and subset are harmless because they can be understood implicitly to be restricted to some set in the context. The usual work-around to this problem is to select a \"large enough\" set formula_291, that contains all the objects of interest, and work with the restriction formula_292 instead of formula_137. Similarly, the \"subset of\" relation formula_35 needs to be restricted to have domain and codomain formula_295 (the power set of a specific set formula_291): the resulting set relation can be denoted by formula_297 Also, the \"member of\" relation needs to be restricted to have domain formula_291 and codomain formula_295 to obtain a binary relation formula_300 that is a set. Bertrand Russell has shown that assuming formula_157 to be defined over all sets leads to a contradiction in naive set theory, see \"Russell's paradox\".\nAnother solution to this problem is to use a set theory with proper classes, such as NBG or Morse\u2013Kelley set theory, and allow the domain and codomain (and so the graph) to be proper classes: in such a theory, equality, membership, and subset are binary relations without special comment. (A minor modification needs to be made to the concept of the ordered triple formula_54, as normally a proper class cannot be a member of an ordered tuple; or of course one can identify the binary relation with its graph in this context.) With this definition one can for instance define a binary relation over every set and its power set.\nHomogeneous relation.\nA homogeneous relation over a set formula_1 is a binary relation over formula_1 and itself, i.e. it is a subset of the Cartesian product formula_305 It is also simply called a (binary) relation over formula_1.\nA homogeneous relation formula_44 over a set formula_1 may be identified with a directed simple graph permitting loops, where formula_1 is the vertex set and formula_44 is the edge set (there is an edge from a vertex formula_4 to a vertex formula_6 if and only if formula_61).\nThe set of all homogeneous relations formula_314 over a set formula_1 is the power set formula_316 which is a Boolean algebra augmented with the involution of mapping of a relation to its converse relation. Considering composition of relations as a binary operation on formula_314, it forms a semigroup with involution.\nSome important properties that a homogeneous relation formula_44 over a set formula_1 may have are:\nA partial order is a relation that is reflexive, antisymmetric, and transitive. A strict partial order is a relation that is irreflexive, asymmetric, and transitive. A total order is a relation that is reflexive, antisymmetric, transitive and connected. A strict total order is a relation that is irreflexive, asymmetric, transitive and connected.\nAn equivalence relation is a relation that is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive.\nFor example, \"formula_4 divides formula_6\" is a partial, but not a total order on natural numbers formula_357 \"formula_358\" is a strict total order on formula_357 and \"formula_4 is parallel to formula_6\" is an equivalence relation on the set of all lines in the Euclidean plane.\nAll operations defined in section also apply to homogeneous relations.\nBeyond that, a homogeneous relation over a set formula_1 may be subjected to closure operations like:\nCalculus of relations.\nDevelopments in algebraic logic have facilitated usage of binary relations. The calculus of relations includes the algebra of sets, extended by composition of relations and the use of converse relations. The inclusion formula_199 meaning that formula_370 implies formula_371, sets the scene in a lattice of relations. But since formula_372 the inclusion symbol is superfluous. Nevertheless, composition of relations and manipulation of the operators according to Schr\u00f6der rules, provides a calculus to work in the power set of formula_373\nIn contrast to homogeneous relations, the composition of relations operation is only a partial function. The necessity of matching target to source of composed relations has led to the suggestion that the study of heterogeneous relations is a chapter of category theory as in the category of sets, except that the morphisms of this category are relations. The objects of the category Rel are sets, and the relation-morphisms compose as required in a category.\nInduced concept lattice.\nBinary relations have been described through their induced concept lattices:\nA concept formula_374 satisfies two properties:\nFor a given relation formula_379 the set of concepts, enlarged by their joins and meets, forms an \"induced lattice of concepts\", with inclusion formula_380 forming a preorder.\nThe MacNeille completion theorem (1937) (that any partial order may be embedded in a complete lattice) is cited in a 2013 survey article \"Decomposition of relations on concept lattices\". The decomposition is\n formula_381, where formula_382 and formula_383 are functions, called mappings or left-total, functional relations in this context. The \"induced concept lattice is isomorphic to the cut completion of the partial order formula_384 that belongs to the minimal decomposition formula_385 of the relation formula_44.\"\nParticular cases are considered below: formula_384 total order corresponds to Ferrers type, and formula_384 identity corresponds to difunctional, a generalization of equivalence relation on a set.\nRelations may be ranked by the Schein rank which counts the number of concepts necessary to cover a relation. Structural analysis of relations with concepts provides an approach for data mining.\nParticular relations.\nDifunctional.\nThe idea of a difunctional relation is to partition objects by distinguishing attributes, as a generalization of the concept of an equivalence relation. One way this can be done is with an intervening set formula_398 of indicators. The partitioning relation formula_399 is a composition of relations using functional relations formula_400 Jacques Riguet named these relations difunctional since the composition formula_401 involves functional relations, commonly called \"partial functions\".\nIn 1950 Riguet showed that such relations satisfy the inclusion:\n formula_402\nIn automata theory, the term rectangular relation has also been used to denote a difunctional relation. This terminology recalls the fact that, when represented as a logical matrix, the columns and rows of a difunctional relation can be arranged as a block matrix with rectangular blocks of ones on the (asymmetric) main diagonal. More formally, a relation formula_44 on formula_42 is difunctional if and only if it can be written as the union of Cartesian products formula_405, where the formula_406 are a partition of a subset of formula_1 and the formula_408 likewise a partition of a subset of formula_2.\nUsing the notation formula_410, a difunctional relation can also be characterized as a relation formula_44 such that wherever formula_412 and formula_413 have a non-empty intersection, then these two sets coincide; formally formula_414 implies formula_415\nIn 1997 researchers found \"utility of binary decomposition based on difunctional dependencies in database management.\" Furthermore, difunctional relations are fundamental in the study of bisimulations.\nIn the context of homogeneous relations, a partial equivalence relation is difunctional.\nFerrers type.\nA strict order on a set is a homogeneous relation arising in order theory.\nIn 1951 Jacques Riguet adopted the ordering of an integer partition, called a Ferrers diagram, to extend ordering to binary relations in general.\nThe corresponding logical matrix of a general binary relation has rows which finish with a sequence of ones. Thus the dots of a Ferrer's diagram are changed to ones and aligned on the right in the matrix.\nAn algebraic statement required for a Ferrers type relation R is\nformula_416\nIf any one of the relations formula_417 is of Ferrers type, then all of them are.\nContact.\nSuppose formula_418 is the power set of formula_291, the set of all subsets of formula_291. Then a relation formula_383 is a contact relation if it satisfies three properties: \nThe set membership relation, formula_425 \"is an element of\", satisfies these properties so formula_426 is a contact relation. The notion of a general contact relation was introduced by Georg Aumann in 1970.\nIn terms of the calculus of relations, sufficient conditions for a contact relation include\nformula_427 \nwhere formula_428 is the converse of set membership (formula_157).\nPreorder R\\R.\nEvery relation formula_44 generates a preorder formula_431 which is the left residual. In terms of converse and complements, formula_432 Forming the diagonal of formula_433, the corresponding row of formula_434 and column of formula_435 will be of opposite logical values, so the diagonal is all zeros. Then \n formula_436, so that formula_431 is a reflexive relation.\nTo show transitivity, one requires that formula_438 Recall that formula_439 is the largest relation such that formula_440 Then \n formula_441\n formula_442 (repeat)\n formula_443 (Schr\u00f6der's rule)\n formula_444 (complementation)\n formula_445 (definition)\nThe inclusion relation \u03a9 on the power set of formula_446 can be obtained in this way from the membership relation formula_157 on subsets of formula_446:\n formula_449\nFringe of a relation.\nGiven a relation formula_44, its fringe is the sub-relation defined as\nformula_451\nWhen formula_44 is a partial identity relation, difunctional, or a block diagonal relation, then formula_453. Otherwise the formula_454 operator selects a boundary sub-relation described in terms of its logical matrix: formula_455 is the side diagonal if formula_44 is an upper right triangular linear order or strict order. formula_455 is the block fringe if formula_44 is irreflexive (formula_459) or upper right block triangular. formula_455 is a sequence of boundary rectangles when formula_44 is of Ferrers type.\nOn the other hand, formula_462 when formula_44 is a dense, linear, strict order.\nMathematical heaps.\nGiven two sets formula_291 and formula_418, the set of binary relations between them formula_466 can be equipped with a ternary operation formula_467 where formula_468 denotes the converse relation of formula_469. In 1953 Viktor Wagner used properties of this ternary operation to define semiheaps, heaps, and generalized heaps. The contrast of heterogeneous and homogeneous relations is highlighted by these definitions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is a pleasant symmetry in Wagner's work between heaps, semiheaps, and generalised heaps on the one hand, and groups, semigroups, and generalised groups on the other. Essentially, the various types of semiheaps appear whenever we consider binary relations (and partial one-one mappings) between \"different\" sets formula_291 and formula_418, while the various types of semigroups appear in the case where formula_472.\u2014\u200a\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3933", "revid": "49440800", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3933", "title": "Braille", "text": "Tactile writing system\nBraille ( , ) is a tactile writing system used by blind or visually impaired people. It can be read either on embossed paper or by using refreshable braille displays that connect to computers and smartphone devices. Braille can be written using a slate and stylus, a braille writer, an electronic braille notetaker or with the use of a computer connected to a braille embosser. For blind readers, braille is an independent writing system, rather than a code of printed orthography.\nBraille is named after its creator, Louis Braille, a Frenchman who lost his sight as a result of a childhood accident. In 1824, at the age of fifteen, he developed the braille code based on the French alphabet as an improvement on night writing. He published his system, which subsequently included musical notation, in 1829. The second revision, published in 1837, was the first binary form of writing developed in the modern era.\nBraille characters are formed using a combination of six raised dots arranged in a 3\u00a0\u00d7\u00a02 matrix, called the braille cell. The number and arrangement of these dots distinguishes one character from another. Since the various braille alphabets originated as transcription codes for printed writing, the mappings (sets of character designations) vary from language to language, and even within one; in English braille there are three levels: \"uncontracted\"\u00a0\u2013 a letter-by-letter transcription used for basic literacy; \"contracted\"\u00a0\u2013 an addition of abbreviations and contractions used as a space-saving mechanism; and \"grade\u00a03\"\u00a0\u2013 various non-standardized personal stenographies that are less commonly used.\nIn addition to braille text (letters, punctuation, contractions), it is also possible to create embossed illustrations and graphs, with the lines either solid or made of series of dots, arrows, and bullets that are larger than braille dots. A full braille cell includes six raised dots arranged in two columns, each column having three dots. The dot positions are identified by numbers from one to six. There are 64 possible combinations, including no dots at all for a word space. Dot configurations can be used to represent a letter, digit, punctuation mark, or even a word.\nEarly braille education is crucial to literacy, education and employment among the blind. Despite the evolution of new technologies, including screen reader software that reads information aloud, braille provides blind people with access to spelling, punctuation and other aspects of written language less accessible through audio alone.\nWhile some have suggested that audio-based technologies will decrease the need for braille, technological advancements such as braille displays have continued to make braille more accessible and available. Braille users highlight that braille remains as essential as print is to the sighted.\nHistory.\nBraille was based on a tactile code, now known as night writing, developed by Charles Barbier. (The name \"night writing\" was later given to it when it was considered as a means for soldiers to communicate silently at night and without a light source, but Barbier's writings do not use this term and suggest that it was originally designed as a simpler form of writing and for the visually impaired.) In Barbier's system, sets of 12 embossed dots were used to encode 36 different sounds. Braille identified three major defects of the code: first, the symbols represented phonetic sounds and not letters of the alphabet\u00a0\u2013 thus the code was unable to render the orthography of the words. Second, the 12-dot symbols could not easily fit beneath the pad of the reading finger. This required the reading finger to move in order to perceive the whole symbol, which slowed the reading process. (This was because Barbier's system was based only on the number of dots in each of two 6-dot columns, not the pattern of the dots.) Third, the code did not include symbols for numerals or punctuation. Braille's solution was to use 6-dot cells and to assign a specific pattern to each letter of the alphabet. Braille also developed symbols for representing numerals and punctuation.\nAt first, braille was a one-to-one transliteration of the French alphabet, but soon various abbreviations (contractions) and even logograms were developed, creating a system much more like shorthand.\nToday, there are braille codes for over 133 languages.\nIn English, some variations in the braille codes have traditionally existed among English-speaking countries. In 1991, work to standardize the braille codes used in the English-speaking world began. Unified English Braille (UEB) has been adopted in all seven member countries of the International Council on English Braille (ICEB) as well as Nigeria.\nDerivation.\nBraille is derived from the Latin alphabet, albeit indirectly. In Braille's original system, the dot patterns were assigned to letters according to their position within the alphabetic order of the French alphabet of the time, with accented letters and \"w\" sorted at the end.\nUnlike print, which consists of mostly arbitrary symbols, the braille alphabet follows a logical sequence. The first ten letters of the alphabet, \"a\"\u2013\"j\", use the upper four dot positions: (black dots in the table below). These stand for the ten digits \"1\"\u2013\"9\" and \"0\" in an alphabetic numeral system similar to Greek numerals (as well as derivations of it, including Hebrew numerals, Cyrillic numerals, Abjad numerals, also Hebrew gematria and Greek isopsephy).\nThough the dots are assigned in no obvious order, the cells with the fewest dots are assigned to the first three letters (and lowest digits), \"abc\" = \"123\" (), and to the three vowels in this part of the alphabet, \"aei\" (), whereas the even digits \"4\", \"6\", \"8\", \"0\" () are right angles.\nThe next ten letters, \"k\"\u2013\"t\", are identical to \"a\"\u2013\"j\" respectively, apart from the addition of a dot at position 3 (red dots in the bottom left corners of the cells in the table below): :\nThe next ten letters (the next \"decade\") are the same again, but with dots also at both position 3 and position 6 (green dots in the bottom rows of the cells in the table above). Here \"w\" was left out as it was not part of the official French alphabet in Braille's time; the French order of the decade was \"u v x y z \u00e7 \u00e9 \u00e0 \u00e8 \u00f9\" ().\nThe next ten letters, ending in \"w\", are the same again, except that for this series position 6 (purple dot in the bottom right corner of the cell in the table above) is used without a dot at position 3. In French braille these are the letters \"\u00e2 \u00ea \u00ee \u00f4 \u00fb \u00eb \u00ef \u00fc \u0153 w\" (). \"W\" had been tacked onto the end of 39 letters of the French alphabet to accommodate English.\nThe \"a\"\u2013\"j\" series shifted down by one dot space () is used for punctuation. Letters \"a\" and \"c\" , which only use dots in the top row, were shifted two places for the apostrophe and hyphen: . (These are also the decade diacritics, on the left in the table below, of the second and third decade.)\nIn addition, there are ten patterns that are based on the first two letters () with their dots shifted to the right; these were assigned to non-French letters (\"\u00ec \u00e4 \u00f2\" ), or serve non-letter functions: (superscript; in English the accent mark), (currency prefix), (capital, in English the decimal point), (number sign), (emphasis mark), (symbol prefix).\nThe first four decades are similar in that the numeric sequence is extended by adding the decade dots, whereas in the fifth decade it is extended by shifting it downward.\nOriginally there had been nine decades. The fifth through ninth used dashes as well as dots, but they proved to be impractical to distinguish by touch under normal conditions and were soon abandoned. From the beginning, these additional decades could be substituted with what we now know as the number sign () applied to the earlier decades, though that only caught on for the digits (the old 5th decade being replaced by applied to the 1st decade). The dash occupying the top row of the original sixth decade was simply omitted, producing the modern fifth decade. (See 1829 braille.)\nAssignment.\nHistorically, there have been three principles in assigning the values of a linear script (print) to Braille: Using Louis Braille's original French letter values; reassigning the braille letters according to the sort order of the print alphabet being transcribed; and reassigning the letters to improve the efficiency of writing in braille.\nUnder international consensus, most braille alphabets follow the French sorting order for the 26 letters of the basic Latin alphabet, and there have been attempts at unifying the letters beyond these 26 (see international braille), though differences remain, for example, in German Braille. This unification avoids the chaos of each nation reordering the braille code to match the sorting order of its print alphabet, as happened in Algerian Braille, where braille codes were numerically reassigned to match the order of the Arabic alphabet and bear little relation to the values used in other countries (compare modern Arabic Braille, which uses the French sorting order), and as happened in an early American version of English Braille, where the letters \"w\", \"x\", \"y\", \"z\" were reassigned to match English alphabetical order. A convention sometimes seen for letters beyond the basic 26 is to exploit the physical symmetry of braille patterns iconically, for example, by assigning a reversed \"n\" to \"\u00f1\" or an inverted \"s\" to \"sh\". (See Hungarian Braille and Bharati Braille, which do this to some extent.)\nA third principle was to assign braille codes according to frequency, with the simplest patterns (quickest ones to write with a stylus) assigned to the most frequent letters of the alphabet. Such frequency-based alphabets were used in Germany and the United States in the 19th century (see American Braille), but with the invention of the braille typewriter their advantage disappeared, and none are attested in modern use\u00a0\u2013 they had the disadvantage that the resulting small number of dots in a text interfered with following the alignment of the letters, and consequently made texts more difficult to read than Braille's more arbitrary letter assignment. Finally, there are braille scripts that do not order the codes numerically at all, such as Japanese Braille and Korean Braille, which are based on more abstract principles of syllable composition.\nTexts are sometimes written in a script of eight dots per cell rather than six, enabling them to encode a greater number of symbols. (See Gardner\u2013Salinas braille codes.) Luxembourgish Braille has adopted eight-dot cells for general use; for example, accented letters take the unaccented versions plus dot 8.\nForm.\nBraille was the first writing system with binary encoding. The system as devised by Braille consists of two parts:\nWithin an individual cell, the dot positions are arranged in two columns of three positions. A raised dot can appear in any of the six positions, producing 64 (26) possible patterns, including one in which there are no raised dots. For reference purposes, a pattern is commonly described by listing the positions where dots are raised, the positions being universally numbered, from top to bottom, as 1 to 3 on the left and 4 to 6 on the right. For example, dot pattern 1-3-4 describes a cell with three dots raised, at the top and bottom in the left column and at the top of the right column: that is, the letter \"m\". The lines of horizontal braille text are separated by a space, much like visible printed text, so that the dots of one line can be differentiated from the braille text above and below. Different assignments of braille codes (or code pages) are used to map the character sets of different printed scripts to the six-bit cells. Braille assignments have also been created for mathematical and musical notation. However, because the six-dot braille cell allows only 64 (26) patterns, including space, the characters of a braille script commonly have multiple values, depending on their context. That is, character mapping between print and braille is not one-to-one. For example, the character corresponds in print to both the letter \"d\" and the digit \"4\".\nIn addition to simple encoding, many braille alphabets use contractions to reduce the size of braille texts and to increase reading speed. (See Contracted braille.)\nWriting braille.\nBraille may be produced by hand using a slate and stylus in which each dot is created from the back of the page, writing in mirror image, or it may be produced on a braille typewriter or Perkins Brailler, or an electronic Brailler or braille notetaker. Braille users with access to smartphones may also activate the on-screen braille input keyboard, to type braille symbols on to their device by placing their fingers on to the screen according to the dot configuration of the symbols they wish to form. These symbols are automatically translated into print on the screen. The different tools that exist for writing braille allow the braille user to select the method that is best for a given task. For example, the slate and stylus is a portable writing tool, much like the pen and paper for the sighted. Errors can be erased using a braille eraser or can be overwritten with all six dots (). \"Interpoint\" refers to braille printing that is offset, so that the paper can be embossed on both sides, with the dots on one side appearing between the divots that form the dots on the other.\nUsing a computer or other electronic device, Braille may be produced with a braille embosser (printer) or a refreshable braille display (screen).\nEight-dot braille.\nBraille has been extended to an 8-dot code, particularly for use with braille embossers and refreshable braille displays. In 8-dot braille the additional dots are added at the bottom of the cell, giving a matrix 4 dots high by 2 dots wide. The additional dots are given the numbers 7 (for the lower-left dot) and 8 (for the lower-right dot). Eight-dot braille has the advantages that the casing of each letter is coded in the cell and that every printable ASCII character can be encoded in a single cell. All 256 (28) possible combinations of 8 dots are encoded by the Unicode standard. Braille with six dots is frequently stored as Braille ASCII.\nLetters.\nThe first 25 braille letters, up through the first half of the 3rd decade, transcribe \"a\u2013z\" (skipping \"w\"). In English Braille, the rest of that decade is rounded out with the ligatures \"and, for, of, the,\" and \"with\". Omitting dot 3 from these forms the 4th decade, the ligatures \"ch, gh, sh, th, wh, ed, er, ou, ow\" and the letter \"w\".\nFormatting.\nVarious formatting marks affect the values of the letters that follow them. They have no direct equivalent in print. The most important in English Braille are:\nThat is, is read as capital 'A', and as the digit '1'.\nPunctuation.\nBasic punctuation marks in English Braille include:\n is both the question mark and the opening quotation mark. Its reading depends on whether it occurs before a word or after.\n is used for both opening and closing parentheses. Its placement relative to spaces and other characters determines its interpretation.\nPunctuation varies from language to language. For example, French Braille uses for its question mark and swaps the quotation marks and parentheses (to and ); it uses () for both the period and the decimal point, and the English decimal point () to mark capitalization.\nContractions.\nBraille contractions are words and affixes that are shortened so that they take up fewer cells. In English Braille, for example, the word \"afternoon\" is written with just three letters, \u27e8afn\u27e9, much like stenoscript. There are also several abbreviation marks that create what are effectively logograms. The most common of these is dot 5, which combines with the first letter of words. With the letter \"m\", the resulting word is \"mother\". There are also ligatures (\"contracted\" letters), which are single letters in braille but correspond to more than one letter in print. The letter \"and\", for example, is used to write words with the sequence \"a-n-d\" in them, such as \"grand\".\nPage dimensions.\nMost braille embossers support between 34 and 40 cells per line, and 25 lines per page.\nA manually operated Perkins braille typewriter supports a maximum of 42 cells per line (its margins are adjustable), and typical paper allows 25 lines per page.\nA large interlining Stainsby has 36 cells per line and 18 lines per page.\nAn A4-sized Marburg braille frame, which allows interpoint braille (dots on both sides of the page, offset so they do not interfere with each other), has 30 cells per line and 27 lines per page.\nBraille writing machine.\nA Braille writing machine is a typewriter with six keys that allows the user to write braille on a regular hard copy page.\nThe first Braille typewriter to gain general acceptance was invented by Frank Haven Hall (Superintendent of the Illinois School for the Blind), and was presented to the public in 1892.\nThe Stainsby Brailler, developed by Henry Stainsby in 1903, is a mechanical writer with a sliding carriage that moves over an aluminium plate as it embosses Braille characters. An improved version was introduced around 1933.\nIn 1951 David Abraham, a woodworking teacher at the Perkins School for the Blind, produced a more advanced Braille typewriter, the Perkins Brailler.\nBraille printers or embossers were produced in the 1950s.\nIn 1960 Robert Mann, a teacher in MIT, wrote DOTSYS, a software that allowed automatic braille translation, and another group created an embossing device called \"M.I.T. Braillemboss\". The Mitre Corporation team of Robert Gildea, Jonathan Millen, Reid Gerhart and Joseph Sullivan (now president of Duxbury Systems) developed DOTSYS III, the first braille translator written in a portable programming language. DOTSYS III was developed for the Atlanta Public Schools as a public domain program.\nIn 1991 Ernest Bate developed the Mountbatten Brailler, an electronic machine used to type braille on braille paper, giving it a number of additional features such as word processing, audio feedback and embossing. This version was improved in 2008 with a quiet writer that had an erase key.\nIn 2011 David S. Morgan produced the first SMART Brailler machine, with added text to speech function and allowed digital capture of data entered.\nBraille reading.\nBraille is traditionally read in hardcopy form, such as with paper books written in braille, documents produced in paper braille (such as restaurant menus), and braille labels or public signage. It can also be read on a refreshable braille display either as a stand-alone electronic device or connected to a computer or smartphone. Refreshable braille displays convert what is visually shown on a computer or smartphone screen into braille through a series of pins that rise and fall to form braille symbols. Currently more than 1% of all printed books have been translated into hardcopy braille.\nThe fastest braille readers apply a light touch and read braille with two hands, although reading braille with one hand is also possible. Although the finger can read only one braille character at a time, the brain chunks braille at a higher level, processing words a digraph, root or suffix at a time. The processing largely takes place in the visual cortex.\nLiteracy.\nChildren who are blind miss out on fundamental parts of early and advanced education if not provided with the necessary tools, such as access to educational materials in braille. Children who are blind or visually impaired can begin learning foundational braille skills from a very young age to become fluent braille readers as they get older. Sighted children are naturally exposed to written language on signs, on TV and in the books they see. Blind children require the same early exposure to literacy, through access to braille rich environments and opportunities to explore the world around them. Print-braille books, for example, present text in both print and braille and can be read by sighted parents to blind children (and vice versa), allowing blind children to develop an early love for reading even before formal reading instruction begins.\nAdults who experience sight loss later in life or who did not have the opportunity to learn it when they were younger can also learn braille. In most cases, adults who learn braille were already literate in print before vision loss and so instruction focuses more on developing the tactile and motor skills needed to read braille.\nWhile different countries publish statistics on how many readers in a given organization request braille, these numbers only provide a partial picture of braille literacy statistics. For example, this data does not survey the entire population of braille readers or always include readers who are no longer in the school system (adults) or readers who request electronic braille materials. Therefore, there are currently no reliable statistics on braille literacy rates, as described in a publication in the \"Journal of Visual Impairment and Blindness\". Regardless of the precise percentage of braille readers, there is consensus that braille should be provided to all those who benefit from it.\nNumerous factors influence access to braille literacy, including school budget constraints, technology advancements such as screen-reader software, access to qualified instruction, and different philosophical views over how blind children should be educated.\nIn the US, a key turning point for braille literacy was the passage of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, an act of Congress that moved thousands of children from specialized schools for the blind into mainstream public schools. Because only a small percentage of public schools could afford to train and hire braille-qualified teachers, braille literacy has declined since the law took effect. Braille literacy rates have improved slightly since the bill was passed, in part because of pressure from consumers and advocacy groups that has led 27 states to pass legislation mandating that children who are legally blind be given the opportunity to learn braille.\nIn 1998 there were 57,425 legally blind students registered in the United States, but only 10% (5,461) of them used braille as their primary reading medium.\nEarly Braille education is crucial to literacy for a blind or low-vision child. A study conducted in the state of Washington found that people who learned braille at an early age did just as well as, if not better than, their sighted peers in several areas, including vocabulary and comprehension. In the preliminary adult study, while evaluating the correlation between adult literacy skills and employment, it was found that 44% of the participants who had learned to read in braille were unemployed, compared to the 77% unemployment rate of those who had learned to read using print. Currently, among the estimated 85,000 blind adults in the United States, 90% of those who are braille-literate are employed. Among adults who do not know braille, only 33% are employed. Statistically, history has proven that braille reading proficiency provides an essential skill set that allows blind or low-vision children to compete with their sighted peers in a school environment and later in life as they enter the workforce.\nRegardless of the specific percentage of braille readers, proponents point out the importance of increasing access to braille for all those who can benefit from it.\nBraille transcription.\nAlthough it is possible to transcribe print by simply substituting the equivalent braille character for its printed equivalent, in English such a character-by-character transcription (known as \"uncontracted braille\") is typically used by beginners or those who only engage in short reading tasks (such as reading household labels).\nBraille characters are much larger than their printed equivalents, and the standard page has room for only 25 lines of 43 characters. To reduce space and increase reading speed, most braille alphabets and orthographies use ligatures, abbreviations, and contractions. Virtually all English braille books in hardcopy (paper) format are transcribed in contracted braille: The Library of Congress's \"Instruction Manual for Braille Transcribing\" runs to over 300 pages, and braille transcribers must pass certification tests.\nUncontracted braille was previously known as grade 1 braille, and contracted braille was previously known as grade\u00a02 braille. Uncontracted braille is a direct transliteration of print words (one-to-one correspondence); hence, the word \"about\" would contain all the same letters in uncontracted braille as it does in inkprint. Contracted braille includes short forms to save space; hence, for example, the letters \"ab\" when standing alone represent the word \"about\" in English contracted braille. In English, some braille users only learn uncontracted braille, particularly if braille is being used for shorter reading tasks such as reading household labels. However, those who plan to use braille for educational and employment purposes and longer reading texts often go on to contracted braille.\nThe system of contractions in English Braille begins with a set of 23 words contracted to single characters. Thus the word \"but\" is contracted to the single letter \"b\", \"can\" to \"c\", \"do\" to \"d\", and so on. Even this simple rule creates issues requiring special cases; for example, \"d\" is, specifically, an abbreviation of the verb \"do\"; the noun \"do\" representing the note of the musical scale is a different word and must be spelled out.\nPortions of words may be contracted, and many rules govern this process. For example, the character with dots 2-3-5 (the letter \"f\" lowered in the Braille cell) stands for \"ff\" when used in the middle of a word. At the beginning of a word, this same character stands for the word \"to\"; the character is written in braille with no space following it. (This contraction was removed in the Unified English Braille Code.) At the end of a word, the same character represents an exclamation point.\nSome contractions are more similar than their print equivalents. For example, the contraction \u27e8lr\u27e9, meaning \"letter\", differs from \u27e8ll\u27e9, meaning \"little\", only by one dot in the second letter: \"little\", \"letter\". This causes greater confusion between the braille spellings of these words and can hinder the learning process of contracted braille.\nThe contraction rules take into account the linguistic structure of the word; thus, contractions are generally not to be used when their use would alter the usual braille form of a base word to which a prefix or suffix has been added. Some portions of the transcription rules are not fully codified and rely on the judgment of the transcriber. Thus, when the contraction rules permit the same word in more than one way, preference is given to \"the contraction that more nearly approximates correct pronunciation\".\n\"Grade 3 braille\" is a variety of non-standardized systems that include many additional shorthand-like contractions. They are not used for publication, but by individuals for their personal convenience.\nBraille translation software.\nWhen people produce braille, this is called braille transcription. When computer software produces braille, this is called a braille translator. Braille translation software exists to handle almost all of the common languages of the world, and many technical areas, such as mathematics (mathematical notation), for example WIMATS, music (musical notation), and tactile graphics.\nBraille reading techniques.\nSince Braille is one of the few writing systems where tactile perception is used, as opposed to visual perception, a braille reader must develop new skills. One skill important for Braille readers is the ability to create smooth and even pressures when running one's fingers along the words. There are many different styles and techniques used for the understanding and development of braille, even though a study by B. F. Holland suggests that there is no specific technique that is superior to any other.\nAnother study by Lowenfield &amp; Abel shows that braille can be read \"the fastest and best... by students who read using the index fingers of both hands\". Another important reading skill emphasized in this study is to finish reading the end of a line with the right hand and to find the beginning of the next line with the left hand simultaneously.\nInternational uniformity.\nWhen Braille was first adapted to languages other than French, many schemes were adopted, including mapping the native alphabet to the alphabetical order of French \u2013 e.g. in English W, which was not in the French alphabet at the time, is mapped to braille X, X to Y, Y to Z, and Z to the first French-accented letter \u2013 or completely rearranging the alphabet such that common letters are represented by the simplest braille patterns. Consequently, mutual intelligibility was greatly hindered by this state of affairs. In 1878, the International Congress on Work for the Blind, held in Paris, proposed an international braille standard, where braille codes for different languages and scripts would be based, not on the order of a particular alphabet, but on phonetic correspondence and transliteration to Latin.\nThis unified braille has been applied to the languages of India and Africa, Arabic, Vietnamese, Hebrew, Russian, and Armenian, as well as nearly all Latin-script languages. In Greek, for example, \u03b3 (g) is written as Latin \"g\", despite the fact that it has the alphabetic position of \"c\"; Hebrew \u05d1 (b), the second letter of the alphabet and cognate with the Latin letter \"b\", is sometimes pronounced /b/ and sometimes /v/, and is written \"b\" or \"v\" accordingly; Russian \u0446 (ts) is written as \"c\", which is the usual letter for /ts/ in those Slavic languages that use the Latin alphabet; and Arabic \u0641 (f) is written as \"f\", despite being historically \"p\" and occurring in that part of the Arabic alphabet (between historic \"o\" and \"q\").\nOther braille conventions.\nOther systems for assigning values to braille patterns are also followed beside the simple mapping of the alphabetical order onto the original French order. Some braille alphabets start with unified braille, and then diverge significantly based on the phonology of the target languages, while others diverge even further.\nIn the various Chinese systems, traditional braille values are used for initial consonants and the simple vowels. In both Mandarin and Cantonese Braille, however, characters have different readings depending on whether they are placed in syllable-initial (onset) or syllable-final (rime) position. For instance, the cell for Latin \"k\", , represents Cantonese \"k\" (\"g\" in Yale and other modern romanizations) when initial, but \"aak\" when final, while Latin \"j\", , represents Cantonese initial \"j\" but final \"oei\".\nNovel systems of braille mapping include Korean, which adopts separate syllable-initial and syllable-final forms for its consonants, explicitly grouping braille cells into syllabic groups in the same way as hangul. Japanese, meanwhile, combines independent vowel dot patterns and modifier consonant dot patterns into a single braille cell \u2013 an abugida representation of each Japanese mora.\nUses.\nBraille is read by people who are blind, deafblind or who have low vision, and by both those born with a visual impairment and those who experience sight loss later in life. Braille may also be used by print impaired people, who although may be fully sighted, due to a physical disability are unable to read print. Even individuals with low vision will find that they benefit from braille, depending on level of vision or context (for example, when lighting or colour contrast is poor). Braille is used for both short and long reading tasks. Examples of short reading tasks include braille labels for identifying household items (or cards in a wallet), reading elevator buttons, accessing phone numbers, recipes, grocery lists and other personal notes. Examples of longer reading tasks include using braille to access educational materials, novels and magazines. People with access to a refreshable braille display can also use braille for reading email and ebooks, browsing the internet and accessing other electronic documents. It is also possible to adapt or purchase playing cards and board games in braille.\nIn India there are instances where the parliament acts have been published in braille, such as \"The Right to Information Act\". Sylheti Braille is used in Northeast India.\nIn Canada, passenger safety information in braille and tactile seat row markers are required aboard planes, trains, large ferries, and interprovincial busses pursuant to the Canadian Transportation Agency's regulations.\nIn the United States, the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 requires various building signage to be in braille.\nIn the United Kingdom, medicines are required to have the name of the medicine in Braille on the labeling.\nCurrency.\nThe current series of Canadian banknotes has a tactile feature consisting of raised dots that indicate the denomination, allowing bills to be easily identified by blind or low vision people. It does not use standard braille numbers to identify the value. Instead, the number of full braille cells, which can be simply counted by both braille readers and non-braille readers alike, is an indicator of the value of the bill.\nMexican bank notes, Australian bank notes, Indian rupee notes, Israeli new shekel notes and Russian ruble notes also have special raised symbols to make them identifiable by persons who are blind or have low vision.\nEuro coins were designed in cooperation with organisations representing blind people, and as a result they incorporate many features allowing them to be distinguished by touch alone. In addition, their visual appearance is designed to make them easy to tell apart for persons who cannot read the inscriptions on the coins. \"A good design for the blind and partially sighted is a good design for everybody\" was the principle behind the cooperation of the European Central Bank and the European Blind Union during the design phase of the first series Euro banknotes in the 1990s. As a result, the design of the first euro banknotes included several characteristics which aid both the blind and partially sighted to confidently use the notes.\nAustralia introduced the tactile feature onto their five-dollar banknote in 2016.\nIn the United Kingdom, the front of the \u00a310 polymer note (the side with raised print), has two clusters of raised dots in the top left hand corner, and the \u00a320 note has three. This tactile feature helps blind and partially sighted people identify the value of the note.\nIn 2003 the US Mint introduced the commemorative Alabama State Quarter, which recognized State Daughter Helen Keller on the Obverse, including the name Helen Keller in both English script and Braille inscription. This appears to be the first known use of Braille on US Coin Currency, though not standard on all coins of this type.\nUnicode.\nThe Braille set was added to the Unicode Standard in version 3.0 (1999).\nMost braille embossers and refreshable braille displays do not use the Unicode code points, but instead reuse the 8-bit code points that are assigned to standard ASCII for braille ASCII. (Thus, for simple material, the same bitstream may be interpreted equally as visual letter forms for sighted readers or their exact semantic equivalent in tactile patterns for blind readers. However, some codes have quite different tactile versus visual interpretations and most are not even defined in Braille ASCII.)\nSome embossers have proprietary control codes for 8-dot braille or for full graphics mode, where dots may be placed anywhere on the page without leaving any space between braille cells so that continuous lines can be drawn in diagrams, but these are rarely used and are not standard.\nThe Unicode standard encodes 6-dot and 8-dot braille glyphs according to their binary appearance, rather than following their assigned numeric order. Dot 1 corresponds to the least significant bit of the low byte of the Unicode scalar value, and dot 8 to the high bit of that byte.\nThe Unicode block for braille is U+2800 ... U+28FF. The mapping of patterns to characters etc. is language dependent: even for English for example, see American Braille and English Braille.\nObservation.\nEvery year on 4 January, World Braille Day is observed internationally to commemorate the birth of Louis Braille and to recognize his efforts. Although the event is not considered a public holiday, it has been recognized by the United Nations as an official day of celebration since 2019.\nThe 200th anniversary of the launch of braille was celebrated in 2024. In the UK, the Royal National Institute of Blind People has held celebrations from September 2024 until August 2025.\nBraille devices.\nThere is a variety of contemporary electronic devices that serve the needs of blind people that operate in Braille, such as refreshable braille displays and Braille e-books that use different technologies for transmitting graphic information of different types (pictures, maps, graphs, texts, etc.).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3934", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3934", "title": "Baby Boom", "text": ""}
{"id": "3935", "revid": "19382112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3935", "title": "BuddHism", "text": ""}
{"id": "3936", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3936", "title": "Bastille Day", "text": "French national day (14 July)\nBastille Day is the common name given in English-speaking countries to the national day of France, which is celebrated on 14 July each year. It is referred to, both legally and commonly, as () in French, though \"la f\u00eate nationale\" is also used in the press.\nFrench National Day is the anniversary of the Storming of the Bastille on 14 July 1789, a major event of the French Revolution, as well as the that celebrated the unity of the French people on 14 July 1790. Celebrations are held throughout France. One that has been reported as \"the oldest and largest military parade in Europe\" is held on 14 July on the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es in Paris in front of the President of France, along with other French officials and foreign guests.\nHistory.\nIn 1789, tensions rose in France between reformist and conservative factions as the country struggled to resolve an economic crisis. In May, the Estates General legislative assembly was revived, but members of the Third Estate broke ranks, declaring themselves to be the National Assembly of the country, and on 20 June, vowed to write a constitution for the kingdom.\nOn 11 July, Jacques Necker, the finance minister of Louis XVI, who was sympathetic to the Third Estate, was dismissed by the King, provoking an angry reaction among Parisians. Crowds formed, fearful of an attack by the royal army or by foreign regiments of mercenaries in the King's service and seeking to arm themselves. Early on 14 July, a crowd besieged the H\u00f4tel des Invalides for firearms, muskets, and cannons stored in its cellars. That same day, another crowd stormed the Bastille, a fortress-prison in Paris that had historically held people jailed on the basis of \"lettres de cachet\" (literally \"signet letters\"), arbitrary royal indictments that could not be appealed and did not indicate the reason for the imprisonment, and which was believed to hold a cache of ammunition and gunpowder. As it happened, at the time of the attack, the Bastille held only seven inmates, none of great political significance.\nThe crowd was eventually reinforced by the mutinous R\u00e9giment des Gardes Fran\u00e7aises (\"Regiment of French Guards\"), whose usual role was to protect public buildings. They proved a fair match for the fort's defenders, and Governor de Launay, the commander of the Bastille, capitulated and opened the gates to avoid a mutual massacre. According to the official documents, about 200 attackers and just one defender died before the capitulation. However, possibly because of a misunderstanding, fighting resumed. In this second round of fighting, de Launay and seven other defenders were killed, as was Jacques de Flesselles, the \"pr\u00e9v\u00f4t des marchands\" (\"provost of the merchants\"), the elected head of the city's guilds, who under the French monarchy had the responsibilities of a present-day mayor.\nShortly after the storming of the Bastille, late in the evening of 4 August, after a very stormy session of the \"Assembl\u00e9e constituante\", feudalism was abolished. On 26 August, the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (\"D\u00e9claration des Droits de l'Homme et du Citoyen\") was proclaimed.\n\"F\u00eate de la F\u00e9d\u00e9ration\".\nAs early as 1789, the year of the storming of the Bastille, preliminary designs for a national festival were underway. These designs were intended to strengthen the country's national identity through the celebration of the events of 14 July 1789. One of the first designs was proposed by Cl\u00e9ment Gonchon, a French textile worker, who presented his design for a festival celebrating the anniversary of the storming of the Bastille to the French city administration and the public on 9 December 1789. There were other proposals and unofficial celebrations of 14 July 1789, but the official festival sponsored by the National Assembly was called the F\u00eate de la F\u00e9d\u00e9ration.\nThe \"F\u00eate de la F\u00e9d\u00e9ration\" on 14 July 1790 was a celebration of the unity of the French nation during the French Revolution. The aim of this celebration, one year after the Storming of the Bastille, was to symbolize peace. The event took place on the Champ de Mars, which was located far outside of Paris at the time. The work needed to transform the Champ de Mars into a suitable location for the celebration was not on schedule to be completed in time. On the day recalled as the Journ\u00e9e des brouettes (\"The Day of the Wheelbarrow\"), thousands of Parisian citizens gathered together to finish the construction needed for the celebration.\nThe day of the festival, the National Guard assembled and proceeded along the boulevard du Temple in the pouring rain, and were met by an estimated 260,000 Parisian citizens at the Champ de Mars. A mass was celebrated by Talleyrand, bishop of Autun. The popular General Lafayette, as captain of the National Guard of Paris and a confidant of the king, took his oath to the constitution, followed by King Louis XVI. After the end of the official celebration, the day ended in a huge four-day popular feast, and people celebrated with fireworks, as well as fine wine and running nude through the streets in order to display their freedom.\nOrigin of the current celebration.\nOn 30 June 1878, a feast was officially arranged in Paris to honour the French Republic (the event was commemorated in a painting by Claude Monet). On 14 July 1879, there was another feast, with a semi-official aspect. The day's events included a reception in the Chamber of Deputies, organised and presided over by L\u00e9on Gambetta (a military reviewer at Longchamp), and a Republican Feast in the Pr\u00e9 Catelan. All throughout France, \"Le Figaro\" wrote, \"people feasted much to honour the storming of the Bastille\".\nIn 1880, the government of the Third Republic wanted to revive the 14 July festival. The campaign for the reinstatement of the festival was sponsored by the notable politician L\u00e9on Gambetta and scholar Henri Baudrillant. On 21 May 1880, Benjamin Raspail proposed a law, signed by sixty-four members of government, to have \"the Republic adopt 14 July as the day of an annual national festival\". There were many disputes over which date to be remembered as the national holiday, including 4 August (the commemoration of the end of the feudal system), 5 May (when the Estates-General first assembled), 27 July (the fall of Robespierre), and 21 January (the date of Louis XVI's execution). The government decided that the date of the holiday would be 14 July, but that was still somewhat problematic. The events of 14 July 1789 were illegal under the previous government, which contradicted the Third Republic's need to establish legal legitimacy. French politicians also did not want the sole foundation of their national holiday to be rooted in a day of bloodshed and class-hatred as the day of storming the Bastille was. Instead, they based the establishment of the holiday as both the celebration of the F\u00eate de la F\u00e9d\u00e9ration, a festival celebrating the anniversary of the Republic of France on 14 July 1789, and the storming of the Bastille. The Assembly voted in favor of the proposal on 21 May, and 8 June. The law was approved on 27 and 29 June. The celebration was made official on 6 July 1880.\nIn the debate leading up to the adoption of the holiday, Senator Henri Martin, who wrote the National Day law, addressed the chamber on 29 June 1880:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Do not forget that behind this 14\u00a0July, where victory of the new era over the Ancien R\u00e9gime was bought by fighting, do not forget that after the day of 14\u00a0July 1789, there was the day of 14\u00a0July 1790\u00a0(...) This [latter] day cannot be blamed for having shed a drop of blood, for having divided the country. It was the consecration of the unity of France\u00a0(...) If some of you might have scruples against the first 14\u00a0July, they certainly hold none against the second. Whatever difference which might part us, something hovers over them, it is the great images of national unity, which we all desire, for which we would all stand, willing to die if necessary.\u2014\u200a\nBastille Day military parade.\nThe Bastille Day military parade is the French military parade that has been held in the morning, every year in Paris, since 1880. While previously held elsewhere within or near the capital city, since 1918 it has been held on the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es, with the participation of the Allies as represented in the Versailles Peace Conference, and with the exception of the period of German occupation from 1940 to 1944 (when the ceremony took place in London under the command of General Charles de Gaulle); and 2020 when the COVID-19 pandemic forced its cancellation. The parade passes down the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es from the Arc de Triomphe to the Place de la Concorde, where the President of the French Republic, his government and foreign ambassadors to France stand. This is a popular event in France, broadcast on French TV, and is the oldest and largest regular military parade in Europe.\nSmaller military parades are held in French garrison towns, including Toulon and Belfort, with local troops.\nBastille Day celebrations in other countries.\nBelgium.\nLi\u00e8ge celebrates Bastille Day each year since the end of the First World War, as Li\u00e8ge was decorated by the L\u00e9gion d'Honneur for its unexpected resistance during the Battle of Li\u00e8ge. The city also hosts a fireworks show outside of Congress Hall. Specifically in Li\u00e8ge, celebrations of Bastille Day have been known to be bigger than the celebrations of the Belgian National holiday. Around 35,000 people gather to celebrate Bastille Day. There is a traditional festival dance of the French consul that draws large crowds, and many unofficial events over the city celebrate the relationship between France and the city of Li\u00e8ge.\nCanada.\nVancouver, British Columbia, holds a celebration featuring exhibits, food, and entertainment. The Toronto Bastille Day festival is also celebrated in Toronto, Ontario. The festival is organized by the French-Canadian community in Toronto and sponsored by the https://. The celebration includes music, performances, sport competitions, and a French Market. At the end of the festival, there is also a traditional French bal populaire.\nCzech Republic.\nSince 2008, Prague has hosted a French market \"\" (\"Fourteenth of July Market\") offering traditional French food and wine as well as music. The market takes place on Kampa Island, it is usually between 11 and 14 July. It acts as an event that marks the relinquish of the EU presidency from France to the Czech Republic. Traditional selections of French produce, including cheese, wine, meat, bread and pastries, are provided by the market. Throughout the event, live music is played in the evenings, with lanterns lighting up the square at night.\nDenmark.\nThe amusement park Tivoli celebrates Bastille Day.\nHungary.\nBudapest's two-day celebration is sponsored by the Institut de France. The festival is hosted along the Danube River, with streets filled with music and dancing. There are also local markets dedicated to French foods and wine, mixed with some traditional Hungarian specialties. At the end of the celebration, a fireworks show is held on the river banks.\nIndia.\nBastille Day is celebrated with great festivity in Pondicherry, a former French colony.\nIreland.\nThe Embassy of France in Ireland organizes several events around Dublin, Cork and Limerick for Bastille Day; including evenings of French music and tasting of French food. Many members of the French community in Ireland take part in the festivities. Events in Dublin include live entertainment, speciality menus on French cuisine, and screenings of popular French films.\nNew Zealand.\nThe Auckland suburb of Remuera hosts an annual French-themed Bastille Day street festival. Visitors enjoy mimes, dancers, music, as well as French foods and drinks. The budding relationship between the two countries, with the establishment of a Maori garden in France and exchange of their analyses of cave art, resulted in the creation of an official reception at the Residence of France. There is also an event in Wellington for the French community held at the Residence of France.\nSouth Africa.\nFranschhoek's weekend festival has been celebrated since 1993. (Franschhoek, or 'French Corner,' is situated in the Western Cape.) As South Africa's gourmet capital, French food, wine and other entertainment is provided throughout the festival. The French Consulate in South Africa also celebrates their national holiday with a party for the French community. Activities also include dressing up in different items of French clothing.\nFrench Polynesia.\nFollowing colonial rule, France annexed a large portion of what is now French Polynesia. Under French rule, Tahitians were permitted to participate in sport, singing, and dancing competitions one day a year: Bastille Day. The single day of celebration evolved into the major Heiva i Tahiti festival in Papeete Tahiti, where traditional events such as canoe races, tattooing, and fire walks are held. The singing and dancing competitions continue with music composed with traditional instruments such as the nasal flute and ukulele.\nUnited Kingdom.\nWithin the UK, London has a large French contingent, and celebrates Bastille Day at various locations across the city including Battersea Park, Camden Town and Kentish Town. Live entertainment is performed at Canary Wharf, with weeklong performances of French theatre at the Lion and Unicorn Theatre in Kentish Town. Restaurants feature cabarets and special menus across the city, and other celebrations include garden parties and sports tournaments. There is also a large event at the Bankside and Borough Market, where there is live music, street performers, and traditional French games played.\nUnited States.\nThe United States has over 20 cities that conduct annual celebrations of Bastille Day. The different cities celebrate with many French staples such as food, music, games, and sometimes the recreation of famous French landmarks.\nBaltimore, Maryland, has a large Bastille Day celebration each year at Petit Louis in the Roland Park area of Baltimore. Boston has a celebration annually, hosted by the French Cultural Center for 40 years. The street festival occurs in Boston's Back Bay neighborhood, near the Cultural Center's headquarters. The celebration includes francophone musical performers, dancing, and French cuisine. New York City has numerous Bastille Day celebrations each July, including \"Bastille Day on 60th Street\" hosted by the French Institute Alliance Fran\u00e7aise between Fifth and Lexington Avenues on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, Bastille Day on Smith Street in Brooklyn, and Bastille Day in Tribeca. There is also the annual Bastille Day Ball, taking place since 1924. Philadelphia's Bastille Day, held at Eastern State Penitentiary, involves Marie Antoinette throwing locally manufactured Tastykakes at the Parisian militia, as well as a re-enactment of the storming of the Bastille. (This Philadelphia tradition ended in 2018.) In Newport, Rhode Island, the annual Bastille Day celebration is organized by the local chapter of the Alliance Fran\u00e7aise. It takes place at King Park in Newport at the monument memorializing the accomplishments of the General Comte de Rochambeau whose 6,000 to 7,000 French forces landed in Newport on 11 July 1780. Their assistance in the defeat of the English in the War of Independence is well documented and is proof of the special relationship between France and the United States. In Washington D.C., food, music, and auction events are sponsored by the Embassy of France. There is also a French Festival within the city, where families can meet period entertainment groups set during the time of the French Revolution. Restaurants host parties serving traditional French food.\nIn Dallas, Texas, the Bastille Day celebration, \"Bastille On Bishop\", began in 2010 and is held annually in the Bishop Arts District of the North Oak Cliff neighborhood, southwest of downtown just across the Trinity River. Dallas' French roots are tied to the short lived socialist Utopian community La R\u00e9union, formed in 1855 and incorporated into the City of Dallas in 1860. Miami's celebration is organized by \"French &amp; Famous\" in partnership with the French American Chamber of Commerce, the Union des Fran\u00e7ais de l'Etranger and many French brands. The event gathers over 1,000 attendees to celebrate \"La F\u00eate Nationale\". The location and theme change every year. In 2017, the theme was \"Guinguette Party\" and attracted 1,200 francophiles at The River Yacht Club. New Orleans, Louisiana, has multiple celebrations, the largest in the historic French Quarter. In Austin, Texas, the Alliance Fran\u00e7aise d'Austin usually conducts a family-friendly Bastille Day party at the French Legation, the home of the French representative to the Republic of Texas from 1841 to 1845.\nChicago, Illinois, has hosted a variety of Bastille Day celebrations in a number of locations in the city, including Navy Pier and Oz Park. The recent incarnations have been sponsored in part by the Chicago branch of the French-American Chamber of Commerce and by the French Consulate-General in Chicago. Milwaukee's four-day street festival begins with a \"Storming of the Bastille\" with a 43-foot replica of the Eiffel Tower. Minneapolis, Minnesota, has a celebration with wine, French food, pastries, a flea market, circus performers and bands. Also in the Twin Cities area, the local chapter of the Alliance Fran\u00e7aise has hosted an annual event for years at varying locations with a competition for the \"Best Baguette of the Twin Cities\". Montgomery, Ohio, has a celebration with wine, beer, local restaurants' fare, pastries, games and bands. St. Louis, Missouri, has annual festivals in the Soulard neighborhood, the former French village of Carondelet, Missouri, and in the Benton Park neighborhood. The Chatillon-DeMenil Mansion in the Benton Park neighborhood, holds an annual Bastille Day festival with reenactments of the beheading of Marie Antoinette and Louis XVI, traditional dancing, and artillery demonstrations. Carondelet also began hosting an annual saloon crawl to celebrate Bastille Day in 2017. The Soulard neighborhood in St. Louis, Missouri celebrates its unique French heritage with special events including a parade, which honors the peasants who rejected the monarchy. The parade includes a 'gathering of the mob,' a walking and golf cart parade, and a mock beheading of the King and Queen.\nPortland, Oregon, has celebrated Bastille Day with crowds up to 8,000, in public festivals at various public parks, since 2001. The event is coordinated by the Alliance Fran\u00e7aise of Portland. Seattle's Bastille Day celebration, held at the Seattle Center, involves performances, picnics, wine and shopping. Sacramento, California, conducts annual \"waiter races\" in the midtown restaurant and shopping district, with a street festival.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3940", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3940", "title": "Blowfish (cipher)", "text": "Block cipher\nBlowfish is a symmetric-key block cipher, designed in 1993 by Bruce Schneier and included in many cipher suites and encryption products. Blowfish provides a good encryption rate in software, and no effective cryptanalysis of it has been found to date for smaller files. It is recommended Blowfish should not be used to encrypt files larger than 4GB in size, Twofish should be used instead. \nBlowfish has a 64-bit block size and therefore it could be vulnerable to Sweet32 birthday attacks.\nSchneier designed Blowfish as a general-purpose algorithm, intended as an alternative to the aging DES and free of the problems and constraints associated with other algorithms. At the time Blowfish was released, many other designs were proprietary, encumbered by patents, or were commercial or government secrets. Schneier has stated that \"Blowfish is unpatented, and will remain so in all countries. The algorithm is hereby placed in the public domain, and can be freely used by anyone.\"\nNotable features of the design include key-dependent S-boxes and a highly complex key schedule.\nThe algorithm.\nBlowfish has a 64-bit block size and a variable key length from 32 bits up to 448 bits. It is a 16-round Feistel cipher and uses large key-dependent S-boxes. In structure it resembles CAST-128, which uses fixed S-boxes.\nThe adjacent diagram shows Blowfish's encryption routine. Each line represents 32\u00a0bits. There are five subkey-arrays: one 18-entry P-array (denoted as K in the diagram, to avoid confusion with the Plaintext) and four 256-entry S-boxes (S0, S1, S2 and S3).\nEvery round \"r\" consists of 4 actions: \nThe F-function splits the 32-bit input into four 8-bit quarters and uses the quarters as input to the S-boxes. The S-boxes accept 8-bit input and produce 32-bit output. The outputs are added modulo 232 and XORed to produce the final 32-bit output (see image in the upper right corner).\nAfter the 16th round, undo the last swap, and XOR L with K18 and R with K17 (output whitening).\nDecryption is exactly the same as encryption, except that P1, P2, ..., P18 are used in the reverse order. This is not so obvious because xor is commutative and associative. A common misconception is to use inverse order of encryption as decryption algorithm (i.e. first XORing P17 and P18 to the ciphertext block, then using the P-entries in reverse order).\nBlowfish's key schedule starts by initializing the P-array and S-boxes with values derived from the hexadecimal digits of pi, which contain no obvious pattern (see nothing up my sleeve number). The secret key is then, byte by byte, cycling the key if necessary, XORed with all the P-entries in order. A 64-bit all-zero block is then encrypted with the algorithm as it stands. The resultant ciphertext replaces P1 and P2. The same ciphertext is then encrypted again with the new subkeys, and the new ciphertext replaces P3 and P4. This continues, replacing the entire P-array and all the S-box entries. In all, the Blowfish encryption algorithm will run 521 times to generate all the subkeys\u00a0\u2013 about 4\u00a0KB of data is processed.\nBecause the P-array is 576\u00a0bits long, and the key bytes are XORed through all these 576\u00a0bits during the initialization, many implementations support key sizes up to 576\u00a0bits. The reason for that is a discrepancy between the original Blowfish description, which uses 448-bit keys, and its reference implementation, which uses 576-bit keys. The test vectors for verifying third-party implementations were also produced with 576-bit keys. When asked which Blowfish version is the correct one, Bruce Schneier answered: \"The test vectors should be used to determine the one true Blowfish\".\nAnother opinion is that the 448\u00a0bits limit is present to ensure that every bit of every subkey depends on every bit of the key, as the last four values of the P-array don't affect every bit of the ciphertext. This point should be taken in consideration for implementations with a different number of rounds, as even though it increases security against an exhaustive attack, it weakens the security guaranteed by the algorithm. And given the slow initialization of the cipher with each change of key, it is granted a natural protection against brute-force attacks, which doesn't really justify key sizes longer than 448\u00a0bits.\nBlowfish in pseudocode.\n P[18] // \"P-array of 18 elements\"\n S[4][256] // \"S-boxes: 4 arrays of 256 elements\"\n function f(x):\n // \"Calculates a function f on a 32-bit input x, using S-boxes and bit manipulation\"\n high_byte := (x shifted right by 24 bits)\n second_byte := (x shifted right by 16 bits) AND 0xff\n third_byte := (x shifted right by 8 bits) AND 0xff\n low_byte := x AND 0xff\n h := S[0][high_byte] + S[1][second_byte]\n return (h XOR S[2][third_byte]) + S[3][low_byte]\n procedure blowfish_encrypt(L, R):\n // \"Encrypts two 32-bit halves L and R using the P-array and function f over 16 rounds\"\n for round := 0 to 15:\n L := L XOR P[round]\n R := f(L) XOR R\n swap values of L and R\n swap values of L and R\n R := R XOR P[16]\n L := L XOR P[17]\n procedure blowfish_decrypt(L, R):\n // \"Decrypts two 32-bit halves L and R using the P-array and function f over 16 rounds in reverse\"\n for round := 17 down to 2:\n L := L XOR P[round]\n R := f(L) XOR R\n swap values of L and R\n swap values of L and R\n R := R XOR P[1]\n L := L XOR P[0]\n // \"Initializes the P-array and S-boxes using the provided key, followed by key expansion\"\n //\" Initialize P-array with the key values\"\n key_position := 0\n for i := 0 to 17:\n k := 0\n for j := 0 to 3:\n k := (k shifted left by 8 bits) OR key[key_position]\n key_position := (key_position + 1) mod key_length\n P[i] := P[i] XOR k\n //\" Blowfish key expansion (521 iterations)\"\n L := 0, R := 0\n for i := 0 to 17 by 2:\n blowfish_encrypt(L, R)\n P[i] := L\n P[i + 1] := R\n //\" Fill S-boxes by encrypting L and R\"\n for i := 0 to 3:\n for j := 0 to 255 by 2:\n blowfish_encrypt(L, R)\n S[i][j] := L\n S[i][j + 1] := R\nBlowfish in practice.\nBlowfish is a fast block cipher, except when changing keys. Each new key requires the pre-processing equivalent of encrypting about 4 kilobytes of text, which is very slow compared to other block ciphers. This prevents its use in certain applications, but is not a problem in others.\nBlowfish must be initialized with a key. It is good practice to have this key hashed with a hash function before use.\nIn one application Blowfish's slow key changing is actually a benefit: the password-hashing method (crypt $2, i.e. bcrypt) used in OpenBSD uses an algorithm derived from Blowfish that makes use of the slow key schedule; the idea is that the extra computational effort required gives protection against dictionary attacks. \"See\" key stretching.\nBlowfish has a memory footprint of just over 4 kilobytes of RAM. This constraint is not a problem even for older desktop and laptop computers, though it does prevent use in the smallest embedded systems such as early smartcards.\nBlowfish was one of the first secure block ciphers not subject to any patents and therefore freely available for anyone to use. This benefit has contributed to its popularity in cryptographic software.\nbcrypt is a password hashing function which, combined with a variable number of iterations (work \"cost\"), exploits the expensive key setup phase of Blowfish to increase the workload and duration of hash calculations, further reducing threats from brute force attacks.\nbcrypt is also the name of a cross-platform file encryption utility developed in 2002 that implements Blowfish.\nWeakness and successors.\nBlowfish's use of a 64-bit block size (as opposed to e.g. AES's 128-bit block size) makes it vulnerable to birthday attacks, particularly in contexts like HTTPS. In 2016, the SWEET32 attack demonstrated how to leverage birthday attacks to perform plaintext recovery (i.e. decrypting ciphertext) against ciphers with a 64-bit block size. The GnuPG project recommends that Blowfish not be used to encrypt files larger than 4 GB due to its small block size.\nA reduced-round variant of Blowfish is known to be susceptible to known-plaintext attacks on reflectively weak keys. Blowfish implementations use 16 rounds of encryption, and are not susceptible to this attack.\nBruce Schneier has recommended migrating to his Blowfish successor, Twofish.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Blowfish2 was released in 2005, developed by Alexander Pukall. It has exactly the same design but has twice as many S tables and uses 64-bit integers instead of 32-bit integers. It no longer works on 64-bit blocks but on 128-bit blocks like AES. Blowfish2 is used for example, in FreePascal.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3942", "revid": "92899", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3942", "title": "Bijection", "text": "One-to-one correspondence\nIn mathematics, a bijection, bijective function, or one-to-one correspondence is a function between two sets such that each element of the second set (the codomain) is the image of exactly one element of the first set (the domain). Equivalently, a bijection is a relation between two sets such that each element of either set is paired with exactly one element of the other set.\nA function is bijective if it is invertible; that is, a function formula_1 is bijective if and only if there is a function formula_2 the \"inverse\" of f, such that each of the two ways for composing the two functions produces an identity function: formula_3 for each formula_4 in formula_5 and formula_6 for each formula_7 in formula_8\nFor example, the \"multiplication by two\" defines a bijection from the integers to the even numbers, which has the \"division by two\" as its inverse function.\nA function is bijective if and only if it is both injective (or \"one-to-one\")\u2014meaning that each element in the codomain is mapped from at most one element of the domain\u2014and surjective (or \"onto\")\u2014meaning that each element of the codomain is mapped from at least one element of the domain. The term \"one-to-one correspondence\" must not be confused with \"one-to-one function\", which means injective but not necessarily surjective.\nThe elementary operation of counting establishes a bijection from some finite set to the first natural numbers (1, 2, 3, ...), up to the number of elements in the counted set. It results that two finite sets have the same number of elements if and only if there exists a bijection between them. More generally, two sets are said to have the same cardinal number if there exists a bijection between them.\nA bijective function from a set to itself is also called a permutation, and the set of all permutations of a set forms its symmetric group.\nSome bijections with further properties have received specific names, which include automorphisms, isomorphisms, homeomorphisms, diffeomorphisms, permutations, and most geometric transformations. Galois correspondences are bijections between sets of mathematical objects of apparently very different nature.\nDefinition.\nFor a binary relation pairing elements of set \"X\" with elements of set \"Y\" to be a bijection, four properties must hold:\nSatisfying properties (1) and (2) means that a pairing is a function with domain \"X\". It is more common to see properties (1) and (2) written as a single statement: Every element of \"X\" is paired with exactly one element of \"Y\". Functions which satisfy property (3) are said to be \"onto \"Y\" \" and are called surjections (or \"surjective functions\"). Functions which satisfy property (4) are said to be \"one-to-one functions\" and are called injections (or \"injective functions\"). With this terminology, a bijection is a function which is both a surjection and an injection, or using other words, a bijection is a function which is both \"one-to-one\" and \"onto\".\nExamples.\nBatting line-up of a baseball or cricket team.\nConsider the batting line-up of a baseball or cricket team (or any list of all the players of any sports team where every player holds a specific spot in a line-up). The set \"X\" will be the players on the team (of size nine in the case of baseball) and the set \"Y\" will be the positions in the batting order (1st, 2nd, 3rd, etc.) The \"pairing\" is given by which player is in what position in this order. Property (1) is satisfied since each player is somewhere in the list. Property (2) is satisfied since no player bats in two (or more) positions in the order. Property (3) says that for each position in the order, there is some player batting in that position and property (4) states that two or more players are never batting in the same position in the list.\nSeats and students of a classroom.\nIn a classroom there are a certain number of seats. A group of students enter the room and the instructor asks them to be seated. After a quick look around the room, the instructor declares that there is a bijection between the set of students and the set of seats, where each student is paired with the seat they are sitting in. What the instructor observed in order to reach this conclusion was that:\nThe instructor was able to conclude that there were just as many seats as there were students, without having to count either set.\nInverses.\nA bijection \"f\" with domain \"X\" (indicated by \"f\": \"X \u2192 Y\" in functional notation) also defines a converse relation starting in \"Y\" and going to \"X\" (by turning the arrows around). The process of \"turning the arrows around\" for an arbitrary function does not, \"in general\", yield a function, but properties (3) and (4) of a bijection say that this inverse relation is a function with domain \"Y\". Moreover, properties (1) and (2) then say that this inverse \"function\" is a surjection and an injection, that is, the inverse function exists and is also a bijection. Functions that have inverse functions are said to be invertible. A function is invertible if and only if it is a bijection.\nStated in concise mathematical notation, a function \"f\": \"X \u2192 Y\" is bijective if and only if it satisfies the condition\nfor every \"y\" in \"Y\" there is a unique \"x\" in \"X\" with \"y\" = \"f\"(\"x\").\nContinuing with the baseball batting line-up example, the function that is being defined takes as input the name of one of the players and outputs the position of that player in the batting order. Since this function is a bijection, it has an inverse function which takes as input a position in the batting order and outputs the player who will be batting in that position.\nComposition.\nThe composition formula_11 of two bijections formula_12 and formula_13 is a bijection, whose inverse is given by formula_11 is formula_15.\nConversely, if the composition formula_16 of two functions is bijective, it only follows that \"f\" is injective and \"g\" is surjective.\nCardinality.\nIf \"X\" and \"Y\" are finite sets, then there exists a bijection between the two sets \"X\" and \"Y\" if and only if \"X\" and \"Y\" have the same number of elements. Indeed, in axiomatic set theory, this is taken as the definition of \"same number of elements\" (equinumerosity), and generalising this definition to infinite sets leads to the concept of cardinal number, a way to distinguish the various sizes of infinite sets.\nCategory theory.\nBijections are precisely the isomorphisms in the category \"Set\" of sets and set functions. However, the bijections are not always the isomorphisms for more complex categories. For example, in the category \"Grp\" of groups, the morphisms must be homomorphisms since they must preserve the group structure, so the isomorphisms are \"group isomorphisms\" which are bijective homomorphisms.\nGeneralization to partial functions.\nThe notion of one-to-one correspondence generalizes to partial functions, where they are called \"partial bijections\", although partial bijections are only required to be injective. The reason for this relaxation is that a (proper) partial function is already undefined for a portion of its domain; thus there is no compelling reason to constrain its inverse to be a total function, i.e. defined everywhere on its domain. The set of all partial bijections on a given base set is called the symmetric inverse semigroup.\nAnother way of defining the same notion is to say that a partial bijection from \"A\" to \"B\" is any relation \n\"R\" (which turns out to be a partial function) with the property that \"R\" is the graph of a bijection \"f\":\"A\u2032\"\u2192\"B\u2032\", where \"A\u2032\" is a subset of \"A\" and \"B\u2032\" is a subset of \"B\".\nWhen the partial bijection is on the same set, it is sometimes called a \"one-to-one partial transformation\". An example is the M\u00f6bius transformation simply defined on the complex plane, rather than its completion to the extended complex plane.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nThis topic is a basic concept in set theory and can be found in any text which includes an introduction to set theory. Almost all texts that deal with an introduction to writing proofs will include a section on set theory, so the topic may be found in any of these:"}
{"id": "3943", "revid": "48546149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3943", "title": "Binary function", "text": "Function that takes two inputs\nIn mathematics, a binary function (also called bivariate function, or function of two variables) is a function that takes two inputs.\nPrecisely stated, a function formula_1 is binary if there exists sets formula_2 such that\nformula_3\nwhere formula_4 is the Cartesian product of formula_5 and formula_6\nAlternative definitions.\nSet-theoretically, a binary function can be represented as a subset of the Cartesian product formula_7, where formula_8 belongs to the subset if and only if formula_9.\nConversely, a subset formula_10 defines a binary function if and only if for any formula_11 and formula_12, there exists a unique formula_13 such that formula_8 belongs to formula_10.\nformula_16 is then defined to be this formula_17.\nAlternatively, a binary function may be interpreted as simply a function from formula_4 to formula_19.\nEven when thought of this way, however, one generally writes formula_16 instead of formula_21.\nExamples.\nDivision of whole numbers can be thought of as a function. If formula_22 is the set of integers, formula_23 is the set of natural numbers (except for zero), and formula_24 is the set of rational numbers, then division is a binary function formula_25.\nIn a vector space \"V\" over a field \"F\", scalar multiplication is a binary function. A scalar \"a\" \u2208 \"F\" is combined with a vector \"v\" \u2208 \"V\" to produce a new vector \"av\" \u2208 \"V\".\nAnother example is that of inner products, or more generally functions of the form formula_26, where x, y are real-valued vectors of appropriate size and M is a matrix. If M is a positive definite matrix, this yields an inner product.\nFunctions of two real variables.\nFunctions whose domain is a subset of formula_27 are often also called functions of two variables even if their domain does not form a rectangle and thus the cartesian product of two sets.\nRestrictions to ordinary functions.\nIn turn, one can also derive ordinary functions of one variable from a binary function.\nGiven any element formula_11, there is a function formula_29, or formula_30, from formula_31 to formula_19, given by formula_33.\nSimilarly, given any element formula_12, there is a function formula_35, or formula_36, from formula_5 to formula_19, given by formula_39. In computer science, this identification between a function from formula_4 to formula_19 and a function from formula_5 to formula_43, where formula_43 is the set of all functions from formula_31 to formula_19, is called \"currying\".\nGeneralisations.\nThe various concepts relating to functions can also be generalised to binary functions.\nFor example, the division example above is \"surjective\" (or \"onto\") because every rational number may be expressed as a quotient of an integer and a natural number.\nThis example is \"injective\" in each input separately, because the functions \"f\" \"x\" and \"f\" \"y\" are always injective.\nHowever, it's not injective in both variables simultaneously, because (for example) \"f\" (2,4) = \"f\" (1,2).\nOne can also consider \"partial\" binary functions, which may be defined only for certain values of the inputs.\nFor example, the division example above may also be interpreted as a partial binary function from Z and N to Q, where N is the set of all natural numbers, including zero.\nBut this function is undefined when the second input is zero.\nA binary operation is a binary function where the sets \"X\", \"Y\", and \"Z\" are all equal; binary operations are often used to define algebraic structures.\nIn linear algebra, a bilinear transformation is a binary function where the sets \"X\", \"Y\", and \"Z\" are all vector spaces and the derived functions \"f\" \"x\" and \"f\"\"y\" are all linear transformations.\nA bilinear transformation, like any binary function, can be interpreted as a function from \"X\" \u00d7 \"Y\" to \"Z\", but this function in general won't be linear.\nHowever, the bilinear transformation can also be interpreted as a single linear transformation from the tensor product formula_47 to \"Z\".\nGeneralisations to ternary and other functions.\nThe concept of binary function generalises to \"ternary\" (or \"3-ary\") \"function\", \"quaternary\" (or \"4-ary\") \"function\", or more generally to \"n-ary function\" for any natural number \"n\".\nA \"0-ary function\" to \"Z\" is simply given by an element of \"Z\".\nOne can also define an \"A-ary function\" where \"A\" is any set; there is one input for each element of \"A\".\nCategory theory.\nIn category theory, \"n\"-ary functions generalise to \"n\"-ary morphisms in a multicategory.\nThe interpretation of an \"n\"-ary morphism as an ordinary morphisms whose domain is some sort of product of the domains of the original \"n\"-ary morphism will work in a monoidal category.\nThe construction of the derived morphisms of one variable will work in a closed monoidal category.\nThe category of sets is closed monoidal, but so is the category of vector spaces, giving the notion of bilinear transformation above.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3947", "revid": "51017224", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3947", "title": "Blue Velvet (film)", "text": "1986 American neo-noir mystery film by David Lynch\nBlue Velvet is a 1986 American neo-noir mystery thriller film written and directed by David Lynch. Blending psychological horror with film noir, the film stars Kyle MacLachlan, Isabella Rossellini, Dennis Hopper, and Laura Dern, and is named after the 1951 song of the same name. The film follows a college student who returns to his hometown and discovers a severed human ear in a field, which leads him to uncover a criminal conspiracy involving a troubled nightclub singer.\nThe screenplay of \"Blue Velvet\" had been passed around multiple times in the late 1970s and early 1980s, with several major studios declining it due to its strong sexual and violent content. After the failure of his 1984 film \"Dune\", Lynch made attempts at developing a more \"personal story\", somewhat characteristic of the surrealist style displayed in his first film \"Eraserhead\" (1977). The independent studio De Laurentiis Entertainment Group, owned at the time by Italian film producer Dino De Laurentiis, agreed to finance and produce the film.\n\"Blue Velvet\" initially received a divided critical response, with many stating that its explicit content served little artistic purpose. Nevertheless, the film earned Lynch his second nomination for the Academy Award for Best Director, and received the year's Best Film and Best Director prizes from the National Society of Film Critics. It came to achieve cult status. As an example of a director casting against the norm, it was credited for revitalizing Hopper's career and for providing Rossellini with a dramatic outlet beyond her previous work as a fashion model and a cosmetics spokeswoman. In the years since, the film has been re-evaluated, and is widely regarded as one of Lynch's major works and one of the greatest films of the 1980s. Publications including \"Sight and Sound\", \"Time\", \"Entertainment Weekly\" and \"BBC Magazine\" have ranked it among the greatest American films of all time. In 2008, it was chosen by the American Film Institute as one of the ten greatest American mystery films.\nPlot.\nCollege student Jeffrey Beaumont returns to his suburban hometown of Lumberton, North Carolina, after his father, Tom, has a near-fatal attack from a medical condition. Walking home from the hospital, Jeffrey cuts through a vacant lot and discovers a severed human ear, which he takes to police detective John Williams. Williams's daughter Sandy tells Jeffrey that the ear somehow relates to a lounge singer named Dorothy Vallens. Intrigued, Jeffrey enters her apartment by posing as an exterminator. While there, he steals a spare key while she is distracted by a man in a distinctive yellow sport coat, whom Jeffrey nicknames the \"Yellow Man\".\nJeffrey and Sandy attend Dorothy's nightclub act, in which she sings \"Blue Velvet\", and leave early so Jeffrey can break into her apartment. Dorothy returns home and undresses; she finds Jeffrey hiding in a closet and forces him to strip at knifepoint, but he retreats to the closet when Frank Booth, a psychopathic gangster and drug lord, arrives and interrupts their encounter. Frank beats and rapes Dorothy while inhaling gas from a canister, alternating between fits of sobbing and violent rage. After Frank leaves, Jeffrey sneaks away and seeks comfort from Sandy.\nSurmising that Frank has abducted Dorothy's husband Don, and son Donnie, to force her into sexual slavery, Jeffrey suspects that Frank cut off Don's ear to intimidate her into submission. While continuing to see Sandy, Jeffrey enters into a sadomasochistic relationship with Dorothy, in which she encourages him to hit her. Jeffrey sees Frank attending Dorothy's show and later observes him selling drugs and meeting with the Yellow Man. Jeffrey then sees the Yellow Man meeting with a \"well-dressed man\".\nWhen Frank catches Jeffrey leaving Dorothy's apartment, he abducts them and takes them to the lair of Ben, a criminal associate holding Don and Donnie hostage. Frank permits Dorothy to see her family and forces Jeffrey to watch Ben perform an impromptu lip-sync of Roy Orbison's \"In Dreams\", which moves Frank to tears. Afterwards, he and his gang take Jeffrey and Dorothy on a high-speed joyride to a sawmill yard, where he again attempts to sexually abuse Dorothy. When Jeffrey intervenes and punches him in the face, an enraged Frank and his gang pull him out of the car. Replaying the tape of \"In Dreams\", Frank smears lipstick on his face and violently kisses Jeffrey. Frank then has Jeffrey restrained and beats him unconscious, while Dorothy pleads for Frank to stop. Jeffrey awakens the next morning, bruised and bloodied.\nWhile visiting the police station, Jeffrey discovers that the Yellow Man is Detective Williams's partner Tom Gordon, who has been murdering Frank's rival drug dealers and stealing confiscated narcotics from the evidence room for Frank to sell. After Jeffrey and Sandy declare their love for each other at a party, they are pursued by a car which they assume belongs to Frank; as they arrive at Jeffrey's home, Sandy realizes the driver is her ex-boyfriend, Mike. After Mike threatens to beat Jeffrey for stealing his girlfriend, Dorothy appears on Jeffrey's porch naked, beaten, and confused. Mike backs down as Jeffrey and Sandy whisk Dorothy to Sandy's house to summon medical attention.\nWhen Dorothy calls Jeffrey \"my secret love\", a distraught Sandy slaps him for cheating on her. Jeffrey asks Sandy to tell her father everything, and Detective Williams then leads a police raid on Frank's headquarters, killing Frank's men. Jeffrey returns alone to Dorothy's apartment, where he discovers Don dead and Gordon mortally wounded. As Jeffrey leaves the apartment, the \"Well-Dressed Man\" arrives, sees Jeffrey in the stairs, and chases him back inside. Jeffrey uses Gordon's walkie-talkie to say he is in the bedroom before hiding in the closet. The \"Well-Dressed Man\" arrives at the apartment and Jeffrey observes he is actually Frank in disguise. Jeffrey kills Frank with Gordon's gun when Frank opens the closet door. Moments later, Sandy and Detective Williams arrive.\nSome time later, Jeffrey and Sandy have continued their relationship, Tom Beaumont has recovered, and Dorothy has been reunited with her son.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nOrigin.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nKyle is dressed like me. My father was a research scientist for the Department of Agriculture in Washington. We were in the woods all the time. I'd sorta had enough of the woods by the time I left, but still, lumber and lumberjacks, all this kinda thing, that's America to me like the picket fences and the roses in the opening shot. It's so burned in, that image, and it makes me feel so happy.\n\u2014David Lynch discusses the autobiographical content in \"Blue Velvet\"\nThe film's story originated from three ideas that crystallized in the filmmaker's mind over a period of time starting as early as 1973.\nThe first idea was only \"a feeling\" and the title, as Lynch told \"Cineaste\" in 1987.\nThe second idea was an image of a severed, human ear lying in a field. \"I don't know why it had to be an ear. Except it needed to be an opening of a part of the body, a hole into something else\u00a0... The ear sits on the head and goes right into the mind so it felt perfect,\" Lynch remarked in a 1986 interview to \"The New York Times\".\nThe third idea was Bobby Vinton's rendition of \"Blue Velvet\" and \"the mood that came with that song a mood, a time, and things that were of that time.\"\nThe scene in which Dorothy appears naked outside was inspired by a real-life experience Lynch had during childhood when he and his brother saw a naked woman walking down a neighborhood street at night. The experience was so traumatic to the young Lynch that it made him cry, and he had never forgotten it.\nAfter completing \"The Elephant Man\" (1980), Lynch met producer Richard Roth over coffee. Roth had read and enjoyed Lynch's \"Ronnie Rocket\" script, but did not think it was something he wanted to produce. He asked Lynch if the filmmaker had any other scripts, but the director only had ideas. \"I told him I had always wanted to sneak into a girl's room to watch her into the night and that, maybe, at one point or another, I would see something that would be the clue to a murder mystery. Roth loved the idea and asked me to write a treatment. I went home and thought of the ear in the field.\" Production was announced in August 1984. Lynch wrote two more drafts before he was satisfied with the script of the film. The problem with them, Lynch has said, was that \"there was maybe all the unpleasantness in the film but nothing else. A lot was not there. And so it went away for a while.\" Conditions at this point were ideal for Lynch's film: he had made a deal with Dino De Laurentiis that gave him complete artistic freedom and final cut privileges, with the stipulation that the filmmaker take a cut in his salary and work with a budget of only $6\u00a0million. This deal meant that \"Blue Velvet\" was the smallest film on De Laurentiis's slate. Consequently, Lynch would be left mostly unsupervised during production. \"After \"Dune\" I was down so far that anything was up! So it was just a euphoria. And when you work with that kind of feeling, you can take chances. You can experiment.\"\nCasting.\nThe cast of \"Blue Velvet\" included several then-relatively unknown actors.\nLynch met Isabella Rossellini at a restaurant, and offered her the role of Dorothy Vallens. Helen Mirren had been Lynch's first choice for the role. Rossellini had gained some exposure before the film for her Lanc\u00f4me ads in the early 1980s and for being the daughter of actress Ingrid Bergman and director Roberto Rossellini. After completion of the film, during test screenings, ICM Partners\u2014the agency representing Rossellini\u2014immediately dropped her as a client. Furthermore, the nuns at the school in Rome that Rossellini attended in her youth called to say they were praying for her.\nKyle MacLachlan had played the central role in Lynch's critical and commercial failure \"Dune\" (1984), a science fiction epic based on the novel of the same name. MacLachlan later became a recurring collaborator with Lynch, who remarked: \"Kyle plays innocents who are interested in the mysteries of life. He's the person you trust enough to go into a strange world with.\" Val Kilmer was offered a role in the film, but he turned it down as felt it was too \"graphic\" for him, a decision he later regretted. Dourif and Stockwell also rejoined Lynch from \"Dune\".\nDennis Hopper was the best-known actor in the film, having directed and starred in \"Easy Rider\" (1969). Hopper\u2014said to be Lynch's third choice (Michael Ironside has stated that Frank was written with him in mind)\u2014accepted the role, reportedly having exclaimed, \"I've got to play Frank! I am Frank!\" Harry Dean Stanton and Steven Berkoff both turned down the role of Frank because of the violent content in the film.\nLaura Dern, then 18 years old, was cast as Sandy after several already-successful actresses turned the role down, one among those being Molly Ringwald. At the time, Dern was enrolled at UCLA as a psychology student, but she dropped out two days into the semester to work on the film.\nShooting.\nPrincipal photography of \"Blue Velvet\" began in August 1985 and completed in November. The film was shot at EUE/Screen Gems studio in Wilmington, North Carolina, which also provided the exterior scenes of Lumberton. The scene with a raped and battered Dorothy proved to be particularly challenging. Several townspeople arrived to watch the filming with picnic baskets and rugs, against the wishes of Rossellini and Lynch. However, they continued filming as normal, and when Lynch yelled cut, the townspeople left. As a result, police told Lynch they were no longer permitted to shoot in any public areas of Wilmington.\nThe Carolina Apartments in downtown Wilmington served as Dorothy's apartment building, with the adjacent Kenan fountain featured prominently in many shots. The building is also the birth place and death place of noted artist Claude Howell. The apartment building stands today, and the Kenan fountain was refurbished in 2020 after sustaining heavy damage during Hurricane Florence.\nEditing.\nLynch's original rough cut ran for approximately four hours. He was contractually obligated to deliver a two-hour movie by De Laurentiis and cut many small subplots and character scenes. He also made cuts at the request of the MPAA. For example, when Frank slaps Dorothy after the first rape scene, the audience was supposed to see Frank actually hitting her. Instead, the film cuts away to Jeffrey in the closet, wincing at what he has just seen. This cut was made to satisfy the MPAA's concerns about violence, though Lynch thought that the change made the scene more disturbing.\nIn 2011, Lynch announced that footage from the deleted scenes, long thought lost, had been discovered. The material was subsequently included on the Blu-ray Disc release of the film. Among the deleted footage was Megan Mullally as Jeffrey's college sweetheart Louise Wertham, whose entire role was cut from the theatrical release. The final cut of the film runs at just over two hours.\nDistribution.\nBecause the material was completely different from anything that would be considered mainstream at the time, De Laurentiis Entertainment Group's marketing employees were unsure of how to promote the film, or even if it would be promoted at all; it wasn't until the positive reception the film received at various film festivals that they began to promote it.\nInterpretations.\nDespite \"Blue Velvet\"'s initial appearance as a mystery, the film operates on a number of thematic levels. The film owes a large debt to 1950s film noir, containing and exploring such conventions as the femme fatale (Dorothy Vallens), a seemingly unstoppable villain (Frank Booth) and the questionable moral outlook of the hero (Jeffrey Beaumont), as well as its unusual use of shadowy, sometimes dark cinematography. \"Blue Velvet\" establishes Lynch's famous \"askew vision\" and introduces several common elements of his work, some of which would later become his trademarks, including distorted characters, a polarized world and debilitating damage to the skull or brain. Perhaps the most significant Lynchian trademark in the film is the unearthing of a dark underbelly in a seemingly idealized small town; Jeffrey even proclaims in the film that he is \"seeing something that was always hidden\". Lynch's characterization of films, symbols and motifs have become well known and his particular style, characterised largely in \"Blue Velvet\" for the first time, has been written about extensively using descriptions like \"dreamlike\", \"ultraweird\", \"dark\", and \"oddball\". Red curtains also appear in key scenes, specifically in Dorothy's apartment and at the night club where she sings, which have since become a Lynch trademark. The film has been compared to Alfred Hitchcock's \"Psycho\" (1960) because of its stark treatment of evil and mental illness. The premise of both films is curiosity, leading to an investigation that draws the lead characters into a hidden, voyeuristic underworld of crime.\nThe film's thematic framework harks back to Edgar Allan Poe, Henry James and early gothic fiction, as well as films such as \"Shadow of a Doubt\" (1943) and \"The Night of the Hunter\" (1955) and the entire notion of film noir. Lynch has called it a \"film about things that are hidden - within a small city and within people.\"\nFeminist psychoanalytic film theorist Laura Mulvey argues that \"Blue Velvet\" establishes a metaphorical Oedipal family\u2014\"the child\", Jeffrey Beaumont and his \"parents\", Frank Booth and Dorothy Vallens - both through deliberate references to film noir. Michael Atkinson claims that the resulting violence in the film can be read as symbolic of domestic violence within real families. He reads Jeffrey as an innocent youth who is both horrified by the violence inflicted by Frank and tempted by it as the means of possessing Dorothy for himself. Atkinson takes a Freudian approach to the film, considering it to be an expression of the traumatised innocence which characterises Lynch's work. He states, \"Dorothy represents the sexual force of the mother [figure] because she is forbidden and because she becomes the object of the unhealthy, infantile impulses at work in Jeffrey's subconscious.\"\nSymbolism.\nSymbolism is used heavily in \"Blue Velvet\". The most consistent symbolism in the film is an insect motif introduced at the end of the first scene, when the camera zooms in on a well-kept suburban lawn until it unearths a swarming underground nest of bugs. This is generally recognized as a metaphor for the seedy underworld that Jeffrey will soon discover under the surface of his own suburban paradise. The severed ear he finds is being overrun by black ants. The bug motif is recurrent throughout the film, most notably in the bug-like gas mask that Frank wears and Jeffrey's exterminator disguise. One of Frank's accomplices is also consistently identified through the yellow jacket he wears, possibly referencing the name of a type of wasp. Finally, a robin eating a bug on a fence becomes a topic of discussion in the last scene of the film.\nThe severed ear that Jeffrey discovers is also a key symbolic element, leading Jeffrey into danger. Indeed, just as Jeffrey's troubles begin, the audience is treated to a nightmarish sequence in which the camera zooms into the canal of the severed, decomposing ear. After the danger has subsided at the end the ear canal closeup is repeated, zooming out on a healthy and clean ear.\nSoundtrack.\nThe \"Blue Velvet\" soundtrack was supervised by Angelo Badalamenti (who makes a brief cameo appearance as the pianist at the Slow Club where Dorothy performs). The soundtrack makes heavy usage of vintage pop songs, such as Bobby Vinton's \"Blue Velvet\" and Roy Orbison's \"In Dreams\", juxtaposed with an orchestral score. During filming, Lynch placed speakers on set and in streets and played Shostakovich to set the mood he wanted to convey. The score alludes to Shostakovich's 15th Symphony, which Lynch had been listening to regularly while writing the screenplay. Lynch had originally opted to use \"Song to the Siren\" by This Mortal Coil during the scene in which Sandy and Jeffrey share a dance; however, he could not obtain the rights for the song at the time. He would go on to use this song in \"Lost Highway\" eleven years later.\n\"Entertainment Weekly\" ranked \"Blue Velvet\"'s soundtrack on its list of the \"100 Greatest Film Soundtracks\", at the 100th position. Critic John Alexander wrote, \"the haunting soundtrack accompanies the title credits, then weaves through the narrative, accentuating the noir mood of the film.\" Lynch worked with music composer Angelo Badalamenti for the first time in this film and asked him to write a score that had to be \"like Shostakovich, be very Russian, but make it the most beautiful thing but make it dark and a little bit scary.\" Badalamenti's success with \"Blue Velvet\" would lead him to contribute to all of Lynch's future full-length films until \"Inland Empire\" as well as the cult television program \"Twin Peaks\". Also included in the sound team was long-time Lynch collaborator Alan Splet, a sound editor and designer who had won an Academy Award for his work on \"The Black Stallion\" (1979) and been nominated for \"Never Cry Wolf\" (1983).\nReception.\nBox office.\n\"Blue Velvet\" premiered in competition at the Montreal World Film Festival in August 1986, and at the Toronto Festival of Festivals on September 12, 1986, and a few days later in the United States. It debuted commercially in both countries on September 19, 1986, in 98 theatres across the United States. In its opening weekend, the film grossed a total of $789,409. It eventually expanded to another 15 theatres, and in the US and Canada grossed a total of $8,551,228. \"Blue Velvet\" was met with uproar by its audiences, with lines formed around city blocks in New York City and Los Angeles. There were reports of mass walkouts and refund demands during its opening week. At a Chicago screening, a man fainted and had to have his pacemaker checked. Upon revival, he returned to the cinema to see the ending. At a Los Angeles cinema, two strangers became engaged in a heated disagreement, but resolved the disagreement in order to return to the theatre.\nCritical reception.\n\"Blue Velvet\" was released to a very polarized reception in the United States. The critics who praised the film were often vociferous. \"The New York Times\" critic Janet Maslin directed much praise toward the performances of Hopper and Rossellini: \"Mr. Hopper and Miss Rossellini are so far outside the bounds of ordinary acting here that their performances are best understood in terms of sheer lack of inhibition; both give themselves entirely over to the material, which seems to be exactly what's called for.\" She called it \"an instant cult classic\", concluding that \"Blue Velvet\" \"is as fascinating as it is freakish\" and \"confirms Mr. Lynch's stature as an innovator, a superb technician, and someone best not encountered in a dark alley.\"\nSheila Benson of the \"Los Angeles Times\" called the film \"the most brilliantly disturbing film ever to have its roots in small-town American life,\" describing it as \"shocking, visionary, rapturously controlled\". Film critic Gene Siskel included \"Blue Velvet\" on his list of the best films of 1986, at the fifth spot. Peter Travers, film critic for \"Rolling Stone\", named it the best film of the 1980s and referred to it as an \"American masterpiece\". Upon its initial release, Woody Allen and Martin Scorsese called \"Blue Velvet\" the best film of the year.\nOn the other hand, Paul Attanasio of \"The Washington Post\" said \"the film showcases a visual stylist utterly in command of his talents\" and that Angelo Badalamenti \"contributes an extraordinary score, slipping seamlessly from slinky jazz to violin figures to the romantic sweep of a classic Hollywood score,\" but stated that Lynch \"isn't interested in communicating, he's interested in parading his personality. The movie doesn't progress or deepen, it just gets weirder, and to no good end.\" A general criticism from US critics was \"Blue Velvet\"'s approach to sexuality and violence. They asserted that this detracted from the film's seriousness as a work of art, and some condemned the film as pornographic. One of its detractors, Roger Ebert, stated that the large amount of \"jokey small-town satire\" in the film made it impossible to take its themes seriously. Ebert praised Rossellini's performance as \"convincing and courageous\" but criticized how she was depicted in the film, even accusing David Lynch of misogyny: \"degraded, slapped around, humiliated and undressed in front of the camera. And when you ask an actress to endure those experiences, you should keep your side of the bargain by putting her in an important film.\" While Ebert in later years came to consider Lynch a great filmmaker, his negative view of \"Blue Velvet\" remained unchanged in the 21st century.\nThe film is widely considered a masterpiece and holds an approval of 91% on Rotten Tomatoes based on 138 reviews, with an average rating of 8.2/10. The website's critical consensus states: \"If audiences walk away from this subversive, surreal shocker not fully understanding the story, they might also walk away with a deeper perception of the potential of film storytelling.\" The film also has a score of 75 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 15 critics, indicating \"generally favorable\" reviews. Looking back in his \"Guardian/Observer\" review, critic Philip French wrote, \"The film is wearing well and has attained a classic status without becoming respectable or losing its sense of danger.\"\nMark Kermode walked out on the film and gave the film a poor review upon its release, but revised his view of the film over time. In 2016, he remarked, \"as a film critic, it taught me that when a film really gets under your skin and really provokes a visceral reaction, you have to be very careful about assessing it ... I didn't walk out on \"Blue Velvet\" because it was a bad film. I walked out on it because it was a really good film. The point was at the time I wasn't good enough for it.\"\nAccolades.\nDavid Lynch was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Director and the Golden Globe Award for Best Screenplay for his work on the film. Dennis Hopper was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor \u2013 Motion Picture for his performance, while Isabella Rossellini won the Independent Spirit Award for Best Female Lead for her performance. Lynch won Best Director and Hopper won Best Supporting Actor at the Los Angeles Film Critics Association awards in 1987. That same year, the film received four National Society of Film Critics awards: Best Film, Best Director (Lynch), Best Cinematography (Frederick Elmes), and Best Supporting Actor (Hopper).\nHome media.\n\"Blue Velvet\" was released on VHS and LaserDisc by Karl-Lorimar Home Video in 1987 and re-issued by Warner Home Video in 1991. After that, it was released on DVD in 2000 and 2002 by MGM Home Entertainment. The film made its Blu-ray debut on November 8, 2011, with a special 25th-anniversary edition featuring never-before-seen deleted scenes. On May 28, 2019, the film was re-released on Blu-ray by the Criterion Collection, featuring a 4K digital restoration, the original stereo soundtrack and other special features, including a behind-the-scenes documentary titled \"Blue Velvet Revisited\". Criterion later released the film as a 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray/Blu-ray combo pack on June 25, 2024.\nLegacy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Blue Velvet\" has weathered the passage of time better than any other Oscar nominee that year, possibly better than any Hollywood movie of its decade. The shock of the new fades by definition, but if it has hardly done so in the case of \"Blue Velvet\", that may be because its tone remains forever elusive.\n\u2014Dennis Lim, 2016\nAlthough it initially gained a relatively small theatrical audience in North America and was met with controversy over its artistic merit, \"Blue Velvet\" soon became the center of a \"national firestorm\" in 1986, and over time became regarded as an American classic. In the late 1980s, and early 1990s, after its release on videotape, the film became a widely recognized cult film, for its dark depiction of a suburban America. With its many VHS, LaserDisc and DVD releases, the film reached broader American audiences. It marked David Lynch's entry into the Hollywood mainstream and Dennis Hopper's comeback. Hopper's performance as Frank Booth has itself left an imprint on popular culture, with countless tributes, cultural references and parodies. The film's success also helped Hollywood address previously censored issues, as \"Psycho\" (1960) had. \"Blue Velvet\" has been frequently compared to that ground-breaking film. It has become one of the most significant, well-recognized films of its era, spawning countless imitations and parodies in media. The film's dark, stylish and erotic production design has served as a benchmark for a number of films, parodies and even Lynch's own later work, notably \"Twin Peaks\" (1990\u201391), and \"Mulholland Drive\" (2001). Peter Travers of \"Rolling Stone\" magazine cited it as one of the most \"influential American films\", as did Michael Atkinson, who dedicated a book to the film's themes and motifs.\n\"Blue Velvet\" frequently appears in critical assessments of all-time great films, is ranked as one of the greatest films of the 1980s, one of the best examples of American surrealism and one of the finest examples of David Lynch's work. In a poll of 54 American critics ranking the \"most outstanding films of the decade\", \"Blue Velvet\" was placed fourth, behind \"Raging Bull\" (1980), \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\" (1982) and the German film \"Wings of Desire\" (1987). An \"Entertainment Weekly\" book special released in 1999 ranked \"Blue Velvet\" 37th of the greatest films of all time. The film was ranked by \"The Guardian\" in its list of the 100 Greatest Films. \"Film Four\" ranked it on their list of 100 Greatest Films. In a 2007 poll of the online film community held by \"Variety\", \"Blue Velvet\" came in at the 95th-greatest film of all time. \"Total Film\" ranked \"Blue Velvet\" as one of the all-time best films in both a critics' list and a public poll, in 2006 and 2007, respectively. In December 2002, a UK film critics' poll in \"Sight &amp; Sound\" ranked the film fifth on their list of the 10 Best Films of the Last 25 Years. In a special \"Entertainment Weekly\" issue, 100 new film classics were chosen from 1983 to 2008: \"Blue Velvet\" was ranked at fourth.\nIn addition to \"Blue Velvet\"'s various \"all-time greatest films\" rankings, the American Film Institute has awarded the film three honors in its lists: 96th on \"100 Years ... 100 Thrills\" in 2001, selecting cinema's most thrilling moments and ranked Frank Booth 36th of the 50 greatest villains in \"100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains\" in 2003. In June 2008, the AFI revealed its \"ten Top Ten\"\u2014the best ten films in ten \"classic\" American film genres\u2014after polling over 1,500 people from the creative community. \"Blue Velvet\" was acknowledged as the eighth best film in the mystery genre. \"Premiere\" magazine listed Frank Booth, played by Dennis Hopper, as the 54th on its list of 'The 100 Greatest Movie Characters of All Time', calling him one of \"the most monstrously funny creations in cinema history\". The film was ranked 84th on Bravo Television's four-hour program \"100 Scariest Movie Moments\" (2004). It is frequently sampled musically and an array of bands and solo artists have taken their names and inspiration from the film. In August 2012, \"Sight &amp; Sound\" unveiled their latest list of the 250 greatest films of all time, with \"Blue Velvet\" ranking at 69th.\n\"Blue Velvet\" was also nominated for the following AFI lists:\nInspired by the film, pop singer Lana Del Rey recorded a cover version of \"Blue Velvet\" in 2012. Used to endorse clothing line H&amp;M, a music video accompanied the track and aired as a television commercial. Set in post-war America, the video drew influence from Lynch and \"Blue Velvet\". In the video, Del Rey plays the role of Dorothy Vallens, performing a private concert similar to the scene where Ben (Dean Stockwell) pantomimes \"In Dreams\" for Frank Booth. Del Rey's version, however, has her lip-syncing \"Blue Velvet\" when a little person dressed as Frank Sinatra approaches and unplugs a hidden Victrola, revealing Del Rey as a fraud. When Lynch heard of the music video, he praised it, telling \"Artinfo\": \"Lana Del Rey, she's got some fantastic charisma and\u2014this is a very interesting thing\u2014it's like she's born out of another time. She's got something that's very appealing to people. And I didn't know she was influenced by me!\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3948", "revid": "381341", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3948", "title": "Binary operation", "text": "Mathematical operation with two operands\nIn mathematics, a binary operation or dyadic operation is a rule for combining two elements (called operands) to produce another element. More formally, a binary operation is an operation of arity two.\nMore specifically, a binary operation on a set is a binary function that maps every pair of elements of the set to an element of the set. Examples include the familiar arithmetic operations like addition, subtraction, multiplication, set operations like union, complement, intersection. Other examples are readily found in different areas of mathematics, such as vector addition, matrix multiplication, and conjugation in groups.\nA binary function that involves several sets is sometimes also called a \"binary operation\". For example, scalar multiplication of vector spaces takes a scalar and a vector to produce a vector, and scalar product takes two vectors to produce a scalar.\nBinary operations are the keystone of most structures that are studied in algebra, in particular in semigroups, monoids, groups, rings, fields, and vector spaces.\nTerminology.\nMore precisely, a binary operation on a set formula_1 is a mapping of the elements of the Cartesian product formula_2 to formula_1:\nformula_4\nIf formula_5 is not a function but a partial function, then formula_5 is called a partial binary operation. For instance, division is a partial binary operation on the set of all real numbers, because one cannot divide by zero: formula_7 is undefined for every real number formula_8. In both model theory and classical universal algebra, binary operations are required to be defined on all elements of formula_2. However, partial algebras generalize universal algebras to allow partial operations.\nSometimes, especially in computer science, the term binary operation is used for any binary function.\nProperties and examples.\nTypical examples of binary operations are the addition (formula_10) and multiplication (formula_11) of numbers and matrices as well as composition of functions on a single set.\nFor instance,\nMany binary operations of interest in both algebra and formal logic are commutative, satisfying formula_36 for all elements formula_8 and formula_38 in formula_1, or associative, satisfying formula_40 for all formula_8, formula_38, and formula_43 in formula_1. Many also have identity elements and inverse elements.\nThe first three examples above are commutative and all of the above examples are associative.\nOn the set of real numbers formula_12, subtraction, that is, formula_46, is a binary operation which is not commutative since, in general, formula_47. It is also not associative, since, in general, formula_48; for instance, formula_49 but formula_50.\nOn the set of natural numbers formula_14, the binary operation exponentiation, formula_52, is not commutative since, formula_53 (cf. Equation xy = yx), and is also not associative since formula_54. For instance, with formula_55, formula_56, and formula_57, formula_58, but formula_59. By changing the set formula_14 to the set of integers formula_61, this binary operation becomes a partial binary operation since it is now undefined when formula_62 and formula_38 is any negative integer. For either set, this operation has a \"right identity\" (which is formula_64) since formula_65 for all formula_8 in the set, which is not an \"identity\" (two sided identity) since formula_67 in general.\nDivision (formula_68), a partial binary operation on the set of real or rational numbers, is not commutative or associative. Tetration (formula_69), as a binary operation on the natural numbers, is not commutative or associative and has no identity element.\nNotation.\nBinary operations are often written using infix notation such as formula_70, formula_71, formula_72 or (by juxtaposition with no symbol) formula_73 rather than by functional notation of the form formula_74. Powers are usually also written without operator, but with the second argument as superscript.\nBinary operations are sometimes written using prefix or (more frequently) postfix notation, both of which dispense with parentheses. They are also called, respectively, Polish notation formula_75 and reverse Polish notation formula_76.\nBinary operations as ternary relations.\nA binary operation formula_5 on a set formula_1 may be viewed as a ternary relation on formula_1, that is, the set of triples formula_80 in formula_81 for all formula_8 and formula_38 in formula_1.\nOther binary operations.\nFor example, scalar multiplication in linear algebra. Here formula_85 is a field and formula_1 is a vector space over that field.\nAlso the dot product of two vectors maps formula_2 to formula_85, where formula_85 is a field and formula_1 is a vector space over formula_85. It depends on authors whether it is considered as a binary operation.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3950", "revid": "28422", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3950", "title": "Bagpipes", "text": "Woodwind instrument\nBagpipes are a woodwind instrument using enclosed reeds fed from a constant reservoir of air in the form of a bag. The Great Highland bagpipes are well known, but people have played bagpipes for centuries throughout large parts of Europe, Northern Africa, Western Asia, around the Persian Gulf and northern parts of South Asia.\nThe term \"bagpipe\" is equally correct in the singular or the plural, though pipers usually refer to the bagpipes as \"the pipes\", \"a set of pipes\" or \"a stand of pipes\".\nBagpipes are part of the aerophone group because to play the instrument, air must be blown into it to produce a sound.\nConstruction.\nA set of bagpipes minimally consists of an air supply, a bag, a chanter, and usually at least one drone. Many bagpipes have more than one drone (and, sometimes, more than one chanter) in various combinations, held in place in stocks\u2014sockets that fasten the various pipes to the bag.\nAir supply.\nThe most common method of supplying air to the bag is through blowing into a blowpipe or blowstick. In some pipes the player must cover the tip of the blowpipe with the tongue while inhaling, in order to prevent unwanted deflation of the bag, but most blowpipes have a non-return valve that eliminates this need. In recent times, there are many instruments that assist in creating a clean air flow to the pipes and assist the collection of condensation.\nThe use of a bellows to supply air is an innovation dating from the 16th or 17th century. In these pipes, sometimes called \"cauld wind pipes\", air is not heated or moistened by the player's breathing, so bellows-driven bagpipes can use more refined or delicate reeds. Such pipes include the Irish uilleann pipes; the border or Lowland pipes, Scottish smallpipes, Northumbrian smallpipes and pastoral pipes in Britain; the \"musette de cour\", the \"musette bechonnet\" and the \"cabrette\" in France; and the Dudy, koziol bialy, and \"koziol czarny\" in Poland.\nBag.\nThe bag is an airtight reservoir that holds air and regulates its flow via arm pressure, allowing the player to maintain continuous, even sound. The player keeps the bag inflated by blowing air into it through a blowpipe or by pumping air into it with a bellows. Materials used for bags vary widely, but the most common are the skins of local animals such as goats, dogs, sheep, and cows. More recently, bags made of synthetic materials including Gore-Tex have become much more common. Some synthetic bags have zips that allow the player to fit a more effective moisture trap to the inside of the bag. However, synthetic bags still carry a risk of colonisation by fungal spores, and the associated danger of lung infection if they are not kept clean, even if they otherwise require less cleaning than do bags made from natural substances.\nBags cut from larger materials are usually saddle-stitched with an extra strip folded over the seam and stitched (for skin bags) or glued (for synthetic bags) to reduce leaks. Holes are then cut to accommodate the stocks. In the case of bags made from largely intact animal skins, the stocks are typically tied into the points where the limbs and the head joined the body of the whole animal, a construction technique common in Central Europe. Different regions have different ways of treating the hide. The simplest methods involve just the use of salt, while more complex treatments involve milk, flour, and the removal of fur. The hide is normally turned inside out so that the fur is on the inside of the bag, as this helps to reduce the effect of moisture buildup within the bag.\nChanter.\nThe chanter is the melody pipe, played with two hands. All bagpipes have at least one chanter; some pipes have two chanters, particularly those in North Africa, in the Balkans, and in Southwest Asia. A chanter can be bored internally so that the inside walls are parallel (or \"cylindrical\") for its full length, or it can be bored in a conical shape. Popular woods include boxwood, cornel, plum or other fruit wood.\nThe chanter is usually open-ended, so there is no easy way for the player to stop the pipe from sounding. Thus most bagpipes share a constant legato sound with no rests in the music. Primarily because of this inability to stop playing, technical movements are made to break up notes and to create the illusion of articulation and accents. Because of their importance, these embellishments (or \"ornaments\") are often highly technical systems specific to each bagpipe, and take many years of study to master. A few bagpipes (such as the musette de cour, the uilleann pipes, the Northumbrian smallpipes, the piva and the left chanter of the surdelina) have closed ends or stop the end on the player's leg, so that when the player \"closes\" (covers all the holes), the chanter becomes silent.\nA practice chanter is a chanter without bag or drones and has a much quieter reed, allowing a player to practice the instrument quietly and with no variables other than playing the chanter.\nThe term \"chanter\" is derived from the Latin \"cantare\", or \"to sing\", much like the modern French verb meaning \"to sing\", \"chanter\".\nA distinctive feature of the gaida's chanter (which it shares with a number of other Eastern European bagpipes) is the \"flea-hole\" (also known as a \"mumbler\" or \"voicer\", \"marmorka\") which is covered by the index finger of the left hand. The flea-hole is smaller than the rest and usually consists of a small tube that is made out of metal or a chicken or duck feather. Uncovering the flea-hole raises any note played by a half step, and it is used in creating the musical ornamentation that gives Balkan music its unique character.\nSome types of gaida can have a double bored chanter, such as the Serbian three-voiced gajde. It has eight fingerholes: the top four are covered by the thumb and the first three fingers of the left hand, then the four fingers of the right hand cover the remaining four holes.\nChanter reed.\nThe note from the chanter is produced by a reed installed at its top. The reed may be a single (a reed with one vibrating tongue) or double reed (of two pieces that vibrate against each other). Double reeds are used with both conical- and parallel-bored chanters while single reeds are generally (although not exclusively) limited to parallel-bored chanters. In general, double-reed chanters are found in pipes of Western Europe while single-reed chanters appear in most other regions.\nThey are made from reed (\"arundo donax\" or Phragmites), bamboo, or elder. A more modern variant for the reed is a combination of a cotton phenolic (Hgw2082) material from which the body of the reed is made and a clarinet reed cut to size in order to fit the body. These types of reeds produce a louder sound and are not so sensitive to humidity and temperature changes.\nDrone.\nMost bagpipes have at least one drone, a pipe that generally is not fingered but rather produces a constant harmonizing note throughout play (usually the tonic note of the chanter). Exceptions are generally those pipes that have a double-chanter instead. A drone is most commonly a cylindrically bored tube with a single reed, although drones with double reeds exist. The drone is generally designed in two or more parts with a sliding joint so that the pitch of the drone can be adjusted.\nDepending on the type of pipes, the drones may lie over the shoulder, across the arm opposite the bag, or may run parallel to the chanter. Some drones have a tuning screw, which effectively alters the length of the drone by opening a hole, allowing the drone to be tuned to two or more distinct pitches. The tuning screw may also shut off the drone altogether. In most types of pipes with one drone, it is pitched two octaves below the tonic of the chanter. Additional drones often add the octave below and then a drone consonant with the fifth of the chanter.\nHistory.\nPossible ancient origins.\nThe evidence for bagpipes prior to the 13th century is still uncertain, but several textual and visual clues have been suggested. The \"Oxford History of Music\" posits that a sculpture of bagpipes has been found on a Hittite slab at Euyuk in Anatolia, dated to 1000 BCE. Another interpretation of this sculpture suggests that it instead depicts a pan flute played along with a friction drum.\nSeveral authors identify the ancient Greek (\u1f00\u03c3\u03ba\u03cc\u03c2 \"askos\" \u2013 wine-skin, \u03b1\u1f50\u03bb\u03cc\u03c2 \"aulos\" \u2013 reed pipe) with the bagpipe.\nDio Chrysostom wrote in the 1st century CE of a contemporary sovereign (possibly the Roman emperor Nero) who could play a pipe (tibia, Roman reedpipes similar to Greek and Etruscan instruments) with his mouth as well as by tucking a bladder beneath his armpit.\nIn the 2nd century CE, Suetonius also described Nero as a player of the \"tibia utricularis\".\nModern scholarship suggests that such instruments, rather than being seen as an independent class, were understood as variants on mouth-blown instruments that used a bag as an alternative blowing aid, and that it was not until drones were added in the European Medieval era that bagpipes were seen as a distinct class.\nSpread and development in Europe.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the early part of the second millennium, representations of bagpipes began to appear with increasing frequency in Western European art and iconography. The Cantigas de Santa Maria, written in Galician-Portuguese and compiled in Castile in the mid-13th century, depicts several types of bagpipes.\nSeveral illustrations of bagpipes also appear in the \"Chronique dite de Baudoin d\u2019Avesnes\", a 13th-century manuscript of northern French origin.\nAlthough evidence of bagpipes in the British Isles prior to the 14th century is contested, they are explicitly mentioned in \"The Canterbury Tales\" (written around 1380):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A baggepype wel coude he blowe and sowne, /And ther-with-al he broghte us out of towne.\u2014\u200a\nBagpipes were also frequent subjects for carvers of wooden choir stalls in the late 15th and early 16th century throughout Europe, sometimes with animal musicians.\nActual specimens of bagpipes from before the 18th century are extremely rare; however, a substantial number of paintings, carvings, engravings, and manuscript illuminations survive. These artefacts are clear evidence that bagpipes varied widely throughout Europe, and even within individual regions. Many examples of early folk bagpipes in continental Europe can be found in the paintings of Brueghel, Teniers, Jordaens, and Durer.\nThe earliest known artefact identified as a part of a bagpipe is a chanter found in 1985 at Rostock, Germany, that has been dated to the late 14th century or the first quarter of the 15th century.\nThe first clear reference to the use of the Scottish Highland bagpipes is from a French history that mentions their use at the Battle of Pinkie in 1547. George Buchanan (1506\u201382) claimed that bagpipes had replaced the trumpet on the battlefield. This period saw the creation of the \"ce\u00f2l m\u00f3r\" (great music) of the bagpipe, which reflected its martial origins, with battle tunes, marches, gatherings, salutes and laments. The Highlands of the early 17th century saw the development of piping families including the MacCrimmonds, MacArthurs, MacGregors, and the Mackays of Gairloch.\nThe earliest Irish mention of the bagpipe is in 1206, approximately thirty years after the Anglo-Norman invasion; another mention attributes their use to Irish troops in Henry VIII's siege of Boulogne. Illustrations in the 1581 book \"The Image of Irelande\" by John Derricke clearly depict a bagpiper. Derricke's illustrations are considered to be reasonably faithful depictions of the attire and equipment of the English and Irish population of the 16th century.\nThe \"Battell\" sequence from \"My Ladye Nevells Booke\" (1591) by William Byrd, which probably alludes to the Irish wars of 1578, contains a piece entitled \"The bagpipe: &amp; the drone\". In 1760, the first serious study of the Scottish Highland bagpipe and its music was attempted in Joseph MacDonald's \"Compleat Theory\". A manuscript from the 1730s by a William Dixon of Northumberland contains music that fits the border pipes, a nine-note bellows-blown bagpipe with a chanter similar to that of the modern Great Highland bagpipe. However, the music in Dixon's manuscript varied greatly from modern Highland bagpipe tunes, consisting mostly of extended variation sets of common dance tunes. Some of the tunes in the Dixon manuscript correspond to those found in the early 19th century manuscript sources of Northumbrian smallpipe tunes, notably the rare book of 50 tunes, many with variations, by John Peacock.\nAs Western classical music developed, both in terms of musical sophistication and instrumental technology, bagpipes in many regions fell out of favour because of their limited range and function. This triggered a long, slow decline that continued, in most cases, into the 20th century.\nExtensive and documented collections of traditional bagpipes may be found at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City, the International Bagpipe Museum in Gij\u00f3n, Spain, the Pitt Rivers Museum in Oxford, England and the Morpeth Chantry Bagpipe Museum in Northumberland, and the Musical Instrument Museum in Phoenix, Arizona.\nThe International Bagpipe Festival is held every two years in Strakonice, Czech Republic.\nRecent history.\nDuring the 19th and 20th centuries, as a result of the participation of Scottish regiments in the expansion of the British Empire, the bagpipes became well known worldwide. This surge in the bagpipes' popularity was boosted by large numbers of Allied pipers which served in World War I and World War II. This coincided with a decline in the popularity of many traditional forms of bagpipe throughout Europe, which began to be displaced by instruments from the classical tradition and later by gramophone and radio.\nAs pipers were easily identifiable, combat losses were high, estimated at one thousand in World War I. A front line role was prohibited following high losses in the Second Battle of El Alamein in 1943, though a few later instances occurred.\nIn the United Kingdom and Commonwealth Nations such as Canada, New Zealand and Australia, the Great Highland bagpipe is commonly used in the military and is often played during formal ceremonies. Foreign militaries patterned after the British army have also adopted the Highland bagpipe, including those of Uganda, Sudan, India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Jordan, and Oman. Many police and fire services in Scotland, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Hong Kong, and the United States have also adopted the tradition of fielding pipe bands.\nIn recent years, often driven by revivals of native folk music and dance, many types of bagpipes have enjoyed a resurgence in popularity and, in many cases, instruments that had fallen into obscurity have become extremely popular. In Brittany, the Great Highland bagpipe and concept of the pipe band were appropriated to create a Breton interpretation known as the bagad. The pipe-band idiom has also been adopted and applied to the Galician gaita as well. Bagpipes have often been used in various films depicting moments from Scottish and Irish history; the film \"Braveheart\" and the theatrical show \"Riverdance\" have served to make the uilleann pipes more commonly known.\nBagpipes are sometimes played at formal events at Commonwealth universities, particularly in Canada. Because of Scottish influences on the sport of curling, bagpipes are also the official instrument of the World Curling Federation and are commonly played during a ceremonial procession of teams before major curling championships.\nBagpipe making was once a craft that produced instruments in many distinctive, local and traditional styles. Today, the world's largest producer of the instrument is Pakistan, where the industry was worth $6.8 million in 2010. In the late 20th century, various models of electronic bagpipes were invented. The first custom-built MIDI bagpipes were developed by the Asturian piper known as Hevia (Jos\u00e9 \u00c1ngel Hevia Velasco).\nAstronaut Kjell N. Lindgren is thought to be the first person to play the bagpipes in outer space, having played \"Amazing Grace\" in tribute to late research scientist Victor Hurst aboard the International Space Station in November 2015.\nTraditionally, one of the purposes of the bagpipe was to provide music for dancing. This has declined with the growth of dance bands, recordings, and the decline of traditional dance. In turn, this has led to many types of pipes developing a performance-led tradition, and indeed much modern music based on the dance music tradition played on bagpipes is suitable for use as dance music.\nModern usage.\nTypes of bagpipes.\nNumerous types of bagpipes today are widely spread across Europe, the Middle East and North Africa as well as through much of the former British Empire. The name bagpipe has almost become synonymous with its best-known form, the Great Highland bagpipe, overshadowing the great number and variety of traditional forms of bagpipe. Despite the decline of these other types of pipes over the last few centuries, in recent years many of these pipes have seen a resurgence or revival as musicians have sought them out; for example, the Irish piping tradition, which by the mid 20th century had declined to a handful of master players is today alive, well, and flourishing, a situation similar to that of the Asturian gaita, the Galician gaita, the Portuguese gaita transmontana, the Aragonese gaita de boto, Northumbrian smallpipes, the Breton biniou, the Balkan gaida, the Romanian cimpoi, the Black Sea tulum, the Scottish smallpipes and pastoral pipes, as well as other varieties. Bulgaria has the Kaba gaida, a large bagpipe of the Rhodope mountains with a hexagonal and rounded drone, often described as a deep-sounding gaida and the Dzhura gaida with a straight conical drone and of a higher pitch. The Macedonian gaida is structurally between a kaba and dzhura gaida and described as a medium pitched gaida.\nIn Southeastern Europe and Eastern Europe bagpipes known as gaida include: the , , (), () () or (), (\"\"), , also and .\nIn Tunisia, it is known by the name \"mezwed\". It is used in the Tunisian pop music genre, also called mezwed, that is named after the instrument. \nUsage in non-traditional music.\nSince the 1960s, bagpipes have also made appearances in other forms of music, including rock, metal, jazz, hip-hop, punk, and classical music, for example with Paul McCartney's \"Mull of Kintyre\", AC/DC's \"It's a Long Way to the Top (If You Wanna Rock 'n' Roll)\", and Peter Maxwell Davies's composition \"An Orkney Wedding, with Sunrise\". \nPublications.\nPeriodicals.\n\"Periodicals covering specific types of bagpipes are addressed in the article for that bagpipe\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3952", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3952", "title": "Bedrock Records", "text": "English record label\nBedrock Records is an English record label for trance, progressive house and techno started by John Digweed. Its name comes from a long running and successful club night held in Hastings and also at Heaven nightclub, London \u2013 both also called Bedrock. Bedrock Records has released many singles from artists such as Astro &amp; Glyde, Brancaccio &amp; Aisher, Steve Lawler, Shmuel Flash, Steve Porter, Sahar Z, Guy J, Henry Saiz, Stelios Vassiloudis, Electric Rescue, The Japanese Popstars and Jerry Bonham. Bedrock is also the name that Digweed and Muir use as their production moniker.\nBedrock has had different imprints: Bedrock Breaks, B_Rock and Black (Bedrock). Currently it has Bedrock Digital and one called Lost &amp; Found belonging to Guy J.\nThe first Bedrock album compiled and mixed by John Digweed was released in 1999, containing several tracks signed to the Bedrock label. \nIn 2018, Digweed marked the 20th anniversary of the label with the release of \"Bedrock XX\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3954", "revid": "915833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3954", "title": "Biochemistry", "text": "Study of chemical processes in living organisms\nBiochemistry, or biological chemistry, is the study of chemical processes within and relating to living organisms. A sub-discipline of both chemistry and biology, biochemistry may be divided into three fields: structural biology, enzymology, and metabolism. Over the last decades of the 20th century, biochemistry has become successful at explaining living processes through these three disciplines. Almost all areas of the life sciences are being uncovered and developed through biochemical methodology and research. Biochemistry focuses on understanding the chemical basis that allows biological molecules to give rise to the processes that occur within living cells and between cells, in turn relating greatly to the understanding of tissues and organs as well as organism structure and function. Biochemistry is closely related to molecular biology, the study of the molecular mechanisms of biological phenomena.\nMuch of biochemistry deals with the structures, functions, and interactions of biological macromolecules such as proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, and lipids. They provide the structure of cells and perform many of the functions associated with life. The chemistry of the cell also depends upon the reactions of small molecules and ions. These can be inorganic (for example, water and metal ions) or organic (for example, the amino acids, which are used to synthesize proteins). The mechanisms used by cells to harness energy from their environment via chemical reactions are known as metabolism. The findings of biochemistry are applied primarily in medicine, nutrition, and agriculture. In medicine, biochemists investigate the causes and cures of diseases. Nutrition studies how to maintain health and wellness and also the effects of nutritional deficiencies. In agriculture, biochemists investigate soil and fertilizers with the goal of improving crop cultivation, crop storage, and pest control. In recent decades, biochemical principles and methods have been combined with problem-solving approaches from engineering to manipulate living systems in order to produce useful tools for research, industrial processes, and diagnosis and control of disease\u2014the discipline of biotechnology.\nHistory.\nAt its most comprehensive definition, biochemistry can be seen as a study of the components and composition of living things and how they come together to become life. In this sense, the history of biochemistry may therefore go back as far as the ancient Greeks. However, biochemistry as a specific scientific discipline began sometime in the 19th century, or a little earlier, depending on which aspect of biochemistry is being focused on. Some argued that the beginning of biochemistry may have been the discovery of the first enzyme, diastase (now called amylase), in 1833 by Anselme Payen, while others considered Eduard Buchner's first demonstration of a complex biochemical process alcoholic fermentation in cell-free extracts in 1897 to be the birth of biochemistry. Some might also point as its beginning to the influential 1842 work by Justus von Liebig, \"Animal chemistry, or, Organic chemistry in its applications to physiology and pathology\", which presented a chemical theory of metabolism, or even earlier to the 18th century studies on fermentation and respiration by Antoine Lavoisier. Many other pioneers in the field who helped to uncover the layers of complexity of biochemistry have been proclaimed founders of modern biochemistry. Emil Fischer, who studied the chemistry of proteins, and F. Gowland Hopkins, who studied enzymes and the dynamic nature of biochemistry, represent two examples of early biochemists.\nThe term \"biochemistry\" was first used when Vinzenz Kletzinsky (1826\u20131882) had his \"Compendium der Biochemie\" printed in Vienna in 1858; it derived from a combination of biology and chemistry. In 1877, Felix Hoppe-Seyler used the term ( in German) as a synonym for physiological chemistry in the foreword to the first issue of \"Zeitschrift f\u00fcr Physiologische Chemie\" (Journal of Physiological Chemistry) where he argued for the setting up of institutes dedicated to this field of study. The German chemist Carl Neuberg however is often cited to have coined the word in 1903, while some credited it to Franz Hofmeister.\nIt was once generally believed that life and its materials had some essential property or substance (often referred to as the \"vital principle\") distinct from any found in non-living matter, and it was thought that only living beings could produce the molecules of life. In 1828, Friedrich W\u00f6hler published a paper on his serendipitous urea synthesis from potassium cyanate and ammonium sulfate; some regarded that as a direct overthrow of vitalism and the establishment of organic chemistry. However, the W\u00f6hler synthesis has sparked controversy as some reject the death of vitalism at his hands. Since then, biochemistry has advanced, especially since the mid-20th century, with the development of new techniques such as chromatography, X-ray diffraction, dual polarisation interferometry, NMR spectroscopy, radioisotopic labeling, electron microscopy and molecular dynamics simulations. These techniques allowed for the discovery and detailed analysis of many molecules and metabolic pathways of the cell, such as glycolysis and the Krebs cycle (citric acid cycle), and led to an understanding of biochemistry on a molecular level.\nAnother significant historic event in biochemistry is the discovery of the gene, and its role in the transfer of information in the cell. In the 1950s, James D. Watson, Francis Crick, Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins were instrumental in solving DNA structure and suggesting its relationship with the genetic transfer of information. In 1958, George Beadle and Edward Tatum received the Nobel Prize for work in fungi showing that one gene produces one enzyme. In 1988, Colin Pitchfork was the first person convicted of murder with DNA evidence, which led to the growth of forensic science. More recently, Andrew Z. Fire and Craig C. Mello received the 2006 Nobel Prize for discovering the role of RNA interference (RNAi) in the silencing of gene expression.\nStarting materials: the chemical elements of life.\nAround two dozen chemical elements are essential to various kinds of biological life. Most rare elements on Earth are not needed by life (exceptions being selenium and iodine), while a few common ones (aluminium and titanium) are not used. Most organisms share element needs, but there are a few differences between plants and animals. For example, ocean algae use bromine, but land plants and animals do not seem to need any. All animals require sodium, but is not an essential element for plants. Plants need boron and silicon, but animals may not (or may need ultra-small amounts).\nJust six elements\u2014carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, calcium and phosphorus\u2014make up almost 99% of the mass of living cells, including those in the human body (see composition of the human body for a complete list). In addition to the six major elements that compose most of the human body, humans require smaller amounts of possibly 18 more.\nBiomolecules.\nThe 4 main classes of molecules in biochemistry (often called biomolecules) are carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids. Many biological molecules are polymers: in this terminology, monomers are relatively small macromolecules that are linked together to create large macromolecules known as polymers. When monomers are linked together to synthesize a biological polymer, they undergo a process called dehydration synthesis. Different macromolecules can assemble in larger complexes, often needed for biological activity.\nCarbohydrates.\nTwo of the main functions of carbohydrates are energy storage and providing structure. One of the common sugars known as glucose is a carbohydrate, but not all carbohydrates are sugars. There are more carbohydrates on Earth than any other known type of biomolecule; they are used to store energy and genetic information, as well as play important roles in cell to cell interactions and communications.\nThe simplest type of carbohydrate is a monosaccharide, which among other properties contains carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, mostly in a ratio of 1:2:1 (generalized formula C\"n\"H2\"n\"O\"n\", where \"n\" is at least 3). Glucose (C6H12O6) is one of the most important carbohydrates; others include fructose (C6H12O6), the sugar commonly associated with the sweet taste of fruits, and deoxyribose (C5H10O4), a component of DNA. A monosaccharide can switch between acyclic (open-chain) form and a cyclic form. The open-chain form can be turned into a ring of carbon atoms bridged by an oxygen atom created from the carbonyl group of one end and the hydroxyl group of another. The cyclic molecule has a hemiacetal or hemiketal group, depending on whether the linear form was an aldose or a ketose.\nIn these cyclic forms, the ring usually has 5 or 6 atoms. These forms are called furanoses and pyranoses, respectively\u2014by analogy with furan and pyran, the simplest compounds with the same carbon-oxygen ring (although they lack the carbon-carbon double bonds of these two molecules). For example, the aldohexose glucose may form a hemiacetal linkage between the hydroxyl on carbon 1 and the oxygen on carbon 4, yielding a molecule with a 5-membered ring, called glucofuranose. The same reaction can take place between carbons 1 and 5 to form a molecule with a 6-membered ring, called glucopyranose. Cyclic forms with a 7-atom ring called heptoses are rare.\nTwo monosaccharides can be joined by a glycosidic or ester bond into a \"disaccharide\" through a dehydration reaction during which a molecule of water is released. The reverse reaction in which the glycosidic bond of a disaccharide is broken into two monosaccharides is termed \"hydrolysis\". The best-known disaccharide is sucrose or ordinary sugar, which consists of a glucose molecule and a fructose molecule joined. Another important disaccharide is lactose found in milk, consisting of a glucose molecule and a galactose molecule. Lactose may be hydrolysed by lactase, and deficiency in this enzyme results in lactose intolerance.\nWhen a few (around three to six) monosaccharides are joined, it is called an \"oligosaccharide\" (\"oligo-\" meaning \"few\"). These molecules tend to be used as markers and signals, as well as having some other uses. Many monosaccharides joined form a polysaccharide. They can be joined in one long linear chain, or they may be branched. Two of the most common polysaccharides are cellulose and glycogen, both consisting of repeating glucose monomers. \"Cellulose\" is an important structural component of plant's cell walls and \"glycogen\" is used as a form of energy storage in animals.\nSugar can be characterized by having reducing or non-reducing ends. A reducing end of a carbohydrate is a carbon atom that can be in equilibrium with the open-chain aldehyde (aldose) or keto form (ketose). If the joining of monomers takes place at such a carbon atom, the free hydroxy group of the pyranose or furanose form is exchanged with an OH-side-chain of another sugar, yielding a full acetal. This prevents opening of the chain to the aldehyde or keto form and renders the modified residue non-reducing. Lactose contains a reducing end at its glucose moiety, whereas the galactose moiety forms a full acetal with the C4-OH group of glucose. Saccharose does not have a reducing end because of full acetal formation between the aldehyde carbon of glucose (C1) and the keto carbon of fructose (C2).\nLipids.\nLipids comprise a diverse range of molecules and to some extent is a catchall for relatively water-insoluble or nonpolar compounds of biological origin, including waxes, fatty acids, fatty-acid derived phospholipids, sphingolipids, glycolipids, and terpenoids (e.g., retinoids and steroids). Some lipids are linear, open-chain aliphatic molecules, while others have ring structures. Some are aromatic (with a cyclic [ring] and planar [flat] structure) while others are not. Some are flexible, while others are rigid.\nLipids are usually made from one molecule of glycerol combined with other molecules. In triglycerides, the main group of bulk lipids, there is one molecule of glycerol and three fatty acids. Fatty acids are considered the monomer in that case, and may be saturated (no double bonds in the carbon chain) or unsaturated (one or more double bonds in the carbon chain).\nMost lipids have some polar character and are largely nonpolar. In general, the bulk of their structure is nonpolar or hydrophobic (\"water-fearing\"), meaning that it does not interact well with polar solvents like water. Another part of their structure is polar or hydrophilic (\"water-loving\") and will tend to associate with polar solvents like water. This makes them amphiphilic molecules (having both hydrophobic and hydrophilic portions). In the case of cholesterol, the polar group is a mere \u2013OH (hydroxyl or alcohol).\nIn the case of phospholipids, the polar groups are considerably larger and more polar, as described below.\nLipids are an integral part of our daily diet. Most oils and milk products that we use for cooking and eating like butter, cheese, ghee etc. are composed of fats. Vegetable oils are rich in various polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA). Lipid-containing foods undergo digestion within the body and are broken into fatty acids and glycerol, the final degradation products of fats and lipids. Lipids, especially phospholipids, are also used in various pharmaceutical products, either as co-solubilizers (e.g. in parenteral infusions) or else as drug carrier components (e.g. in a liposome or transfersome).\nProteins.\nProteins are very large molecules\u2014macro-biopolymers\u2014made from monomers called amino acids. An amino acid consists of an alpha carbon atom attached to an amino group, \u2013NH2, a carboxylic acid group, \u2013COOH (although these exist as \u2013NH3+ and \u2013COO\u2212 under physiologic conditions), a simple hydrogen atom, and a side chain commonly denoted as \"\u2013R\". The side chain \"R\" is different for each amino acid of which there are 20 standard ones. It is this \"R\" group that makes each amino acid different, and the properties of the side chains greatly influence the overall three-dimensional conformation of a protein. Some amino acids have functions by themselves or in a modified form; for instance, glutamate functions as an important neurotransmitter. Amino acids can be joined via a peptide bond. In this dehydration synthesis, a water molecule is removed and the peptide bond connects the nitrogen of one amino acid's amino group to the carbon of the other's carboxylic acid group. The resulting molecule is called a \"dipeptide\", and short stretches of amino acids (usually, fewer than thirty) are called \"peptides\" or polypeptides. Longer stretches merit the title \"proteins\". As an example, the important blood serum protein albumin contains 585 amino acid residues.\nProteins can have structural and/or functional roles. For instance, movements of the proteins actin and myosin ultimately are responsible for the contraction of skeletal muscle. One property many proteins have is that they specifically bind to a certain molecule or class of molecules\u2014they may be \"extremely\" selective in what they bind. Antibodies are an example of proteins that attach to one specific type of molecule. Antibodies are composed of heavy and light chains. Two heavy chains would be linked to two light chains through disulfide linkages between their amino acids. Antibodies are specific through variation based on differences in the N-terminal domain.\nThe enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), which uses antibodies, is one of the most sensitive tests modern medicine uses to detect various biomolecules. Probably the most important proteins, however, are the enzymes. Virtually every reaction in a living cell requires an enzyme to lower the activation energy of the reaction. These molecules recognize specific reactant molecules called \"substrates\"; they then catalyze the reaction between them. By lowering the activation energy, the enzyme speeds up that reaction by a rate of 1011 or more; a reaction that would normally take over 3,000 years to complete spontaneously might take less than a second with an enzyme. The enzyme itself is not used up in the process and is free to catalyze the same reaction with a new set of substrates. Using various modifiers, the activity of the enzyme can be regulated, enabling control of the biochemistry of the cell as a whole.\nThe structure of proteins is traditionally described in a hierarchy of four levels. The primary structure of a protein consists of its linear sequence of amino acids; for instance, \"alanine-glycine-tryptophan-serine-glutamate-asparagine-glycine-lysine-...\". Secondary structure is concerned with local morphology (morphology being the study of structure). Some combinations of amino acids will tend to curl up in a coil called an \u03b1-helix or into a sheet called a \u03b2-sheet; some \u03b1-helixes can be seen in the hemoglobin schematic above. Tertiary structure is the entire three-dimensional shape of the protein. This shape is determined by the sequence of amino acids. In fact, a single change can change the entire structure. The alpha chain of hemoglobin contains 146 amino acid residues; substitution of the glutamate residue at position 6 with a valine residue changes the behavior of hemoglobin so much that it results in sickle-cell disease. Finally, quaternary structure is concerned with the structure of a protein with multiple peptide subunits, like hemoglobin with its four subunits. Not all proteins have more than one subunit.\nIngested proteins are usually broken up into single amino acids or dipeptides in the small intestine and then absorbed. They can then be joined to form new proteins. Intermediate products of glycolysis, the citric acid cycle, and the pentose phosphate pathway can be used to form all twenty amino acids, and most bacteria and plants possess all the necessary enzymes to synthesize them. Humans and other mammals, however, can synthesize only half of them. They cannot synthesize isoleucine, leucine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine, threonine, tryptophan, and valine. Because they must be ingested, these are the essential amino acids. Mammals do possess the enzymes to synthesize alanine, asparagine, aspartate, cysteine, glutamate, glutamine, glycine, proline, serine, and tyrosine, the nonessential amino acids. While they can synthesize arginine and histidine, they cannot produce it in sufficient amounts for young, growing animals, and so these are often considered essential amino acids.\nIf the amino group is removed from an amino acid, it leaves behind a carbon skeleton called an \u03b1-keto acid. Enzymes called transaminases can easily transfer the amino group from one amino acid (making it an \u03b1-keto acid) to another \u03b1-keto acid (making it an amino acid). This is important in the biosynthesis of amino acids, as for many of the pathways, intermediates from other biochemical pathways are converted to the \u03b1-keto acid skeleton, and then an amino group is added, often via transamination. The amino acids may then be linked together to form a protein.\nA similar process is used to break down proteins. It is first hydrolyzed into its component amino acids. Free ammonia (NH3), existing as the ammonium ion (NH4+) in blood, is toxic to life forms. A suitable method for excreting it must therefore exist. Different tactics have evolved in different animals, depending on the animals' needs. Unicellular organisms release the ammonia into the environment. Likewise, bony fish can release ammonia into the water where it is quickly diluted. In general, mammals convert ammonia into urea, via the urea cycle.\nIn order to determine whether two proteins are related, or in other words to decide whether they are homologous or not, scientists use sequence-comparison methods. Methods like sequence alignments and structural alignments are powerful tools that help scientists identify homologies between related molecules. The relevance of finding homologies among proteins goes beyond forming an evolutionary pattern of protein families. By finding how similar two protein sequences are, we acquire knowledge about their structure and therefore their function.\nNucleic acids.\nNucleic acids, so-called because of their prevalence in cellular nuclei, is the generic name of the family of biopolymers. They are complex, high-molecular-weight biochemical macromolecules that can convey genetic information in all living cells and viruses. The monomers are called nucleotides, and each consists of three components: a nitrogenous heterocyclic base (either a purine or a pyrimidine), a pentose sugar, and a phosphate group.\nThe most common nucleic acids are deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA). The phosphate group and the sugar of each nucleotide bond with each other to form the backbone of the nucleic acid, while the sequence of nitrogenous bases stores the information. The most common nitrogenous bases are adenine, cytosine, guanine, thymine, and uracil. The nitrogenous bases of each strand of a nucleic acid will form hydrogen bonds with certain other nitrogenous bases in a complementary strand of nucleic acid. Adenine binds with thymine and uracil, thymine binds only with adenine, and cytosine and guanine can bind only with one another. Adenine, thymine, and uracil contain two hydrogen bonds, while hydrogen bonds formed between cytosine and guanine are three.\nAside from the genetic material of the cell, nucleic acids often play a role as second messengers, as well as forming the base molecule for adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the primary energy-carrier molecule found in all living organisms. Also, the nitrogenous bases possible in the two nucleic acids are different: adenine, cytosine, and guanine occur in both RNA and DNA, while thymine occurs only in DNA and uracil occurs in RNA.\nMetabolism.\nCarbohydrates as energy source.\nGlucose is an energy source in most life forms. For instance, polysaccharides are broken down into their monomers by enzymes (glycogen phosphorylase removes glucose residues from glycogen, a polysaccharide). Disaccharides like lactose or sucrose are cleaved into their two component monosaccharides.\nGlycolysis (anaerobic).\nGlucose is mainly metabolized by a very important ten-step pathway called glycolysis, the net result of which is to break down one molecule of glucose into two molecules of pyruvate. This also produces a net two molecules of ATP, the energy currency of cells, along with two reducing equivalents of converting NAD+ (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide: oxidized form) to NADH (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide: reduced form). This does not require oxygen; if no oxygen is available (or the cell cannot use oxygen), the NAD is restored by converting the pyruvate to lactate (lactic acid) (e.g. in humans) or to ethanol plus carbon dioxide (e.g. in yeast). Other monosaccharides like galactose and fructose can be converted into intermediates of the glycolytic pathway.\nAerobic.\nIn aerobic cells with sufficient oxygen, as in most human cells, the pyruvate is further metabolized. It is irreversibly converted to acetyl-CoA, giving off one carbon atom as the waste product carbon dioxide, generating another reducing equivalent as NADH. The two molecules acetyl-CoA (from one molecule of glucose) then enter the citric acid cycle, producing two molecules of ATP, six more NADH molecules and two reduced (ubi)quinones (via FADH2 as enzyme-bound cofactor), and releasing the remaining carbon atoms as carbon dioxide. The produced NADH and quinol molecules then feed into the enzyme complexes of the respiratory chain, an electron transport system transferring the electrons ultimately to oxygen and conserving the released energy in the form of a proton gradient over a membrane (inner mitochondrial membrane in eukaryotes). Thus, oxygen is reduced to water and the original electron acceptors NAD+ and quinone are regenerated. This is why humans breathe in oxygen and breathe out carbon dioxide. The energy released from transferring the electrons from high-energy states in NADH and quinol is conserved first as proton gradient and converted to ATP via ATP synthase. This generates an additional \"28\" molecules of ATP (24 from the 8 NADH + 4 from the 2 quinols), totaling to 32 molecules of ATP conserved per degraded glucose (two from glycolysis + two from the citrate cycle). It is clear that using oxygen to completely oxidize glucose provides an organism with far more energy than any oxygen-independent metabolic feature, and this is thought to be the reason why complex life appeared only after Earth's atmosphere accumulated large amounts of oxygen.\nGluconeogenesis.\nIn vertebrates, vigorously contracting skeletal muscles (during weightlifting or sprinting, for example) do not receive enough oxygen to meet the energy demand, and so they shift to anaerobic metabolism, converting glucose to lactate.\nThe combination of glucose from noncarbohydrates origin, such as fat and proteins. This only happens when glycogen supplies in the liver are worn out. The pathway is a crucial reversal of glycolysis from pyruvate to glucose and can use many sources like amino acids, glycerol and Krebs Cycle. Large scale protein and fat catabolism usually occur when those suffer from starvation or certain endocrine disorders. The liver regenerates the glucose, using a process called gluconeogenesis. This process is not quite the opposite of glycolysis, and actually requires three times the amount of energy gained from glycolysis (six molecules of ATP are used, compared to the two gained in glycolysis). Analogous to the above reactions, the glucose produced can then undergo glycolysis in tissues that need energy, be stored as glycogen (or starch in plants), or be converted to other monosaccharides or joined into di- or oligosaccharides. The combined pathways of glycolysis during exercise, lactate's crossing via the bloodstream to the liver, subsequent gluconeogenesis and release of glucose into the bloodstream is called the Cori cycle.\nRelationship to other \"molecular-scale\" biological sciences.\nResearchers in biochemistry use specific techniques native to biochemistry, but increasingly combine these with techniques and ideas developed in the fields of genetics, molecular biology, and biophysics. There is not a defined line between these disciplines. Biochemistry studies the chemistry required for biological activity of molecules, molecular biology studies their biological activity, genetics studies their heredity, which happens to be carried by their genome. This is shown in the following schematic that depicts one possible view of the relationships between the fields:\nSee also.\nLists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCited literature.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3956", "revid": "44356317", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3956", "title": "Badminton", "text": "Racquet sport\nBadminton is a racquet sport played using racquets to hit a shuttlecock across a net. Although it may be played with larger teams, the most common forms of the game are \"singles\" (with one player per side) and \"doubles\" (with two players per side). Badminton is often played as a casual outdoor activity in a yard or on a beach; professional games are played on a rectangular indoor court. Points are scored by striking the shuttlecock with the racquet and landing it within the other team's half of the court, within the set boundaries.\nEach side may only strike the shuttlecock once before it passes over the net. Play ends once the shuttlecock has struck the floor or ground, or if a fault has been called by the umpire, service judge, or (in their absence) the opposing side.\nThe shuttlecock is a feathered or (in informal matches) plastic projectile that flies differently from the balls used in many other sports. In particular, the feathers create much higher drag, causing the shuttlecock to decelerate more rapidly. Shuttlecocks also have a high top speed compared to the balls in other racquet sports, making badminton the fastest racquet sport in the world. The flight of the shuttlecock gives the sport its distinctive nature, and in certain languages the sport is named by reference to this feature (e.g., German , literally feather-ball).\nThe game developed in British India from the earlier game of battledore and shuttlecock. European play came to be dominated by Denmark but the game has become very popular in Asia. In 1992, badminton debuted as a Summer Olympic sport with four events: men's singles, women's singles, men's doubles, and women's doubles; mixed doubles was added four years later. At high levels of play, the sport demands excellent fitness: players require aerobic stamina, agility, strength, speed, and precision. It is also a technical sport, requiring good motor coordination and the development of sophisticated racquet movements involving much greater flexibility in the wrist than some other racquet sports.\nHistory.\nGames employing shuttlecocks have been played for centuries across Eurasia, but the modern game of badminton developed in the mid-19th century among the expatriate officers of British India as a variant of the earlier game of battledore and shuttlecock (\"battledore\" was an older term for \"racquet\"). Its exact origin remains obscure. The name derives from the Duke of Beaufort's Badminton House in Gloucestershire, but why or when remains unclear. As early as 1860, a London toy dealer named Isaac Spratt published a booklet entitled \"Badminton Battledore \u2013 A New Game\", but no copy is known to have survived. An 1863 article in \"The Cornhill Magazine\" describes badminton as \"battledore and shuttlecock played with sides, across a string suspended some five feet from the ground\".\nThe game originally developed in India among the British expatriates, where it was very popular by the 1870s. Ball badminton, a form of the game played with a wool ball instead of a shuttlecock, was being played in Thanjavur as early as the 1850s and was at first played interchangeably with badminton by the British, the woollen ball being preferred in windy or wet weather.\nEarly on, the game was also known as Poona or Poonah after the garrison town of Poona (Pune), where it was particularly popular and where the first rules for the game were drawn up in 1873. By 1875, officers returning home had started a badminton club in Folkestone. Initially, the sport was played with sides ranging from 1 to 4 players, but it was quickly established that games between two or four competitors worked the best. The shuttlecocks were coated with India rubber and, in outdoor play, sometimes weighted with lead. Although the depth of the net was of no consequence, it was preferred that it should reach the ground.\nThe sport was played under the Pune rules until 1887, when J. H. E. Hart of the Bath Badminton Club drew up revised regulations. In 1890, Hart and Bagnel Wild again revised the rules. The Badminton Association of England (BAE) published these rules in 1893 and officially launched the sport at a house called \"Dunbar\" in Portsmouth on 13 September. The BAE started the first badminton competition, the All England Open Badminton Championships for gentlemen's doubles, ladies' doubles, and mixed doubles, in 1899. Singles competitions were added in 1900 and an England\u2013Ireland championship match appeared in 1904.\nEngland, Scotland, Wales, Canada, Denmark, France, Ireland, the Netherlands, and New Zealand were the founding members of the International Badminton Federation in 1934, now known as the Badminton World Federation. India joined as an affiliate in 1936. The BWF now governs international badminton. Although initiated in England, competitive men's badminton has traditionally been dominated in Europe by Denmark. Worldwide, Asian nations have become dominant in international competition. China, Denmark, Indonesia, Malaysia, India, South Korea, Taiwan (playing as 'Chinese Taipei') and Japan are the nations which have consistently produced world-class players in the past few decades, with China being the greatest force in men's and women's competition recently. Great Britain, where the rules of the modern game were codified, is not among the top powers in the sport, but has had significant Olympic and World success in doubles play, especially mixed doubles.\nThe game has also become a popular backyard sport in the United States.\nRules.\nThe following information is a simplified summary of badminton rules based on the BWF Statutes publication, \"Laws of Badminton\".\nCourt.\nThe court is rectangular and divided into halves by a net. Courts are usually marked for both singles and doubles play, although badminton rules permit a court to be marked for singles only. The doubles court is wider than the singles court, but both are of the same length. The exception, which often causes confusion to newer players, is that the doubles court has a shorter serve-length dimension.\nThe full width of the court is , and in singles this width is reduced to . The full length of the court is . The service courts are marked by a centre line dividing the width of the court, by a short service line at a distance of from the net, and by the outer side and back boundaries. In doubles, the service court is also marked by a long service line, which is from the back boundary.\nThe net is high at the edges and high in the centre. The net posts are placed over the doubles sidelines, even when singles is played.\nThe minimum height for the ceiling above the court is not mentioned in the Laws of Badminton. Nonetheless, a badminton court will not be suitable if the ceiling is likely to be hit on a high serve.\nServing.\nWhen the server serves, the shuttlecock must pass over the short service line on the opponents' court or it will count as a fault. The server and receiver must remain within their service courts, without touching the boundary lines, until the server strikes the shuttlecock. The other two players may stand wherever they wish, so long as they do not block the vision of the server or receiver.\nAt the start of the rally, the server and receiver stand in diagonally opposite \"service courts\" (see court dimensions). The server hits the shuttlecock so that it would land in the receiver's service court. This is similar to tennis, except that in a badminton serve the whole shuttle must be below 1.15 metres from the surface of the court at the instant of being hit by the server's racket, the shuttlecock is not allowed to bounce and in badminton, the players stand inside their service courts, unlike tennis.\nWhen the serving side loses a rally, the server immediately passes to their opponent(s) (this differs from the old system where sometimes the serve passes to the doubles partner for what is known as a \"second serve\").\nIn singles, the server stands in their right service court when their score is even, and in their left service court when their score is odd.\nIn doubles, if the serving side wins a rally, the same player continues to serve, but he/she changes service courts so that she/he serves to a different opponent each time. If the opponents win the rally and their new score is even, the player in the right service court serves; if odd, the player in the left service court serves. The players' service courts are determined by their positions at the start of the previous rally, not by where they were standing at the end of the rally. A consequence of this system is that each time a side regains the service, the server will be the player who did \"not\" serve last time.\nScoring.\nEach game is played to 21 points, with players scoring a point by winning a rally. This differs from the old system in which players may only win a point on their serve and each game is to 15 points. A match is the best of three games.\nIf the score ties at 20\u201320, then the game continues until one side gains a two-point lead (such as 24\u201322), except when there is a tie at 29\u201329, in which the game goes to a golden point of 30. Whoever scores this point wins the game.\nAt the start of a match, the shuttlecock is cast and the side towards which the shuttlecock is pointing serves first. Alternatively, a coin may be tossed, with the winners choosing whether to serve or receive first, or choosing which end of the court to occupy first, and their opponents making the remaining choice.\nIn subsequent games, the winners of the previous game serve first. Matches are best out of three: a player or pair must win two games (of 21 points each) to win the match. For the first rally of any doubles game, the serving pair may decide who serves and the receiving pair may decide who receives. The players change ends at the start of the second game; if the match reaches a third game, they change ends both at the start of the game and when the leading player's or pair's score reaches 11 points.\nA new scoring system is being attempted by the BWF, in which the 21x3 scoring system may be replaced with 15x3. The move itself has been very controversial amongst several badminton players.\nLets.\nIf a let is called, the rally is stopped and replayed with no change to the score. Lets may occur because of some unexpected disturbance such as a shuttlecock landing on a court (having been hit there by players playing in adjacent court) or in small halls the shuttle may touch an overhead rail which can be classed as a let.\nIf the receiver is not ready when the service is delivered, a let shall be called; yet, if the receiver attempts to return the shuttlecock, the receiver shall be judged to have been ready.\nEquipment.\nBadminton rules restrict the design and size of racquets and shuttlecocks.\nRacquets.\nBadminton racquets are lightweight, with top quality racquets weighing between not including grip or strings. They are composed of many different materials ranging from carbon fibre composite (graphite reinforced plastic) to solid steel, which may be augmented by a variety of materials. Carbon fibre has an excellent strength to weight ratio, is stiff, and gives excellent kinetic energy transfer. Before the adoption of carbon fibre composite, racquets were made of light metals such as aluminium. Earlier still, racquets were made of wood. Cheap racquets are still often made of metals such as steel, but wooden racquets are no longer manufactured for the ordinary market, because of their excessive mass and cost. Nowadays, nanomaterials such as carbon nanotubes and fullerenes are added to racquets giving them greater durability.\nThere is a wide variety of racquet designs, although the laws limit the racquet size and shape. Different racquets have playing characteristics that appeal to different players. The traditional oval head shape is still available, but an isometric head shape is increasingly common in new racquets.\nStrings.\nBadminton strings for racquets are thin, high-performing strings with thicknesses ranging from about 0.62 to 0.73\u00a0mm. Thicker strings are more durable, but many players prefer the feel of thinner strings. String tension is normally in the range of 80 to 160\u00a0N (18 to 36 lbf). Recreational players generally string at lower tensions than professionals, typically between 80 and 110 N (18 and 25\u00a0lbf). Professionals string between about 110 and 160 N (25 and 36\u00a0lbf). Some string manufacturers measure the thickness of their strings under tension so they are actually thicker than specified when slack. Ashaway Micropower is actually 0.7mm but Yonex BG-66 is about 0.72mm.\nIt is often argued that high string tensions improve control, whereas low string tensions increase power. The arguments for this generally rely on crude mechanical reasoning, such as claiming that a lower tension string bed is more bouncy and therefore provides more power. This is, in fact, incorrect, for a higher string tension can cause the shuttle to slide off the racquet and hence make it harder to hit a shot accurately. An alternative view suggests that the optimum tension for power depends on the player: the faster and more accurately a player can swing their racquet, the higher the tension for maximum power. Neither view has been subjected to a rigorous mechanical analysis, nor is there clear evidence in favour of one or the other. The most effective way for a player to find a good string tension is to experiment.\nGrip.\nThe choice of grip allows a player to increase the thickness of their racquet handle and choose a comfortable surface to hold. A player may build up the handle with one or several grips before applying the final layer.\nPlayers may choose between a variety of grip materials. The most common choices are PU synthetic grips or towelling grips. Grip choice is a matter of personal preference. Players often find that sweat becomes a problem; in this case, a drying agent may be applied to the grip or hands, sweatbands may be used, the player may choose another grip material or change their grip more frequently.\nThere are two main types of grip: \"replacement\" grips and \"overgrips\". Replacement grips are thicker and are often used to increase the size of the handle. Overgrips are thinner (less than 1\u00a0mm), and are often used as the final layer. Many players, however, prefer to use replacement grips as the final layer. Towelling grips are always replacement grips. Replacement grips have an adhesive backing, whereas overgrips have only a small patch of adhesive at the start of the tape and must be applied under tension; overgrips are more convenient for players who change grips frequently, because they may be removed more rapidly without damaging the underlying material.\nShuttlecock.\nA shuttlecock (often abbreviated to \"shuttle\"; also called a \"birdie\") is a high-drag projectile, with an open conical shape: the cone is formed from sixteen overlapping feathers embedded into a rounded cork base. The cork is covered with thin leather or synthetic material. Synthetic shuttles are often used by recreational players to reduce their costs as feathered shuttles break easily. These nylon shuttles may be constructed with either natural cork or synthetic foam base and a plastic skirt.\nBadminton rules also provide for testing a shuttlecock for the correct speed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;4.4.1: To test a shuttlecock, hit a full underhand stroke that makes contact with the shuttlecock over the back boundary line. The shuttlecock shall be hit at an upward angle and in a direction parallel to the sidelines.\n4.4.2: A shuttlecock of the correct speed will land not less than 530\u00a0mm and not more than 990\u00a0mm short of the other back boundary line.\nShoes.\nBadminton shoes are lightweight with soles of rubber or similar high-grip, non-marking materials, similar to tennis shoes.\nCompared to running shoes, badminton shoes have little lateral support. High levels of lateral support are useful for activities where lateral motion is undesirable and unexpected. Badminton, however, requires powerful lateral movements. A highly built-up lateral support will not be able to protect the foot in badminton; instead, it will encourage catastrophic collapse at the point where the shoe's support fails, and the player's ankles are not ready for the sudden loading, which can cause sprains. For this reason, players should choose badminton shoes rather than general trainers or running shoes, because proper badminton shoes will have a very thin sole, lower a person's centre of gravity, and therefore result in fewer injuries.\nOutfits.\nThe Badminton World Federation and Octagon developed a rule that female badminton players must wear dresses or skirts \"to ensure attractive presentation\", but although it was included in the official rulebook in 2011, it was dropped before it was supposed to go into effect in 2012.\nTechnique.\nStrokes.\nBadminton offers a wide variety of basic strokes, and players require a high level of skill to perform all of them effectively. All strokes can be played either \"forehand\" or \"backhand\". A player's forehand side is the same side as their playing hand: for a right-handed player, the forehand side is their right side and the backhand side is their left side. Forehand strokes are hit with the front of the hand leading (like hitting with the palm), whereas backhand strokes are hit with the back of the hand leading (like hitting with the knuckles). Players frequently play certain strokes on the forehand side with a backhand hitting action, and vice versa.\nIn the forecourt and midcourt, most strokes can be played equally effectively on either the forehand or backhand side; but in the rear court, players will attempt to play as many strokes as possible on their forehands, often preferring to play a \"round-the-head\" forehand overhead (a forehand \"on the backhand side\") rather than attempt a backhand overhead. Playing a backhand overhead has two main disadvantages. First, the player must turn their back to their opponents, restricting their view of them and the court. Second, backhand overheads cannot be hit with as much power as forehands: the hitting action is limited by the shoulder joint, which permits a much greater range of movement for a forehand overhead than for a backhand. The \"backhand clear\" is considered by most players and coaches to be the most difficult basic stroke in the game, since the precise technique is needed in order to muster enough power for the shuttlecock to travel the full length of the court. For the same reason, \"backhand smashes\" tend to be weak.\nPosition of the shuttlecock and receiving player.\nThe choice of stroke depends on how near the shuttlecock is to the net, whether it is above net height, and where an opponent is currently positioned: players have much better attacking options if they can reach the shuttlecock well above net height, especially if it is also close to the net. In the forecourt, a high shuttlecock will be met with a \"net kill\", hitting it steeply downwards and attempting to win the rally immediately. This is why it is best to drop the shuttlecock just over the net in this situation. In the midcourt, a high shuttlecock will usually be met with a powerful \"smash\", also hitting downwards and hoping for an outright winner or a weak reply. Athletic \"jump smashes\", where players jump upwards for a steeper smash angle, are a common and spectacular element of elite men's doubles play. In the rearcourt, players strive to hit the shuttlecock while it is still above them, rather than allowing it to drop lower. This \"overhead\" hitting allows them to play smashes, \"clears\" (hitting the shuttlecock high and to the back of the opponents' court), and \"drop shots\" (hitting the shuttlecock softly so that it falls sharply downwards into the opponents' forecourt). If the shuttlecock has dropped lower, then a smash is impossible and a full-length, high clear is difficult.\nVertical position of the shuttlecock.\nWhen the shuttlecock is well below net height, players have no choice but to hit upwards. \"Lifts\", where the shuttlecock is hit upwards to the back of the opponents' court, can be played from all parts of the court. If a player does not lift, their only remaining option is to push the shuttlecock softly back to the net: in the forecourt, this is called a \"net shot\"; in the midcourt or rear court, it is often called a \"push\" or \"block\".\nWhen the shuttlecock is near to net height, players can hit \"drives\", which travel flat and rapidly over the net into the opponents' rear midcourt and rear court. Pushes may also be hit flatter, placing the shuttlecock into the front midcourt. Drives and pushes may be played from the midcourt or forecourt, and are most often used in doubles: they are an attempt to regain the attack, rather than choosing to lift the shuttlecock and defend against smashes. After a successful drive or push, the opponents will often be forced to lift the shuttlecock.\nSpin.\nBalls may be spun to alter their bounce (for example, topspin and backspin in tennis) or trajectory, and players may slice the ball (strike it with an angled racquet face) to produce such spin. The shuttlecock is not allowed to bounce, but slicing the shuttlecock does have applications in badminton. (See Basic strokes for an explanation of technical terms.)\nDue to the way that its feathers overlap, a shuttlecock also has a slight natural spin about its axis of rotational symmetry. The spin is in a counter-clockwise direction as seen from above when dropping a shuttlecock. This natural spin affects certain strokes: a tumbling net shot is more effective if the slicing action is from right to left, rather than from left to right.\nBiomechanics.\nBadminton biomechanics have not been the subject of extensive scientific study, but some studies confirm the minor role of the wrist in power generation and indicate that the major contributions to power come from internal and external rotations of the upper and lower arm. Recent guides to the sport thus emphasize forearm rotation rather than wrist movements.\nThe feathers impart substantial drag, causing the shuttlecock to decelerate greatly over distance. The shuttlecock is also extremely aerodynamically stable: regardless of initial orientation, it will turn to fly cork-first and remain in the cork-first orientation.\nOne consequence of the shuttlecock's drag is that it requires considerable power to hit it the full length of the court, which is not the case for most racquet sports. The drag also influences the flight path of a lifted (\"lobbed\") shuttlecock: the parabola of its flight is heavily skewed so that it falls at a steeper angle than it rises. With very high serves, the shuttlecock may even fall vertically.\nOther factors.\nWhen defending against a smash, players have three basic options: lift, block, or drive. In singles, a block to the net is the most common reply. In doubles, a lift is the safest option but it usually allows the opponents to continue smashing; blocks and drives are counter-attacking strokes but may be intercepted by the smasher's partner. Many players use a backhand hitting action for returning smashes on both the forehand and backhand sides because backhands are more effective than forehands at covering smashes directed to the body. Hard shots directed towards the body are difficult to defend.\nThe service is restricted by the Laws and presents its own array of stroke choices. Unlike in tennis, the server's racquet must be pointing in a downward direction to deliver the serve so normally the shuttle must be hit upwards to pass over the net. The server can choose a \"low serve\" into the forecourt (like a push), or a lift to the back of the service court, or a flat \"drive serve\". Lifted serves may be either \"high serves\", where the shuttlecock is lifted so high that it falls almost vertically at the back of the court, or \"flick serves\", where the shuttlecock is lifted to a lesser height but falls sooner.\nDeception.\nOnce players have mastered these basic strokes, they can hit the shuttlecock from and to any part of the court, powerfully and softly as required. Beyond the basics, however, badminton offers rich potential for advanced stroke skills that provide a competitive advantage. Because badminton players have to cover a short distance as quickly as possible, the purpose of many advanced strokes is to deceive the opponent, so that either they are tricked into believing that a different stroke is being played, or they are forced to delay their movement until they actually sees the shuttle's direction. \"Deception\" in badminton is often used in both of these senses. When a player is genuinely deceived, they will often lose the point immediately because they cannot change their direction quickly enough to reach the shuttlecock. Experienced players will be aware of the trick and cautious not to move too early, but the attempted deception is still useful because it forces the opponent to delay their movement slightly. Against weaker players whose intended strokes are obvious, an experienced player may move before the shuttlecock has been hit, anticipating the stroke to gain an advantage.\n\"Slicing\" and using a \"shortened hitting action\" are the two main technical devices that facilitate deception. Slicing involves hitting the shuttlecock with an angled racquet face, causing it to travel in a different direction than suggested by the body or arm movement. Slicing also causes the shuttlecock to travel more slowly than the arm movement suggests. For example, a good crosscourt \"sliced drop shot\" will use a hitting action that suggests a straight clear or a smash, deceiving the opponent about both the power and direction of the shuttlecock. A more sophisticated slicing action involves brushing the strings around the shuttlecock during the hit, in order to make the shuttlecock spin. This can be used to improve the shuttle's trajectory, by making it dip more rapidly as it passes the net; for example, a sliced low serve can travel slightly faster than a normal low serve, yet land on the same spot. Spinning the shuttlecock is also used to create \"spinning net shots\" (also called \"tumbling net shots\"), in which the shuttlecock turns over itself several times (tumbles) before stabilizing; sometimes the shuttlecock remains inverted instead of tumbling. The main advantage of a spinning net shot is that the opponent will be unwilling to address the shuttlecock until it has stopped tumbling, since hitting the feathers will result in an unpredictable stroke. Spinning net shots are especially important for high-level singles players.\nThe lightness of modern racquets allows players to use a very short hitting action for many strokes, thereby maintaining the option to hit a powerful or a soft stroke until the last possible moment. For example, a singles player may hold their racquet ready for a net shot, but then flick the shuttlecock to the back instead with a shallow lift when they notice the opponent has moved before the actual shot was played. A shallow lift takes less time to reach the ground and as mentioned above a rally is over when the shuttlecock touches the ground. This makes the opponent's task of covering the whole court much more difficult than if the lift was hit higher and with a bigger, obvious swing. A short hitting action is not only useful for deception: it also allows the player to hit powerful strokes when they have no time for a big arm swing. A big arm swing is also usually not advised in badminton because bigger swings make it more difficult to recover for the next shot in fast exchanges. The use of grip tightening is crucial to these techniques, and is often described as \"finger power\". Elite players develop finger power to the extent that they can hit some power strokes, such as net kills, with less than a racquet swing.\nIt is also possible to reverse this style of deception, by suggesting a powerful stroke before slowing down the hitting action to play a soft stroke. In general, this latter style of deception is more common in the rear court (for example, drop shots disguised as smashes), whereas the former style is more common in the forecourt and midcourt (for example, lifts disguised as net shots).\nDeception is not limited to slicing and short hitting actions. Players may also use \"double motion\", where they make an initial racquet movement in one direction before withdrawing the racquet to hit in another direction. Players will often do this to send opponents in the wrong direction. The racquet movement is typically used to suggest a straight angle but then play the stroke crosscourt, or vice versa. \"Triple motion\" is also possible, but this is very rare in actual play. An alternative to double motion is to use a \"racquet head fake\", where the initial motion is continued but the racquet is turned during the hit. This produces a smaller change in direction but does not require as much time.\nInjuries.\nIn badminton, cramps, usually in the arms and legs, are very common. Elbow, and leg pain is also common due to fast movement. A notable incident in badminton is the death of Zhang Zhijie, who collapsed onto the court, and died of cardiac arrest.\nAnother notable incident is the major knee injury of Carolina Marin, in which she had landed on her already surgically repaired knee awkwardly, breaking her right knee. She was leading 21\u201314, and in the second game, was forced to retire, 10\u20136.\nStrategy.\nTo win in badminton, players need to employ a wide variety of strokes in the right situations. These range from powerful jumping smashes to delicate tumbling net returns. Often rallies finish with a smash, but setting up the smash requires subtler strokes. For example, a net shot can force the opponent to lift the shuttlecock, which gives an opportunity to smash. If the net shot is tight and tumbling, then the opponent's lift will not reach the back of the court, which makes the subsequent smash much harder to return.\nDeception is also important, helping players gain time back, and tricking the opponent (if played properly). Expert players prepare for many different strokes that look identical and use slicing to deceive their opponents about the speed or direction of the stroke. If an opponent tries to anticipate the stroke, they may move in the wrong direction and may be unable to change their body momentum in time to reach the shuttlecock.\nSingles.\nSince one person needs to cover the entire court, singles tactics are based on forcing the opponent to move as much as possible; this means that singles strokes are normally directed to the corners of the court. Players exploit the length of the court by combining lifts and clears with drop shots and net shots. Smashing tends to be less prominent in singles than in doubles because the smasher has no partner to follow up their effort and is thus vulnerable to a skillfully placed return. Moreover, frequent smashing can be exhausting in singles where the conservation of a player's energy is at a premium. However, players with strong smashes will sometimes use the shot to create openings, and players commonly smash weak returns to try to end rallies.\nIn singles, players will often start the rally with a forehand high serve or with a flick serve. Low serves are also used frequently, either forehand or backhand. Drive serves are rare.\nAt high levels of play, singles demand extraordinary fitness. Singles is a game of patient positional manoeuvring, unlike the all-out aggression of doubles.\nDoubles.\nBoth pairs will try to gain and maintain the attack, smashing downwards when the opportunity arises. Whenever possible, a pair will adopt an ideal attacking formation with one player hitting down from the rear court, and their partner in the midcourt intercepting all smash returns except the lift. If the rear court attacker plays a drop shot, their partner will move into the forecourt to threaten the net reply. If a pair cannot hit downwards, they will use flat strokes in an attempt to gain the attack. If a pair is forced to lift or clear the shuttlecock, then they must defend: they will adopt a side-by-side position in the rear midcourt, to cover the full width of their court against the opponents' smashes. In doubles, players generally smash to the middle ground between two players in order to take advantage of confusion and clashes.\nAt high levels of play, the backhand serve has become popular to the extent that forehand serves have become fairly rare at a high level of play. The straight low serve is used most frequently, in an attempt to prevent the opponents gaining the attack immediately. Flick serves are used to prevent the opponent from anticipating the low serve and attacking it decisively.\nAt high levels of play, doubles rallies are extremely fast. Men's doubles are the most aggressive form of badminton, with a high proportion of powerful jump smashes and very quick reflex exchanges. Because of this, spectator interest is sometimes greater for men's doubles than for singles.\nMixed doubles.\nIn mixed doubles, both pairs typically try to maintain an attacking formation with the woman at the front and the man at the back. This is because the male players are usually substantially stronger, and can, therefore, produce smashes that are more powerful. As a result, mixed doubles require greater tactical awareness and subtler positional play. Clever opponents will try to reverse the ideal position, by forcing the woman towards the back or the man towards the front. In order to protect against this danger, mixed players must be careful and systematic in their shot selection.\nAt high levels of play, the formations will generally be more flexible: the top women players are capable of playing powerfully from the back-court, and will happily do so if required. When the opportunity arises, however, the pair will switch back to the standard mixed attacking position, with the woman in front and men in the back.\nAir badminton.\nDerivative of badminton, intended to be played outdoors using a modified shuttlecock on non-conventional surfaces, including sand.\nOrganization.\nGoverning bodies.\nThe Badminton World Federation (BWF) is the internationally recognized governing body of the sport responsible for the regulation of tournaments and approaching fair play. Five regional confederations are associated with the BWF, the rest are unaffiliated, or are minor in comparison.\nUnaffiliated:\nCompetitions.\nThe BWF organizes several international competitions, including the Thomas Cup, the premier men's international team event first held in 1948\u20131949, and the Uber Cup, the women's equivalent first held in 1956\u20131957. The competitions now take place once every two years. More than 50 national teams compete in qualifying tournaments within continental confederations for a place in the finals. The final tournament involves 12 teams, following an increase from eight teams in 2004. It was further increased to 16 teams in 2012.\nThe Sudirman Cup, a gender-mixed international team event held once every two years, began in 1989. Teams are divided into seven levels based on the performance of each country. To win the tournament, a country must perform well across all five disciplines (men's doubles and singles, women's doubles and singles, and mixed doubles). Like association football (soccer), it features a promotion and relegation system at every level. However, the system was last used in 2009 and teams competing will now be grouped by world rankings.\nBadminton was a demonstration event at the 1972 and 1988 Summer Olympics. It became an official Summer Olympic sport at the Barcelona Olympics in 1992 and its gold medals now generally rate as the sport's most coveted prizes for individual players.\nIn the BWF World Championships, first held in 1977, currently only the highest-ranked 64 players in the world, and a maximum of four from each country can participate in any category. Therefore, it's not an \"open\" format. In both the BWF World and the Olympic competitions restrictions on the number of participants from any one country have caused some controversy, because they result in excluding some world elite level players from the strongest badminton nations. The Thomas, Uber, and Sudirman Cups, the Olympics, and the BWF World (and World Junior Championships), are all categorized as level one tournaments.\nAt the start of 2007, the BWF introduced a new tournament structure for the highest level tournaments aside from those in level one: the BWF Super Series. This \"level two\" tournament series is a circuit for the world's elite players, staging twelve open tournaments around the world with 32 players (half the previous limit). The players collect points that determine whether they can play in Super Series Finals held at the year-end. Among the tournaments in this series is the venerable All-England Championships, first held in 1900, which was once considered the unofficial world championships of the sport.\nLevel three tournaments consist of Grand Prix Gold and Grand Prix event. Top players can collect the world ranking points and enable them to play in the BWF Super Series open tournaments. These include the regional competitions in Asia (Badminton Asia Championships) and Europe (European Badminton Championships), which produce the world's best players as well as the Pan America Badminton Championships.\nThe level four tournaments, known as International Challenge, International Series, and Future Series, encourage participation by junior players.\nComparison with tennis.\nBadminton is frequently compared to tennis due to several qualities. The following is a list of manifest differences:\nStatistics such as the smash speed, above, prompt badminton enthusiasts to make other comparisons that are more contentious. For example, it is often claimed that badminton is the fastest racquet sport. Although badminton holds the record for the fastest initial speed of a racquet sports projectile, the shuttlecock decelerates substantially faster than other projectiles such as tennis balls. In turn, this qualification must be qualified by consideration of the distance over which the shuttlecock travels: a smashed shuttlecock travels a shorter distance than a tennis ball during a serve.\nWhile fans of badminton and tennis often claim that their sport is the more physically demanding, such comparisons are difficult to make objectively because of the differing demands of the games. No formal study currently exists evaluating the physical condition of the players or demands during gameplay.\nBadminton and tennis techniques differ substantially. The lightness of the shuttlecock and of badminton racquets allows badminton players to make use of the wrist and fingers much more than tennis players; in tennis, the wrist is normally held stable, and playing with a mobile wrist may lead to injury. For the same reasons, badminton players can generate power from a short racquet swing: for some strokes such as net kills, an elite player's swing may be less than . For strokes that require more power, a longer swing will typically be used, but the badminton racquet swing will rarely be as long as a typical tennis swing.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3957", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3957", "title": "Baroque", "text": "Artistic style in Europe and colonies, c. 1600\u20131750\n \nThe Baroque ( , , ) is a Western style of architecture, music, dance, painting, sculpture, poetry, and other arts that flourished from the early 17th century until the 1750s. It followed Renaissance art and Mannerism and preceded the Rococo (in the past often referred to as \"late Baroque\") and Neoclassical styles. It was encouraged by the Catholic Church as a means to counter the simplicity and austerity of Protestant architecture, art, and music, though Lutheran Baroque art developed in parts of Europe as well.\nThe Baroque style used contrast, movement, exuberant detail, deep color, grandeur, and surprise to achieve a sense of awe. The style began at the start of the 17th century in Rome, then spread rapidly to the rest of Italy, France, Spain, and Portugal, then to Austria, southern Germany, Poland and Russia. By the 1730s, it had evolved into an even more flamboyant style, called \"rocaille\" or \"Rococo\", which appeared in France and Central Europe until the mid to late 18th century. In the territories of the Spanish and Portuguese Empires including the Iberian Peninsula it continued, together with new styles, until the first decade of the 19th century.\nIn the decorative arts, the style employs plentiful and intricate ornamentation. The departure from Renaissance classicism has its own ways in each country. But a general feature is that everywhere the starting point is the ornamental elements introduced by the Renaissance. The classical repertoire is crowded, dense, overlapping, loaded, in order to provoke shock effects. New motifs introduced by Baroque are: the cartouche, trophies and weapons, baskets of fruit or flowers, and others, made in marquetry, stucco, or carved.\nOrigin of the word.\nThe English word \"baroque\" comes directly from the French. Some scholars state that the French word originated from the Portuguese term 'a flawed pearl', pointing to the Latin 'wart', or to a word with the Romance suffix (common in pre-Roman Iberia). Other sources suggest a Medieval Latin term used in logic, , as the most likely source.\nIn the 16th century the Medieval Latin word moved beyond scholastic logic and came into use to characterise anything that seemed absurdly complex. The French philosopher (1533\u20131592) helped to give the term (spelled by him) the meaning 'bizarre, uselessly complicated'. Other early sources associate with magic, complexity, confusion, and excess.\nThe word \"baroque\" was also associated with irregular pearls before the 18th century. The French and Portuguese were terms often associated with jewelry. An example from 1531 uses the term to describe pearls in an inventory of Charles V of France's treasures. Later, the word appears in a 1694 edition of , which describes \"baroque\" as \"only used for pearls that are imperfectly round.\" A 1728 Portuguese dictionary similarly describes as relating to a \"coarse and uneven pearl\".\nAn alternative derivation of the word \"baroque\" points to the name of the Italian painter Federico Barocci (1528\u20131612).\nIn the 18th century the term began to be used to describe music, and not in a flattering way. In an anonymous satirical review of the premi\u00e8re of 's in October 1733, which was printed in the in May 1734, the critic wrote that the novelty in this opera was \"\", complaining that the music lacked coherent melody, was unsparing with dissonances, constantly changed key and meter, and speedily ran through every compositional device.\nIn 1762 recorded that the term could figuratively describe something \"irregular, bizarre or unequal\".\nJean-Jacques Rousseau, who was a musician and composer as well as a philosopher, wrote in the in 1768: \"Baroque music is that in which the harmony is confused, and loaded with modulations and dissonances. The singing is harsh and unnatural, the intonation difficult, and the movement limited. It appears that term comes from the word 'baroco' used by logicians.\"\nIn 1788 defined the term in the as \"an architectural style that is highly adorned and tormented\".\nThe French terms and appeared in in 1835. By the mid-19th century, art critics and historians had adopted the term \"baroque\" as a way to ridicule post-Renaissance art. This was the sense of the word as used in 1855 by the leading art historian Jacob Burckhardt, who wrote that baroque artists \"despised and abused detail\" because they lacked \"respect for tradition\".\nIn 1888 the art historian Heinrich W\u00f6lfflin published the first serious academic work on the style, \"Renaissance und Barock\", which described the differences between the painting, sculpture, and architecture of the Renaissance and the Baroque.\nArchitecture: origins and characteristics.\nThe Baroque style of architecture was a result of doctrines adopted by the Catholic Church at the Council of Trent in 1545\u20131563, in response to the Protestant Reformation. The first phase of the Counter-Reformation had imposed a severe, academic style on religious architecture, which had appealed to intellectuals but not the mass of churchgoers. The Council of Trent decided instead to appeal to a more popular audience, and declared that the arts should communicate religious themes with direct and emotional involvement. Similarly, Lutheran Baroque art developed as a confessional marker of identity, in response to the Great Iconoclasm of Calvinists.\nBaroque churches were designed with a large central space, where the worshippers could be close to the altar, with a dome or cupola high overhead, allowing light to illuminate the church below. The dome was one of the central symbolic features of Baroque architecture illustrating the union between the heavens and the earth. The inside of the cupola was lavishly decorated with paintings of angels and saints, and with stucco statuettes of angels, giving the impression to those below of looking up at heaven. Another feature of Baroque churches are the \"quadratura\"; trompe-l'\u0153il paintings on the ceiling in stucco frames, either real or painted, crowded with paintings of saints and angels and connected by architectural details with the balustrades and consoles. \"Quadratura\" paintings of Atlantes below the cornices appear to be supporting the ceiling of the church. Unlike the painted ceilings of Michelangelo in the Sistine Chapel, which combined different scenes, each with its own perspective, to be looked at one at a time, the Baroque ceiling paintings were carefully created so the viewer on the floor of the church would see the entire ceiling in correct perspective, as if the figures were real.\nThe interiors of Baroque churches became more and more ornate in the High Baroque, and focused around the altar, usually placed under the dome. The most celebrated baroque decorative works of the High Baroque are the Chair of Saint Peter (1647\u20131653) and St. Peter's Baldachin (1623\u20131634), both by Gian Lorenzo Bernini, in St. Peter's Basilica in Rome. The Baldequin of St. Peter is an example of the balance of opposites in Baroque art; the gigantic proportions of the piece, with the apparent lightness of the canopy; and the contrast between the solid twisted columns, bronze, gold and marble of the piece with the flowing draperies of the angels on the canopy. The Dresden Frauenkirche serves as a prominent example of Lutheran Baroque art, which was completed in 1743 after being commissioned by the Lutheran city council of Dresden and was \"compared by eighteenth-century observers to St Peter's in Rome\".\nThe twisted column in the interior of churches is one of the signature features of the Baroque. It gives both a sense of motion and also a dramatic new way of reflecting light.\nThe cartouche was another characteristic feature of Baroque decoration. These were large plaques carved of marble or stone, usually oval and with a rounded surface, which carried images or text in gilded letters, and were placed as interior decoration or above the doorways of buildings, delivering messages to those below. They showed a wide variety of invention, and were found in all types of buildings, from cathedrals and palaces to small chapels.\nBaroque architects sometimes used forced perspective to create illusions. For the Palazzo Spada in Rome, Francesco Borromini used columns of diminishing size, a narrowing floor and a miniature statue in the garden beyond to create the illusion that a passageway was thirty meters long, when it was actually only seven meters long. A statue at the end of the passage appears to be life-size, though it is only sixty centimeters high. Borromini designed the illusion with the assistance of a mathematician.\nItalian Baroque.\nThe first building in Rome to have a Baroque fa\u00e7ade was the Church of the Ges\u00f9 in 1584; it was plain by later Baroque standards, but marked a break with the traditional Renaissance fa\u00e7ades that preceded it. The interior of this church remained very austere until the high Baroque, when it was lavishly ornamented.\nIn Rome in 1605, Paul V became the first of series of popes who commissioned basilicas and church buildings designed to inspire emotion and awe through a proliferation of forms, and a richness of colours and dramatic effects. Among the most influential monuments of the Early Baroque were the fa\u00e7ade of St. Peter's Basilica (1606\u20131619), and the new nave and loggia which connected the fa\u00e7ade to Michelangelo's dome in the earlier church. The new design created a dramatic contrast between the soaring dome and the disproportionately wide fa\u00e7ade, and the contrast on the fa\u00e7ade itself between the Doric columns and the great mass of the portico.\nIn the mid to late 17th century the style reached its peak, later termed the High Baroque. Many monumental works were commissioned by Popes Urban VIII and Alexander VII. The sculptor and architect Gian Lorenzo Bernini designed a new quadruple colonnade around St. Peter's Square (1656 to 1667). The three galleries of columns in a giant ellipse balance the oversize dome and give the Church and square a unity and the feeling of a giant theatre.\nAnother major innovator of the Italian High Baroque was Francesco Borromini, whose major work was the Church of San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane or Saint Charles of the Four Fountains (1634\u20131646). The sense of movement is given not by the decoration, but by the walls themselves, which undulate and by concave and convex elements, including an oval tower and balcony inserted into a concave traverse. The interior was equally revolutionary; the main space of the church was oval, beneath an oval dome.\nPainted ceilings, crowded with angels and saints and trompe-l'\u0153il architectural effects, were an important feature of the Italian High Baroque. Major works included \"The Entry of Saint Ignatius into Paradise\" by Andrea Pozzo (1685\u20131695) in the Sant'Ignazio Church, Rome, and \"The Triumph of the Name of Jesus\" by Giovanni Battista Gaulli in the Church of the Ges\u00f9 in Rome (1669\u20131683), which featured figures spilling out of the picture frame and dramatic oblique lighting and light-dark contrasts.\nThe style spread quickly from Rome to other regions of Italy: It appeared in Venice in the church of Santa Maria della Salute (1631\u20131687) by Baldassare Longhena, a highly original octagonal form crowned with an enormous cupola. It appeared also in Turin, notably in the Chapel of the Holy Shroud (1668\u20131694) by Guarino Guarini. The style also began to be used in palaces; Guarini designed the Palazzo Carignano in Turin, while Longhena designed the Ca' Rezzonico on the Grand Canal, (1657), finished by Giorgio Massari with decorated with paintings by Giovanni Battista Tiepolo. A series of massive earthquakes in Sicily required the rebuilding of most of them and several were built in the exuberant late Baroque or Rococo style.\nSpanish Baroque.\nThe Catholic Church in Spain, and particularly the Jesuits, were the driving force of Spanish Baroque architecture. The first major work in this style was the San Isidro Chapel in Madrid, begun in 1643 by Pedro de la Torre. It contrasted an extreme richness of ornament on the exterior with simplicity in the interior, divided into multiple spaces and using effects of light to create a sense of mystery. The Santiago de Compostela Cathedral was modernized with a series of Baroque additions beginning at the end of the 17th century, starting with a highly ornate bell tower (1680), then flanked by two even taller and more ornate towers, called the \"Obradorio\", added between 1738 and 1750 by Fernando de Casas Novoa. Another landmark of the Spanish Baroque is the chapel tower of the Palace of San Telmo in Seville by Leonardo de Figueroa.\nGranada had only been conquered from the Moors in the 15th century, and had its own distinct variety of Baroque. The painter, sculptor and architect Alonso Cano designed the Baroque interior of Granada Cathedral between 1652 and his death in 1657. It features dramatic contrasts of the massive white columns and gold decor.\nThe most ornamental and lavishly decorated architecture of the Spanish Baroque is called Churrigueresque style, named after the brothers Churriguera, who worked primarily in Salamanca and Madrid. Their works include the buildings on Salamanca's main square, the Plaza Mayor (1729). This highly ornamental Baroque style was influential in many churches and cathedrals built by the Spanish in the Americas.\nOther notable Spanish baroque architects of the late Baroque include Pedro de Ribera, a pupil of Churriguera, who designed the Real Hospicio de San Fernando in Madrid, and Narciso Tom\u00e9, who designed the celebrated El Transparente altarpiece at Toledo Cathedral (1729\u20131732) which gives the illusion, in certain light, of floating upwards.\nThe architects of the Spanish Baroque had an effect far beyond Spain; their work was highly influential in the churches built in the Spanish colonies in Latin America and the Philippines. The church built by the Jesuits for the College of San Francisco Javier in Tepotzotl\u00e1n, with its ornate Baroque fa\u00e7ade and tower, is a good example.\nCentral Europe.\nFrom 1680 to 1750, many highly ornate cathedrals, abbeys, and pilgrimage churches were built in Central Europe, Austria, Bohemia and southwestern Poland. Some were in Rococo style, a distinct, more flamboyant and asymmetric style which emerged from the Baroque, then replaced it in Central Europe in the first half of the 18th century, until it was replaced in turn by classicism.\nThe princes of the multitude of states in that region also chose Baroque or Rococo for their palaces and residences, and often used Italian-trained architects to construct them.\nA notable example is the St. Nicholas Church (Mal\u00e1 Strana) in Prague (1704\u20131755), built by Christoph Dientzenhofer and his son Kilian Ignaz Dientzenhofer. Decoration covers all of walls of interior of the church. The altar is placed in the nave beneath the central dome, and surrounded by chapels, light comes down from the dome above and from the surrounding chapels. The altar is entirely surrounded by arches, columns, curved balustrades and pilasters of coloured stone, which are richly decorated with statuary, creating a deliberate confusion between the real architecture and the decoration. The architecture is transformed into a theatre of light, colour and movement.\nIn Poland, the Italian-inspired Polish Baroque lasted from the early 17th to the mid-18th century and emphasised richness of detail and colour. The first Baroque building in present-day Poland and probably one of the most recognizable is the Saints Peter and Paul Church, Krak\u00f3w, designed by Giovanni Battista Trevano. Sigismund's Column in Warsaw, erected in 1644, was the world's first secular Baroque monument built in the form of a column. The palatial residence style was exemplified by the Wilan\u00f3w Palace, constructed between 1677 and 1696. The most renowned Baroque architect active in Poland was Dutchman Tylman van Gameren and his notable works include Warsaw's St. Kazimierz Church and Krasi\u0144ski Palace, Church of St. Anne, Krak\u00f3w and Branicki Palace, Bia\u0142ystok. However, the most celebrated work of Polish Baroque is the Pozna\u0144 Fara Church, with details by Pompeo Ferrari. After Thirty Years' War under the agreements of the Peace of Westphalia two unique baroque wattle and daub structures was built: Church of Peace in Jawor, Holy Trinity Church of Peace in \u015awidnica the largest wooden Baroque temple in Europe.\nGerman Baroque.\nThe many states within the Holy Roman Empire on the territory of today's Germany all looked to represent themselves with impressive Baroque buildings. Notable architects included Johann Bernhard Fischer von Erlach, Lukas von Hildebrandt and Dominikus Zimmermann in Bavaria, Balthasar Neumann in Bruhl, and Matth\u00e4us Daniel P\u00f6ppelmann in Dresden. In Prussia, Frederick II of Prussia was inspired by the Grand Trianon of the Palace of Versailles, and used it as the model for his summer residence, Sanssouci, in Potsdam, designed for him by Georg Wenzeslaus von Knobelsdorff (1745\u20131747). Another work of Baroque palace architecture is the Zwinger (Dresden), the former orangerie of the palace of the electors of Saxony in the 18th century.\nOne of the best examples of a rococo church is the Basilika Vierzehnheiligen, or Basilica of the Fourteen Holy Helpers, a pilgrimage church located near the town of Bad Staffelstein near Bamberg, in Bavaria, southern Germany. The Basilica was designed by Balthasar Neumann and was constructed between 1743 and 1772, its plan a series of interlocking circles around a central oval with the altar placed in the exact centre of the church. The interior of this church illustrates the summit of Rococo decoration.\nAnother notable example of the style is the Pilgrimage Church of Wies (). It was designed by the brothers J. B. and Dominikus Zimmermann. It is located in the foothills of the Alps, in the municipality of Steingaden in the Weilheim-Schongau district, Bavaria, Germany. Construction took place between 1745 and 1754, and the interior was decorated with frescoes and with stuccowork in the tradition of the Wessobrunner School. It is now a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nFrench Baroque.\nBaroque in France developed quite differently from the ornate and dramatic local versions of Baroque from Italy, Spain and the rest of Europe. It appears severe, more detached and restrained by comparison, preempting Neoclassicism and the architecture of the Enlightenment. Unlike Italian buildings, French Baroque buildings have no broken pediments or curvilinear fa\u00e7ades. Even religious buildings avoided the intense spatial drama one finds in the work of Borromini. The style is closely associated with the works built for Louis XIV (reign 1643\u20131715), and because of this, it is also known as the Louis XIV style. Louis XIV invited the master of Baroque, Bernini, to submit a design for the new east wing of the Louvre, but rejected it in favor of a more classical design by Claude Perrault and Louis Le Vau.\nThe main architects of the style included Fran\u00e7ois Mansart (1598\u20131666), Pierre Le Muet (Church of Val-de-Gr\u00e2ce, 1645\u20131665) and Louis Le Vau (Vaux-le-Vicomte, 1657\u20131661). Mansart was the first architect to introduce Baroque styling, principally the frequent use of an applied order and heavy rustication, into the French architectural vocabulary. The mansard roof was not invented by Mansart, but it has become associated with him, as he used it frequently.\nThe major royal project of the period was the expansion of Palace of Versailles, begun in 1661 by Le Vau with decoration by the painter Charles Le Brun. The gardens were designed by Andr\u00e9 Le N\u00f4tre specifically to complement and amplify the architecture. The Galerie des Glaces (Hall of Mirrors), the centerpiece of the ch\u00e2teau, with paintings by Le Brun, was constructed between 1678 and 1686. Mansart completed the Grand Trianon in 1687. The chapel, designed by Robert de Cotte, was finished in 1710. Following the death of Louis XIV, Louis XV added the more intimate Petit Trianon and the highly ornate theatre. The fountains in the gardens were designed to be seen from the interior, and to add to the dramatic effect. The palace was admired and copied by other monarchs of Europe, particularly Peter the Great of Russia, who visited Versailles early in the reign of Louis XV, and built his own version at Peterhof Palace near Saint Petersburg, between 1705 and 1725.\nPortuguese Baroque.\nBaroque architecture in Portugal lasted about two centuries (the late seventeenth century and eighteenth century). The reigns of John V and Joseph I had increased imports of gold and diamonds, in a period called Royal Absolutism, which allowed the Portuguese Baroque to flourish.\nBaroque architecture in Portugal enjoys a special situation and different timeline from the rest of Europe.\nIt is conditioned by several political, artistic, and economic factors, that originate several phases, and different kinds of outside influences, resulting in a unique blend, often misunderstood by those looking for Italian art, find instead specific forms and character which give it a uniquely Portuguese variety. Another key factor is the existence of the Jesuitical architecture, also called \"plain style\" (Estilo Ch\u00e3o or Estilo Plano) which like the name evokes, is plainer and appears somewhat austere.\nThe buildings are single-room basilicas, deep main chapel, lateral chapels (with small doors for communication), without interior and exterior decoration, simple portal and windows. \nIt is a practical building, allowing it to be built throughout the empire with minor adjustments, and prepared to be decorated later or when economic resources are available.\nIn fact, the first Portuguese Baroque does not lack in building because \"plain style\" is easy to be transformed, by means of decoration (painting, tiling, etc.), turning empty areas into pompous, elaborate baroque scenarios. The same could be applied to the exterior. Subsequently, it is easy to adapt the building to the taste of the time and place, and add on new features and details. Practical and economical.\nWith more inhabitants and better economic resources, the north, particularly the areas of Porto and Braga, witnessed an architectural renewal, visible in the large list of churches, convents and palaces built by the aristocracy.\nPorto is the city of Baroque in Portugal. Its historical centre is part of UNESCO World Heritage List.\nMany of the Baroque works in the historical area of the city and beyond, belong to Nicolau Nasoni an Italian architect living in Portugal, drawing original buildings with scenographic emplacement such as the church and tower of Cl\u00e9rigos, the logia of the Porto Cathedral, the church of Miseric\u00f3rdia, the Palace of S\u00e3o Jo\u00e3o Novo, the Palace of Freixo, the Episcopal Palace (Portuguese: \"Pa\u00e7o Episcopal do Porto\") along with many others.\nRussian Baroque.\nThe debut of Russian Baroque, or Petrine Baroque, followed a long visit of Peter the Great to western Europe in 1697\u20131698, where he visited the Ch\u00e2teaux of Fontainebleau and Versailles as well as other architectural monuments. He decided, on his return to Russia, to construct similar monuments in St. Petersburg, which became the new capital of Russia in 1712. Early major monuments in the Petrine Baroque include the Peter and Paul Cathedral and Menshikov Palace.\nDuring the reign of Anna and Elisabeth, Russian architecture was dominated by the luxurious Baroque style of Italian-born Francesco Bartolomeo Rastrelli, which developed into Elizabethan Baroque. Rastrelli's signature buildings include the Winter Palace, the Catherine Palace and the Smolny Cathedral. Other distinctive monuments of the Elizabethan Baroque are the bell tower of the Troitse-Sergiyeva Lavra and the Red Gate.\nIn Moscow, Naryshkin Baroque became widespread, especially in the architecture of Eastern Orthodox churches in the late 17th century. It was a combination of western European Baroque with traditional Russian folk styles.\nBaroque in the Spanish and Portuguese Colonial Americas.\nDue to the colonization of the Americas by European countries, the Baroque naturally moved to the New World, finding especially favorable ground in the regions dominated by Spain and Portugal, both countries being centralized and irreducibly Catholic monarchies, by extension subject to Rome and adherents of the Baroque Counter-Reformation. European artists migrated to America and made school, and along with the widespread penetration of Catholic missionaries, many of whom were skilled artists, created a multiform Baroque often influenced by popular taste. The Criollo and indigenous crafters did much to give this Baroque unique features. The main centres of American Baroque cultivation, that are still standing, are (in this order) Mexico, Peru, Brazil, Cuba, Ecuador, Colombia, Bolivia, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Puerto Rico and Panama.\nOf particular note is the so-called \"Missionary Baroque\", developed in the framework of the Spanish reductions in areas extending from Mexico and southwestern portions of current-day United States to as far south as Argentina and Chile, indigenous settlements organized by Spanish Catholic missionaries in order to convert them to the Christian faith and acculturate them in the Western life, forming a hybrid Baroque influenced by Native culture, where flourished Criollos and many indigenous artisans and musicians, even literate, some of great ability and talent of their own. Missionaries' accounts often repeat that Western art, especially music, had a hypnotic impact on foresters, and the images of saints were viewed as having great powers. Many natives were converted, and a new form of devotion was created, of passionate intensity, laden with mysticism, superstition, and theatricality, which delighted in festive masses, sacred concerts, and mysteries.\nThe Colonial Baroque architecture in the Spanish America is characterized by a profuse decoration (portal of La Profesa Church, Mexico City; fa\u00e7ades covered with Puebla-style azulejos, as in the Church of San Francisco Acatepec in San Andr\u00e9s Cholula and Convent Church of San Francisco, Puebla), which will be exacerbated in the so-called Churrigueresque style (Fa\u00e7ade of the Tabernacle of the Mexico City Metropolitan Cathedral, by Lorenzo Rodr\u00edguez; Church of San Francisco Javier, Tepotzotl\u00e1n; Church of Santa Prisca de Taxco). In Peru, the constructions mostly developed in the cities of Lima, Cusco, Arequipa and Trujillo, since 1650 show original characteristics that are advanced even to the European Baroque, as in the use of cushioned walls and solomonic columns (Iglesia de la Compa\u00f1\u00eda de Jes\u00fas, Cusco; Basilica and Convent of San Francisco, Lima). Other countries include: the Metropolitan Cathedral of Sucre in Bolivia; Cathedral Basilica of Esquipulas in Guatemala; Tegucigalpa Cathedral in Honduras; Le\u00f3n Cathedral in Nicaragua; the Church of la Compa\u00f1\u00eda de Jes\u00fas, Quito, Ecuador; the Church of San Ignacio, Bogot\u00e1, Colombia; the Caracas Cathedral in Venezuela; the Cabildo of Buenos Aires in Argentina; the Church of Santo Domingo in Santiago, Chile; and Havana Cathedral in Cuba. It is also worth remembering the quality of the churches of the Spanish Jesuit Missions in Bolivia, Spanish Jesuit missions in Paraguay, the Spanish missions in Mexico and the Spanish Franciscan missions in California.\nIn Brazil, as in the metropolis, Portugal, the architecture has a certain Italian influence, usually of a Borrominesque type, as can be seen in the Co-Cathedral of Recife (1784) and Church of Nossa Senhora da Gl\u00f3ria do Outeiro in Rio de Janeiro (1739). In the region of Minas Gerais, highlighted the work of Aleijadinho, author of a group of churches that stand out for their curved planimetry, fa\u00e7ades with concave-convex dynamic effects and a plastic treatment of all architectural elements (Church of S\u00e3o Francisco de Assis, Ouro Preto, 1765\u20131788).\nBaroque in the Spanish and Portuguese Colonial Asia.\nIn the Portuguese colonies of India (Goa, Daman and Diu) an architectural style of Baroque forms mixed with Hindu elements flourished, such as the Se Cathedral and the Basilica of Bom Jesus of Goa, which houses the tomb of St. Francis Xavier. The set of churches and convents of Goa was declared a World Heritage Site in 1986.\nIn the Philippines, which was a Spanish colony for over three centuries, a large number of Baroque constructions are preserved. Four of these as well as the Baroque and Neoclassical city of Vigan are both UNESCO World Heritage Sites; and although they lack formal classification, The Walled City of Manila along with the city of Tayabas both contain a significant extent of Spanish-Baroque-era architecture.\nEchoes in Wallachia and Moldavia.\nAs we saw, the Baroque is a Western style, born in Italy. Through the commercial and cultural relationships of Italians with countries of the Balkan Peninsula, including Moldavia and Wallachia, Baroque influences arrive to Eastern Europe. These influences were not very strong, since they usually take place in architecture and stone-sculpted ornaments, and are also mixed intensely with details taken from Byzantine and Islamic art.\nBefore and after the fall of the Byzantine Empire, all the art of Wallachia and Moldavia was primarily influenced by that of Constantinople. Until the end of the 16th century, with little modifications, the plans of churches and monasteries, the murals, and the ornaments carved in stone remain the same as before. From a period starting with the reigns of Matei Basarab (1632\u20131654) and Vasile Lupu (1634\u20131653), which coincided with the popularization of Italian Baroque, new ornaments were added, and the style of religious furniture changed. This was not random at all. Decorative elements and principles were brought from Italy, through Venice, or through the Dalmatian regions, and they were adopted by architects and craftsmen from the east. The window and door frames, the \"pisanie\" with dedication, the tombstones, the columns and railings, and a part of the bronze, silver or wooden furniture, received a more important role than the one they had before. They existed before too, inspired by the Byzantine tradition, but they gained a more realist look, showing delicate floral motifs. The relief that existed before too, became more accentuated, having volume and consistency. Before this period, reliefs from Wallachia and Moldavia, like the ones from the East, had only two levels, at a small distance one from the other, one at the surface and the other in depth. Big flowers, maybe roses, peonies or thistles, thick leaves, of acanthus or another similar plant, were twisting on columns, or surround door and windows. A place where the Baroque had a strong influence was columns and the railings. Capitals were more decorated than before with foliage. Columns have often twisting shafts, a local reinterpretation of the Solomonic column. Maximalist railings are placed between these columns, decorated with rinceaux. Some of the ones from the Mogo\u0219oaia Palace are also decorated with dolphins. Cartouches are also used sometimes, mostly on tombstones, like on the one of Constantin Br\u00e2ncoveanu. This movement, is known as the Br\u00e2ncovenesc style, after Constantin Br\u00e2ncoveanu, a ruler of Wallachia whose reign (1654\u20131714) is highly associated with this kind of architecture and design. The style is also present during the 18th century, and in a part of the 19th. Many of the churches and residences erected by boyards and voivodes of these periods are Br\u00e2ncovenesc. Although Baroque influences can be clearly seen, the Br\u00e2ncovenesc style takes much more inspiration from the local tradition.\nAs the 18th century passed, with the Phanariot (members of prominent Greek families in Phanar, Istanbul) reigns in Wallachia and Moldavia, Baroque influences come from Istanbul too. They came before too, during the 17th century, but with the Phanariots, more Western Baroque motifs that arrived to the Ottoman Empire had their final destination in present-day Romania. In Moldavia, Baroque elements come from Russia too, where the influence of Italian art was strong.\nPainting.\nBaroque painters worked deliberately to set themselves apart from the painters of the Renaissance and the Mannerism period after it. In their palette, they used intense and warm colours, and particularly made use of the primary colours red, blue and yellow, frequently putting all three in close proximity. They avoided the even lighting of Renaissance painting and used strong contrasts of light and darkness on certain parts of the picture to direct attention to the central actions or figures. In their composition, they avoided the tranquil scenes of Renaissance paintings, and chose the moments of the greatest movement and drama. Unlike the tranquil faces of Renaissance paintings, the faces in Baroque paintings clearly expressed their emotions. They often used asymmetry, with action occurring away from the centre of the picture, and created axes that were neither vertical nor horizontal, but slanting to the left or right, giving a sense of instability and movement. They enhanced this impression of movement by having the costumes of the personages blown by the wind, or moved by their own gestures. The overall impressions were movement, emotion and drama. Another essential element of baroque painting was allegory; every painting told a story and had a message, often encrypted in symbols and allegorical characters, which an educated viewer was expected to know and read.\nEarly evidence of Italian Baroque ideas in painting occurred in Bologna, where Annibale Carracci, Agostino Carracci and Ludovico Carracci sought to return the visual arts to the ordered Classicism of the Renaissance. Their art, however, also incorporated ideas central the Counter-Reformation; these included intense emotion and religious imagery that appealed more to the heart than to the intellect.\nAnother influential painter of the Baroque era was Michelangelo Merisi da Caravaggio. His realistic approach to the human figure, painted directly from life and dramatically spotlit against a dark background, shocked his contemporaries and opened a new chapter in the history of painting. Other major painters associated closely with the Baroque style include Artemisia Gentileschi, Elisabetta Sirani, Giovanna Garzoni, Guido Reni, Domenichino, Andrea Pozzo, and Paolo de Matteis in Italy; Francisco de Zurbar\u00e1n, Bartolom\u00e9 Esteban Murillo and Diego Vel\u00e1zquez in Spain; Adam Elsheimer in Germany; and Nicolas Poussin, Simon Vouet, Georges de La Tour and Claude Lorrain in France (though Poussin and Lorrain spent most of his working life in Italy). Poussin and de La Tour adopted a \"classical\" Baroque style with less focus on emotion and greater attention to the line of the figures in the painting than to colour.\nPeter Paul Rubens was the most important painter of the Flemish Baroque style. Rubens' highly charged compositions reference erudite aspects of classical and Christian history. His unique and immensely popular Baroque style emphasised movement, colour, and sensuality, which followed the immediate, dramatic artistic style promoted in the Counter-Reformation. Rubens specialized in making altarpieces, portraits, landscapes, and history paintings of mythological and allegorical subjects.\nOne important domain of Baroque painting was \"Quadratura\", or paintings in \"trompe-l'\u0153il\", which literally \"fooled the eye\". These were usually painted on the stucco of ceilings or upper walls and balustrades, and gave the impression to those on the ground looking up were that they were seeing the heavens populated with crowds of angels, saints and other heavenly figures, set against painted skies and imaginary architecture.\nIn Italy, artists often collaborated with architects on interior decoration; Pietro da Cortona was one of the painters of the 17th century who employed this illusionist way of painting. Among his most important commissions were the frescoes he painted for the Palazzo Barberini (1633\u201339), to glorify the reign of Pope Urban VIII. Pietro da Cortona's compositions were the largest decorative frescoes executed in Rome since the work of Michelangelo at the Sistine Chapel.\nFran\u00e7ois Boucher was an important figure in the more delicate French Rococo style, which appeared during the late Baroque period. He designed tapestries, carpets and theatre decoration as well as painting. His work was extremely popular with Madame de Pompadour, the Mistress of King Louis XV. His paintings featured mythological romantic, and mildly erotic themes.\nHispanic Americas.\nIn the Hispanic Americas, the first influences were from Sevillan Tenebrism, mainly from Zurbar\u00e1n\u2014some of whose works are still preserved in Mexico and Peru\u2014as can be seen in the work of the Mexicans Jos\u00e9 Ju\u00e1rez and Sebasti\u00e1n L\u00f3pez de Arteaga, and the Bolivian Melchor P\u00e9rez de Holgu\u00edn. The Cusco School of painting arose after the arrival of the Italian painter Bernardo Bitti in 1583, who introduced Mannerism in the Americas. It highlighted the work of Luis de Ria\u00f1o, disciple of the Italian Angelino Medoro, author of the murals of the Church of San Pedro, Andahuaylillas. It also highlighted the Indian (Quechua) painters Diego Quispe Tito and Basilio Santa Cruz Pumacallao, as well as Marcos Zapata, author of the fifty large canvases that cover the high arches of Cusco Cathedral. In Ecuador, the Quito School was formed, mainly represented by the mestizo Miguel de Santiago and the criollo Nicol\u00e1s Javier de Gor\u00edbar.\nIn the 18th century sculptural altarpieces began to be replaced by paintings, developing notably the Baroque painting in the Americas. Similarly, the demand for civil works, mainly portraits of the aristocratic classes and the ecclesiastical hierarchy, grew. The main influence was the Murillesque, and in some cases\u2014as in the criollo Crist\u00f3bal de Villalpando\u2013that of Juan de Vald\u00e9s Leal. The painting of this era has a more sentimental tone, with sweet and softer shapes. Its proponents include Gregorio Vasquez de Arce y Ceballos in Colombia, and Juan Rodr\u00edguez Ju\u00e1rez and Miguel Cabrera in Mexico.\nSculpture.\nThe dominant figure in baroque sculpture was Gian Lorenzo Bernini. Under the patronage of Pope Urban VIII, he made a remarkable series of monumental statues of saints and figures whose faces and gestures vividly expressed their emotions, as well as portrait busts of exceptional realism, and highly decorative works for the Vatican such as the imposing Chair of St. Peter beneath the dome in St. Peter's Basilica. In addition, he designed fountains with monumental groups of sculpture to decorate the major squares of Rome.\nBaroque sculpture was inspired by ancient Roman statuary, particularly by the famous first century CE statue of \"Laoco\u00f6n and His Sons\", which was unearthed in 1506 and put on display in the gallery of the Vatican. When he visited Paris in 1665, Bernini addressed the students at the academy of painting and sculpture. He advised the students to work from classical models, rather than from nature. He told the students, \"When I had trouble with my first statue, I consulted the \"Antinous\" like an oracle.\" That \"Antinous\" statue is known today as the Hermes of the Museo Pio-Clementino.\nNotable late French baroque sculptors included \u00c9tienne Maurice Falconet and Jean Baptiste Pigalle. Pigalle was commissioned by Frederick the Great to make statues for Frederick's own version of Versailles at Sanssouci in Potsdam, Germany. Falconet also received an important foreign commission, creating the famous \"Bronze Horseman\" statue of Peter the Great found in St. Petersburg.\nIn Spain, the sculptor Francisco Salzillo worked exclusively on religious themes, using polychromed wood. Some of the finest baroque sculptural craftsmanship was found in the gilded stucco altars of churches of the Spanish colonies of the New World, made by local craftsmen; examples include the Chapel del Rosario, Puebla, (Mexico), 1724\u20131731.\nFurniture.\nThe main motifs used are: horns of plenty, festoons, baby angels, lion heads holding a metal ring in their mouths, female faces surrounded by garlands, oval cartouches, acanthus leaves, classical columns, caryatids, pediments, and other elements of Classical architecture sculpted on some parts of pieces of furniture, baskets with fruits or flowers, shells, armour and trophies, heads of Apollo or Bacchus, and C-shaped volutes.\nDuring the first period of the reign of Louis XIV, furniture followed the previous Louis XIII style, and was massive, and profusely decorated with sculpture and gilding. After 1680, thanks in large part to the furniture designer Andr\u00e9-Charles Boulle, a more original and delicate style appeared, sometimes known as Boulle work. It was based on the inlay of ebony and other rare woods, a technique first used in Florence in the 15th century, which was refined and developed by Boulle and others working for Louis XIV. Furniture was inlaid with plaques of ebony, copper, and exotic woods of different colors.\nNew and often enduring types of furniture appeared; the commode, with two to four drawers, replaced the old \"coffre\", or chest. The \"canap\u00e9\", or sofa, appeared, in the form of a combination of two or three armchairs. New kinds of armchairs appeared, including the \"fauteuil en confessionale\" or \"Confessional armchair\", which had padded cushions ions on either side of the back of the chair. The console table also made its first appearance; it was designed to be placed against a wall. Another new type of furniture was the \"table \u00e0 gibier\", a marble-topped table for holding dishes. Early varieties of the desk appeared; the Mazarin desk had a central section set back, placed between two columns of drawers, with four feet on each column.\nMusic.\nThe term \"Baroque\" is also used to designate the style of music composed during a period that overlaps with that of Baroque art. The first uses of the term 'baroque' for music were criticisms. In an anonymous, satirical review of the premi\u00e8re in October 1733 of Jean-Philippe Rameau's \"Hippolyte et Aricie,\" printed in the \"Mercure de France\" in May 1734, the critic implied that the novelty of this opera was \"du barocque,\" complaining that the music lacked coherent melody, was filled with unremitting dissonances, constantly changed key and meter, and speedily ran through every compositional device. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who was a musician and noted composer as well as philosopher, made a very similar observation in 1768 in the famous \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" of Denis Diderot: \"Baroque music is that in which the harmony is confused, and loaded with modulations and dissonances. The singing is harsh and unnatural, the intonation difficult, and the movement limited. It appears that term comes from the word 'baroco' used by logicians.\"\nCommon use of the term for the music of the period began only in 1919, by Curt Sachs, and it was not until 1940 that it was first used in English in an article published by Manfred Bukofzer.\nThe baroque was a period of musical experimentation and innovation which explains the amount of ornaments and improvisation performed by the musicians. New forms were invented, including the concerto and sinfonia. Opera was born in Italy at the end of the 16th century (with Jacopo Peri's mostly lost \"Dafne\", produced in Florence in 1598) and soon spread through the rest of Europe: Louis XIV created the first Royal Academy of Music. In 1669 the poet Pierre Perrin opened an academy of opera in Paris, the first opera theatre in France open to the public, and premiered \"Pomone\", the first grand opera in French, with music by Robert Cambert, with five acts, elaborate stage machinery, and a ballet. Heinrich Sch\u00fctz in Germany, Jean-Baptiste Lully in France, and Henry Purcell in England all helped to establish their national traditions in the 17th century.\nSeveral new instruments, including the piano, were introduced during this period. The invention of the piano is credited to Bartolomeo Cristofori (1655\u20131731) of Padua, Italy, who was employed by Ferdinando de' Medici, Grand Prince of Tuscany, as the Keeper of the Instruments. Cristofori named the instrument \"un cimbalo di cipresso di piano e forte\" (\"a keyboard of cypress with soft and loud\"), abbreviated over time as \"pianoforte\", \"fortepiano\", and later, simply, piano.\nDance.\nThe classical ballet also originated in the Baroque era. The style of court dance was brought to France by Marie de' Medici, and in the beginning the members of the court themselves were the dancers. Louis XIV himself performed in public in several ballets. In March 1662, the Acad\u00e9mie Royale de Danse, was founded by the King. It was the first professional dance school and company, and set the standards and vocabulary for ballet throughout Europe during the period.\nLiterary theory.\nHeinrich W\u00f6lfflin was the first to transfer the term Baroque to literature. The key concepts of Baroque literary theory, such as \"conceit\" (\"concetto\"), \"wit\" (\"acutezza\", \"ingegno\"), and \"wonder\" (\"meraviglia\"), were not fully developed in literary theory until the publication of Emanuele Tesauro's \"Il Cannocchiale aristotelico\" (The Aristotelian Telescope) in 1654. This seminal treatise\u2014inspired by Giambattista Marino's epic \"Adone\" and the work of the Spanish Jesuit philosopher Baltasar Graci\u00e1n\u2014developed a theory of metaphor as a universal language of images and as a supreme intellectual act, at once an artifice and an epistemologically privileged mode of access to truth.\nDramaturgy of Central Europe in the Baroque\nWalter Benjamin\u2019s study of the Baroque in \"The Origin of German Tragic Drama\", is a notoriously difficult but also exceptionally beloved major historical standard on the period. According to its conceit the work concentrates on Baroque drama though in fact the content of this study is extraordinarily diverse and even arcane in both the depth and range of its contents, dealing with an overwhelming heterogeneity of material in this historical terrain\u2014though especially focusing its attention on Central Europe and (while Austrians of the Holy Roman Empire are sometimes mentioned and even Spanish under the Habsburg Emperor Ferdinand) concentrating on Germany.\nA major theme of the work is Benjamin\u2019s mapping of the way in which the period arises in reaction to the collectively traumagenic violence of the Thirty Years War. This was a war in which virtually all of Europe participated at the bloody climax of the Reformation, though it was fought more or less exclusively in the Holy Roman Empire with all major powers (with the exception of England and Russia, who nevertheless became embroiled or were effected in various ways) sending their armies to meet in battle on that terrain.\nFor Walter Benjamin in his study of the Origin, the almost pathological-seeming (or at any rate historically aberrant and intense) elaboration of detail and tendency toward recursive involutions or even the horror vacui quality of cultural production characteristic of the era arises as a psychic defense or digressive suppression of terror and anomie in the absence of the symbolically transcendent authority so long manifest in the institutions and ritual forms of absolution projected across the continent by the Western Church in Rome in the collapse of its continental supremacy in administration and social control\u2014a process which has sometimes been called the \u2018dismemberment of Christendom,\u2019 or more positively the birth of modernity and thus also of the hegemony of capitalism, as Max Weber and various other (including Hugh Trevor Roper\u2019s \"Crisis of the Seventeenth Century\" and his more famous monograph on the \"European Witch Craze\").\nTheatre.\nThe Baroque period was a golden age for theatre in France and Spain; playwrights included Corneille, Racine and Moli\u00e8re in France; and Lope de Vega and Pedro Calder\u00f3n de la Barca in Spain.\nDuring the Baroque period, the art and style of the theatre evolved rapidly, alongside the development of opera and of ballet. The design of newer and larger theatres, the invention the use of more elaborate machinery, the wider use of the proscenium arch, which framed the stage and hid the machinery from the audience, encouraged more scenic effects and spectacle.\nThe Baroque had a Catholic and conservative character in Spain, following an Italian literary model during the Renaissance. The Hispanic Baroque theatre aimed for a public content with an ideal reality that manifested fundamental three sentiments: Catholic religion, monarchist and national pride and honour originating from the chivalric, knightly world.\nTwo periods are known in the Baroque Spanish theatre, with the division occurring in 1630. The first period is represented chiefly by Lope de Vega, but also by Tirso de Molina, Gaspar Aguilar, Guill\u00e9n de Castro, Antonio Mira de Amescua, Luis V\u00e9lez de Guevara, Juan Ruiz de Alarc\u00f3n, Diego Jim\u00e9nez de Enciso, Luis Belmonte Berm\u00fadez, Felipe God\u00ednez, Luis Qui\u00f1ones de Benavente or Juan P\u00e9rez de Montalb\u00e1n. Many of these figures attended \"academias literarias\" (literary academies) including the famous Medrano Academy founded by Sebasti\u00e1n Francisco de Medrano. The second period is represented by Pedro Calder\u00f3n de la Barca and fellow dramatists Antonio Hurtado de Mendoza, \u00c1lvaro Cubillo de Arag\u00f3n, Jer\u00f3nimo de C\u00e1ncer, Francisco de Rojas Zorrilla, Juan de Matos Fragoso, Antonio Coello y Ochoa, Agust\u00edn Moreto, and Francisco Bances Candamo. These classifications are loose because each author had his own way and could occasionally adhere himself to the formula established by Lope. It may even be that Lope's \"manner\" was more liberal and structured than Calder\u00f3n's.\nLope de Vega introduced through his \"Arte nuevo de hacer comedias en este tiempo\" (1609) the \"new comedy\". He established a new dramatic formula that broke the three Aristotle unities of the Italian school of poetry (action, time, and place) and a fourth unity of Aristotle which is about style, mixing of tragic and comic elements showing different types of verses and stanzas upon what is represented. Although Lope has a great knowledge of the plastic arts, he did not use it during the major part of his career nor in theatre or scenography. The Lope's comedy granted a second role to the visual aspects of the theatrical representation.\nTirso de Molina, Lope de Vega, and Calder\u00f3n were the most important play writers in Golden Era Spain. Their works, known for their subtle intelligence and profound comprehension of a person's humanity, could be considered a bridge between Lope's primitive comedy and the more elaborate comedy of Calder\u00f3n. Tirso de Molina is best known for two works, \"The Convicted Suspicions\" and \"The Trickster of Seville\", one of the first versions of the Don Juan myth.\nUpon his arrival to Madrid, Cosimo Lotti brought to the Spanish court the most advanced theatrical techniques of Europe. His techniques and mechanic knowledge were applied in palace exhibitions called \"Fiestas\" and in lavish exhibitions of rivers or artificial fountains called \"Naumaquias\". He was in charge of styling the Gardens of Buen Retiro, of Zarzuela, and of Aranjuez and the construction of the theatrical building of Coliseo del Buen Retiro. Lope's formulas begin with a verse that it unbefitting of the palace theatre foundation and the birth of new concepts that begun the careers of some play writers like Calder\u00f3n de la Barca. Marking the principal innovations of the New Lopesian Comedy, Calder\u00f3n's style marked many differences, with a great deal of constructive care and attention to his internal structure. Calder\u00f3n's work is in formal perfection and a very lyric and symbolic language. Liberty, vitality and openness of Lope gave a step to Calder\u00f3n's intellectual reflection and formal precision. In his comedy it reflected his ideological and doctrine intentions in above the passion and the action, the work of Autos sacramentales achieved high ranks. The genre of Comedia is political, multi-artistic and in a sense hybrid. The poetic text interweaved with Medias and resources originating from architecture, music and painting freeing the deception that is in the Lopesian comedy was made up from the lack of scenery and engaging the dialogue of action.\nThe best known German playwright was Andreas Gryphius, who used the Jesuit model of the Dutch Joost van den Vondel and Pierre Corneille. There was also Johannes Velten who combined the traditions of the English comedians and the commedia dell'arte with the classic theatre of Corneille and Moli\u00e8re. His touring company was perhaps the most significant and important of the 17th century.\nThe foremost Italian baroque tragedian was Federico Della Valle. His literary activity is summed up by the four plays that he wrote for the courtly theater: the tragicomedy \"Adelonda di Frigia\" (1595) and especially his three tragedies, \"Judith\" (1627), \"Esther\" (1627) and \"La reina di Scotia\" (1628). Della Valle had many imitators and followers who combined in their works Baroque taste and the didactic aims of the Jesuits (Francesco Sforza Pallavicino, Girolamo Graziani, etc.)\nIn the Tsardom of Russia, the development of the Russian version of Baroque took shape only in the second half of the 17th century, primarily due to the initiative of tsar Alexis of Russia, who wanted to open a court theatre in 1672. Its director and dramatist was Johann Gottfried Gregorii, a German-Russian Lutheran pastor, who wrote, in particular, a 10-hour play \"The Action of Artaxerxes\". The dramaturgy of Symeon of Polotsk and Demetrius of Rostov became key contribution to the Russian Baroque.\nSpanish colonial Americas.\nFollowing the evolution marked from Spain, at the end of the 16th century, the companies of comedians, essentially transhumant, began to professionalize. With professionalization came regulation and censorship: as in Europe, the theatre oscillated between tolerance and even government protection and rejection (with exceptions) or persecution by the Church. The theatre was useful to the authorities as an instrument to disseminate the desired behavior and models, respect for the social order and the monarchy, school of religious dogma.\nThe \"corrales\" were administered for the benefit of hospitals that shared the benefits of the representations. The itinerant companies (or \"of the league\"), who carried the theatre in improvised open-air stages by the regions that did not have fixed locals, required a viceregal license to work, whose price or \"pinci\u00f3n\" was destined to alms and works pious. For companies that worked stably in the capitals and major cities, one of their main sources of income was participation in the festivities of the Corpus Christi, which provided them with not only economic benefits, but also recognition and social prestige. The representations in the viceregal palace and the mansions of the aristocracy, where they represented both the comedies of their repertoire and special productions with great lighting effects, scenery, and stage, were also an important source of well-paid and prestigious work.\nBorn in the Viceroyalty of New Spain but later settled in Spain, Juan Ruiz de Alarc\u00f3n is the most prominent figure in the Baroque theatre of New Spain. Despite his accommodation to Lope de Vega's new comedy, his \"marked secularism\", his discretion and restraint, and a keen capacity for \"psychological penetration\" as distinctive features of Alarc\u00f3n against his Spanish contemporaries have been noted. Noteworthy among his works \"La verdad sospechosa\", a comedy of characters that reflected his constant moralizing purpose. The dramatic production of Sor Juana In\u00e9s de la Cruz places her as the second figure of the Spanish-American Baroque theatre. It is worth mentioning among her works the auto sacramental \"El divino Narciso\" and the comedy \"Los empe\u00f1os de una casa\".\nGardens.\nThe Baroque garden, also known as the \"jardin \u00e0 la fran\u00e7aise\" or French formal garden, first appeared in Rome in the 16th century, and then most famously in France in the 17th century in the gardens of Vaux le Vicomte and the Palace of Versailles. Baroque gardens were built by Kings and princes in Germany, the Netherlands, Austria, Spain, Poland, Italy and Russia until the mid-18th century, when they began to be remade into by the more natural English landscape garden.\nThe purpose of the baroque garden was to illustrate the power of man over nature, and the glory of its builder, Baroque gardens were laid out in geometric patterns, like the rooms of a house. They were usually best seen from the outside and looking down, either from a ch\u00e2teau or terrace. The elements of a baroque garden included parterres of flower beds or low hedges trimmed into ornate Baroque designs, and straight lanes and alleys of gravel which divided and crisscrossed the garden. Terraces, ramps, staircases and cascades were placed where there were differences of elevation, and provided viewing points. Circular or rectangular ponds or basins of water were the settings for fountains and statues. Bosquets or carefully trimmed groves or lines of identical trees, gave the appearance of walls of greenery and were backdrops for statues. On the edges, the gardens usually had pavilions, orangeries and other structures where visitors could take shelter from the sun or rain.\nBaroque gardens required enormous numbers of gardeners, continual trimming, and abundant water. In the later part of the Baroque period, the formal elements began to be replaced with more natural features, including winding paths, groves of varied trees left to grow untrimmed; rustic architecture and picturesque structures, such as Roman temples or Chinese pagodas, as well as \"secret gardens\" on the edges of the main garden, filled with greenery, where visitors could read or have quiet conversations. By the mid-18th century most of the Baroque gardens were partially or entirely transformed into variations of the English landscape garden.\nBesides Versailles and Vaux-le-Vicomte, celebrated baroque gardens still retaining much of their original appearance include the Royal Palace of Caserta near Naples; Nymphenburg Palace and Augustusburg and Falkenlust Palaces, Br\u00fchl in Germany; Het Loo Palace, Netherlands; the Belvedere Palace in Vienna; Royal Palace of La Granja de San Ildefonso, Spain; and Peterhof Palace in St. Petersburg, Russia.\nUrban planning and design.\n16th through 19th century European cities witnessed a large change in urban design and planning principals that reshaped the landscapes and built environment. Rome, Paris, and other major cities were transformed to accommodate growing populations through improvements in housing, transportation, and public services. Throughout this time, the Baroque style was in full swing, and the influences of elaborate, dramatic, and artistic architectural styles extended into the urban fabric through what is known as Baroque urban planning. The experience of living and walking in the cities aims to complement the emotions of the Baroque style. This style of planning often embraced displaying the wealth and strength of the ruling powers, and the important buildings served as the visual and symbolic center of the cities.\nThe replanning of the city of Rome under the rule of Pope Sixtus V revived and expanded the city in the 16th century. Many grand piazzas and squares were added as public spaces to contribute to the dramatic effect of the Baroque style. The piazzas featured fountains and other decorative features to embody the emotions of the time. An important factor in Baroque style planning was to connect churches, government structures, and piazzas together in a refined network of axis'. This allowed the important landmarks of the Catholic Church to become the focal points of the city.\nMore characteristics of Baroque urban planning are embodied in Barcelona. The Eixample district, designed by Ildefons Cerd\u00e0, showcases wide avenues in a grid system with a few diagonal boulevards. The intersections are unique with octagonal blocks, which provide the streets with great visibility and light. Many works in this district come from architect Antoni Gaud\u00ed, who displays a unique style. Centered in the Eixample district design is the Sagrada Fam\u00edlia by Gaud\u00ed, which poses great significance to the city.\nPosterity.\nTransition to rococo.\nThe Rococo is the final stage of the Baroque, and in many ways took the Baroque's fundamental qualities of illusion and drama to their logical extremes. Beginning in France as a reaction against the heavy Baroque grandeur of Louis XIV's court at the Palace of Versailles, the rococo movement became associated particularly with the powerful (1721\u20131764), the mistress of the new king, Louis XV (1710\u20131774). Because of this, the style was also known as \"Pompadour\". Although it's highly associated with the reign of Louis XV, it didn't appear in this period. Multiple works from the last years of Louis XIV's reign are examples of early Rococo. The name of the movement derives from the French , or pebble, and refers to stones and shells that decorate the interiors of caves, as similar shell forms became a common feature in Rococo design. It began as a design and decorative arts style, and was characterized by elegant flowing shapes. Architecture followed and then painting and sculpture. The French painter with whom the term Rococo is most often associated is Jean-Antoine Watteau, whose pastoral scenes, or , dominate the early part of the 18th century.\nThere are multiple similarities between Rococo and Baroque. Both styles insist on monumental forms, and so use continuous spaces, double columns or pilasters, and luxurious materials (including gilded elements). There also noticeable differences. Rococo designed freed themselves from the adherence to symmetry that had dominated architecture and design since the Renaissance. Many small objects, like ink pots or porcelain figures, but also some ornaments, are often asymmetrical. This goes hand in hand with the fact that most ornamentation consisted of interpretation of foliage and sea shells, not as many Classical ornaments inherited from the Renaissance like in Baroque. Another key difference is the fact that since the Baroque is the main cultural manifestation of the spirit of the Counter-Reformation, it is most often associated with ecclesiastical architecture. In contrast, the Rococo is mainly associated with palaces and domestic architecture. In Paris, the popularity of the Rococo coincided with the emergence of the salon as a new type of social gathering, the venues for which were often decorated in this style. Rococo rooms were typically smaller than their Baroque counterparts, reflecting a movement towards domestic intimacy. Colours also match this change, from the earthy tones of Caravaggio's paintings, and the interiors of red marble and gilded mounts of the reign of Louis XIV, to the pastel and relaxed pale blue, Pompadour pink, and white of the Louis XV and Madame de Pompadour's France. Similarly to colours, there was also a transition from serious, dramatic and moralistic subjects in painting and sculpture, to lighthearted and joyful themes.\nOne last difference between Baroque and Rococo is the interest that 18th century aristocrats had for East Asia. Orientalist trends in Western aesthetics were present before the Baroque period, but they tended to draw inspiration from Islamic rather than East Asian sources. This continued during the Baroque period, as exemplified by the Turkish-inspired style known as Turquerie. Orientalist fascination with the Islamic world (including Turquerie) would continue into and beyond the Rococo period; however, by that time, Chinese and other East Asian cultures would also come to influence Western aesthetics. Chinoiserie was a style in fine art, architecture and design, popular during the 18th century, that was heavily inspired by Chinese art, but also by Rococo at the same time. Because traveling to China or other Far Eastern countries was hard at that time and so remained mysterious to most Westerners, European imagination were fuelled by perceptions of Asia as a place of wealth and luxury, and consequently patrons from emperors to merchants vied with each other in adorning their living quarters with Asian goods and decorating them in Asian styles. Where Asian objects were hard to obtain, European craftsmen and painters stepped up to fill the demand, creating a blend of Rococo forms and Asian figures, motifs and techniques. Aside from European recreations of objects in East Asian style, Chinese lacquerware was reused in multiple ways. European aristocrats fully decorated a handful of rooms of palaces, with Chinese lacquer panels used as wall panels. Due to its aspect, black lacquer was popular for Western men's studies. Those panels used were usually glossy and black, made in the Henan province of China. They were made of multiple layers of lacquer, then incised with motifs in-filled with colour and gold. Chinese, but also Japanese lacquer panels were also used by some 18th century European carpenters for making furniture. In order to be produced, Asian screens were dismantled and used to veneer European-made furniture.\nCondemnation and academic rediscovery.\nThe pioneer German art historian and archeologist Johann Joachim Winckelmann also condemned the baroque style, and praised the superior values of classical art and architecture. By the 19th century, Baroque was a target for ridicule and criticism. The neoclassical critic Francesco Milizia wrote: \"Borrominini in architecture, Bernini in sculpture, Pietro da Cortona in painting...are a plague on good taste, which infected a large number of artists.\" In the 19th century, criticism went even further; the British critic John Ruskin declared that baroque sculpture was not only bad, but also morally corrupt.\nThe Swiss-born art historian Heinrich W\u00f6lfflin (1864\u20131945) started the rehabilitation of the word Baroque in his \"Renaissance und Barock\" (1888); W\u00f6lfflin identified the Baroque as \"movement imported into mass\", an art antithetic to Renaissance art. He did not make the distinctions between Mannerism and Baroque that modern writers do, and he ignored the later phase, the academic Baroque that lasted into the 18th century. Baroque art and architecture became fashionable in the interwar period, and has largely remained in critical favor. The term \"Baroque\" may still be used, often pejoratively, describing works of art, craft, or design that are thought to have excessive ornamentation or complexity of line. At the same time \"baroque\" has become an accepted terms for various trends in Roman art and Roman architecture in the 2nd and 3rd centuries AD, which display some of the same characteristics as the later Baroque.\nRevivals and influence through eclecticism.\nHighly criticized, the Baroque would later be a source of inspiration for artists, architects and designers during the 19th century through Romanticism, a movement that developed in the 18th century and that reached its peak in the 19th. It was characterized by its emphasis on emotion and individualism, as well as glorification of the past and nature, preferring the medieval to the classical. A mix of literary, religious, and political factors prompted late-18th and 19th century British architects and designers to look back to the Middle Ages for inspiration. Romanticism is the reason the 19th century is best known as the century of revivals. In France, Romanticism was not the key factor that led to the revival of Gothic architecture and design. Vandalism of monuments and buildings associated with the Ancien R\u00e9gime (Old Regime) happened during the French Revolution. Because of this an archaeologist, Alexandre Lenoir, was appointed curator of the Petits-Augustins depot, where sculptures, statues and tombs removed from churches, abbeys and convents had been transported. He organized the Museum of French Monuments (1795\u20131816), and was the first to bring back the taste for the art of the Middle Ages, which progressed slowly to flourish a quarter of a century later.\nThis taste and revival of medieval art led to the revival of other periods, including the Baroque and Rococo. Revivalism started with themes first from the Middle Ages, then, towards the end of the reign of Louis Philippe I (1830\u20131848), from the Renaissance. Baroque and Rococo inspiration was more popular during the reign of Napoleon III (1852\u20131870), and continued later, after the fall of the Second French Empire.\nCompared to how in England architects and designers saw the Gothic as a national style, Rococo was seen as one of the most representative movements for France. The French felt much more connected to the styles of the Ancien R\u00e9gime and Napoleon's Empire, than to the medieval or Renaissance past, although Gothic architecture appeared in France, not in England.\nThe revivalism of the 19th century led in time to eclecticism (mix of elements of different styles). Because architects often revived Classical styles, most Eclectic buildings and designs have a distinctive look. Besides pure revivals, the Baroque was also one of the main sources of inspiration for eclecticism. The coupled column and the giant order, two elements widely used in Baroque, are often present in this kind of 19th and early 20th century buildings. Eclecticism was not limited only to architecture. Many designs from the Second Empire style (1848\u20131870) have elements taken from different styles. Little furniture from the period escaped its three most prevalent historicist influences, which are sometimes kept distinct and sometimes combined: the Renaissance, Louis XV (Rococo), and Louis XVI styles. Revivals and inspiration also came sometimes from Baroque, like in the case of remakes and arabesques that imitate Boulle marquetry, and from other styles, like Gothic, Renaissance, or English Regency.\nThe Belle \u00c9poque was a period that begun around 1871\u20131880 and that ended with the outbreak of World War I in 1914. It was characterized by optimism, regional peace, economic prosperity, colonial expansion, and technological, scientific, and cultural innovations. Eclecticism reached its peak in this period, with Beaux Arts architecture. The style takes its name from the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts in Paris, where it developed and where many of the main exponents of the style studied. Buildings in this style often feature Ionic columns with their volues on the corner (like those found in French Baroque), a rusticated basement level, overall simplicity but with some really detailed parts, arched doors, and an arch above the entrance like that of the Petit Palais in Paris. The style aimed for a Baroque opulence through lavishly decorated monumental structures that evoked Louis XIV's Versailles. When it comes to the design of the Belle \u00c9poque, all furniture from the past was admired, including, perhaps, contrary to expectations, the Second Empire style (the style of the proceeding period), which remained popular until 1900. In the years around 1900, there was a gigantic recapitulation of styles of all countries in all preceding periods. Everything from Chinese to Spanish models, from Boulle to Gothic, found its way into furniture production, but some styles were more appreciated than others. The High Middle Ages and the early Renaissance were especially prized. Exoticism of every stripe and exuberant Rococo designs were also favoured.\nRevivals and influence of the Baroque faded away and disappeared with Art Deco, a style created as a collective effort of multiple French designers to make a new modern style around 1910. It was obscure before WW1, but became very popular during the interwar period, being heavily associated with the 1920s and the 1930s. The movement was a blend of multiple characteristics taken from Modernist currents from the 1900s and the 1910s, like the Vienna Secession, Cubism, Fauvism, Primitivism, Suprematism, Constructivism, Futurism, De Stijl, and Expressionism. Besides Modernism, elements taken from styles popular during the Belle \u00c9poque, like Rococo Revival, Neoclassicism, or the neo-Louis XVI style, are also present in Art Deco. The proportions, volumes and structure of Beaux Arts architecture before WW1 is present in early Art Deco buildings of the 1910s and 1920s. Elements taken from Baroque are quite rare, architects and designers preferring the Louis XVI style.\nAt the end of the interwar period, with the rise in popularity of the International Style, characterized by the complete lack of any ornamentation led to the complete abandonment of influence and revivals of the Baroque. Multiple International Style architects and designers, but also Modernist artists criticized Baroque for its extravagance and what they saw as \"excess\". Ironically this was just at the same time as the critical appreciation of the original Baroque was reviving strongly.\nPostmodern appreciation and reinterpretations.\nAppreciation for the Baroque reappeared with the rise of Postmodernism, a movement that questioned Modernism (the status quo after WW2), and which promoted the inclusion of elements of historic styles in new designs, and appreciation for the pre-Modernist past. Specific references to Baroque are rare, since Postmodernism often included highly simplified elements that were 'quotations' of Classicism in general, like pediments or columns.\nMore references to Baroque are found in Versace ceramic ware and fashion, decorated with maximalist acanthus rinceaux, very similar to the ones found in Italian Baroque ornament plates and in Boulle work, but also similar to the ones found on Empire objects, especially textiles, from the reign of Napoleon I.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3959", "revid": "46977059", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3959", "title": "Boolean algebra (structure)", "text": "Algebraic structure modeling logical operations\nIn abstract algebra, a Boolean algebra or Boolean lattice is a complemented distributive lattice. This type of algebraic structure captures essential properties of both set operations and logic operations. A Boolean algebra can be seen as a generalization of a power set algebra or a field of sets, or its elements can be viewed as generalized truth values. It is also a special case of a De Morgan algebra and a Kleene algebra (with involution).\nEvery Boolean algebra gives rise to a Boolean ring, and vice versa, with ring multiplication corresponding to conjunction or meet \u2227, and ring addition to exclusive disjunction or symmetric difference (not disjunction \u2228). However, the theory of Boolean rings has an inherent asymmetry between the two operators, while the axioms and theorems of Boolean algebra express the symmetry of the theory described by the duality principle.\nHistory.\nThe term \"Boolean algebra\" honors George Boole (1815\u20131864), a self-educated English mathematician. He introduced the algebraic system initially in a small pamphlet, \"The Mathematical Analysis of Logic\", published in 1847 in response to an ongoing public controversy between Augustus De Morgan and William Hamilton, and later as a more substantial book, \"The Laws of Thought\", published in 1854. Boole's formulation differs from that described above in some important respects. For example, conjunction and disjunction in Boole were not a dual pair of operations. Boolean algebra emerged in the 1860s, in papers written by William Jevons and Charles Sanders Peirce.\nThe first systematic presentation of Boolean algebra and distributive lattices is owed to the 1890 \"Vorlesungen\" of Ernst Schr\u00f6der. The first extensive treatment of Boolean algebra in English is A. N. Whitehead's 1898 \"Universal Algebra\". Boolean algebra as an axiomatic algebraic structure in the modern axiomatic sense begins with a 1904 paper by Edward V. Huntington. Boolean algebra came of age as serious mathematics with the work of Marshall Stone in the 1930s, and with Garrett Birkhoff's 1940 \"Lattice Theory\". In the 1960s, Paul Cohen, Dana Scott, and others found deep new results in mathematical logic and axiomatic set theory using offshoots of Boolean algebra, namely forcing and Boolean-valued models.\nDefinition.\nA Boolean algebra is a set \"A\", equipped with two binary operations \u2227 (called \"meet\" or \"and\"), \u2228 (called \"join\" or \"or\"), a unary operation \u00ac (called \"complement\" or \"not\") and two elements 0 and 1 in \"A\" (called \"bottom\" and \"top\", or \"least\" and \"greatest\" element, also denoted by the symbols \u22a5 and \u22a4, respectively), such that for all elements \"a\", \"b\" and \"c\" of \"A\", the following axioms hold:\nNote, however, that the absorption law and even the associativity law can be excluded from the set of axioms as they can be derived from the other axioms (see Proven properties).\nA Boolean algebra with only one element is called a trivial Boolean algebra or a degenerate Boolean algebra. (In older works, some authors required 0 and 1 to be \"distinct\" elements in order to exclude this case.)\nIt follows from the last three pairs of axioms above (identity, distributivity and complements), or from the absorption axiom, that\n \"a\" = \"b\" \u2227 \"a\" \u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 if and only if \u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 \"a\" \u2228 \"b\" = \"b\".\nThe relation \u2264 defined by \"a\" \u2264 \"b\" if these equivalent conditions hold, is a partial order with least element 0 and greatest element 1. The meet \"a\" \u2227 \"b\" and the join \"a\" \u2228 \"b\" of two elements coincide with their infimum and supremum, respectively, with respect to \u2264.\nThe first four pairs of axioms constitute a definition of a bounded lattice.\nIt follows from the first five pairs of axioms that any complement is unique.\nThe set of axioms is self-dual in the sense that if one exchanges \u2228 with \u2227 and 0 with 1 in an axiom, the result is again an axiom. Therefore, by applying this operation to a Boolean algebra (or Boolean lattice), one obtains another Boolean algebra with the same elements; it is called its dual.\n* It has applications in logic, interpreting 0 as \"false\", 1 as \"true\", \u2227 as \"and\", \u2228 as \"or\", and \u00ac as \"not\". Expressions involving variables and the Boolean operations represent statement forms, and two such expressions can be shown to be equal using the above axioms if and only if the corresponding statement forms are logically equivalent.\n* The two-element Boolean algebra is also used for circuit design in electrical engineering; here 0 and 1 represent the two different states of one bit in a digital circuit, typically high and low voltage. Circuits are described by expressions containing variables, and two such expressions are equal for all values of the variables if and only if the corresponding circuits have the same input\u2013output behavior. Furthermore, every possible input\u2013output behavior can be modeled by a suitable Boolean expression.\n* The two-element Boolean algebra is also important in the general theory of Boolean algebras, because an equation involving several variables is generally true in all Boolean algebras if and only if it is true in the two-element Boolean algebra (which can be checked by a trivial brute force algorithm for small numbers of variables). This can for example be used to show that the following laws (\"Consensus theorems\") are generally valid in all Boolean algebras:\n** (\"a\" \u2228 \"b\") \u2227 (\u00ac\"a\" \u2228 \"c\") \u2227 (\"b\" \u2228 \"c\") \u2261 (\"a\" \u2228 \"b\") \u2227 (\u00ac\"a\" \u2228 \"c\")\n** (\"a\" \u2227 \"b\") \u2228 (\u00ac\"a\" \u2227 \"c\") \u2228 (\"b\" \u2227 \"c\") \u2261 (\"a\" \u2227 \"b\") \u2228 (\u00ac\"a\" \u2227 \"c\")\n* After the two-element Boolean algebra, the simplest Boolean algebra is that defined by the power set of two atoms:\nExamples.\nformula_1\nbecomes a Boolean algebra when its operations are defined by \"e\" \u2228 \"f\" := \"e\" + \"f\" \u2212 \"ef\" and \"e\" \u2227 \"f\" := \"ef\".\nHomomorphisms and isomorphisms.\nA \"homomorphism\" between two Boolean algebras \"A\" and \"B\" is a function \"f\" : \"A\" \u2192 \"B\" such that for all \"a\", \"b\" in \"A\":\n \"f\"(\"a\" \u2228 \"b\") = \"f\"(\"a\") \u2228 \"f\"(\"b\"),\n \"f\"(\"a\" \u2227 \"b\") = \"f\"(\"a\") \u2227 \"f\"(\"b\"),\n \"f\"(0) = 0,\n \"f\"(1) = 1.\nIt then follows that \"f\"(\u00ac\"a\") = \u00ac\"f\"(\"a\") for all \"a\" in \"A\". The class of all Boolean algebras, together with this notion of morphism, forms a full subcategory of the category of lattices.\nAn \"isomorphism\" between two Boolean algebras \"A\" and \"B\" is a homomorphism \"f\" : \"A\" \u2192 \"B\" with an inverse homomorphism, that is, a homomorphism \"g\" : \"B\" \u2192 \"A\" such that the composition \"g\" \u2218 \"f\" : \"A\" \u2192 \"A\" is the identity function on \"A\", and the composition \"f\" \u2218 \"g\" : \"B\" \u2192 \"B\" is the identity function on \"B\". A homomorphism of Boolean algebras is an isomorphism if and only if it is bijective.\nBoolean rings.\nEvery Boolean algebra (\"A\", \u2227, \u2228) gives rise to a ring (\"A\", +, \u00b7) by defining \"a\" + \"b\" := (\"a\" \u2227 \u00ac\"b\") \u2228 (\"b\" \u2227 \u00ac\"a\") = (\"a\" \u2228 \"b\") \u2227 \u00ac(\"a\" \u2227 \"b\") (this operation is called symmetric difference in the case of sets and XOR in the case of logic) and \"a\" \u00b7 \"b\" := \"a\" \u2227 \"b\". The zero element of this ring coincides with the 0 of the Boolean algebra; the multiplicative identity element of the ring is the 1 of the Boolean algebra. This ring has the property that \"a\" \u00b7 \"a\" = \"a\" for all \"a\" in \"A\"; rings with this property are called Boolean rings.\nConversely, if a Boolean ring \"A\" is given, we can turn it into a Boolean algebra by defining \"x\" \u2228 \"y\" := \"x\" + \"y\" + (\"x\" \u00b7 \"y\") and \"x\" \u2227 \"y\" := \"x\" \u00b7 \"y\". Since these two constructions are inverses of each other, we can say that every Boolean ring arises from a Boolean algebra, and vice versa. Furthermore, a map \"f\" : \"A\" \u2192 \"B\" is a homomorphism of Boolean algebras if and only if it is a homomorphism of Boolean rings. The categories of Boolean rings and Boolean algebras are equivalent; in fact the categories are isomorphic.\nHsiang (1985) gave a rule-based algorithm to check whether two arbitrary expressions denote the same value in every Boolean ring.\nMore generally, Boudet, Jouannaud, and Schmidt-Schau\u00df (1989) gave an algorithm to solve equations between arbitrary Boolean-ring expressions. Employing the similarity of Boolean rings and Boolean algebras, both algorithms have applications in automated theorem proving.\nIdeals and filters.\nAn \"ideal\" of the Boolean algebra A is a nonempty subset I such that for all x, y in I we have in I and for all a in A we have in I. This notion of ideal coincides with the notion of ring ideal in the Boolean ring A. An ideal I of A is called \"prime\" if and if in I always implies a in I or b in I. Furthermore, for every we have that , and then if I is prime we have or for every . An ideal I of A is called \"maximal\" if and if the only ideal properly containing I is A itself. For an ideal I, if and , then or is contained in another proper ideal J. Hence, such an I is not maximal, and therefore the notions of prime ideal and maximal ideal are equivalent in Boolean algebras. Moreover, these notions coincide with ring theoretic ones of prime ideal and maximal ideal in the Boolean ring A.\nThe dual of an \"ideal\" is a \"filter\". A \"filter\" of the Boolean algebra A is a nonempty subset p such that for all x, y in p we have in p and for all a in A we have in p. The dual of a \"maximal\" (or \"prime\") \"ideal\" in a Boolean algebra is \"ultrafilter\". Ultrafilters can alternatively be described as 2-valued morphisms from A to the two-element Boolean algebra. The statement \"every filter in a Boolean algebra can be extended to an ultrafilter\" is called the \"ultrafilter lemma\" and cannot be proven in Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory (ZF), if ZF is consistent. Within ZF, the ultrafilter lemma is strictly weaker than the axiom of choice. The ultrafilter lemma has many equivalent formulations: \"every Boolean algebra has an ultrafilter\", \"every ideal in a Boolean algebra can be extended to a prime ideal\", etc.\nRepresentations.\nIt can be shown that every \"finite\" Boolean algebra is isomorphic to the Boolean algebra of all subsets of a finite set. Therefore, the number of elements of every finite Boolean algebra is a power of two.\nStone's celebrated \"representation theorem for Boolean algebras\" states that \"every\" Boolean algebra \"A\" is isomorphic to the Boolean algebra of all clopen sets in some (compact totally disconnected Hausdorff) topological space.\nAxiomatics.\nThe first axiomatization of Boolean lattices/algebras in general was given by the English philosopher and mathematician Alfred North Whitehead in 1898. It included the above axioms and additionally \"x\" \u2228 1 = 1 and \"x\" \u2227 0 = 0. In 1904, the American mathematician Edward V. Huntington (1874\u20131952) gave probably the most parsimonious axiomatization based on \u2227, \u2228, \u00ac, even proving the associativity laws (see box). He also proved that these axioms are independent of each other.\nIn 1933, Huntington set out the following elegant axiomatization for Boolean algebra. It requires just one binary operation + and a unary functional symbol \"n\", to be read as 'complement', which satisfy the following laws:\nHerbert Robbins immediately asked: If the Huntington equation is replaced with its dual, to wit:\ndo (1), (2), and (4) form a basis for Boolean algebra? Calling (1), (2), and (4) a \"Robbins algebra\", the question then becomes: Is every Robbins algebra a Boolean algebra? This question (which came to be known as the Robbins conjecture) remained open for decades, and became a favorite question of Alfred Tarski and his students.\nIn 1996, William McCune at Argonne National Laboratory, building on earlier work by Larry Wos, Steve Winker, and Bob Veroff, answered Robbins's question in the affirmative: Every Robbins algebra is a Boolean algebra. Crucial to McCune's proof was the computer program EQP he designed. For a simplification of McCune's proof, see Dahn (1998).\nFurther work has been done for reducing the number of axioms; see Minimal axioms for Boolean algebra.\nGeneralizations.\nRemoving the requirement of existence of a unit from the axioms of Boolean algebra yields \"generalized Boolean algebras\". Formally, a distributive lattice \"B\" is a generalized Boolean lattice, if it has a smallest element 0 and for any elements \"a\" and \"b\" in \"B\" such that \"a\" \u2264 \"b\", there exists an element \"x\" such that \"a\" \u2227 \"x\" = 0 and \"a\" \u2228 \"x\" = \"b\". Defining \"a\" \\ \"b\" as the unique \"x\" such that (\"a\" \u2227 \"b\") \u2228 \"x\" = \"a\" and (\"a\" \u2227 \"b\") \u2227 \"x\" = 0, we say that the structure (\"B\", \u2227, \u2228, \\, 0) is a \"generalized Boolean algebra\", while (\"B\", \u2228, 0) is a \"generalized Boolean semilattice\". Generalized Boolean lattices are exactly the ideals of Boolean lattices.\nA structure that satisfies all axioms for Boolean algebras except the two distributivity axioms is called an orthocomplemented lattice. Orthocomplemented lattices arise naturally in quantum logic as lattices of closed linear subspaces for separable Hilbert spaces.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* List of Boolean algebra topics\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3960", "revid": "7716227", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3960", "title": "Bank of Italy", "text": "Central Bank of Italy\nThe Bank of Italy (Italian: \"Banca d'Italia\", , informally referred to as \"Bankitalia\") is the national central bank for Italy within the Eurosystem. It was the Italian central bank from 1893 to 1998, issuing the lira. \nIn addition to its monetary role, the Bank of Italy is also a financial supervisory authority. In that capacity, it increasingly implements policies set at the European Union level. It is the national competent authority for Italy within European Banking Supervision. It is a voting member of the Board of Supervisors of the European Banking Authority (EBA). It is Italy's designated National Resolution Authority and plenary session member of the Single Resolution Board (SRB). It provides the permanent single common representative for Italy in the Supervisory composition of the General Board of the Anti-Money Laundering Authority (AMLA). It also hosts the Institute for the Supervision of Insurance (Italian acronym IVASS), which is a voting member of the Board of Supervisors of the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA). It is also a member of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB).\nHistory.\nThe institution was established in 1893 from the combination of three major banks in Italy (after the Banca Romana scandal). The new central bank first issued banknotes during 1926. Until 1928, it was directed by a general manager and after this time by a governor elected by an internal commission of managers, with a decree from the president of the Italian Republic, for a term of seven years. In 1863, the crisis of the world money market created panic and the rush to the counters to collect the metallic currency in exchange for the banknotes. The Italian government responded in 1866 by introducing the fiat and legal tender of paper money. The government was accused in this way of favouring the issuing banks, and a long debate called the \"banking question\" arose about the advisability of having one or more issuers.\nThe Minghetti-Finali law of 1873 established the mandatory consortium of issuing institutions among the six existing issuing institutions, the National Bank of the Kingdom of Italy, Banca Nazionale Toscana, Banca Toscana di Credito, Banca Romana, Banco di Napoli, and Banco di Sicilia; the measure proved insufficient. Following the Banca Romana scandal, the reorganization of the issuing institutions became necessary.\nEstablishment.\nLaw no. 449 of 10 August 1893 of the Giolitti I government established the Bank of Italy through the merger of four banks: the National Bank in the Kingdom of Italy (formerly Banca Nazionale in the Sardinian States), the Banca Nazionale Toscana, the Banca Toscana di Credito for the Industries and Commerce of Italy and with the liquidation management of Banca Romana. With a complex series of mergers between these banks, the current Bank of Italy was formed. Some families of bankers, historical partners: Bombrini, Bastogi, and Balduino were the supporters of the operation. The institute enjoyed (together with the Banks of Naples and Sicily) the issuing privilege, it also acted as a \"bank of banks\" through the rediscount of bills, but did not have supervisory powers over other banks.\nThe bank remains a private limited company and was headed by a director. From 1900 to 1928, Bonaldo Stringher was the director and gave the Bank the role of manager of Italian monetary policy and lender of last resort, bringing it closer to a modern central bank. In particular, he understood that a central bank cannot aim at maximizing profit (which is achieved by printing as much paper money) but must instead aim at price stability. In 1907, the Bank of Italy coordinated the rescue of the Italian Banking Company, a major lender of Fiat, an operation that ended with the absorption of the bank in crisis into the Italian Discount Bank. In 1911 the central bank organized a consortium to rescue the steel companies (Acciaierie di Terni, Ilva and others) of which the Bank of Italy was directly creditor, financing the operation also through the issue of banknotes.\nIn 1912, the credit institute for cooperation, with social purposes, was established, led by the Bank of Italy and also participated by public bodies, savings banks, Monte dei Paschi di Siena, the Cassa di Previdenza, and the Credit Institution for the Cooperatives of Milan. The institute in 1929 was transformed by its director Arturo Osio into the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro. In 1913, the Subsidy Consortium was established, led by the Bank of Italy and also participated by the Banks of Naples and Sicily, some savings banks, Monte dei Paschi di Siena and by the San Paolo Bank of Turin. In 1922, the Consortium saved Ansaldo and took control of it. In 1923, it did the same with Banco di Roma. Also in 1913, Francesco Saverio Nitti drew up a bill that entrusted the Bank of Italy with the supervision of other banks, but the private banks managed to avoid its approval. In 1914, the Bank of Italy assisted the Banco di Roma, which had to devalue its capital due to losses reported in the activities in the eastern Mediterranean.\nBanking Law of 1926 and aftermath.\nIn 1921, after World War I, it was always the Bank of Italy that led the consortium that managed the liquidation of the Italian Discount Bank and saved the Banco di Roma once again from crisis. In 1926, the Italian fascist government of Benito Mussolini undertook a major reorganization of the monetary system, partly motivated by the desire to assert the state's dominance over the private credit system and especially the two Milanese investment banks, Banca Commerciale Italiana and Credito Italiano. The context of the new legislation was also affected by the ongoing turmoil affecting banks affiliated with the Christian democratic Italian People's Party, such as \"Credito Nazionale\". \nR.D.L. 812 of none }} granted the Bank of Italy an exclusive right to issue currency, terminating the prior issuance privileges of the Banco di Napoli and Banco di Sicilia and abrogating the Royal Decree of none }}, no. 204. Subsequently, R.D.L. 1820 of none }} entrusted the Bank of Italy with the task of supervising savings banks. Also in 1926, the Subsidy Consortium was reorganized as Istituto Liquidazioni, still under the control of the central bank. In 1933 it would be separated from the bank and absorbed by the newly established Istituto per la Ricostruzione Industriale. In 1928, the Bank was reorganized. The general manager was joined by a governor with greater powers. While all the banks were in very bad conditions, the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro of the self-styled socialist Arturo Osio, in 1929 confiscated eleven Catholic banks, and in 1932 the Banca Agricola Italiana which had financed SNIA Viscosa di Gualino. \nBanks and the economy of the 1930s.\nItaly in the 1930s had an agricultural economy, a small number of industrial families who relied on the subcontracting of local suppliers, formed by a myriad of small family-run businesses, not international and whose survival depended on large groups of industrialists, in turn, linked to commercial banks. The savings from agriculture flowed into the rural coffers, the popular banks and the cooperative credit which financed the life of the provincial crafts, small businesses and construction. The job of the banks was to match the customers' short-term investment horizon with the long-term investments of large groups (Rediscount). National banks turned to local banks that had large deposits of deposits for smaller, low-risk loans. The Cassa Depositi e Prestiti channelled postal savings in favour of local authorities, public institutions and infrastructures, which were a way of absorbing mass unemployment, through a vast program of public works. The ideological basis of the law was that savings are a matter of national interest and must be protected by the State, a principle also enshrined in the Republican Constitution and concretized in the first place in the law establishing the interbank guarantee fund and in the policy of public bailouts.\nThe banking legislation of 1936\u20131938 established a banking supervisory agency, the (IDREC), chaired by the Bank of Italy's governor. The bank no longer had the right to give credit to individuals but only to other banks as a lender of last resort. public bailout policy. Finally, it had the power to require other banks to deposit a portion of the available funds with the same central bank; by varying the share, the Bank of Italy could operate credit tightening or enlargements. The law established certain minimum capital and management requirements necessary to guarantee risk management, stability and operational continuity: minimum capital, minimum ratio between loans and deposits, credit limits, provisions for compulsory reserve.\nIRI and World War II.\nAfter the \"defenestration\" of Bonaldo Stringher, Alberto Beneduce took over and was forced to retire in 1936 after a \"heart attack\" during a meeting at the Bank for International Settlements in Basel. They conceived the duty of the banks towards the public interest of the country, as the subject who had to collect savings to lend them to entrepreneurs, as a tool for development and growth. The process was to be led by a \"circulation bank\", which would increase the speed of circulation of money in the real economy.\nThe Central Bank supported the fascist monetary policy of defending the stability of the Italian lira (known as the \"Quota 90\"), through the reduction of discounts and advances, and financing the enormous expenses of wars in the 1930s and 1940s through the unlimited issuing of money (and the \"inflation tax\", not progressive with income), as Hjalmar Schacht did in Germany under Hitler. Operationally, the government issued and sold debt securities to finance military spending, and the military industry reinvested its government profits in the purchase of such bonds as a \"de facto\" advance on future orders, fueling a closed financial circuit. In simple terms, this was something like the ECB issuing money and lending it to private banks who keep it in their current accounts with the ECB. This mechanism was called \"capital circuit\". The printing of tickets and the scarcity of consumer goods created an overabundance of money that poured into bank deposits, allowing a new expansion of credit, which was directed in favour of the economic sectors themselves. given that the state paid the banks a higher interest on the BOTs than the savers. The absorption of savings into investments in fixed capital had already taken place in the First World War and industries were working with existing production capacities. Without consumption and investments, public spending by the state remained. The war could start with a modest tax levy and inflation within the normal limits in the first months, before the black market and ration cards.\nThe situation followed the conflict of interest between the state entrepreneur and the state bank, albeit in the name of a higher ideological purpose. In 1938, the government decreed the power to directly appoint presidents and vice-presidents of the board of directors of banks. Beneduce planned to have a public bank take over the long-term credit of large companies, financed with bonds of equal duration for public works, energy, and industry. After them, the Central Bank maintained a low-profile monetary policy, consistent with the directives of fascism. IRI operated differently, in agreement with the Italian banks and industries that supported fascism. The banks renounced exercising an option by \"converting\" the debts into shares (or a law in this regard), preferring not to enter directly into the ownership of the industrial groups. The groups transferred the bank debts to IRI, which became the new owner in exchange for shares (at the book value, not always the same as the market value), until they held control of the property and therefore of management. The debt of the IRI rose to nine and a half billion lire at the time, two-thirds of which were paid within the war, because they were drastically diluted by inflation which has the effect of lowering the real weight of debts until the accounting entries are cancelled. of issuance, but also to halve the purchasing power of small savers. The remaining debt was paid by 1953.\nThe IRI in turn had debts towards the Bank of Italy for five billion lire: the State issued bonds for IRI for one and a half billion, \"sterilizing\" the debt that should have been repaid with \"annuity\" interest. accrued until 1971. The change of constitutional order and currency (exchange rate for conversion), and inflation meant that IRI (and industries) paid the Bank of Italy less than a third of the sum. After the armistice of 8 September, the German authorities demanded the delivery of the gold reserve. 173 tons of gold were first transferred to the Milan office, and then to Fortezza. Traces of it were subsequently lost. In the 1960s, the public debt increased and so did inflation. Governor Guido Carli made a policy of credit crunch to stop inflation, particularly in 1964. In general, the Bank of Italy played an important political role under this governorship. Other credit crunches were implemented between 1969 and 1970 due to the flight of capital abroad and in 1974 as a result of the oil crisis. In March 1979, the governor of the Bank of Italy, Paolo Baffi, and the deputy director in charge of supervision, Mario Sarcinelli, were accused by the Rome public prosecutor of private interest in official acts and personal aiding and abetting. Sarcinelli was arrested, and released from prison only after being suspended from duties relating to surveillance, while Baffi avoided prison due to his age. In 1981 the two will be completely acquitted. Subsequently, the suspicion will emerge that the indictment was wanted by P2 to prevent the Bank of Italy from supervising Roberto Cavali Banco Ambrosiano.\nPostwar period.\nThe postwar inflation, also due to the Am-lire, was fought with the credit crunch desired by the governor Luigi Einaudi, which was obtained through the compulsory reserve on deposits. In particular, the instrument of compulsory reserves of banks at the central bank was used, introduced in 1926 but never really applied. In 1948 the governor was given the task of regulating the money supply and deciding the discount rate. The universal banks were the ones that had gained the most from war and inflation (under the Authorization Regime of the Interministerial Credit Committee), with the greatest growth in deposits.\nAlong with the recovery, speculative stocks and capital flight abroad appeared. Credit limits were no longer tied to equity, as equity figures were completely distorted by inflation. The squeeze on lending, the liquidity crisis and the Eenaudian deflation pushed operators to finance themselves by placing stocks on the market and returning capital, thus blocking the rise in prices; and by resorting to self-financing (even without distributing profits), aided by the fact that inflation had made it possible to quickly amortize fixed assets whose book value was now nominal.\nDuring the years of the Reconstruction, governor Donato Menichella governed the issue in a gradual and balanced way: he did not implement expansionary manoeuvres to encourage growth but was careful to avoid the creation of credit crunches. In this, he was helped by the low public debt. Its monetary policy program was stability for development. A part of the available bank savings was channelled annually to the Treasury to cover the budget deficit (in the current year), while during his tenure the public debt of the state never rose above 1% of GDP, until 1964. In July 1981, a \"divorce\" between the State (Ministry of the Treasury) and its central bank was initiated by the decision of the then Treasury Minister Beniamino Andreatta.\nFrom that moment on, the institute was no longer required to purchase the bonds that the government was unable to place on the market, thus ceasing the monetization of the Italian public debt that it had carried out since the Second World War up to that moment. This decision was opposed by the Minister of Finance Rino Formica, who would have liked the Bank of Italy to be required to repay at least a portion of these securities, and from the summer of 1982 a series of intra-government verbal clashes between the two ministers known as the wives' quarrel, which was followed by the fall of the second Spadolini government a few months later. The divorce between the Ministry of the Treasury and the Bank of Italy is still considered by economic doctrine as a factor of great stabilization of inflation (which went from over 20% in 1980 to less than 5% in the following years) and a central prerequisite for guarantee the full independence of the technical monetary policy body (central bank) from the choices related to fiscal policy (under the responsibility of the government), but also a factor of considerable incidence of growth of the Italian public debt. The law of 7 February 1992 n. 82, proposed by the then Minister of the Treasury Guido Carli, clarifies that the decision on the discount rate is the exclusive competence of the governor and must no longer be agreed in concert with the Minister of the Treasury (the previous decree of the President of the Republic is modified in relation to the new law with the Presidential Decree of 18 July).\nEuro and 2006 reform.\nThe Legislative Decree 10 March 1998 n. 43 removes the Bank of Italy from management by the Italian government, sanctioning its belonging to the European system of central banks. From this date, therefore, the quantity of currency in circulation is decided autonomously by the Central Bank. With the introduction of the Euro on 1 January 1999, the Bank thus loses the function of presiding over national monetary policy. This function has since been exercised collectively by the Governing Council of the European Central Bank, which also includes the Governor of the Bank of Italy. On 13 June 1999 the Senate of the Republic, during the XIII Legislature, discussed bill no. 4083 \"Rules on the ownership of the Bank of Italy and on the criteria for appointing the Board of Governors of the Bank of Italy\". This bill would like the state to acquire all the shares of the institute, but it is never approved.\nOn 4 January 2004, the weekly \"Famiglia Cristiana\" reportsed for the first time in history the list of participants in the capital of the Bank of Italy with the relative shares. The source is a Mediobanca Research &amp; Studies dossier, directed by the researcher Fulvio Coltorti, who, by investigating backwards on the balance sheets of banks, insurance companies and institutions, and gradually noting the shares that indicated a shareholding in the capital of the Bank of Italia managed to reconstruct a large part of the list of participants of the highest Italian financial institution. On 20 September 2005, the list of shareholders was officially made available by the Bank of Italy; until now it was considered confidential. On 19 December 2005, after intense press campaigns and criticism of his actions in the context of the Bancopoli scandal, Governor Antonio Fazio resigned. A few days later, Mario Draghi, who took office on 16 January 2006, was appointed in his place.\nThe law of 28 December 2005, n. 262, as part of various measures to protect savings, introduces for the first time a term to the mandate of the governor and the members of the directorate. It also dealt with (article 19, paragraph 10) the issue of ownership of the capital of the Bank of Italy, providing for the redefinition of the Bank's shareholding structure by means of a government regulation to be issued within three years of the law's entry into force. This regulation should have governed the methods of transferring shares held by \"subjects other than the State or other public bodies\". The delegation made by law 262/2005, therefore, expired without the regulation being issued, but the right to ownership of the shares of the current participants is in any case safeguarded by a provision of the Bank's Statute. On the basis of law 262/2005, Mario Draghi becomes the first governor to have a term of six years, renewable once for a further six years.\nMissions and organization.\nMissions.\nAfter the charge of monetary and exchange rate policies was shifted in 1998 to the European Central Bank, within the European institutional framework, the bank implements the decisions, issues euro banknotes and withdraws and destroys worn pieces. The main function has thus become banking and financial supervision. The objective is to ensure the stability and efficiency of the system and compliance with rules and regulations; the bank pursues it through secondary legislation, controls and cooperation with governmental authorities.\nFollowing a reform in 2005, which was prompted by takeover scandals, the bank has lost exclusive antitrust authority in the credit sector, which is now shared with the Italian Competition Authority (). Other functions include market supervision, oversight of the payment system and provision of settlement services, State treasury service, Central Credit Register, economic analysis and institutional consultancy. As of 2021, the Bank of Italy owned 2,451.8 tonnes of gold, the third-largest gold reserve in the world.\nGoverning bodies.\nThe bank's governing bodies are the General Meeting of Shareholders, the board of directors, the governor, the director general and three deputy directors-general; the last five constitute the directorate. The general meeting takes place yearly and with the purpose of approving accounts and appointing the auditors. The board of directors has administrative powers and is chaired by the governor (or by the director-general in his absence). Following a reform in 2005, the governor lost exclusive responsibility regarding decisions of external relevance (i.e. banking and financial supervision), which has been transferred to the directorate (by majority vote). The director-general is responsible for the day-to-day administration of the bank and acts as governor when absent. The board of auditors assesses the bank's administration and compliance with the law, regulations and statute.\nAppointment.\nThe directorate's term of office lasts six years and is renewable once. The appointment of the governor is the responsibility of the government, head of the board of directors, with the approval of the president (formally a decree of the president). The board of directors is elected by the shareholders according to the bank statute. On 25 October 2011, Silvio Berlusconi nominated Ignazio Visco to be the bank's new governor to replace Mario Draghi when he left to become president of the European Central Bank in November.\nCurrency and coinage.\nItaly has a long history of different coinage types, which spans thousands of years. Since Italy has been for centuries divided into many historic states, they all had different coinage systems, but when the country became unified in 1861, the Italian lira came into place, and was used until 2002. The term originates from \"libra\", the largest unit of the Carolingian monetary system used in Western Europe and elsewhere from the 8th to the 20th century. \nItalian lira was introduced by the Napoleonic Kingdom of Italy in 1807 at par with the French franc, and was subsequently adopted by the different states that would eventually form the Kingdom of Italy in 1861. It was subdivided into 100 \"centesimi\" (singular: \"centesimo\"), which means \"hundredths\" or \"cents\". The lira was also the currency of the Albanian Kingdom from 1941 to 1943. There was no standard sign or abbreviation for the Italian lira. The abbreviations \"Lit.\" (standing for \"Lira italiana\") and L. (standing for \"Lira\") and the signs \u20a4 or \u00a3 were all accepted representations of the currency. Banks and financial institutions, including the Bank of Italy, often used \"Lit.\" and this was regarded internationally as the abbreviation for the Italian lira.\nHandwritten documents and signs at market stalls would often use \"\u00a3\" or \"\u20a4\", while coins used \"L.\" Italian postage stamps mostly used the word in full but some (such as the 1975 monuments series) used \"L.\" The name of the currency could also be written in full as a prefix or a suffix (e.g. Lire\u00a0100,000 or 100,000\u00a0lire). The ISO 4217 currency code for the lira was \"ITL\". The Italian lira was the official unit of currency in Italy until 1 January 1999, when it was replaced by the euro (euro coins and notes were not introduced until 2002). Old lira denominated currency ceased to be legal tender on 28 February 2002. The conversion rate is 1,936.27 lire to the euro.\nAll lira banknotes in use immediately before the introduction of the euro, as all post WW2 coins, were still exchangeable for euros in all branches of the Bank of Italy until 28 February 2012.\nShareholders.\nBanca d'Italia had 300,000 shares with a nominal value of \u20ac25,000. Originally scattered around the banks of Italy, the shares now accumulated due to the merger of the banks since the 1990s and also a number of pension and social security institutions. The status of the bank states that a minimum of 54% of profits would go to the Italian government, and only a maximum of 6% of profits would be distributed as dividends according to share ratios. Even so, the Bank of Italy stands out among central banks in the Eurosystem as having no state ownership (the National Bank of Belgium and Bank of Greece have mixed ownership).\nAs of early 2024, the 15 largest shareholders represented slightly over half of the bank's equity, namely UniCredit (5.0 percent), Cassa nazionale di previdenza ed assistenza per gli ingegneri ed architetti liberi professionisti (4.9 percent), Fondazione ENPAM (4.9 percent), Cassa nazionale di previdenza e assistenza forense (4.9 percent), Intesa Sanpaolo (4.9 percent), Cassa nazionale di previdenza e assistenza dei dottori commercialisti (3.7 percent), BPER Banca (3.3 percent), ICCREA Banca (3.1 percent), Generali Italia (3.0 percent), the National Institute for Social Security (3.0 percent), Istituto nazionale per l'assicurazione contro gli infortuni sul lavoro (3.0 percent), Cassa di Sovvenzioni e Risparmio fra il Personale della Banca d'Italia (3.0 percent), Cassa di Risparmio di Asti (3.0 percent), Banca Nazionale del Lavoro (2.8 percent), and Cr\u00e9dit Agricole Italia (2.8 percent). The remaining 49 percent were dispersed among 157 shareholders, mainly banks and banking foundations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3962", "revid": "47822643", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3962", "title": "British", "text": "British may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "3963", "revid": "18953656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3963", "title": "Beachcomber (pen name)", "text": "Group of column writers\nBeachcomber is a \"nom de plume\" that has been used by several journalists writing a long-running humorous column in the \"Daily Express\". It was originated in 1917 by Major John Bernard Arbuthnot MVO as his signature on the column, titled 'By the Way'. The name Beachcomber was then passed to D. B. Wyndham Lewis in 1919 and, in turn, to J. B. Morton, who wrote the column till 1975. It was later revived by William Hartston, current author of the column.\n\"By the Way\" column.\n\"By the Way\" was originally a column in \"The Globe\", consisting of unsigned humorous pieces; P. G. Wodehouse was assistant editor of the column from August 1903 and editor from August 1904 to May 1909, during which time he was assisted by Herbert Westbrook. After the \"Globe\"'s closure, it was re-established as a society news column in the \"Daily Express\" from 1917, initially written by social correspondent Major John Arbuthnot, who invented the name \"Beachcomber\".\nAfter Arbuthnot was promoted to deputy editor, it was taken over sometime in 1919 by Wyndham-Lewis, who reinvented it as an outlet for his wit and humour. It was then passed to Morton during 1924, though it is likely there was a period when they overlapped. Morton wrote the column until 1975; it was revived in January 1996 and continues today, written by William Hartston. The column is unsigned except by \"Beachcomber\" and it was not publicly known that Morton or Wyndham-Lewis wrote it until the 1930s. The name is mainly associated with Morton, who has been credited as an influence by Spike Milligan amongst others. Morton introduced the recurring characters and serial stories that were a major feature of the column during his 51-year run.\nThe format of the column was a random assortment of small paragraphs which were otherwise unconnected. These could be anything, such as:\nMorton's other interest, France, was occasionally represented by epic tales of his rambling walks through the French countryside. These were not intended as humour.\n\"By the Way\" was popular with the readership, and of course, this is one of the reasons it lasted so long. Its style and randomness could be off-putting and it is safe to say the humour could be something of an acquired taste. Oddly, one of the column's greatest opponents was the \"Express\" newspaper's owner, Lord Beaverbrook, who had to keep being assured the column was indeed funny. A prominent critic was George Orwell, who frequently referred to him in his essays and diaries as \"A Catholic Apologist\" and accused him of being \"silly-clever\", in line with his criticisms of G. K. Chesterton, Hilaire Belloc, Ronald Knox and Wyndham-Lewis.\n\"By the Way\" was one of the few features kept continuously running in the often seriously reduced \"Daily Express\" throughout World War II, when Morton's lampooning of Hitler, including the British invention of bracerot to make the Nazis' trousers fall down at inopportune moments, was regarded as valuable for morale. The column appeared daily until 1965 when it was changed to weekly. It was cancelled in 1975 and revived as a daily piece in January 1996. It continues to the present day in much the same format but is now entitled \"Beachcomber\", not \"By the Way\".\nOther media.\nThe Will Hay film \"Boys Will Be Boys\" (1935) was set at Morton's Narkover school.\nAccording to Spike Milligan, the columns were an influence on the comedic style of his radio series, \"The Goon Show\".\nIn 1968, Milligan based a BBC television series named \"The World of Beachcomber\" on the columns. A small selection was issued on a 1971 LP and a 2-cassette set of the series' soundtrack was made available in the late 1990s.\nIn 1989, BBC Radio 4 broadcast the first of three series based on Morton's work. This featured Richard Ingrams as Beachcomber, John Wells as Prodnose, Patricia Routledge and John Sessions. The compilations prepared by Mike Barfield. Series 1 was also made available as a 2-cassette set.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3965", "revid": "917354", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3965", "title": "Bill Joy", "text": "American computer engineer (born 1954)\nWilliam Nelson Joy (born November 8, 1954) is an American computer engineer and venture capitalist. He co-founded Sun Microsystems in 1982 along with Scott McNealy, Vinod Khosla, and Andy Bechtolsheim, and served as Chief Scientist and CTO at the company until 2003.\nHe played an integral role in the early development of BSD UNIX while being a graduate student at Berkeley, and he is the original author of the vi text editor. He also wrote the 2000 essay \"Why The Future Doesn't Need Us\", in which he expressed deep concerns over the development of modern technologies.\nJoy was elected a member of the National Academy of Engineering (1999) for contributions to operating systems and networking software.\nEarly career.\nJoy was born in the Detroit suburb of Farmington Hills, Michigan, to William Joy, a school vice-principal and counselor, and Ruth Joy. He earned a Bachelor of Science in electrical engineering from the University of Michigan and a Master of Science in electrical engineering and computer science from the University of California, Berkeley, in 1979.\nWhile a graduate student at Berkeley, he worked for Fabry's Computer Systems Research Group (CSRG) on the Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) version of the Unix operating system. He initially worked on a Pascal compiler left at Berkeley by Ken Thompson, who had been visiting the university when Joy had just started his graduate work.\nHe later moved on to improving the Unix kernel, and also handled BSD distributions. Some of his most notable contributions were the ex and vi editors and the C shell. Joy's prowess as a computer programmer is legendary, with an oft-told anecdote that he wrote the vi editor in a weekend. Joy denies this assertion. A few of his other accomplishments have also been sometimes exaggerated; Eric Schmidt, CEO of Novell at the time, inaccurately reported during an interview in PBS's documentary \"Nerds 2.0.1\" that Joy had personally rewritten the BSD kernel in a weekend. \nIn 1980, he also wrote codice_1, about which Rob Pike and Brian W. Kernighan wrote that it went against Unix philosophy.\nAccording to a \"Salon\" article, during the early 1980s, DARPA had contracted the company Bolt, Beranek and Newman (BBN) to add TCP/IP to Berkeley UNIX. Joy had been instructed to plug BBN's stack into Berkeley Unix, but he refused to do so, as he had a low opinion of BBN's TCP/IP. So, Joy wrote his own high-performance TCP/IP stack. According to John Gage:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"BBN had a big contract to implement TCP/IP, but their stuff didn't work, and grad student Joy's stuff worked. So they had this big meeting and this grad student in a T-shirt shows up, and they said, \"How did you do this?\" And Bill said, \"It's very simple\u00a0\u2014 you read the protocol and write the code.\"\u2014\u200a\nRob Gurwitz, who was working at BBN at the time, disputes this version of events.\nSun Microsystems.\nIn 1982, after the firm had been going for six months, Joy, Sun's sixteenth employee, was brought in with full co-founder status at Sun Microsystems. At Sun, Joy was an inspiration for the development of NFS, the SPARC microprocessors, the Java programming language, Jini/JavaSpaces, and JXTA.\nIn 1986, Joy was awarded a Grace Murray Hopper Award by the ACM for his work on the Berkeley UNIX Operating System.\nOn September 9, 2003, Sun announced Joy was leaving the company and that he \"is taking time to consider his next move and has no definite plans\".\nPost-Sun activities.\nIn 1999, Joy co-founded a venture capital firm, HighBAR Ventures, with two Sun colleagues, Andy Bechtolsheim and Roy Thiele-Sardi\u00f1a. In January 2005 he was named a partner in venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins. There, Joy has made several investments in green energy industries, even though he does not have any credentials in the field. He once said, \"My method is to look at something that seems like a good idea and assume it's true\".\nIn 2011, he was inducted as a Fellow of the Computer History Museum for his work on the Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) Unix system and the co-founding of Sun Microsystems.\nTechnology concerns.\nIn 2000, Joy gained notoriety with the publication of his article in \"Wired\" magazine, \"Why The Future Doesn't Need Us\", in which he declared, in what some have described as a \"neo-Luddite\" position, that he was convinced that growing advances in genetic engineering and nanotechnology would bring risks to humanity. He argued that intelligent robots would replace humanity, at the very least in intellectual and social dominance, in the relatively near future. He supports and promotes the idea of abandonment of GNR (genetics, nanotechnology, and robotics) technologies, instead of going into an arms race between negative uses of the technology and defense against those negative uses (good nano-machines patrolling and defending against Grey goo \"bad\" nano-machines). This stance of broad relinquishment was criticized by technologists such as technological-singularity thinker Ray Kurzweil, who instead advocates fine-grained relinquishment and ethical guidelines. Joy was also criticized by \"The American Spectator\", which characterized Joy's essay as a (possibly unwitting) rationale for statism.\nA bar-room discussion of these technologies with Ray Kurzweil started to set Joy's thinking along this path. He states in his essay that during the conversation, he became surprised that other serious scientists were considering such possibilities likely, and even more astounded at what he felt was a lack of consideration of the contingencies. After bringing the subject up with a few more acquaintances, he states that he was further alarmed by what he felt was that although many people considered these futures possible or probable, that very few of them shared as serious a concern for the dangers as he seemed to. This concern led to his in-depth examination of the issue and the positions of others in the scientific community on it, and eventually, to his current activities regarding it.\nDespite this, he is a venture capitalist, investing in GNR technology companies. He has also raised a specialty venture fund to address the dangers of pandemic diseases, such as the H5N1 avian influenza and biological weapons.\nJoy's law.\nOf management.\nIn his 2013 book \"Makers\", author Chris Anderson credited Joy with establishing \"Joy's law\" based on a quip: \"No matter who you are, most of the smartest people work for someone else [other than you].\" His argument was that companies use an inefficient process by not hiring the best employees, only those they are able to hire. His \"law\" was a continuation of Friedrich Hayek's \"The Use of Knowledge in Society\" and warned that the competition outside of a company would always have the potential to be greater than the company itself.\nOf computing.\nJoy devised a formula in 1983, also called \"Joy's law\", stating that the peak computer speed doubles each year and thus is given by a simple function of time. Specifically,\nformula_1\nin which S is the peak computer speed attained during year Y, expressed in MIPS.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3966", "revid": "48911350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3966", "title": "BGP", "text": ""}
{"id": "3967", "revid": "6036800", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3967", "title": "Bandwidth (signal processing)", "text": "Range of usable frequencies\nBandwidth is the difference between the upper and lower frequencies in a continuous band of frequencies. It is typically measured in unit of hertz (symbol Hz).\nIt may refer more specifically to two subcategories: \"Passband bandwidth\" is the difference between the upper and lower cutoff frequencies of, for example, a band-pass filter, a communication channel, or a signal spectrum. \"Baseband bandwidth\" is equal to the upper cutoff frequency of a low-pass filter or baseband signal, which includes a zero frequency.\nBandwidth in hertz is a central concept in many fields, including electronics, information theory, digital communications, radio communications, signal processing, and spectroscopy and is one of the determinants of the capacity of a given communication channel.\nA key characteristic of bandwidth is that any band of a given width can carry the same amount of information, regardless of where that band is located in the frequency spectrum. For example, a 3\u00a0kHz band can carry a telephone conversation whether that band is at baseband (as in a POTS telephone line) or modulated to some higher frequency. However, wide bandwidths are easier to obtain and process at higher frequencies because the is smaller.\nOverview.\nBandwidth is a key concept in many telecommunications applications. In radio communications, for example, bandwidth is the frequency range occupied by a modulated carrier signal. An FM radio receiver's tuner spans a limited range of frequencies. A government agency (such as the Federal Communications Commission in the United States) may apportion the regionally available bandwidth to broadcast license holders so that their signals do not mutually interfere. In this context, bandwidth is also known as channel spacing.\nFor other applications, there are other definitions. One definition of bandwidth, for a system, could be the range of frequencies over which the system produces a specified level of performance. A less strict and more practically useful definition will refer to the frequencies beyond which performance is degraded. In the case of frequency response, degradation could, for example, mean more than 3\u00a0dB below the maximum value or it could mean below a certain absolute value. As with any definition of the \"width\" of a function, many definitions are suitable for different purposes.\nIn the context of, for example, the sampling theorem and Nyquist sampling rate, bandwidth typically refers to baseband bandwidth. In the context of Nyquist symbol rate or Shannon-Hartley channel capacity for communication systems it refers to passband bandwidth.\nThe &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Rayleigh bandwidth of a simple radar pulse is defined as the inverse of its duration. For example, a one-microsecond pulse has a Rayleigh bandwidth of one megahertz.\nThe &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;essential bandwidth is defined as the portion of a signal spectrum in the frequency domain which contains most of the energy of the signal.\n\"x\" dB bandwidth.\nIn some contexts, the signal bandwidth in hertz refers to the frequency range in which the signal's spectral density (in W/Hz or V2/Hz) is nonzero or above a small threshold value. The threshold value is often defined relative to the maximum value, and is most commonly the 3 dB point, that is the point where the spectral density is half its maximum value (or the spectral amplitude, in formula_1 or formula_2, is 70.7% of its maximum). This figure, with a lower threshold value, can be used in calculations of the lowest sampling rate that will satisfy the sampling theorem. \nThe bandwidth is also used to denote system bandwidth, for example in filter or communication channel systems. To say that a system has a certain bandwidth means that the system can process signals with that range of frequencies, or that the system reduces the bandwidth of a white noise input to that bandwidth.\nThe 3\u00a0dB bandwidth of an electronic filter or communication channel is the part of the system's frequency response that lies within 3\u00a0dB of the response at its peak, which, in the passband filter case, is typically at or near its center frequency, and in the low-pass filter is at or near its cutoff frequency. If the maximum gain is 0\u00a0dB, the 3\u00a0dB bandwidth is the frequency range where attenuation is less than 3\u00a0dB. 3\u00a0dB attenuation is also where power is half its maximum. This same \"half-power gain\" convention is also used in spectral width, and more generally for the extent of functions as full width at half maximum (FWHM).\nIn electronic filter design, a filter specification may require that within the filter passband, the gain is nominally 0\u00a0dB with a small variation, for example within the \u00b11\u00a0dB interval. In the stopband(s), the required attenuation in decibels is above a certain level, for example &gt;100\u00a0dB. In a transition band the gain is not specified. In this case, the filter bandwidth corresponds to the passband width, which in this example is the 1\u00a0dB-bandwidth. If the filter shows amplitude ripple within the passband, the \"x\"\u00a0dB point refers to the point where the gain is \"x\"\u00a0dB below the nominal passband gain rather than \"x\"\u00a0dB below the maximum gain.\nIn signal processing and control theory the bandwidth is the frequency at which the closed-loop system gain drops 3\u00a0dB below peak.\nIn communication systems, in calculations of the Shannon\u2013Hartley channel capacity, bandwidth refers to the 3\u00a0dB-bandwidth. In calculations of the maximum symbol rate, the Nyquist sampling rate, and maximum bit rate according to the Hartley's law, the bandwidth refers to the frequency range within which the gain is non-zero.\nThe fact that in equivalent baseband models of communication systems, the signal spectrum consists of both negative and positive frequencies, can lead to confusion about bandwidth since they are sometimes referred to only by the positive half, and one will occasionally see expressions such as formula_3, where formula_4 is the total bandwidth (i.e. the maximum passband bandwidth of the carrier-modulated RF signal and the minimum passband bandwidth of the physical passband channel), and formula_5 is the positive bandwidth (the baseband bandwidth of the equivalent channel model). For instance, the baseband model of the signal would require a low-pass filter with cutoff frequency of at least formula_5 to stay intact, and the physical passband channel would require a passband filter of at least formula_4 to stay intact.\nRelative bandwidth.\nThe absolute bandwidth is not always the most appropriate or useful measure of bandwidth. For instance, in the field of antennas the difficulty of constructing an antenna to meet a specified absolute bandwidth is easier at a higher frequency than at a lower frequency. For this reason, bandwidth is often quoted relative to the frequency of operation which gives a better indication of the structure and sophistication needed for the circuit or device under consideration.\nThere are two different measures of relative bandwidth in common use: \"fractional bandwidth\" (formula_8) and \"ratio bandwidth\" (formula_9). In the following, the absolute bandwidth is defined as follows,\nformula_10 \nwhere formula_11 and formula_12 are the upper and lower frequency limits respectively of the band in question.\nFractional bandwidth.\nFractional bandwidth is defined as the absolute bandwidth divided by the center frequency (formula_13),\nformula_14\nThe center frequency is usually defined as the arithmetic mean of the upper and lower frequencies so that,\nformula_15 and\nformula_16\nHowever, the center frequency is sometimes defined as the geometric mean of the upper and lower frequencies,\nformula_17 and\nformula_18\nWhile the geometric mean is more rarely used than the arithmetic mean (and the latter can be assumed if not stated explicitly) the former is considered more mathematically rigorous. It more properly reflects the logarithmic relationship of fractional bandwidth with increasing frequency. For narrowband applications, there is only marginal difference between the two definitions. The geometric mean version is inconsequentially larger. For wideband applications they diverge substantially with the arithmetic mean version approaching 2 in the limit and the geometric mean version approaching infinity.\nFractional bandwidth is sometimes expressed as a percentage of the center frequency (percent bandwidth, formula_19),\nformula_20\nRatio bandwidth.\nRatio bandwidth is defined as the ratio of the upper and lower limits of the band,\nformula_21\nRatio bandwidth may be notated as formula_22. The relationship between ratio bandwidth and fractional bandwidth is given by,\nformula_23 and\nformula_24\nPercent bandwidth is a less meaningful measure in wideband applications. A percent bandwidth of 100% corresponds to a ratio bandwidth of 3:1. All higher ratios up to infinity are compressed into the range 100\u2013200%.\nRatio bandwidth is often expressed in octaves (i.e., as a frequency level) for wideband applications. An octave is a frequency ratio of 2:1 leading to this expression for the number of octaves, formula_25\nNoise equivalent bandwidth.\nThe noise equivalent bandwidth (or equivalent noise bandwidth (enbw)) of a system of frequency response formula_26 is the bandwidth of an ideal filter with rectangular frequency response centered on the system's central frequency that produces the same average power outgoing formula_26 when both systems are excited with a white noise source.\nThe value of the noise equivalent bandwidth depends on the ideal filter reference gain used. Typically, this gain equals formula_28 at its center frequency, but it can also equal the peak value of formula_28. \nThe noise equivalent bandwidth formula_30 can be calculated in the frequency domain using formula_26 or in the time domain by exploiting the Parseval's theorem with the system impulse response formula_32. If formula_26 is a lowpass system with zero central frequency and the filter reference gain is referred to this frequency, then: \nformula_34\nThe same expression can be applied to bandpass systems by substituting the equivalent baseband frequency response for formula_26. \nThe noise equivalent bandwidth is widely used to simplify the analysis of telecommunication systems in the presence of noise.\nPhotonics.\nIn photonics, the term \"bandwidth\" carries a variety of meanings:\nA related concept is the spectral linewidth of the radiation emitted by excited atoms.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3968", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3968", "title": "Bodhisattva", "text": "Buddhist term for aspirant to enlightenment\nIn Buddhism, a bodhisattva is a person who has attained, or is striving towards, \"bodhi\" ('awakening', 'enlightenment') or Buddhahood. Often, the term specifically refers to a person who forgoes or delays personal nirvana or \"bodhi\" in order to compassionately help other individuals reach Buddhahood.\nIn the Early Buddhist schools, as well as modern Therav\u0101da Buddhism, bodhisattva (or bodhisatta) refers to someone who has made a resolution to become a Buddha and has also received a confirmation or prediction from a living Buddha that this will come to pass. In Therav\u0101da Buddhism, the bodhisattva is mainly seen as an exceptional and rare individual. Only a few select individuals are ultimately able to become bodhisattvas, such as Maitreya. \nIn Mah\u0101y\u0101na Buddhism, a bodhisattva refers to anyone who has generated \"bodhicitta\", a spontaneous wish and compassionate mind to attain Buddhahood for the benefit of all sentient beings. Mahayana bodhisattvas are spiritually heroic persons that work to attain awakening and are driven by a great compassion (\"mah\u0101karu\u1e47\u0101\"). These beings are exemplified by important spiritual qualities such as the \"four divine abodes\" (\"brahmavih\u0101ras\") of loving-kindness (\"maitr\u012b\"), compassion (\"karu\u1e47\u0101\"), empathetic joy (\"mudit\u0101\") and equanimity (\"upek\u1e63\u0101\"), as well as the various bodhisattva \"perfections\" (\"p\u0101ramit\u0101s\") which include \"praj\u00f1\u0101p\u0101ramit\u0101\" (\"transcendent knowledge\" or \"perfection of wisdom\") and skillful means (\"up\u0101ya\").\nMah\u0101y\u0101na Buddhism generally understands the bodhisattva path as being open to everyone, and Mah\u0101y\u0101na Buddhists encourage all individuals to become bodhisattvas. Spiritually advanced bodhisattvas such as Avalokiteshvara, Maitreya, and Manjushri are also widely venerated across the Mah\u0101y\u0101na Buddhist world and are believed to possess great magical power, which they employ to help all living beings.\nEtymology.\nBodhisattva is a combination of two Sanskrit words: Bodhi (\u092c\u094b\u0927\u093f), meaning \"awakening\" or \"enlightenment\" and \nSattva (\u0938\u0924\u094d\u0924\u094d\u0935), meaning \"being\", as pertaining to a person who has achieved, or is striving towards, \"bodhi\" ('awakening' or 'enlightenment') or Buddhahood.\nEarly Buddhism.\nIn pre-sectarian Buddhism, the term \"bodhisatta\" is used in the early texts to refer to Gautama Buddha in his previous lives and as a young man in his last life, when he was working towards liberation. In the early Buddhist discourses, the Buddha regularly uses the phrase \"when I was an unawakened Bodhisatta\" to describe his experiences before his attainment of awakening. The early texts which discuss the period before the Buddha's awakening mainly focus on his spiritual development. According to Bhikkhu Analayo, most of these passages focus on three main themes: \"the bodhisattva's overcoming of unwholesome states of mind, his development of mental tranquillity, and the growth of his insight.\"\nOther early sources like the \"Acchariyabbhutadhamma-sutta\" (MN 123, and its Chinese parallel in Madhyama-\u0101gama 32) discuss the marvelous qualities of the bodhisattva Gautama in his previous life in Tu\u1e63ita heaven. The Pali text focuses on how the bodhisattva was endowed with mindfulness and clear comprehension while living in Tu\u1e63ita, while the Chinese source states that his lifespan, appearance, and glory was greater than all the devas (gods). These sources also discuss various miracles which accompanied the bodhisattva's conception and birth, most famously, his taking seven steps and proclaiming that this was his last life. The Chinese source (titled \"Discourse on Marvellous Qualities\") also states that while living as a monk under the Buddha K\u0101\u015byapa he \"made his initial vow to [realize] Buddhahood [while] practicing the holy life.\"\nAnother early source that discusses the qualities of bodhisattvas is the \"Mah\u0101pad\u0101na sutta.\" This text discusses bodhisattva qualities in the context of six previous Buddhas who lived long ago, such as Buddha Vipa\u015by\u012b. Yet another important element of the bodhisattva doctrine, the prediction of someone's future Buddhahood, is found in another Chinese early Buddhist text, the \"Discourse on an Explanation about the Past\" (M\u0100 66). In this discourse, a monk named Maitreya aspires to become a Buddha in the future and the Buddha then predicts that Maitreya will become a Buddha in the future Other discourses found in the \" Ekottarika-\u0101gama\" present the \"bodhisattva Maitreya\" as an example figure (E\u0100 20.6 and E\u0100 42.6) and one sutra in this collection also discuss how the Buddha taught the bodhisattva path of the six perfections to Maitreya (E\u0100 27.5).\n'Bodhisatta' may also connote a being who is \"bound for enlightenment\", in other words, a person whose aim is to become fully enlightened. In the P\u0101li canon, the Bodhisatta (bodhisattva) is also described as someone who is still subject to birth, illness, death, sorrow, defilement, and delusion. According to the Therav\u0101da monk Bhikkhu Bodhi, while all the Buddhist traditions agree that to attain Buddhahood, one must \"make a deliberate resolution\" and fulfill the spiritual perfections (p\u0101ram\u012bs or p\u0101ramit\u0101s) as a bodhisattva, the actual bodhisattva path is not taught in the earliest strata of Buddhist texts such as the Pali Nikayas (and their counterparts such as the Chinese \u0100gamas) which instead focus on the ideal of the arahant.\nThe oldest known story about how Gautama Buddha becomes a bodhisattva is the story of his encounter with the previous Buddha, D\u012bpankara. During this encounter, a previous incarnation of Gautama, variously named Sumedha, Megha, or Sumati offers five blue lotuses and spreads out his hair or entire body for D\u012bpankara to walk on, resolving to one day become a Buddha. D\u012bpankara then confirms that they will attain Buddhahood. Early Buddhist authors saw this story as indicating that the making of a resolution (\"abhin\u012bh\u0101ra\") in the presence of a living Buddha and his prediction/confirmation (\"vy\u0101kara\u1e47a\") of one's future Buddhahood was necessary to become a bodhisattva. According to Drewes, \"all known models of the path to Buddhahood developed from this basic understanding.\"\nStories and teachings on the bodhisattva ideal are found in the various Jataka tale sources, which mainly focus on stories of the past lives of the Sakyamuni. Among the non-Mahayana Nikaya schools, the Jataka literature was likely the main genre that contained bodhisattva teachings. These stories had certainly become an important part of popular Buddhism by the time of the carving of the Bharhut Stupa railings (c. 125\u2013100 BCE), which contain depictions of around thirty Jataka tales. Thus, it is possible that the bodhisattva ideal was popularized through the telling of Jatakas. Jataka tales contain numerous stories which focus on the past life deeds of Sakyamuni when he was a bodhisattva. These deeds generally express bodhisattva qualities and practices (such as compassion, the six perfections, and supernatural power) in dramatic ways, and include numerous acts of self-sacrifice.\nApart from Jataka stories related to Sakyamuni, the idea that Metteya (Maitreya), who currently resides in Tu\u1e63ita, would become the future Buddha and that this had been predicted by the Buddha Sakyamuni was also an early doctrine related to the bodhisattva ideal. It first appears in the \"Cakkavattisihanadasutta\". According to A. L. Basham, it is also possible that some of the Ashokan edicts reveal knowledge of the bodhisattva ideal. Basham even argues that Ashoka may have considered himself a bodhisattva, as one edict states that he \"set out for sambodhi.\"\nNik\u0101ya schools.\nBy the time that the Buddhist tradition had developed into various competing sects, the idea of the bodhisattva vehicle (Sanskrit: \"bodhisattvayana\") as a distinct (and superior) path from that of the arhat and solitary buddha was widespread among all the major non-Mahayana Buddhist traditions or Nikaya schools, including Therav\u0101da, Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101da and Mah\u0101s\u0101\u1e43ghika. The doctrine is found, for example, in 2nd century CE sources like the \"Avad\u0101na\u015bataka\" and the \"Divy\u0101vad\u0101na.\" The bodhisattvayana was referred by other names such as \"vehicle of the perfections\" (\"p\u0101ramit\u0101y\u0101na\"), \"bodhisatva dharma\", \"bodhisatva training\", and \"vehicle of perfect Buddhahood\".\nAccording to various sources, some of the Nikaya schools (such as the Dharmaguptaka and some of the Mahasamghika sects) transmitted a collection of texts on bodhisattvas alongside the Tripitaka, which they termed \"Bodhisattva Pi\u1e6daka\" or \"Vaipulya (Extensive) Pi\u1e6daka\". None of these have survived. Dar Hayal attributes the historical development of the bodhisattva ideal to \"the growth of bhakti (devotion, faith, love) and the idealisation and spiritualisation of the Buddha.\"\nThe North Indian Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101da school held it took Gautama three \"incalculable aeons\" (\"asa\u1e43khyeyas\") and ninety one aeons (\"kalpas\") to become a Buddha after his resolution (\"pra\u1e47idh\u0101na\") in front of a past Buddha. During the first incalculable aeon he is said to have encountered and served 75,000 Buddhas, and 76,000 in the second, after which he received his first prediction (\"vy\u0101kara\u1e47a\") of future Buddhahood from D\u012bpankara, meaning that he could no longer fall back from the path to Buddhahood. For Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101da, the first two incalculable aeons is a period of time in which a bodhisattva may still fall away and regress from the path. At the end of the second incalculable aeon, they encounter a buddha and receive their prediction, at which point they are certain to achieve Buddhahood.\nThus, the presence of a living Buddha is also necessary for Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101da. The \"Mah\u0101vibh\u0101\u1e63\u0101\" explains that its discussion of the bodhisattva path is partly meant \"to stop those who are in fact not bodhisattvas from giving rise to the self-conceit that they are.\" However, for Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101da, one is not technically a bodhisattva until the end of the third incalculable aeon, after which one begins to perform the actions which lead to the manifestation of the marks of a great person.\nThe \"Mah\u0101vastu\" of the Mah\u0101s\u0101\u1e43ghika-Lokottarav\u0101dins presents various ideas regarding the school's conception of the bodhisattva ideal. According to this text, bodhisattva Gautama had already reached a level of dispassion at the time of Buddha D\u012bpa\u1e43kara many aeons ago and he is also said to have attained the perfection of wisdom countless aeons ago.\nThe \"Mah\u0101vastu\" also presents four stages or courses (\"cary\u0101s)\" of the bodhisattva path without giving specific time frames (though it's said to take various incalculable aeons). This set of four phases of the path is also found in other sources, including the Gandhari \u201c\"Many-Buddhas S\u016btra\"\u201d (*\"Bahubudha gasutra\") and the Chinese \"F\u00f3 b\u011bnx\u00edng j\u00ed j\u012bng\" (\u4f5b\u672c\u884c \u96c6\u7d93, Taisho vol. 3, no. 190, pp.\u00a0669a1\u2013672a11).\nThe four \"cary\u0101s\" (Gandhari: \"caria\") are the following:\nTherav\u0101da.\nThe bodhisattva ideal is also found in southern Buddhist sources, like the Therav\u0101da school's \"Buddhava\u1e43sa\" (1st-2nd century BCE), which explains how Gautama, after making a resolution (\"abhin\u012bh\u0101ra\") and receiving his prediction (\"vy\u0101kara\u1e47a\") of future Buddhahood from past Buddha D\u012bpa\u1e43kara, he became certain (\"dhuva\") to attain Buddhahood. Gautama then took four incalculable aeons and a hundred thousand, shorter \"kalpas\" (aeons) to reach Buddhahood. Several sources in the Pali Canon depict the idea that there are multiple Buddhas and that there will be many future Buddhas, all of which must train as bodhisattas. Non-canonical Theravada Jataka literature also teaches about bodhisattvas and the bodhisattva path. The worship of bodhisattvas like Metteya, Saman (Samantabhadra) and Natha (Avalokite\u015bvara) can also be found in Theravada Buddhism.\nBy the time of the great scholar Buddhaghosa (5th-century CE), orthodox Therav\u0101da held the standard Indian Buddhist view that there were three main spiritual paths within Buddhism: the way of the Buddhas (\"buddhay\u0101na\") i.e. the bodhisatta path; the way of the individual Buddhas (\"paccekabuddhay\u0101na\"); and the way of the disciples (\"s\u0101vakay\u0101na\").\nThe Sri Lankan commentator Dhammap\u0101la (6th century CE) wrote a commentary on the \"Cariy\u0101pi\u1e6daka\", a text which focuses on the bodhisattva path and on the ten perfections of a bodhisatta. Dhammap\u0101la's commentary notes that to become a bodhisattva one must make a valid resolution in front of a living Buddha. The Buddha then must provide a prediction (\"vy\u0101kara\u1e47a\") which confirms that one is irreversible (\"anivattana\") from the attainment of Buddhahood. The \"Nid\u0101nakath\u0101\", as well as the \"Buddhava\u1e43sa\" and \"Cariy\u0101pi\u1e6daka\" commentaries makes this explicit by stating that one cannot use a substitute (such as a Bodhi tree, Buddha statue or Stupa) for the presence of a living Buddha, since only a Buddha has the knowledge for making a reliable prediction. This is the generally accepted view maintained in orthodox Theravada today.\nAccording to Therav\u0101da commentators like Dhammap\u0101la as well as the \"Suttanip\u0101ta\" commentary, there are three types of bodhisattvas:\nAccording to modern Theravada authors, meeting a Buddha is needed to truly make someone a bodhisattva because any other resolution to attain Buddhahood may easily be forgotten or abandoned during the aeons ahead. The Burmese monk Ledi Sayadaw (1846\u20131923) explains that though it is easy to make vows for future Buddhahood by oneself, it is very difficult to maintain the necessary conduct and views during periods when the Dharma has disappeared from the world. One will easily fall back during such periods and this is why one is not truly a full bodhisattva until one receives recognition from a living Buddha.\nBecause of this, it was and remains a common practice in Theravada to attempt to establish the necessary conditions to meet the future Buddha Maitreya and thus receive a prediction from him. Medieval Theravada literature and inscriptions report the aspirations of monks, kings and ministers to meet Maitreya for this purpose. Modern figures such as Anagarika Dharmapala (1864\u20131933), and U Nu (1907\u20131995) both sought to receive a prediction from a Buddha in the future and believed meritorious actions done for the good of Buddhism would help in their endeavor to become bodhisattvas in the future.\nOver time the term came to be applied to other figures besides Gautama Buddha in Theravada lands, possibly due to the influence of Mahayana. The Theravada Abhayagiri tradition of Sri Lanka practiced Mahayana Buddhism and was very influential until the 12th century. Kings of Sri Lanka were often described as bodhisattvas, starting at least as early as Sirisanghabodhi (r. 247\u2013249), who was renowned for his compassion, took vows for the welfare of the citizens, and was regarded as a mah\u0101satta (Sanskrit: \"mah\u0101sattva\"), an epithet used almost exclusively in Mahayana Buddhism. Many other Sri Lankan kings from the 3rd until the 15th century were also described as bodhisattas and their royal duties were sometimes clearly associated with the practice of the ten p\u0101ramit\u0101s. In some cases, they explicitly claimed to have received predictions of Buddhahood in past lives.\nPopular Buddhist figures have also been seen as bodhisattvas in Theravada Buddhist lands. Shanta Ratnayaka notes that Anagarika Dharmapala, Asarapasarana Saranarikara Sangharaja, and Hikkaduwe Sri Sumamgala \"are often called bodhisattvas\". Buddhaghosa was also traditionally considered to be a reincarnation of Maitreya. Paul Williams writes that some modern Theravada meditation masters in Thailand are popularly regarded as bodhisattvas. Various modern figures of esoteric Theravada traditions (such as the weizz\u0101s of Burma) have also claimed to be bodhisattvas.\nTheravada bhikkhu and scholar Walpola Rahula writes that the bodhisattva ideal has traditionally been held to be higher than the state of a \"\u015br\u0101vaka\" not only in Mahayana but also in Theravada. Rahula writes \"the fact is that both the Theravada and the Mahayana unanimously accept the Bodhisattva ideal as the highest...Although the Theravada holds that anybody can be a Bodhisattva, it does not stipulate or insist that all must be Bodhisattva which is considered not practical.\" He also quotes the 10th century king of Sri Lanka, Mahinda IV (956\u2013972 CE), who had the words inscribed \"none but the bodhisattvas will become kings of a prosperous Lanka,\" among other examples.\nJeffrey Samuels echoes this perspective, noting that while in Mahayana Buddhism the bodhisattva path is held to be universal and for everyone, in Theravada it is \"reserved for and appropriated by certain exceptional people.\"\nMah\u0101y\u0101na.\nEarly Mah\u0101y\u0101na.\nMah\u0101y\u0101na Buddhism (often also called \"Bodhisattvay\u0101na\", \"Bodhisattva Vehicle\") is based principally upon the path of a bodhisattva. This path was seen as higher and nobler than becoming an arhat or a solitary Buddha. Hayal notes that Sanskrit sources generally depict the bodhisattva path as reaching a higher goal (i.e. \"anuttara-samyak-sambodhi\") than the goal of the path of the \"disciples\" (\u015br\u0101vakas), which is the nirvana attained by arhats. For example, the \"Lotus Sutra\" states:\nTo the sravakas, he preached the doctrine which is associated with the four Noble Truths and leads to Dependent Origination. It aims at transcending birth, old age, disease, death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress of mind and weariness; and it ends in nirvana. But, to the great being, the bodhisattva, he preached the doctrine, which is associated with the six perfections and which ends in the Knowledge of the Omniscient One after the attainment of the supreme and perfect bodhi.\nAccording to Peter Skilling, the Mahayana movement began when \"at an uncertain point, let us say in the first century BCE, groups of monks, nuns, and lay-followers began to devote themselves exclusively to the Bodhisatva vehicle.\" These Mahayanists universalized the bodhisattvayana as a path which was open to everyone and which was taught for all beings to follow. This was in contrast to the Nikaya schools, which held that the bodhisattva path was only for a rare set of individuals. Indian Mahayanists preserved and promoted a set of texts called Vaipulya (\"Extensive\") sutras (later called Mahayana sutras).\nMahayana sources like the \"Lotus Sutra\" also claim that arhats that have reached nirvana have not truly finished their spiritual quest, for they still have not attained the superior goal of sambodhi (Buddhahood) and thus must continue to strive until they reach this goal.\nThe \"\", one of the earliest known Mahayana texts, contains a simple and brief definition for the term \"bodhisattva\", which is also the earliest known Mah\u0101y\u0101na definition. This definition is given as the following: \"Because he has bodhi as his aim, a bodhisattva-mah\u0101sattva is so called.\"\nMahayana sutras also depict the bodhisattva as a being which, because they want to reach Buddhahood for the sake of all beings, is more loving and compassionate than the sravaka (who only wishes to end their own suffering). Thus, another major difference between the bodhisattva and the arhat is that the bodhisattva practices the path for the good of others (\"par-\u0101rtha\"), due to their bodhicitta, while the sravakas do so for their own good (\"sv-\u0101rtha\") and thus, do not have bodhicitta (which is compassionately focused on others).\nMahayana bodhisattvas were not just abstract models for Buddhist practice, but also developed as distinct figures which were venerated by Indian Buddhists. These included figures like Manjushri and Avalokiteshvara, which are personifications of the basic virtues of wisdom and compassion respectively and are the two most important bodhisattvas in Mahayana. The development of bodhisattva devotion parallels the development of the Hindu bhakti movement. Indeed, Dayal sees the development of Indian bodhisattva cults as a Buddhist reaction to the growth of bhakti centered religion in India which helped to popularize and reinvigorate Indian Buddhism.\nSome Mahayana sutras promoted another revolutionary doctrinal turn, claiming that the three vehicles of the \"\u015ar\u0101vakay\u0101na, Pratyekabuddhay\u0101na\" and the \"Bodhisattvay\u0101na\" were really just one vehicle (\"ekayana\"). This is most famously promoted in the \"Lotus S\u016btra\" which claims that the very idea of three separate vehicles is just an \"upaya\", a skillful device invented by the Buddha to get beings of various abilities on the path. But ultimately, it will be revealed to them that there is only one vehicle, the \"ekayana\", which ends in Buddhahood.\nMature scholastic Mah\u0101y\u0101na.\nClassical Indian mahayanists held that the only sutras which teach the bodhisattva vehicle are the Mahayana sutras. Thus, Nagarjuna writes \"the subjects based on the deeds of Bodhisattvas were not mentioned in [non-Mah\u0101y\u0101na] s\u016btras.\" They also held that the bodhisattva path was superior to the \u015br\u0101vaka vehicle and so the bodhisattva vehicle is the \"great vehicle\" (mahayana) due to its greater aspiration to save others, while the \u015br\u0101vaka vehicle is the \"small\" or \"inferior\" vehicle (hinayana). Thus, Asanga argues in his \"Mah\u0101y\u0101nas\u016btr\u0101la\u1e43k\u0101ra\" that the two vehicles differ in numerous ways, such as intention, teaching, employment (i.e., means), support, and the time that it takes to reach the goal.\nOver time, Mahayana Buddhists developed mature systematized doctrines about the bodhisattva. The authors of the various Madhyamaka treatises often presented the view of the \"ekayana\", and thus held that all beings can become bodhisattvas. The texts and sutras associated with the Yogacara school developed a different theory of three separate \"gotras\" (families, lineages), that inherently predisposed a person to either the vehicle of the \"arhat\", \"pratyekabuddha\" or \"samyak-sa\u1e43buddha\" (fully self-awakened one). For the yogacarins then, only some beings (those who have the \"bodhisattva lineage\") can enter the bodhisattva path. In East Asian Buddhism, the view of the one vehicle (\"ekayana\") which holds that all Buddhist teachings are really part of a single path, is the standard view.\nThe term bodhisattva was also used in a broader sense by later authors. According to the eighth-century Mah\u0101y\u0101na philosopher Haribhadra, the term \"bodhisattva\" can refer to those who follow any of the three vehicles, since all are working towards \"bodhi\". Therefore, the specific term for a Mah\u0101y\u0101na bodhisattva is a \"mah\u0101sattva\" (great being) \"bodhisattva\". According to Ati\u015ba's 11th century \"Bodhipathaprad\u012bpa,\" the central defining feature of a Mah\u0101y\u0101na bodhisattva is the universal aspiration to end suffering for all sentient beings, which is termed \"bodhicitta\" (the mind set on awakening).\nThe bodhisattva doctrine went through a significant transformation during the development of Buddhist tantra, also known as Vajrayana. This movement developed new ideas and texts which introduced new bodhisattvas and re-interpreted old ones in new forms, developed in elaborate mandalas for them and introduced new practices which made use of mantras, mudras and other tantric elements.\nEntering the bodhisattva path.\nAccording to David Drewes, \"Mahayana sutras unanimously depict the path beginning with the first arising of the thought of becoming a Buddha (\"prathamacittotp\u0101da\"), or the initial arising of \"bodhicitta\", typically aeons before one first receives a Buddha's prediction, and apply the term bodhisattva from this point.\" The \"Ten Stages Sutra\", for example, explains that the arising of bodhicitta is the first step in the bodhisattva's career. Thus, the arising of bodhicitta, the compassionate mind aimed at awakening for the sake of all beings, is a central defining element of the bodhisattva path.\nAnother key element of the bodhisattva path is the concept of a bodhisattva's \"pra\u1e47idh\u0101na\" - which can mean a resolution, resolve, vow, prayer, wish, aspiration and determination. This more general idea of an earnest wish or solemn resolve which is closely connected with bodhicitta (and is the cause and result of bodhicitta) eventually developed into the idea that bodhisattvas take certain formulaic \"bodhisattva vows.\" One of the earliest of these formulas is found in the \"\" and states:\nWe having crossed (the stream of samsara), may we help living beings to cross! We being liberated, may we liberate others! We being comforted, may we comfort others! We being finally released, may we release others!\nOther sutras contain longer and more complex formulas, such as the ten vows found in the \"Ten Stages Sutra\".\nMahayana sources also discuss the importance of a Buddha's prediction (\"vy\u0101kara\u1e47a\") of a bodhisattva's future Buddhahood. This is seen as an important step along the bodhisattva path.\nLater Mahayana Buddhists also developed specific rituals and devotional acts for which helped to develop various preliminary qualities, such as faith, worship, prayer, and confession, that lead to the arising of \"bodhicitta\". These elements, which constitute a kind of preliminary preparation for bodhicitta, are found in the \"seven part worship\" (\"sapt\u0101\u1e45gavidhi, sapt\u0101\u1e47gap\u016bj\u0101\" or \"saptavidh\u0101 anuttarap\u016bj\u0101\"). This ritual form is visible in the works of Shantideva (8th century) and includes:\nAfter these preliminaries have been accomplished, then the aspirant is seen as being ready to give rise to bodhicitta, often through the recitation of a bodhisattva vow. Contemporary Mah\u0101y\u0101na Buddhism encourages everyone to give rise to bodhicitta and ceremonially take bodhisattva vows. With these vows and precepts, one makes the promise to work for the complete enlightenment of all sentient beings by practicing the transcendent virtues or paramitas.\nIn Mah\u0101y\u0101na, bodhisattvas are often not Buddhist monks and are former lay practitioners.\nBodhisattva conduct (cary\u0101).\nAfter a being has entered the path by giving rise to bodhicitta, they must make effort in the practice or conduct (\"cary\u0101\") of the bodhisattvas, which includes all the duties, virtues and practices that bodhisattvas must accomplish to attain Buddhahood. An important early Mahayana source for the practice of the bodhisattva is the \"Bodhisattvapi\u1e6daka s\u016btra,\" a major sutra found in the \"Mah\u0101ratnak\u016b\u1e6da\" collection which was widely cited by various sources. According to Ulrich Pagel, this text is \"one of the longest works on the bodhisattva in Mahayana literature\" and thus provides extensive information on the topic of bodhisattva training, especially the perfections (\"p\u0101ramit\u0101\"). Pagel also argues that this text was quite influential on later Mahayana writings which discuss the bodhisattva and thus was \"of fundamental importance to the evolution of the bodhisattva doctrine.\" Other sutras in the \"Mah\u0101ratnak\u016b\u1e6da\" collection are also important sources for the bodhisattva path.\nAccording to Pagel, the basic outline of the bodhisattva practice in the \"Bodhisattvapi\u1e6daka\" is outlined in a passage which states \"the path to enlightenment comprises benevolence towards all sentient beings, striving after the perfections and compliance with the means of conversion.\" This path begins with contemplating the failures of samsara, developing faith in the Buddha, giving rise to bodhicitta and practicing the four immesurables. It then proceeds through all six perfections and finally discusses the four means of converting sentient beings (\"sa\u1e43grahavastu\"). The path is presented through prose exposition, mnemonic lists (\"matrka\") and also through Jataka narratives. Using this general framework, the \"Bodhisattvapi\u1e6daka\" incorporates discussions related to other practices including super knowledge (\"abhij\u00f1\u0101\"), learning, 'skill' (\"kau\u015balya\"), accumulation of merit (\"pu\u1e47yasa\u1e43bh\u0101ra\"), the thirty-seven factors of awakening (\"bodhipak\u1e63adharmas\"), perfect mental quietude (\"\u015bamatha\") and insight (\"vipa\u015byan\u0101\").\nLater Mahayana treatises (\"\u015b\u0101stras\") like the \"Bodhisattvabhumi\" and the \"Mah\u0101y\u0101nas\u016btr\u0101lamk\u0101ra\" provide the following schema of bodhisattva practices:\nThe first six perfections (\"p\u0101ramit\u0101s\") are the most significant and popular set of bodhisattva virtues and thus they serve as a central framework for bodhisattva practice. They are the most widely taught and commented upon virtues throughout the history of Mahayana Buddhist literature and feature prominently in major Sanskrit sources such as the \"Bodhisattvabhumi\", the \"Mah\u0101y\u0101nas\u016btr\u0101lamk\u0101ra,\" the \"King of Samadhis Sutra\" and the \"Ten Stages Sutra\". They are extolled and praised by these sources as \"the great oceans of all the bright virtues and auspicious principles\" (\"Bodhisattvabhumi\") and \"the Teacher, the Way and the Light...the Refuge and the Shelter, the Support and the Sanctuary\" (\"A\u1e63\u1e6das\u0101hasrik\u0101\").\nWhile many Mahayana sources discuss the bodhisattva's training in ethical discipline (\"\u015b\u012bla\") in classic Buddhist terms, over time, there also developed specific sets of ethical precepts for bodhisattvas (Skt. \"bodhisattva-\u015b\u012bla\"). These various sets of precepts are usually taken by bodhisattva aspirants (lay and ordained monastics) along with classic Buddhist pratimoksha precepts. However, in some Japanese Buddhist traditions, monastics rely solely on the bodhisattva precepts.\nThe perfection of wisdom (\"praj\u00f1\u0101p\u0101ramit\u0101\") is generally seen as the most important and primary of the perfections, without which all the others fall short. Thus, the \"Madhyamakavatara\" (6:2) states that wisdom leads the other perfections as a man with eyes leads the blind. This perfect or transcendent wisdom has various qualities, such as being non-attached (\"asakti\"), non-conceptual and non-dual (\"advaya\") and signless (\"animitta\"). It is generally understood as a kind of insight into the true nature of all phenomena (\"dharmas\") which in Mahayana sutras is widely described as emptiness (\"shunyat\u0101\").\nAnother key virtue which the bodhisattva must develop is great compassion (\"mah\u0101-karu\u1e47\u0101\"), a vast sense of care aimed at ending the suffering of all sentient beings. This great compassion is the ethical foundation of the bodhisattva, and it is also an applied aspect of their bodhicitta. Great compassion must also be closely joined with the perfection of wisdom, which reveals that all the beings that the bodhisattva strives to save are ultimately empty of self (\"an\u0101tman\") and lack inherent existence (\"ni\u1e25svabh\u0101va\"). Due to the bodhisattva's compassionate wish to save all beings, they develop innumerable skillful means or strategies (\"upaya\") with which to teach and guide different kinds of beings with all sorts of different inclinations and tendencies.\nAnother key virtue for the bodhisattva is mindfulness (\"sm\u1e5bti\"), which Dayal calls \"the sine qua non of moral progress for a bodhisattva.\" Mindfulness is widely emphasized by Buddhist authors and Sanskrit sources and it appears four times in the list of 37 \"bodhipak\u1e63adharmas\". According to the \"A\u1e63\u1e6das\u0101hasrik\u0101\", a bodhisattva must never lose mindfulness so as not to be confused or distracted. The \"Mah\u0101y\u0101nas\u016btr\u0101lamk\u0101ra\" states that mindfulness is the principal asset of a bodhisattva, while both Asvaghosa and Shantideva state that without mindfulness, a bodhisattva will be helpless and uncontrolled (like a mad elephant) and will not succeed in conquering the mental afflictions.\nLength and nature of the path.\nJust as with non-Mahayana sources, Mahayana sutras generally depict the bodhisattva path as a long path that takes many lifetimes across many aeons. Some sutras state that a beginner bodhisattva could take anywhere from 3 to 22 countless eons (\"mah\u0101sa\u1e43khyeya kalpas\") to become a Buddha. The \"Mah\u0101y\u0101nasa\u1e43graha\" of Asanga states that the bodhisattva must cultivate the six paramitas for three incalculable aeons (\"kalp\u0101sa\u1e43khyeya\"). Shantideva meanwhile states that bodhisattvas must practice each perfection for sixty aeons or kalpas and also declares that a bodhisattva must practice the path for an \"inconceivable\" (\"acintya\") number of kalpas. Thus, the bodhisattva path could take many billions upon billions of years to complete.\nLater developments in Indian and Asian Mahayana Buddhism (especially in Vajrayana or tantric Buddhism) lead to the idea that certain methods and practices could substantially shorten the path (and even lead to Buddhahood in a single lifetime). In Pure Land Buddhism, an aspirant might go to a Buddha's pure land or buddha-field (\"buddhak\u1e63etra\"), like Sukhavati, where they can study the path directly with a Buddha. This could significantly shorten the length of the path, or at least make it more bearable. East Asian Pure Land Buddhist traditions, such as J\u014ddo-sh\u016b and J\u014ddo Shinsh\u016b, hold the view that realizing Buddhahood through the long bodhisattva path of the perfections is no longer practical in the current age (which is understood as a degenerate age called \"mappo\"). Thus, they rely on the salvific power of Amitabha to bring Buddhist practitioners to the pure land of Sukhavati, where they will better be able to practice the path.\nThis view is rejected by other schools such as Tendai, Shingon and Zen. The founders of Tendai and Shingon, Saicho and Kukai, held that anyone who practiced the path properly could reach awakening in this very lifetime. Buddhist schools like Tiantai, Huayan, Chan and the various Vajray\u0101na traditions maintain that they teach ways to attain Buddhahood within one lifetime.\nSome of early depictions of the Bodhisattva path in texts such as the \"Ugraparip\u1e5bcch\u0101 S\u016btra\" describe it as an arduous, difficult monastic path suited only for the few which is nevertheless the most glorious path one can take. Three kinds of bodhisattvas are mentioned: the forest, city, and monastery bodhisattvas\u2014with forest dwelling being promoted a superior, even necessary path in sutras such as the \"Ugraparip\u1e5bcch\u0101\" and the \"Samadhiraja\" sutras. The early \"Rastrapalapariprccha sutra\" also promotes a solitary life of meditation in the forests, far away from the distractions of the householder life. The \"Rastrapala\" is also highly critical of monks living in monasteries and in cities who are seen as not practicing meditation and morality.\nThe \"Ratnagunasamcayagatha\" also says the bodhisattva should undertake ascetic practices (\"dh\u016btagu\u1e47a\"), \"wander freely without a home\", practice the paramitas and train under a guru in order to perfect his meditation practice and realization of \"praj\u00f1aparamita\". The twelve \"dh\u016btagu\u1e47as\" are also promoted by the \"King of Samadhis Sutra\", the \"Ten Stages Sutra\" and Shantideva. Some scholars have used these texts to argue for \"the forest hypothesis\", the theory that the initial Bodhisattva ideal was associated with a strict forest asceticism. But other scholars point out that many other Mahayana sutras do not promote this ideal, and instead teach \"easy\" practices like memorizing, reciting, teaching and copying Mahayana sutras, as well as meditating on Buddhas and bodhisattvas (and reciting or chanting their names). Ulrich Pagel also notes that in numerous sutras found in the \"Mah\u0101ratnak\u016b\u1e6da\" collection, the bodhisattva ideal is placed \"firmly within the reach of non-celibate layfolk.\"\nNirvana.\nRelated to the different views on the different types of \"yanas\" or vehicles is the question of a bodhisattva's relationship to nirv\u0101\u1e47a. In the various Mah\u0101y\u0101na texts, two theories can be discerned. One view is the idea that a bodhisattva must postpone their awakening until full Buddhahood is attained (at which point one ceases to be reborn, which is the classical view of nirv\u0101\u1e47a). This view is promoted in some sutras like the \"Pa\u00f1cavimsatisahasrika-praj\u00f1aparamita-sutra\". The idea is also found in the \"La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra S\u016btra\", which mentions that bodhisattvas take the following vow: \"I shall not enter into final nirvana before all beings have been liberated.\" Likewise, the \"\u015aik\u1e63\u0101samuccaya\" states \"I must lead all beings to Liberation. I will stay here till the end, even for the sake of one living soul.\"\nThe second theory is the idea that there are two kinds of nirv\u0101\u1e47a, the nirv\u0101\u1e47a of an arhat and a superior type of nirv\u0101\u1e47a called \"aprati\u1e63\u1e6dhita (\"non-abiding) that allows a Buddha to remain engaged in the samsaric realms without being affected by them. This attainment was understood as a kind of non-dual state in which one is neither limited to samsara nor nirvana. A being who has reached this kind of nirvana is not restricted from manifesting in the samsaric realms, and yet they remain fully detached from the defilements found in these realms (and thus they can help others).\nThis doctrine of non-abiding nirvana developed in the Yogacara school. As noted by Paul Williams, the idea of \"aprati\u1e63\u1e6dhita nirv\u0101\u1e47a\" may have taken some time to develop and is not obvious in some of the early Mah\u0101y\u0101na literature, therefore while earlier sutras may sometimes speak of \"postponement\", later texts saw no need to postpone the \"superior\" \"aprati\u1e63\u1e6dhita nirv\u0101\u1e47a\".\nIn this Yogacara model, the bodhisattva definitely rejects and avoids the liberation of the \"\u015bravaka\" and \"pratyekabuddha\", described in Mah\u0101y\u0101na literature as either inferior or \"hina\" (as in Asa\u1e45ga's fourth century \"Yog\u0101c\u0101rabh\u016bmi\") or as ultimately false or illusory (as in the \"Lotus S\u016btra\"). That a bodhisattva has the option to pursue such a lesser path, but instead chooses the long path towards Buddhahood is one of the five criteria for one to be considered a bodhisattva. The other four are: being human, being a man, making a vow to become a Buddha in the presence of a previous Buddha, and receiving a prophecy from that Buddha.\nOver time, a more varied analysis of bodhisattva careers developed focused on one's motivation. This can be seen in the Tibetan Buddhist teaching on three types of motivation for generating bodhicitta. According to Patrul Rinpoche's 19th-century \"Words of My Perfect Teacher\" (\"Kun bzang bla ma'i gzhal lung\"), a bodhisattva might be motivated in one of three ways. They are:\nThese three are not types of people, but rather types of motivation. According to Patrul Rinpoche, the third quality of intention is most noble though the mode by which Buddhahood occurs is the first; that is, it is only possible to teach others the path to enlightenment once one has attained enlightenment oneself.\nBodhisattva stages.\nAccording to James B. Apple, if one studies the earliest textual materials which discuss the bodhisattva path (which includes the translations of Lokakshema and the Gandharan manuscripts), \"one finds four key stages that are demarcated throughout this early textual material that constitute the most basic elements in the path of a bodhisattva\". These main elements are:\nAccording to Drewes, the \"A\u1e63\u1e6das\u0101hasrik\u0101 Praj\u00f1\u0101p\u0101ramit\u0101 S\u016btra\" divides the bodhisattva path into three main stages. The first stage is that of bodhisattvas who \"first set out in the vehicle\" (\"prathamay\u0101nasa\u1e43prasthita\"), then there is the \"irreversible\" (\"avinivartan\u012bya\") stage, and finally the third \"bound by one more birth\" (\"ekaj\u0101tipratibaddha\"), as in, destined to become a Buddha in the next life. Lamotte also mentions four similar stages of the bodhiattva career which are found in the \"Dazhidulun\" translated by Kumarajiva: (1) \"Prathamacittotp\u0101dika\" (\"who produces the mind of Bodhi for the first time\"), (2) \"\u1e62a\u1e6dp\u0101ramit\u0101cary\u0101pratipanna\" (\"devoted to the practice of the six perfections\"), (3) \"Avinivartan\u012bya\" (non-regression), (4) \"Ekaj\u0101tipratibaddha\" (\"separated by only one lifetime from buddhahood\").\nDrewes notes that Mah\u0101y\u0101na s\u016btras mainly depict a bodhisattvas' first arising of bodhicitta as occurring in the presence of a Buddha. Furthermore, according to Drewes, most Mah\u0101y\u0101na s\u016btras \"never encourage anyone to become a bodhisattva or present any ritual or other means of doing so.\" In a similar manner to the nik\u0101ya sources, Mah\u0101y\u0101na s\u016btras also see new bodhisattvas as likely to regress, while seeing irreversible bodhisattvas are quite rare. Thus, according to Drewes, \"the \"A\u1e63\u1e6das\u0101hasrik\u0101\", for instance, states that as many bodhisattvas as there grains of sand in the Ganges turn back from the pursuit of Buddhahood and that out of innumerable beings who give rise to bodhicitta and progress toward Buddhahood, only one or two will reach the point of becoming irreversible.\"\nDrewes also adds that early texts like the \"A\u1e63\u1e6das\u0101hasrik\u0101\" treat bodhisattvas who are beginners (\"\u0101dikarmika\") or \"not long set out in the [great] vehicle\" with scorn, describing them as \"blind\", \"unintelligent\", \"lazy\" and \"weak\". Early Mahayana works identify them with those who reject Mahayana or who abandon Mahayana, and they are seen as likely to become \"\u015br\u0101vakas\" (those on the \"arhat\" path). Rather than encouraging them to become bodhisattvas, what early Mahayana sutras like the \"A\u1e63\u1e6da\" do is to help individuals determine if they have already received a prediction in a past life, or if they are close to this point.\nThe \"A\u1e63\u1e6da\" provides a variety of methods, including forms of ritual or divination, methods dealing with dreams and various tests, especially tests based on one's reaction to the hearing of the content in the \"A\u1e63\u1e6das\u0101hasrik\u0101\" itself. The text states that encountering and accepting its teachings mean one is close to being given a prediction and that if one does not \"shrink back, cower or despair\" from the text, but \"firmly believes it\", one is either irreversible or is close to this stage. Many other Mahayana sutras such as the \"Ak\u1e63obhyavy\u016bha\", \"Vimalak\u012brtinirde\u015ba\", \"Sukh\u0101vat\u012bvy\u016bha\", and the \"\u015a\u016bra\u1e43gamasam\u0101dhi S\u016btra\" present textual approaches to determine one's status as an advanced bodhisattva. These mainly depend on a person's attitude towards listening to, believing, preaching, proclaiming, copying or memorizing and reciting the sutra as well as practicing the sutra's teachings.\nAccording to Drewes, this claim that merely having faith in Mah\u0101y\u0101na s\u016btras meant that one was an advanced bodhisattva, was a departure from previous Nikaya views about bodhisattvas. It created new groups of Buddhists who accepted each other's bodhisattva status. Some Mahayana texts are more open with their bodhisattva doctrine. The \"Lotus Sutra\" famously assures large numbers people that they will certainly achieve Buddhahood, with few requirements (other than hearing and accepting the \"Lotus Sutra\" itself).\nAvaivartika (non-retrogression).\nThe term \"avaivartika\" refers to the stage in Buddhist practice where a practitioner reaches a point of irreversibility, ensuring that they will not regress in their spiritual progress. Alternative Sanskrit forms include \"avivartika\", \"avinivartan\u012bya\" and \"avaivartyabh\u016bmi.\" Attaining this state guarantees that the practitioner remains steadfast on the path to enlightenment and will not abandon their aspirations or regress to a lower stage of realization.\nWithin the framework of the Bodhisattva path, various Buddhist scriptures identify different stages at which non-retrogression is attained. Some sources associate it with the path of preparation (\"prayogam\u0101rga\"), where a bodhisattva solidifies their commitment and will no longer turn back to pursue the path of an arhat. Others link it to the first \"bh\u016bmi\" (stage) of the bodhisattva path or, in later systematic presentations, to the eighth \"bh\u016bmi\", after which full Buddhahood becomes inevitable.\nThe concept of \"avaivartika\" appears in early Mah\u0101y\u0101na texts such as the \"Mah\u0101praj\u00f1\u0101p\u0101ramit\u0101\u015b\u0101stra\", which distinguishes between bodhisattvas who are prone to regression (\"vaivartika\") and those who are not (\"avaivartika\"). True bodhisattvas are those who have transcended the possibility of falling back, while those who remain susceptible to regression are considered bodhisattvas only in a nominal sense.\nThe \"A\u1e63\u1e6das\u0101hasrik\u0101 Praj\u00f1\u0101p\u0101ramit\u0101 S\u016btra\", particularly in its early Chinese translation by Lokak\u1e63ema, emphasizes \"avaivartika\" as a pivotal attainment. It describes how the bodhisattva, upon reaching the state of \"anutpattikadharmak\u1e63\u0101nti\" (the realization of the unborn nature of phenomena), becomes irreversible in their journey toward complete enlightenment. Unlike later Mah\u0101y\u0101na texts, which integrate this stage within the structured \"bh\u016bmi\" system, Lokak\u1e63ema's version presents it more fluidly, portraying the \"avaivartin\" as one of a few key categories of bodhisattvas.\nIn Pure Land traditions, rebirth in Amit\u0101bha Buddha's Pure Land (\"Sukh\u0101vat\u012b\") is equated with entering the stage of non-retrogression. It is believed that those who attain birth in Sukh\u0101vat\u012b are assured of progressing toward enlightenment without the risk of falling back into lower states of existence.\nThe attainment of \"avaivartika\" is often associated with the bodhisattva's ability to inspire and lead countless beings toward liberation. Some texts suggest that a bodhisattva's non-retrogression is linked to prior predictions (\"vy\u0101kara\u1e47a\") made by past Buddhas, affirming their inevitable attainment of supreme enlightenment. Moreover, while later traditions integrate skillful means (\"up\u0101yakau\u015balya\") as a defining trait of the \"avaivartin\", early texts such as Lokak\u1e63ema's \"A\u1e63\u1e6da\" emphasize avoiding complacency in meditative absorption, which could lead to an arhat-like state rather than the full Buddhahood sought by bodhisattvas.\nBh\u016bmis (stages).\nAccording to various Mah\u0101y\u0101na sources, on the way to becoming a Buddha, a bodhisattva proceeds through various stages (\"bh\u016bmis\") of spiritual progress\".\" The term \"bh\u016bmi\" means \"earth\" or \"place\" and figurately can mean \"ground, plane, stage, level; state of consciousness\". There are various lists of bhumis, the most common is a list of ten found in the \"Da\u015babh\u016bmikas\u016btra\" (but there are also lists of seven stages as well as lists which have more than 10 stages).\nThe \"Da\u015babh\u016bmikas\u016btra\" lists the following ten stages:\nIn some sources, these ten stages are correlated with a different schema of the buddhist path called the five paths which is derived from Vaibhasika Abhidharma sources.\nThe \"\u015a\u016bra\u1e45gama S\u016btra\" recognizes 57 stages. Various Vajray\u0101na schools recognize additional grounds (varying from 3 to 10 further stages), mostly 6 more grounds with variant descriptions. A bodhisattva above the 7th ground is called a \"mah\u0101sattva\". Some bodhisattvas such as Samantabhadra are also said to have already attained Buddhahood.\nS\u014dt\u014d Zen.\nAs part of the S\u014dt\u014d Zen school of Mah\u0101yan\u0101, D\u014dgen Zenji described Four Exemplary Acts of a Bodhisattva:\nMahayana bodhisattvas.\nBuddhists (especially Mahayanists) venerate several bodhisattvas (such as Maitreya, Manjushri and Avalokiteshvara) which are seen as highly spiritually advanced (having attained the tenth bhumi) and thus possessing immense magical power. According to Lewis Lancaster, these \"celestial\" or \"heavenly\" bodhisattvas are seen as \"either the manifestations of a Buddha or they are beings who possess the power of producing many bodies through great feats of magical transformation.\"\nThe religious devotion to these bodhisattvas probably first developed in north India, and they are widely depicted in Gandharan and Kashmiri art. In Asian art, they are typically depicted as princes and princesses, with royal robes and jewellery (since they are the princes of the Dharma). In Buddhist art, a bodhisattva is often described as a beautiful figure with a serene expression and graceful manner. This is probably in accordance to the description of Prince Siddh\u0101rtha Gautama as a bodhisattva. The depiction of bodhisattva in Buddhist art around the world aspires to express the bodhisattva's qualities such as loving-kindness (\"metta\"), compassion (\"karuna\"), empathetic joy (\"mudita\") and equanimity (\"upekkha\").\nLiterature which glorifies such bodhisattvas and recounts their various miracles remains very popular in Asia. One example of such a work of literature is \"More Records of Kuan-shih-yin's Responsive Manifestations\" by Lu Kao (459\u2013532) which was very influential in China. In Tibetan Buddhism, the \"Ma\u1e47i Kambum\" is a similarly influential text (a revealed text, or terma) which focuses on Chenrezig (Avalokiteshvara, who is seen as the country's patron bodhisattva) and his miraculous activities in Tibet.\nThese celestial bodhisattvas like Avalokiteshvara (Guanyin) are also seen as compassionate savior figures, constantly working for the good of all beings. The Avalokiteshvara chapter of the \"Lotus Sutra\" even states that calling Avalokiteshvara to mind can help save someone from natural disasters, demons, and other calamities. It is also supposed to protect one from the afflictions (lust, anger and ignorance). Bodhisattvas can also transform themselves into whatever physical form is useful for helping sentient beings (a god, a bird, a male or female, even a Buddha). Because of this, bodhisattvas are seen as beings that one can pray to for aid and consolation from the sufferings of everyday life as well as for guidance in the path to enlightenment. Thus, the great translator Xuanzang is said to have constantly prayed to Avalokiteshvara for protection on his long journey to India.\nEight main Bodhisattvas.\nIn the later Indian Vajrayana tradition, there arose a popular grouping of eight bodhisattvas known as the \"Eight Great Bodhisattvas\", or \"Eight Close Sons\" (Skt. \"a\u1e63\u1e6da utaputra\"; Tib. \"nyew\u00e9 s\u00e9 gy\u00e9\") and are seen as the most important Mahayana bodhisattvas and appear in numerous esoteric mandalas (e.g. Garbhadhatu mandala).\nThese same \"Eight Great Bodhisattvas\" (Chn. \"B\u0101d\u00e0 P\u00fas\u00e0\", Jp. \"Hachi Daibosatsu\") also appear in East Asian Esoteric Buddhist sources, such as \"The Sutra on the Ma\u1e47\u1e0dalas of the Eight Great Bodhisattvas\" (\u516b\u5927\u83e9\u85a9\u66fc\u837c\u7f85\u7d93), translated by Amoghavajra in the 8th century and Faxian (10th century).\nWhile there are numerous lists of Eight Great Bodhisattvas, the most widespread or \"standard\" listing is:\nFemale bodhisattvas.\nThe bodhisattva Praj\u00f1\u0101p\u0101ramit\u0101-devi is a female personification of the perfection of wisdom and the \"Praj\u00f1\u0101p\u0101ramit\u0101 sutras\". She became an important figure, widely depicted in Indian Buddhist art.\nGuanyin (Jp: Kannon), a female form of Avalokiteshvara, is the most widely revered bodhisattva in East Asian Buddhism, generally depicted as a motherly figure. Guanyin is venerated in various other forms and manifestations, including Cund\u012b, Cint\u0101ma\u1e47icakra, Hayagriva, Eleven-Headed Thousand-Armed Guanyin and Guanyin Of The Southern Seas among others.\nGender variant representations of some bodhisattvas, most notably Avalokite\u015bvara, has prompted conversation regarding the nature of a bodhisattva's appearance. Chan master Sheng Yen has stated that Mah\u0101sattvas such as Avalokite\u015bvara (known as Guanyin in Chinese) are androgynous (Ch. \u4e2d\u6027; pinyin: \"zh\u014dngx\u00ecng\"), which accounts for their ability to manifest in masculine and feminine forms of various degrees.\nIn Tibetan Buddhism, Tara or Jetsun D\u00f6lma (\"rje btsun sgrol ma\") is the most important female bodhisattva.\nNumerous Mahayana sutras feature female bodhisattvas as main characters and discuss their life, teachings and future Buddhahood. These include \"The Questions of the Girl Vimala\u015braddh\u0101\" (Tohoku Kangyur - Toh number 84), \"The Questions of Vimaladatt\u0101\" (Toh 77), \"The Lion's Roar of \u015ar\u012bm\u0101l\u0101dev\u012b\" (Toh 92), \"The Inquiry of Lokadhara\" (Toh 174), \"The S\u016btra of A\u015bokadatt\u0101's Prophecy\" (Toh 76), \"The Questions of Vimalaprabh\u0101\" (Toh 168), \"The S\u016btra of K\u1e63emavat\u012b's Prophecy\" (Toh 192), \"The Questions of the Girl Sumati\" (Toh 74), \"The Questions of Ga\u1e45gottara\" (Toh 75), \"The Questions of an Old Lady\" (Toh 171), \"The Miraculous Play of Ma\u00f1ju\u015br\u012b\" (Toh 96), and \"The S\u016btra of the Girl Candrottar\u0101's Prophecy\" (Toh 191).\nPopular figures.\nOver time, numerous historical Buddhist figures also came to be seen as bodhisattvas in their own right, deserving of devotion. For example, an extensive hagiography developed around Nagarjuna, the Indian founder of the madhyamaka school of philosophy. Followers of Tibetan Buddhism consider the Dalai Lamas and the Karmapas to be an emanation of Chenrezig, the Bodhisattva of Compassion. Various Japanese Buddhist schools consider their founding figures like Kukai and Nichiren to be bodhisattvas. In Chinese Buddhism, various historical figures have been called bodhisattvas.\nFurthermore, various Hindu deities are considered to be bodhisattvas in Mahayana Buddhist sources. For example, in the \"K\u0101ra\u1e47\u1e0davy\u016bhas\u016btra\", Vishnu, Shiva, Brahma and Saraswati are said to be bodhisattvas, all emanations of Avalokiteshvara. Deities like Saraswati (Chinese: \"Bi\u00e0nc\u00e1iti\u0101n\", \u8faf\u624d\u5929, Japanese: Benzaiten) and Shiva (C: \"D\u00e0z\u00ecz\u00e0iti\u0101n\", \u5927\u81ea\u5728\u5929; J: Daikokuten) are still venerated as bodhisattva devas and dharmapalas (guardian deities) in East Asian Buddhism. Both figures are closely connected with Avalokiteshvara. In a similar manner, the Hindu deity Harihara is called a bodhisattva in the famed \"N\u012blaka\u1e47\u1e6dha Dh\u0101ra\u1e47\u012b,\" which states: \"O Effulgence, World-Transcendent, come, oh Hari, the great bodhisattva.\"\nThe empress Wu Zetian of the Tang dynasty, was the only female ruler of China. She used the growing popularity of Esoteric Buddhism in China for her own needs. Though she was not the only ruler to have made such a claim, the political utility of her claims, coupled with sincerity make her a great example. She built several temples and contributed to the finishing of the Longmen Caves and even went on to patronise Buddhism over Confucianism or Daoism. She ruled by the title of \"Holy Emperor\", and claimed to be a Bodhisattva too. She became one of China's most influential rulers.\nOthers.\nOther important bodhisattvas in Mahayana Buddhism include:\nFierce bodhisattvas.\nWhile bodhisattvas tend to be depicted as conventionally beautiful, there are instances of their manifestation as fierceful and monstrous looking beings. A notable example is Guanyin's manifestation as a preta named \"Flaming Face\" (). This trope is commonly employed among the Wisdom Kings, among whom Mah\u0101m\u0101y\u016br\u012b Vidy\u0101r\u0101j\u00f1\u012b stands out with a feminine title and benevolent expression. In some depictions, her mount takes on a wrathful appearance. This variation is also found among images of Vajrapani.\nIn Tibetan Buddhism, fierce manifestations (Tibetan: \"trowo)\" of the major bodhisattvas are quite common and they often act as protector deities.\nSacred places.\nThe place of a bodhisattva's earthly deeds, such as the achievement of enlightenment or the acts of Dharma, is known as a \"bodhima\u1e47\u1e0da\" (place of awakening), and may be a site of pilgrimage. Many temples and monasteries are famous as bodhima\u1e47\u1e0das. Perhaps the most famous bodhima\u1e47\u1e0da of all is the Bodhi Tree under which \u015a\u0101kyamu\u1e47i achieved Buddhahood. There are also sacred places of awakening for bodhisattvas located throughout the Buddhist world. Mount Potalaka, a sacred mountain in India, is traditionally held to be Avalokiteshvara's bodhima\u1e47\u1e0da.\nIn Chinese Buddhism, there are four mountains that are regarded as bodhima\u1e47\u1e0das for bodhisattvas, with each site having major monasteries and being popular for pilgrimages by both monastics and laypeople. These four sacred places are:\nIn Theravada Buddhism.\nWhile the veneration of bodhisattvas is much more widespread and popular in the Mahayana Buddhist world, it is also found in Theravada Buddhist regions. Bodhisattvas which are venerated in Theravada lands include Natha Deviyo (Avalokiteshvara), Metteya (Maitreya), Upulvan (i.e. Vishnu), Saman (Samantabhadra) and Pattini. The veneration of some of these figures may have been influenced by Mahayana Buddhism. These figures are also understood as devas that have converted to Buddhism and have sworn to protect it.\nThe recounting of Jataka tales, which discuss the bodhisattva deeds of Gautama before his awakening (i.e. during his past lives as a bodhisatta), also remains a popular practice.\nEtymology.\nThe etymology of the Indic terms bodhisattva and bodhisatta is not fully understood. The term bodhi is uncontroversial and means \"awakening\" or \"enlightenment\" (from the root \"budh-\"). The second part of the compound has many possible meanings or derivations, including:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3969", "revid": "372290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3969", "title": "Buckingham Palace", "text": "Official London residence of the British monarch\nBuckingham Palace () is a royal residence in London, and the administrative headquarters of the monarch of the United Kingdom. Located in the City of Westminster, the palace is often at the centre of state occasions and royal hospitality. It has been a focal point for the British people at times of national rejoicing and mourning.\nOriginally known as Buckingham House, the building at the core of today's palace was a large townhouse built for the Duke of Buckingham and Normanby in 1703 on a site that had been in private ownership for at least 150 years. It was acquired by George III in 1761 as a private residence for Queen Charlotte and became known as The Queen's House. During the 19th century it was enlarged by architects John Nash and Edward Blore, who constructed three wings around a central courtyard. Buckingham Palace became the London residence of the British monarch on the accession of Queen Victoria in 1837.\nThe last major structural additions were made in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, including the East Front, which contains the balcony on which the royal family traditionally appears to greet crowds. A German bomb destroyed the palace chapel during the Second World War; the King's Gallery was built on the site and opened to the public in 1962 to exhibit works of art from the Royal Collection.\nThe original early-19th-century interior designs, many of which survive, include widespread use of brightly coloured scagliola and blue and pink lapis, on the advice of Charles Long. King Edward VII oversaw a partial redecoration in a Belle \u00c9poque cream and gold colour scheme. Many smaller reception rooms are furnished in the Chinese regency style with furniture and fittings brought from the Royal Pavilion at Brighton and from Carlton House. The palace has 775 rooms, and the garden is the largest private garden in London. The state rooms, used for official and state entertaining, are open to the public each year for most of August and September and on some days in winter and spring.\nHistory.\nPre-1624.\nIn the Middle Ages, the site of the future palace formed part of the Manor of Ebury (also called Eia). The marshy ground was watered by the river Tyburn, which still flows below the courtyard and south wing of the palace. Where the river was fordable (at Cow Ford), the village of Eye Cross grew. Ownership of the site changed hands many times; owners included Edward the Confessor and Edith of Wessex in late Saxon times, and, after the Norman Conquest, William the Conqueror. William gave the site to Geoffrey de Mandeville, who bequeathed it to the monks of Westminster Abbey.\nIn 1531, Henry VIII acquired the Hospital of St James, which became St James's Palace, from Eton College, and in 1536 he took the Manor of Ebury from Westminster Abbey. These transfers brought the site of Buckingham Palace back into royal hands for the first time since William the Conqueror had given it away almost 500 years earlier. Various owners leased it from royal landlords, and the freehold was the subject of frenzied speculation during the 17th century. By then, the old village of Eye Cross had long since fallen into decay, and the area was mostly wasteland. Needing money, James VI and I sold off part of the Crown freehold but retained part of the site on which he established a mulberry garden for the production of silk. (This is at the north-west corner of today's palace.) Clement Walker in \"Anarchia Anglicana\" (1649) refers to \"new-erected sodoms and spintries at the Mulberry Garden at S. James's\"; this suggests it may have been a place of debauchery. Eventually, in the late 17th century, the freehold was inherited from the property tycoon Hugh Audley by the great heiress Mary Davies.\nFirst houses on the site (1624\u20131761).\nPossibly the first house erected within the site was that of William Blake, around 1624. The next owner was George Goring, 1st Earl of Norwich, who from 1633 extended Blake's house, which came to be known as Goring House, and developed much of today's garden, then known as Goring Great Garden. He did not, however, obtain the freehold interest in the mulberry garden. Unbeknown to Goring, in 1640 the interest \"failed to pass the Great Seal before Charles I fled London, which it needed to do for legal execution\". It was this critical omission that would help the British royal family regain the freehold under George III. When the improvident Goring defaulted on his rents, Henry Bennet, 1st Earl of Arlington was able to purchase the lease of Goring House and he was occupying it when it burned down in 1674, following which he constructed Arlington House on the site \u2013 the location of the southern wing of today's palace \u2013 the next year. In 1698, John Sheffield acquired the lease. He later became the first Duke of Buckingham and Normanby. Buckingham House was built for Sheffield in 1703 to the design of William Winde. The style chosen was of a large, three-floored central block with two smaller flanking service wings. It was eventually sold by Buckingham's illegitimate son, Charles Sheffield, in 1761 to George III for \u00a321,000. Sheffield's leasehold on the mulberry garden site, the freehold of which was still owned by the royal family, was due to expire in 1774.\nFrom Queen's House to palace (1761\u20131837).\nUnder the new royal ownership, the building was originally intended as a private retreat for Queen Charlotte, and was accordingly known as The Queen's House. Remodelling of the structure began in 1762. In 1775, an Act of Parliament settled the property on Queen Charlotte, in exchange for her rights to nearby Old Somerset House, and 14 of her 15 children were born there. Some furnishings were transferred from Carlton House and others had been bought in France after the French Revolution of 1789. While St James's Palace remained the official and ceremonial royal residence, the name \"Buckingham Palace\" was used from at least 1791. \nAfter his accession to the throne in 1820, George IV continued the renovation, intending to create a small, comfortable home. However, in 1826, while the work was in progress, the King decided to modify the house into a palace with the help of his architect John Nash. The fa\u00e7ade was designed with George IV's preference for French neoclassical architecture in mind. The cost of the renovations grew dramatically, and by 1829 the extravagance of Nash's designs resulted in his removal as the architect. On the death of George IV in 1830, his younger brother William IV hired Edward Blore to finish the work. William never moved into the palace, preferring Clarence House, which had been built to his specifications and which had been his London home while he was heir presumptive. After the Palace of Westminster was destroyed by fire in 1834, he offered to convert Buckingham Palace into a new Houses of Parliament, but his offer was declined.\nQueen Victoria (1837\u20131901).\nBuckingham Palace became the principal royal residence in 1837, on the accession of Queen Victoria, who was the first monarch to reside there. While the state rooms were a riot of gilt and colour, the necessities of the new palace were somewhat less luxurious. The chimneys were said to smoke so much that the fires had to be allowed to die down, and consequently the palace was often cold. Ventilation was so poor that the interior had a foul smell, and when it was decided to install gas lamps, there was a serious worry about the build-up of gas on the lower floors. It was also said that the staff were lax and lazy and the palace was dirty. Following the Queen's marriage in 1840, her husband, Prince Albert, concerned himself with a reorganisation of the household offices and staff, and with addressing the design faults of the palace. By the end of 1840, all the problems had been rectified. However, the builders were to return within a decade.\nBy 1847, the couple found the palace too small for court life and their growing family and a new wing, designed by Edward Blore, was built by Thomas Cubitt, enclosing the central quadrangle. The work, carried out from 1847 to 1849, was paid for by the sale of Brighton Pavilion in 1850. The large East Front, facing The Mall, is today the \"public face\" of Buckingham Palace and contains the balcony from which the royal family acknowledge the crowds on momentous occasions and after the annual Trooping the Colour. The ballroom wing and a further suite of state rooms were also built in this period, designed by Nash's student James Pennethorne. Before Prince Albert's death, in addition to royal ceremonies, investitures and presentations Buckingham Palace was frequently the scene of lavish costume balls and musical entertainments. The most celebrated contemporary musicians entertained there; for example Felix Mendelssohn is known to have played there on three occasions, and Johann Strauss II and his orchestra played there when in England.\nWidowed in 1861, the grief-stricken Queen withdrew from public life and left Buckingham Palace to live at Windsor Castle, Balmoral Castle and Osborne House. For many years the palace was seldom used, even neglected. In 1864, a note was found pinned to the fence, saying: \"These commanding premises to be let or sold, in consequence of the late occupant's declining business.\" Eventually, public opinion persuaded the Queen to return to London, though even then she preferred to live elsewhere whenever possible. Court functions were still held at Windsor Castle, presided over by the sombre Queen habitually dressed in mourning black, while Buckingham Palace remained shuttered for most of the year.\nEarly 20th century (1901\u20131945).\nIn 1901, the new king, Edward VII, began redecorating the palace. He and his wife, Queen Alexandra, had always been at the forefront of London high society, and their friends, known as \"the Marlborough House Set\", were considered to be the most eminent and fashionable of the age. Buckingham Palace\u2014the Ballroom, Grand Entrance, Marble Hall, Grand Staircase, vestibules and galleries were redecorated in the Belle \u00c9poque cream and gold colour scheme they retain today\u2014once again became a setting for entertaining on a majestic scale but leaving some to feel Edward's heavy redecorations were at odds with Nash's original work.\nThe last major building work took place during the reign of George V when, in 1913, Aston Webb redesigned Blore's 1850 East Front to resemble in part Giacomo Leoni's Lyme Park in Cheshire. This new refaced principal fa\u00e7ade (of Portland stone) was designed to be the backdrop to the Victoria Memorial, a large memorial statue of Queen Victoria created by sculptor Thomas Brock, erected outside the main gates on a surround constructed by architect Aston Webb. George V, who had succeeded Edward VII in 1910, had a more serious personality than his father; greater emphasis was now placed on official entertainment and royal duties than on lavish parties. He arranged a series of command performances featuring jazz musicians such as the Original Dixieland Jazz Band (1919; the first jazz performance for a head of state), Sidney Bechet and Louis Armstrong (1932), which earned the palace a nomination in 2009 for a (Kind of) Blue Plaque by the Brecon Jazz Festival as one of the venues making the greatest contribution to jazz music in the United Kingdom.\nDuring the First World War, which lasted from 1914 until 1918, the palace escaped unscathed. Its more valuable contents were evacuated to Windsor, but the royal family remained in residence. The King imposed rationing at the palace, much to the dismay of his guests and household. To the King's later regret, David Lloyd George persuaded him to go further and ostentatiously lock the wine cellars and refrain from alcohol, to set a good example to the supposedly inebriated working class. The workers continued to imbibe, and the King was left unhappy at his enforced abstinence.\nGeorge V's wife, Queen Mary, was a connoisseur of the arts and took a keen interest in the Royal Collection of furniture and art, both restoring and adding to it. Queen Mary also had many new fixtures and fittings installed, such as the pair of marble Empire style chimneypieces by Benjamin Vulliamy, dating from 1810, in the ground floor Bow Room, the huge low room at the centre of the garden fa\u00e7ade. Queen Mary was also responsible for the decoration of the Blue Drawing Room. This room, long, previously known as the South Drawing Room, has a ceiling designed by Nash, coffered with huge gilt console brackets. In 1938, the northwest pavilion, designed by Nash as a conservatory, was converted into a swimming pool.\nSecond World War.\nDuring the Second World War, which broke out in 1939, the palace was bombed nine times. The most serious and publicised incident destroyed the palace chapel in 1940. One bomb fell in the palace quadrangle while George VI and Queen Elizabeth (the future Queen Mother) were in the palace, and many windows were blown in and the chapel destroyed. The King and Queen were filmed inspecting their bombed home, and the newsreel footage shown in cinemas throughout the United Kingdom to show the common suffering of rich and poor. As \"The Sunday Graphic\" reported:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By the Editor: The King and Queen have endured the ordeal which has come to their subjects. For the second time a German bomber has tried to bring death and destruction to the home of Their Majesties\u00a0... When this war is over the common danger which King George and Queen Elizabeth have shared with their people will be a cherished memory and an inspiration through the years.\nIt was at this time the Queen famously declared: \"I'm glad we have been bombed. Now I can look the East End in the face\".\nOn 15 September 1940, known as Battle of Britain Day, an RAF pilot, Ray Holmes of No. 504 Squadron, rammed a German Dornier Do 17 bomber he believed was going to bomb the palace. Holmes had run out of ammunition to shoot down the bomber and made the quick decision to ram it. He bailed out and the bomber crashed into the forecourt of London Victoria station. Its engine was later exhibited at the Imperial War Museum in London. Holmes became a King's Messenger after the war and died at the age of 90 in 2005. \nOn VE Day\u20148 May 1945\u2014the palace was the centre of British celebrations. The King, the Queen, Princess Elizabeth (the future queen) and Princess Margaret appeared on the balcony, with the palace's blacked-out windows behind them, to cheers from a vast crowd in The Mall. The damaged palace was carefully restored after the war by John Mowlem &amp; Co.\nMid\u201320th century to present day.\nMany of the palace's contents are part of the Royal Collection; they can, on occasion, be viewed by the public at the King's Gallery, near the Royal Mews. The purpose-built gallery opened in 1962 and displays a changing selection of items from the collection. It occupies the site of the chapel that was destroyed in the Second World War. The palace was designated a Grade I listed building in 1970. Its state rooms have been open to the public during August and September and on some dates throughout the year since 1993. The money raised in entry fees was originally put towards the rebuilding of Windsor Castle after the 1992 fire devastated many of its staterooms. In the year to 31 March 2017, 580,000 people visited the palace, and 154,000 visited the gallery. In 2004, the palace attempted to claim money from the community energy fund to heat Buckingham Palace, but the claim was rejected due to fear of public backlash.\nThe palace used to racially segregate staff. In 1968, Charles Tryon, 2nd Baron Tryon, acting as treasurer to Queen Elizabeth II, sought to exempt Buckingham Palace from full application of the Race Relations Act 1968. He stated that the palace did not hire people of colour for clerical jobs, only as domestic servants. He arranged with civil servants for an exemption that meant that complaints of racism against the royal household would be sent directly to the Home Secretary and kept out of the legal system.\nThe palace, like Windsor Castle, is owned by the reigning monarch in right of the Crown. Occupied royal palaces are not part of the Crown Estate, nor are they the monarch's personal property, unlike Sandringham House and Balmoral Castle. The Government of the United Kingdom is responsible for maintaining the palace in exchange for the profits made by the Crown Estate. In 2015, the State Dining Room was closed for a year and a half because its ceiling had become potentially dangerous. A 10-year schedule of maintenance work, including new plumbing, wiring, boilers and radiators, and the installation of solar panels on the roof, has been estimated to cost \u00a3369\u00a0million and was approved by the prime minister in November 2016. It will be funded by a temporary increase in the Sovereign Grant paid from the income of the Crown Estate and is intended to extend the building's working life by at least 50 years. In 2017, the House of Commons backed funding for the project by 464 votes to 56.\nBuckingham Palace is a symbol and home of the British monarchy, an art gallery and a tourist attraction. Behind the gilded railings and gates that were completed by the Bromsgrove Guild in 1911, lies Webb's famous fa\u00e7ade, which was described in a book published by the Royal Collection Trust as looking \"like everybody's idea of a palace\". It has not only been a weekday home of Elizabeth II and Prince Philip but was also the London residence and office of the Duke of York until 2023. Prince Edward, Duke of Edinburgh and Sophie, Duchess of Edinburgh continue to have a private apartment in the palace for use when they are in London. The palace also houses their offices, as well as those of the Princess Royal and Princess Alexandra, and is the workplace of more than 800 people. Charles III and Queen Camilla live at Clarence House while restoration work continues, although they conduct official business at Buckingham Palace, the monarch's administrative headquarters, including audiences and receptions. Every year, some 50,000 invited guests are entertained at garden parties, receptions, audiences and banquets. Three garden parties are held in the summer, usually in July. The forecourt of Buckingham Palace is used for the Changing of the Guard, a major ceremony and tourist attraction (daily from April to July; every other day in other months).\nInterior.\nThe front of the palace measures across, by deep, by high and contains over of floorspace. There are 775 rooms, including 188 staff bedrooms, 92 offices, 78 bathrooms, 52 principal bedrooms and 19 state rooms. The royal family occupy a small suite of private rooms in the north wing. It also has a cinema, swimming pool, doctor's surgery, jeweller's workshop and post office. In the 1960s, under Court Postmaster William King, the Post Office branch included pigeon holes for Master of the Household, Equerry in Waiting, Privy Purse Door, and Sergeant Footman.\nPrincipal rooms.\nThe principal rooms are contained on the first-floor \"piano nobile\" behind the west-facing garden fa\u00e7ade at the rear of the palace. The centre of this ornate suite of state rooms is the Music Room, its large bow the dominant feature of the fa\u00e7ade. Flanking the Music Room are the Blue and the White Drawing Rooms. At the centre of the suite, serving as a corridor to link the state rooms, is the Picture Gallery, which is top-lit and long. The Gallery is hung with numerous works including some by Rembrandt, van Dyck, Rubens and Vermeer; other rooms leading from the Picture Gallery are the Throne Room and the Green Drawing Room. The Green Drawing Room serves as a huge anteroom to the Throne Room, and is part of the ceremonial route to the throne from the Guard Room at the top of the Grand Staircase. The Guard Room contains white marble statues of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert, in Roman costume, set in a tribune lined with tapestries. These very formal rooms are used only for ceremonial and official entertaining but are open to the public every summer.\nSemi-state apartments.\nDirectly underneath the state apartments are the less grand semi-state apartments. Opening from the Marble Hall, these rooms are used for less formal entertaining, such as luncheon parties and private audiences. At the centre of this floor is the Bow Room, through which thousands of guests pass annually to the monarch's garden parties. When paying a state visit to Britain, foreign heads of state are usually entertained by the monarch at Buckingham Palace. They are allocated an extensive suite of rooms known as the Belgian Suite, situated at the foot of the Minister's Staircase, on the ground floor of the west-facing Garden Wing. Some of the rooms are named and decorated for particular visitors, such as the 1844 Room, decorated in that year for the state visit of Nicholas I of Russia, and the 1855 Room, in honour of the visit of Napoleon III of France. The former is a sitting room that also serves as an audience room and is often used for personal investitures. Narrow corridors link the rooms of the suite; one of them is given extra height and perspective by saucer domes designed by Nash in the style of Soane. A second corridor in the suite has Gothic-influenced cross-over vaulting. The suite was named after Leopold I of Belgium, uncle of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert. In 1936, the suite briefly became the private apartments of the palace when Edward VIII occupied them. The original early-19th-century interior designs, many of which still survive, included widespread use of brightly coloured scagliola and blue and pink lapis, on the advice of Charles Long. Edward VII oversaw a partial redecoration in a Belle \u00c9poque cream and gold colour scheme.\nEast wing.\nBetween 1847 and 1850, when Blore was building the new east wing, the Brighton Pavilion was once again plundered of its fittings. As a result, many of the rooms in the new wing have a distinctly oriental atmosphere. The red and blue Chinese Luncheon Room is made up of parts of the Brighton Banqueting and Music Rooms with a large oriental chimneypiece designed by Robert Jones and sculpted by Richard Westmacott. It was formerly in the Music Room at the Brighton Pavilion. The ornate clock, known as the Kylin Clock, was made in Jingdezhen, Jiangxi Province, China, in the second half of the 18th century; it has a later movement by Benjamin Vulliamy circa 1820. The Yellow Drawing Room has hand-painted Chinese wallpaper supplied in 1817 for the Brighton Saloon, and a chimneypiece which is a European vision of a Chinese chimneypiece. It has nodding mandarins in niches and fearsome winged dragons, designed by Robert Jones.\nAt the centre of this wing is the famous balcony with the Centre Room behind its glass doors. This is a Chinese-style saloon enhanced by Queen Mary, who, working with the designer Charles Allom, created a more \"binding\" Chinese theme in the late 1920s, although the lacquer doors were brought from Brighton in 1873. Running the length of the \"piano nobile\" of the east wing is the Great Gallery, modestly known as the Principal Corridor, which runs the length of the eastern side of the quadrangle. It has mirrored doors and mirrored cross walls reflecting porcelain pagodas and other oriental furniture from Brighton. The Chinese Luncheon Room and Yellow Drawing Room are situated at each end of this gallery, with the Centre Room in between.\nCourt ceremonies.\nInvestitures for the awarding of honours (which include the conferring of knighthoods by dubbing with a sword) usually take place in the palace's Throne Room. Investitures are conducted by the King or another senior member of the royal family: a military band plays in the musicians' gallery, as recipients receive their honours, watched by their families and friends.\nState banquets take place in the Ballroom, built in 1854. At long, wide and high, it is the largest room in the palace; at one end of the room is a throne dais (beneath a giant, domed velvet canopy, known as a \"shamiana\" or baldachin, that was used at the Delhi Durbar in 1911). State Banquets are formal dinners held on the first evening of a state visit by a foreign head of state. On these occasions, for up to 170 guests in formal \"white tie and decorations\", including tiaras, the dining table is laid with the Grand Service, a collection of silver-gilt plate made in 1811 for the Prince of Wales, later George IV. \nThe largest and most formal reception at Buckingham Palace takes place every November when the King entertains members of the diplomatic corps. On this grand occasion, all the state rooms are in use, as the royal family proceed through them, beginning at the great north doors of the Picture Gallery. As Nash had envisaged, all the large, double-mirrored doors stand open, reflecting the numerous crystal chandeliers and sconces, creating a deliberate optical illusion of space and light.\nSmaller ceremonies such as the reception of new ambassadors take place in the \"1844 Room\". Here too, the King holds small lunch parties, and often meetings of the Privy Council. Larger lunch parties often take place in the curved and domed Music Room or the State Dining Room. Since the bombing of the palace chapel in World War II, royal christenings have sometimes taken place in the Music Room. Queen Elizabeth II's first three children were all baptised there. On all formal occasions, the ceremonies are attended by the Yeomen of the Guard, in their historic uniforms, and other officers of the court such as the Lord Chamberlain.\nFormer ceremonial.\nCourt dress.\nFormerly, men not wearing military uniform wore knee breeches of 18th-century design. Women's evening dress included trains and tiaras or feathers in their hair (often both). The dress code governing formal court uniform and dress has progressively relaxed. After the First World War, when Queen Mary wished to follow fashion by raising her skirts a few inches from the ground, she requested a lady-in-waiting to shorten her own skirt first to gauge the King's reaction. King George V disapproved, so the Queen kept her hemline unfashionably low. Following his accession in 1936, King George VI and Queen Elizabeth allowed the hemline of daytime skirts to rise. Today, there is no official dress code. Most men invited to Buckingham Palace in the daytime choose to wear service uniform or lounge suits; a minority wear morning coats, and in the evening, depending on the formality of the occasion, black tie or white tie.\nCourt presentation of d\u00e9butantes.\nD\u00e9butantes were aristocratic young ladies making their first entr\u00e9e into society through a presentation to the monarch at court. These occasions, known as \"coming out\", took place at the palace from the reign of Edward VII. The d\u00e9butantes entered\u2014wearing full court dress, with three ostrich feathers in their hair\u2014curtsied, performed a backwards walk and a further curtsey, while manoeuvring a dress train of prescribed length. The ceremony, known as an evening court, corresponded to the \"court drawing rooms\" of Victoria's reign. After World War II, the ceremony was replaced by less formal afternoon receptions, omitting the requirement of court evening dress. In 1958, Queen Elizabeth II abolished the presentation parties for d\u00e9butantes, replacing them with Garden Parties, for up to 8,000 invitees in the Garden. They are the largest functions of the year.\nGarden and surroundings.\nAt the rear of the palace is the large and park-like garden, which together with its lake is the largest private garden in London. There, Elizabeth II hosted her annual garden parties each summer and also held large functions to celebrate royal milestones, such as jubilees. It covers and includes a helicopter landing area, a lake and a tennis court.\nAdjacent to the palace is the Royal Mews, also designed by Nash, where the royal carriages, including the Gold State Coach, are housed. This Rococo styled gilt coach, designed by William Chambers in 1760, has painted panels by Giovanni Battista Cipriani. It was first used for the State Opening of Parliament by George III in 1762 and has been used by the monarch for every coronation since William IV. It was last used for the coronation of King Charles III and Queen Camilla. Also housed in the mews are the coach horses used at royal ceremonial processions as well as many of the cars used by the royal family.\nThe Mall, a ceremonial approach route to the palace, was designed by Aston Webb and completed in 1911 as part of a grand memorial to Queen Victoria. It extends from Admiralty Arch, across St James's Park to the Victoria Memorial, concluding at the entrance gates into the palace forecourt. This route is used by the cavalcades and motorcades of visiting heads of state, and by the royal family on state occasions\u2014such as the annual Trooping the Colour.\nSecurity breaches.\nThe boy Jones was an intruder who gained entry to the palace on three occasions between 1838 and 1841. At least 12 people have managed to gain unauthorised entry into the palace or its grounds since 1914, including Michael Fagan, who broke into the palace twice in 1982 and entered Queen Elizabeth II's bedroom on the second occasion on 9 July. At the time, news media reported that he had a long conversation with her while she waited for security officers to arrive, but in a 2012 interview with \"The Independent\", Fagan said she ran out of the room, and no conversation took place. It was only in 2007 that trespassing on the palace grounds became a specific criminal offence.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3970", "revid": "45313785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3970", "title": "British Airways", "text": "Flag carrier of the United Kingdom\nBritish Airways plc (BA) is the flag carrier of the United Kingdom. It is headquartered in London, England at Waterside, near its main hub at Heathrow Airport.\nThe airline is the second largest UK-based carrier, based on fleet size and passengers carried, behind easyJet. In January 2011, BA merged with Iberia, creating the International Airlines Group (IAG), a holding company registered in Madrid, Spain. British Airways is the first passenger airline to have generated more than US$1 billion on a single air route in a year.\nIn 1972 a British Airways Board was established by the Government of the United Kingdom to manage the two nationalised airline corporations, British Overseas Airways Corporation and British European Airways, and two regional airlines, Cambrian Airways and Northeast Airlines. On 31 March 1974, all four companies were merged to form British Airways. BA was privatised in February 1987 as part of a wider privatisation plan by the Thatcher government. The carrier expanded with the acquisition of British Caledonian in 1987, Dan-Air in 1992, TAT European Airlines in 1993 and British Midland International in 2012.\nThe company continues to receive ample public support. British Airways received a bailout equivalent to \u00a3300\u2009million. After the bailout, and receipt of government funding through the UK's furlough scheme, the airline received an additional \u00a32 billion state backed loan in 2021. \nHistory.\nThe corporate lineage of British Airways goes back to five airlines established in the United Kingdom between 1916 and 1922. The first of these, Aircraft Transport &amp; Travel (AT&amp;T), began the world's first daily international commercial air service from London to Paris on 25 August 1919. The five airlines merged in 1924 and several other airlines were established and merged during the 1930s and 1940s. The mergers and acquisitions resulted in two state-owned airlines, the British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC), formed in 1939, and British European Airways (BEA), formed in 1947.\nProposals to establish a single British airline, combining the assets of the BOAC and BEA, were first raised in 1953 as a result of difficulties in attempts by BOAC and BEA to negotiate air rights through the British colony of Cyprus. Increasingly BOAC was protesting that BEA was using its subsidiary Cyprus Airways to circumvent an agreement that BEA would not fly routes further east than Cyprus, particularly to the increasingly important oil regions in the Middle East. The chairman of BOAC, Miles Thomas, was in favour of a merger as a potential solution to this disagreement and had backing for the idea from the Chancellor of the Exchequer at the time, Rab Butler. However, opposition from the Treasury blocked the proposal.\nConsequently, it was only following the recommendations of the 1969 Edwards Report that a new British Airways Board, managing both BEA and BOAC, and the two regional British airlines Cambrian Airways based at Cardiff, and Northeast Airlines based at Newcastle upon Tyne, was constituted on 1 April 1972. Although each airline's branding was maintained initially, two years later the British Airways Board unified its branding, effectively establishing British Airways as an airline on 31 March 1974.\nFollowing two years of fierce competition with British Caledonian, the second-largest airline in the United Kingdom at the time, the Government changed its aviation policy in 1976 so that the two carriers would no longer compete on long-haul routes.\nBritish Airways and Air France operated the Concorde, the world's first supersonic aircraft that first carried passengers on 21 January 1976 from London Heathrow to Bahrain. Services to the United States began on 24 May 1976 with a flight to Washington Dulles, and flights to New York JFK followed on 22 September 1977. Service to Singapore was established in co-operation with Singapore Airlines as a continuation of the flight to Bahrain. Following the crash of Air France Flight 4590 and the 11 September attacks, British Airways decided to cease Concorde operations in 2003 after 27 years of service. The final commercial Concorde flight was BA002 from New York-JFK to London-Heathrow on 24 October 2003.\nIn 1981 the airline was instructed to prepare for privatisation by the Thatcher government. Sir John King, later Lord King, was appointed chairman, charged with bringing the airline back into profitability. While many other large airlines struggled, King was credited with transforming British Airways into one of the most profitable air carriers in the world. In December 1983, British Airways plc was formed with the government holding all of the shares. BA was privatised and was floated on the London Stock Exchange in February 1987. British Airways effected the takeover of the UK's \"second\" airline, British Caledonian, in July of that same year.\nThe formation of Richard Branson's Virgin Atlantic in 1984 created a competitor for BA. The intense rivalry between British Airways and Virgin Atlantic culminated in the former being sued for libel in 1993, arising from claims and counterclaims over a dirty tricks campaign against Virgin. This campaign included allegations of poaching Virgin Atlantic customers, tampering with private files belonging to Virgin, and undermining Virgin's financial reputation in the city. As a result of the case BA management apologised \"unreservedly\", and the company agreed to pay \u00a3110,000 in damages to Virgin, \u00a3500,000 to Branson personally and \u00a33\u00a0million legal costs. Lord King stepped down as chairman in 1993 and was replaced by his deputy, Colin Marshall, while Bob Ayling took over as CEO. Virgin filed a separate action in the U.S. that same year regarding BA's domination of the trans-Atlantic routes, but it was thrown out in 1999.\nIn 1992 British Airways expanded through the acquisition of the financially troubled Dan-Air, giving BA a much larger presence at Gatwick Airport. In January 1993 it purchased a 49% shareholding in TAT European Airlines.\nBritish Asia Airways was formed in March 1993 to operate between London and Taipei. That same month BA purchased a 25% stake in Qantas and, with the acquisition of Brymon Airways in May, formed British Airways Citiexpress (later BA Connect).\nIn 1996 BA took up an option to purchase the remaining 51% in TAT European Airlines and acquired a 67$ stake in Air Liberte.\nIn September 1998, British Airways, along with American Airlines, Canadian Airlines, Cathay Pacific and Qantas, formed the Oneworld airline alliance. Oneworld began operations on 1 February 1999, and is the third-largest airline alliance in the world, behind SkyTeam and Star Alliance.\nBob Ayling's leadership led to a cost savings of \u00a3750 million and the establishment of a budget airline, Go, in 1998. The next year, however, British Airways reported an 84% drop in profits in its first quarter alone, its worst in seven years. In March 2000, Ayling was removed from his position and British Airways announced Rod Eddington as his successor. That year, British Airways and KLM conducted talks on a potential merger, reaching a decision in July to file an official merger plan with the European Commission. The plan fell through in September 2000. British Asia Airways ceased operations in 2001 after BA suspended flights to Taipei. Go was sold to a management buyout backed by 3i in June 2001. Eddington would make further workforce cuts due to reduced demand following 11 September attacks in 2001, and BA sold its stake in Qantas in September 2004. In 2005 Willie Walsh, managing director of Aer Lingus and a former pilot, became the chief executive officer of British Airways. BA unveiled its new subsidiary OpenSkies in January 2008, taking advantage of the liberalisation of transatlantic traffic rights between Europe and the United States. OpenSkies flies non-stop from Paris to New York's JFK and Newark airports.\nIn July 2008, British Airways announced a merger plan with Iberia, another flag carrier airline in the Oneworld alliance, wherein each airline would retain its original brand. The agreement was confirmed in April 2010, and in July the European Commission and United States Department of Transportation permitted the merger and began to co-ordinate transatlantic routes with American Airlines. On 6 October 2010 the alliance between British Airways, American Airlines and Iberia formally began operations. The alliance generates an estimated \u00a3230\u00a0million in annual cost-saving for BA, in addition to the \u00a3330 million which would be saved by the merger with Iberia. This merger was finalised on 21 January 2011, resulting in the establishment of International Airlines Group (IAG), the world's third-largest airline in terms of annual revenue and the second-largest airline group in Europe. Prior to merging, British Airways owned a 13.5% stake in Iberia, and thus received ownership of 55% of the combined International Airlines Group; Iberia's other shareholders received the remaining 45%. As a part of the merger, British Airways ceased trading independently on the London Stock Exchange after 23 years as a constituent of the FTSE 100 Index.\nIn September 2010 Willie Walsh, now CEO of IAG, announced that the group was considering acquiring other airlines and had drawn up a shortlist of twelve possible acquisitions. In November 2011 IAG announced an agreement in principle to purchase British Midland International from Lufthansa. A contract to purchase the airline was agreed the next month, and the sale was completed for \u00a3172.5\u00a0million on 30 March 2012. The airline established a new subsidiary based at London City Airport operating Airbus A318s.\nBritish Airways was the official airline partner of the 2012 Summer Olympics. On 18 May 2012 it flew the Olympic flame from Athens International Airport to RNAS Culdrose while carrying various dignitaries.\nOn 27 May 2017, British Airways suffered a computer power failure. All flights were cancelled and thousands of passengers were affected. By the following day, the company had not succeeded in reestablishing the normal function of its computer systems. When asked by reporters for more information on the ongoing problems, British Airways stated \"The root cause was a power supply issue which our affected our IT systems \u2013 we continue to investigate this\" and declined to comment further. Willie Walsh later attributed the crash to an electrical engineer disconnecting the UPS and said there would be an independent investigation.\nAmidst the decline in the value of Iranian currency due to the reintroduction of U.S. sanctions on Iran, BA announced that the Iranian route was \"not commercially viable\" and ended services to Iran on 22 September 2018.\nIn 2018, British Airways partnered with British tailor and designer Ozwald Boateng to redesign the company's historic uniforms, in honour of its approaching centenary, creating a new look for BA, while adhering to its traditional style. The new collection \"A British Original\" was launched in 2023. \nIn 2019, as part of the celebration of its centenary of airline operations, staffed dressed in heritage uniforms dating back to the 1930s to greet Queen Elizabeth II and British Airways announced that four aircraft would receive retro liveries. The first of these is a Boeing 747-400 (G-BYGC), which was repainted into the former BOAC livery, which it retained until its retirement. Two more Boeing 747-400s were repainted with former British Airways liveries. One wore the Landor livery until its retirement in 2020 (G-BNLY), the other (G-CIVB), wore the original \"Union Jack\" livery until its retirement in 2020 also. An Airbus A319 was repainted into British European Airways livery, which is still flying as G-EUPJ.\nOn 12 October 2020, it was announced that Sean Doyle, CEO of Aer Lingus (also part of the IAG airline group) would succeed \u00c1lex Cruz as CEO. On 28 April 2020, the company set out plans to make up to 12,000 staff redundant because of the global collapse of air traffic due to the COVID-19 pandemic and that it may not reopen its operations at Gatwick airport. n 28 July 2020, the company's cabin crew union issued an \"industrial action\" warning in order to prevent the 12,000 job cuts and pay cuts.T hey reopened at Gatwick in March 2022.\nIn July 2020, British Airways announced the immediate retirement of its entire 747-400 fleet, having originally intended to phase out the remaining 747s in 2024. The airline stated that its decision to bring forward the date was in part due to the downturn in air travel following the COVID-19 pandemic and to focus on incorporating more modern and fuel-efficient aircraft such as the Airbus A350 and Boeing 787. At the same time, British Airways also announced its intention to eliminate carbon emissions by 2050. \nCorporate affairs.\nCustomer relations.\nBritish Airways has a reputation for poor service, including poor treatment by staff, changes to its offerings, and an unwillingness to pay compensation claims. In 2025, the airline was named worst in long-haul flights, based on a customer survey by the consumer group, \"Which?\". Increasingly the firm has focused on it consumers in more expensive classes, opposed to economy flyers. This shift began slowly in 2020, as a result of a corporate redirection, lead by current CEO Sean Doyle, who wants to expand the company's premium offerings. The company announced suddenly in 2025 that they would change their loyalty point system for frequent flyers, inciting public backlash as many customers lost accrued value in points. The company was forced to reverse course on some of its strategic offerings, only for premium customers, after customer complaints.\nThe firm increasingly has failed to respond to customer requests. During a recent power outage, the company's website stated that no flights were delayed, despite several cancellations occurring with passengers stranded on planes. In May 2025, A BBC journalist was incorrectly boarded under a different name by British Airways staff onto a plane, causing her return journey to be cancelled, and exposing security failures by the airline.\nBusiness trends.\nThe key trends for British Airways are shown below.\nOn the merger with Iberia, the accounting reference date was changed from 31 March to 31 December; figures below are therefore for the years to 31 March up to 2010, for the nine months to 31 December 2010, and for the years to 31 December thereafter:\nIn 2020, due to the crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, British Airways had to reduce its\u00a042,000-strong workforce by 12,000 jobs. According to the estimate by IAG, a parent company, it will take the air travel industry several years to return to previous performance and profitability levels.\nHowever, 2022 saw a dramatic increase in travel, and the company now faced a worker shortage, forcing it to cancel more than 1,500 flights. During February 2023, The international airlines group, the owners of British Airways announced that the group has returned to making an annual profit of \u20ac1.3\u00a0billion for the first time since the pandemic, following a \u20ac2.8\u00a0billion loss in 2021. The company warned that due to the surge in demand for flying this could lead to more disruption.\nOperations.\nBritish Airways is the largest airline based in the United Kingdom in terms of fleet size, international flights, and international destinations and was, until 2008, the largest airline by passenger numbers. The airline carried 34.6\u00a0million passengers in 2008, but, rival carrier easyJet transported 44.5\u00a0million passengers that year, passing British Airways for the first time. British Airways holds a United Kingdom Civil Aviation Authority Type A Operating Licence, it is permitted to carry passengers, cargo, and mail on aircraft with 20 or more seats.\nThe airline's head office, Waterside, is located in Harmondsworth, a village near Heathrow Airport. Waterside was completed in June 1998 to replace British Airways' previous head office, Speedbird House, located on the grounds of Heathrow.\nBritish Airways' main base is at Heathrow Airport, but it also has a major presence at Gatwick Airport. It also has a base at London City Airport, where its subsidiary BA CityFlyer is the largest operator. BA had previously operated a significant hub at Manchester Airport. Manchester to New York (JFK) services were withdrawn; later all international services outside London ceased when the subsidiary BA Connect was sold. Passengers wishing to travel internationally with BA either to or from regional UK destinations must now transfer in London. Heathrow Airport is dominated by British Airways, which owns 50% of the slots available at the airport as of 2019, growing from 40% in 2004. The majority of BA services operate from Terminal 5, with the exception of some flights at Terminal 3 owing to insufficient capacity at Terminal 5. At London City Airport, the company owns 52% of the slots as of 2019.\nIn August 2014, Willie Walsh advised the airline would continue to use flight paths over Iraq despite the hostilities there. A few days earlier Qantas announced it would avoid Iraqi airspace, while other airlines did likewise. The issue arose following the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 over Ukraine, and a temporary suspension of flights to and from Ben Gurion Airport during the 2014 Israel\u2013Gaza conflict.\nSubsidiaries.\nOver its history, BA has had many subsidiaries. In addition to the below, British Airways also owned Airways Aero Association, the operator of the British Airways flying club based at Wycombe Air Park in High Wycombe, until it was sold to Surinder Arora in 2007.\nShareholdings.\nBritish Airways obtained a 15% stake in the now-defunct UK regional airline Flybe from the sale of BA Connect in March 2007. It sold the stake in 2014.\nBA also owned a 10% stake in InterCapital and Regional Rail (ICRR), the company that managed the operations of Eurostar (UK) Ltd from 1998 to 2010, when the management of Eurostar was restructured.\nIndustrial relations.\n1990s.\nStaff working for British Airways are represented by a number of trade unions. Pilots are represented by British Air Line Pilots' Association, cabin crew by British Airlines Stewards and Stewardesses Association, a branch of Unite the Union; other employees are represented by other Unite the Union branches and the GMB Union. \nIn 1997, under Bob Ayling, management faced strike action by cabin crew over a \u00a31billion cost-cutting drive to return the airline to profitability. After this strike, in 2009 another cabin crew strike occurred. Staff morale has reportedly been unstable since the 2009 strike. In an effort to increase interaction between management, employees, and the unions, various conferences and workshops have taken place, often with thousands in attendance.\n2000s.\nIn 2005, wildcat action was taken by union members over a decision by Gate Gourmet not to renew the contracts of 670 workers and replace them with agency staff. The strike was estimated to cost British Airways \u00a330 million, disrupting 100,000 passengers flights. In October 2006, BA became involved in a civil rights dispute when a Christian employee was forbidden to wear a necklace bearing the cross, a religious symbol. While a long standing employee policy, British politicians such as the former Home Secretary John Reid and the former Foreign Secretary Jack Straw have questioned the policy.\nRelations have been turbulent between BA and its largest union, Unite. In 2007, cabin crew threatened strike action over proposed salary changes, but was called off at the last minute. This disagreement resulted in losses of \u00a380 million for the airline. In December 2009, a ballot for strike action over the Christmas holiday period received a high level of support, but action was blocked by a court injunction deeming the ballot illegal. \n2010s.\nNegotiations between the parties failed to stop strike action in March 2010. During the strike, British Airways rescinded on employee benefits to those who participated in the strike. \"The Guardian\" reported that BA had consulted with outside firms in order undermine the unions: although the story was later withdrawn. A strike was announced for May 2010, where BA again sought an injunction. Members of the Socialist Workers Party disrupted negotiations between BA management and Unite union to support industrial action. Further disruption struck when Derek Simpson, a Unite co-leader, was discovered to have leaked details of confidential negotiations online via Twitter. \nIndustrial action re-emerged in 2017, this time brought on by flight attendants employed by Mixed Fleet, who received less favourable pay and terms and conditions, compared with cabin staff who joined prior to 2010. A ballot for industrial action was distributed to Mixed Fleet crew in November 2016, resulting in an overwhelmingly majority support for industrial action. Unite described Mixed Fleet crew as on \"poverty pay\", with many Mixed Fleet flight attendants sleeping in their cars in between shifts because they cannot afford the fuel to drive home, or operating while sick as they cannot afford to call in sick and lose their pay for the shift. \nThe union demanded BA end its anti-union practice of removing staff travel concessions, bonus payments, and other benefits to cabin crew who undertook industrial action; as well as strike-breaking tactics such as wet-leasing aircraft from other airlines and offering financial incentives for cabin crew not to strike. The first strike dates during the 2016 Christmas holiday were cancelled due to ongoing pay negotiations. Industrial action by Mixed Fleet later started in January 2017, after rejecting the airline's pay offer. Strike action continued throughout 2017, resulting in one of the longest running disputes in aviation history. On October 31st of that year, after 85 days of discontinuous industrial action, Mixed Fleet accepted a new pay deal from BA and ended the strikes.\n2020s.\nIn the summer of 2022, Unite and GMB union members backed a proposal to strike during the summer holiday at Heathrow airport. Strikes were proposed amid staffing shortages and low wages, as reported by union representatives.\nLegal issues.\nBritish Airways has been involved in several class action lawsuits, in addition to other legal disputes. In 2018, the company settled a UK-based class action suit for a data breach. In 2023, the company was required to pay $1.1 million USD as the United States government found they refused to pay refunds in a timely manner. British Airways was in violation of the US Department of Transportation rules on refunds for cancelled flights.\nDestinations.\nBritish Airways serves over 170 destinations in 70 countries, including eight domestic and 27 in the United States.\nAlliances.\nBritish Airways co-founded the airline alliance Oneworld in 1999 with airlines American Airlines, Cathay Pacific and Qantas.\nCodeshare agreements.\nBritish Airways has codeshares with the following airlines:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInterline agreements.\nBritish Airways has Interline agreements with the following airlines:\nFleet.\nAs of \u00a02025[ [update]], the British Airways operates a fleet of 274 aircraft with 42 orders. BA operates a mix of Airbus narrow and wide-body aircraft, and Boeing wide-body aircraft, specifically the 777 and 787. In October 2020, British Airways retired its fleet of 747-400 aircraft. It was one of the largest operators of the 747, having previously operated the -100, -200, and -400 aircraft from 1974 (1969 with BOAC).\nBritish Airways Engineering.\nThe airline has its own engineering branch to maintain its aircraft fleet, this includes line maintenance at over 70 airports around the world. Amongst the company's various hangar facilities are its two major maintenance centres at Glasgow and Cardiff Airports.\nMarketing.\nBranding.\nThe musical theme predominantly used on British Airways advertising has been \"The Flower Duet\" by L\u00e9o Delibes. This was first used in a 1984 advertisement directed by Tony Scott, in an arrangement by Howard Blake. It was reworked by Malcolm McLaren and Yanni for 1989's iconic \"Face\" advertisement, and subsequently appeared in many different arrangements between 1990 and 2010. The slogan 'the world's favourite airline', first used in 1983, was dropped in 2001 after Lufthansa overtook BA in terms of passenger numbers. Other advertising slogans have included \"The World's Best Airline\", \"We'll Take More Care of You\", \"Fly the Flag\", and \"To Fly, To Serve\".\nBA had an account for 23 years with Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, an agency that created many of their most famous advertisements, including \"The World's Biggest Offer\" and the influential \"Face\" campaign. Saatchi &amp; Saatchi later imitated this advert for Silverjet, a rival of BA, after BA discontinued their business activities. Since 2007, BA used Bartle Bogle Hegarty as its advertising agency.\nIn October 2022, BA launched a brand new ad campaign, titled \"A British Original\" produced by London-based Uncommon Creative Studio. This was to be another record-breaking campaign for its use of 500 unique executions along with a series of 32 short films, coinciding with the launch of Ozwald Boateng's new collection of uniform.\nBritish Airways purchased the internet domain ba.com in 2002 from previous owner Bell Atlantic, 'BA' being the company's initialism and its IATA Airline code.\nBritish Airways is the official airline of the Wimbledon Championship tennis tournament, and was the official airline and tier one partner of the 2012 Summer Olympics and Paralympics. BA was also the official airline of England's bid to host the 2018 Football World Cup.\n\"High Life\", founded in 1973, is the official in-flight magazine of the airline.\nSafety video.\nThe airline used a cartoon safety video from circa 2005 until 2017. Beginning on 1 September 2017 the airline introduced the new Comic Relief live action safety video hosted by Chabuddy G, with appearances by British celebrities Gillian Anderson, Rowan Atkinson, Jim Broadbent, Rob Brydon, Warwick Davis, Chiwetel Ejiofor, Ian McKellen, Thandie Newton, and Gordon Ramsay. A \"sequel\" video, also hosted by Chabuddy G, was released in 2018, with Michael Caine, Olivia Colman, Jourdan Dunn, Naomie Harris, Joanna Lumley, and David Walliams. The two videos are part of Comic Relief's charity programme. On 17 April 2023, the airline launched a new safety video as a part of \"A British Original\" campaign, with Emma Raducanu, Robert Peston, Little Simz, and Steven Bartlett.\nLiveries, logos, and tail fins.\nThe aircraft that British Airways inherited from the four-way merger between BOAC, BEA, Cambrian, and Northeast were temporarily given the text logo \"British airways\" but retained the original airline's livery. With its formation in 1974, British Airways' aeroplanes were given a new white, blue, and red colour scheme with a cropped Union Jack painted on their tail fins, designed by Negus &amp; Negus. In 1984, a new livery designed by Landor Associates updated the airline's look as it prepared for privatisation. To celebrate its centenary in 2019, BA announced four retro liveries: three on Boeing 747-400 aircraft (one in each of BOAC, Negus &amp; Negus, and Landor Associates liveries), and one A319 in BEA livery.\nIn 1997, there was a controversial change to a new Project Utopia livery; all aircraft used the corporate colours consistently on the fuselage, but tailfins bore one of multiple designs. Several people spoke out against the change, including the former prime minister Margaret Thatcher, who famously covered the tail of a model 747 at an event with a handkerchief, to show her displeasure. BA's traditional rival, Virgin Atlantic, took advantage of the negative press coverage by applying the Union flag to the winglets of their aircraft along with the slogan \"Britain's national flagcarrier\".\nIn 1999, the CEO of British Airways, Bob Ayling, announced that all BA planes would adopt the tailfin design \"Chatham Dockyard Union Flag\" originally intended to be used only on the Concorde, based on the Union Flag.\nArms.\nIn 2011, British Airways made a brand relaunch project, in which BA introduced a stylised, metallic version of the arms by For People Design to be used along with its \"Speedmarque\" logo. This is used exclusively on aircraft, First Wing Lounge and advertisements.\nIn 2024, the damaged letters patent of the arms went up for auction online before being withdrawn.\nLoyalty programme.\nBritish Airways' tiered loyalty programme, called the British Airways Club, is a programme designed to incentivise its members to travel on British Airways and other partners, by advertising benefits and awarding members with currency. Members would accrue points called 'Avios' and 'tier points' based on methods permitted by the airline, which included flying on the airline itself. Avios is a currency owned by its parent company International Airlines Group. 'Tier points' are used to determine a member's tier in the programme. Once a member reached a high enough tier by attaining enough 'tier points', they could access airport lounges and dedicated \"fast\" queues.\nMembers of the programme were also granted status within the Oneworld alliance, which permitted similar benefits when flying with Oneworld member airlines. The level of benefits were determined by the member's tier.\nOn 1 April 2025, the programme was rebranded from 'Executive Club' to 'The British Airways Club'. Before the rebrand, 'tier points' were earned based on the airline, distance and cabin class flown. With the 'British Airways Club', 'tier points' are now earned based on absolute spending with the airline (including the fare component and carrier-imposed surcharges, but not Government Taxes or Airport fees such as Air Passenger Duty). 1 'tier point' is awarded per \u00a31 spent. Additional tier points can also be earned through booking a holiday package (flight plus hotel and/or car rental) through British Airways Holidays, or achieving specific spend thresholds on BA's premium American Express credit card.\nCabins and services.\nShort haul.\n\"Euro Traveller\" is British Airways' economy class cabin on all short-haul flights within Europe, including domestic flights within the UK.\nHeathrow and Gatwick-based flights are operated by Airbus A320 series aircraft. Seat pitch varies from 78\" to 31\" depending on aircraft type and location of the seat.\nAll flights from Heathrow and Gatwick have a buy on board system with a range of food designed by Tom Kerridge. Food can be pre-ordered through the British Airways mobile application. Alternatively, a limited selection can be purchased on-board using credit and debit card or by using Frequent Flyer Avios points. British Airways is rolling out Wi-Fi across its fleet of aircraft with 90% expected to be Wi-Fi enabled by 2020.\n\"Club Europe\" is the short-haul business class available on all short-haul flights. This class allows for access to business lounges at most airports and complimentary onboard catering, as well as fast-track security at most airports. The middle seat of the standard Airbus configured cabin is left free. Instead, a cocktail table folds up from under the middle seat on refurbished aircraft.\nMid-haul and long-haul.\n\"First\" is offered on all Airbus A380s, Boeing 777-300ERs, Boeing 787-9/10s and on some Boeing 777-200ERs. There are between eight and fourteen private suites depending on the aircraft type. Each First suite comes with a bed, a wide entertainment screen, in-seat power and complimentary Wi-Fi access on select aircraft.\nThe exclusive Concorde Room lounge at Heathrow Terminal 5 is directly accessible via a private door from security, and offers pre-flight dining with waiter service and more intimate space. Dedicated British Airways 'Galleries First' lounges are available at some airports, and Business lounges are used where these are not available. Some feature a 'First Dining' section where passengers holding a first class ticket can access a pre-flight dining service.\n\"Club World\" is the long-haul business class cabin. The cabin features fully convertible flat bed seats. In March 2019, BA unveiled its new business-class seats \u2013 named \"Club Suite\" \u2013 on the new A350 aircraft, which feature a suite with a door.\n\"World Traveller Plus\" is the premium economy class cabin provided on all BA long haul aircraft. This cabin offers wider seats, extended leg-room, additional seat comforts such as larger IFE screen, a foot rest and power sockets. An enhanced food and beverage offering is also a feature of this class. Passengers are given a light refreshment upon boarding and a hot towel shortly after take-off.\n\"World Traveller\" is the mid-haul and long-haul economy class cabin. It offers seat-back entertainment, complimentary food and drink, pillows, and blankets. While the in-flight entertainment screens are available on all long-haul aircraft, international power outlets are available on the aircraft based at Heathrow. Wifi is also available on selected aircraft at an extra fee.\nIncidents and accidents.\nBritish Airways is known to have a strong reputation for safety and has been consistently ranked within the top 20 safest airlines globally according to \"Business Insider\" and \"AirlineRatings.com.\"\nSince BA's inception in 1974, it has been involved in three hull-loss incidents (British Airways Flight 149 was destroyed on the ground at Kuwait International Airport as a result of military action during the First Gulf War with no one on board) and two hijacking attempts. To date, the only fatal accident experienced by a BA aircraft occurred in 1976 with British Airways Flight 476 which was involved in a midair collision later attributed to an error made by air traffic control.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3972", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3972", "title": "Bicycling", "text": ""}
{"id": "3973", "revid": "3138265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3973", "title": "Bicycle", "text": "Pedal-driven two-wheel vehicle\nA bicycle, also called a pedal cycle, bike, push-bike or cycle, is a human-powered or motor-assisted, pedal-driven, single-track vehicle, with two wheels attached to a frame, one behind the other. A &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;bicycle rider is called a cyclist, or bicyclist.\nThe bicycle was introduced in the 19th century in Europe. By the early 21st century, there were more than 1\u00a0billion bicycles. Bicycles are the principal means of transport in many regions. They also provide a popular form of recreation, and have been adapted for use as children's toys. Bicycles are used for fitness, military and police applications, courier services, bicycle racing, and artistic cycling.\nThe basic shape and configuration of a typical upright or \"safety\" bicycle, has changed little since the first chain-driven model was developed around 1885. However, many details have been improved, especially since the advent of modern materials and computer-aided design. These have allowed for a proliferation of specialized designs for many types of cycling. In the 21st century, electric bicycles have become popular.\nThe bicycle's invention has had an enormous effect on society, both in terms of culture and of advancing modern industrial methods. Several components that played a key role in the development of the automobile were initially invented for use in the bicycle, including ball bearings, pneumatic tires, chain-driven sprockets, and tension-spoked wheels.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"bicycle\" first appeared in English print in \"The Daily News\" in 1868, to describe \"Bysicles and trysicles\" on the \"Champs Elys\u00e9es and Bois de Boulogne\". The word was first used in 1847 in a French publication to describe an unidentified two-wheeled vehicle, possibly a carriage. The design of the bicycle was an advance on the velocipede, although the words were used with some degree of overlap for a time.\nOther words for bicycle include \"bike\", \"pushbike\", \"pedal cycle\", or \"cycle\". In Unicode, the code point for \"bicycle\" is codice_1. The entity codice_2 in HTML produces \ud83d\udeb2.\nAlthough bike and cycle are used interchangeably to refer mostly to two types of two-wheelers, the terms still vary across the world. In India, for example, a cycle refers only to a two-wheeler using pedal power whereas the term bike is used to describe a two-wheeler using internal combustion engine or electric motors as a source of motive power instead of motorcycle/motorbike.\nHistory.\nThe \"dandy horse\", also called \"Draisienne\" or \"Laufmaschine\" (\"running machine\"), was the first human means of transport to use only two wheels in tandem and was invented by the German Baron Karl von Drais. It is regarded as the first bicycle and von Drais is seen as the \"father of the bicycle\", but it did not have pedals. Von Drais introduced it to the public in Mannheim in 1817 and in Paris in 1818. Its rider sat astride a wooden frame supported by two in-line wheels and pushed the vehicle along with his or her feet while steering the front wheel.\nThe first mechanically propelled, two-wheeled vehicle may have been built by Kirkpatrick MacMillan, a Scottish blacksmith, in 1839, although the claim is often disputed. He is also associated with the first recorded instance of a cycling traffic offense, when a Glasgow newspaper in 1842 reported an accident in which an anonymous \"gentleman from Dumfries-shire... bestride a velocipede... of ingenious design\" knocked over a little girl in Glasgow and was fined five shillings ().\nIn the early 1860s, the Frenchmen Pierre Michaux and Pierre Lallement took bicycle design in a new direction by adding a mechanical crank drive with pedals on an enlarged front wheel (the velocipede). This was the first in mass production. Another French inventor named Douglas Grasso had a failed prototype of Pierre Lallement's bicycle several years earlier. Several inventions followed using rear-wheel drive, the best known being the rod-driven velocipede by Scotsman Thomas McCall in 1869. In that same year, bicycle wheels with wire spokes were patented by Eug\u00e8ne Meyer of Paris. The French \"v\u00e9locip\u00e8de\", made of iron and wood, developed into the \"penny-farthing\" (historically known as an \"ordinary bicycle\", a retronym, since there was then no other kind). It featured a tubular steel frame on which were mounted wire-spoked wheels with solid rubber tires. These bicycles were difficult to ride due to their high seat and poor weight distribution. In 1868, Rowley Turner, a sales agent of the Coventry Sewing Machine Company (which soon became the Coventry Machinists Company), brought a Michaux cycle to Coventry, England. His uncle, Josiah Turner, and business partner James Starley, used this as a basis for the 'Coventry Model' in what became Britain's first cycle factory.\nThe \"dwarf ordinary\" addressed some of these faults by reducing the front wheel diameter and setting the seat further back. This, in turn, required gearing\u2014effected in a variety of ways\u2014to efficiently use pedal power. Having to both pedal and steer via the front wheel remained a problem. Englishman J.K. Starley (nephew of James Starley), J.H. Lawson, and Shergold solved this problem by introducing the chain drive (originated by the unsuccessful \"bicyclette\" of Englishman Henry Lawson), connecting the frame-mounted cranks to the rear wheel. These models were known as safety bicycles, dwarf safeties, or upright bicycles for their lower seat height and better weight distribution. Although, without pneumatic tires, the ride of the smaller-wheeled bicycle would be much rougher than that of the larger-wheeled variety. Starley's 1885 Rover, manufactured in Coventry is usually described as the first recognizably modern bicycle. Soon, the \"seat tube\" was added, which created the modern bike's double-triangle \"diamond frame\".\nFurther innovations increased comfort and ushered in a second bicycle craze, the 1890s \"Golden Age of Bicycles\". In 1888, Scotsman John Boyd Dunlop introduced the first practical pneumatic tire, which soon became universal. Willie Hume demonstrated the supremacy of Dunlop's tyres in 1889, winning the tyre's first-ever races in Ireland and then England. Soon after, the rear freewheel was developed, enabling the rider to coast. This refinement led to the 1890s invention of coaster brakes. D\u00e9railleur gears and hand-operated Bowden cable-pull brakes were also developed during these years, but were only slowly adopted by casual riders.\nThe Svea Velocipede with vertical pedal arrangement and locking hubs was introduced in 1892 by the Swedish engineers Fredrik Ljungstr\u00f6m and Birger Ljungstr\u00f6m. It attracted attention at the World Fair and was produced in a few thousand units.\nIn the 1870s, many cycling clubs flourished. They were popular in a time when there were no cars on the market and the principal mode of transportation was horse-drawn vehicles. Among the earliest clubs was The Bicycle Touring Club, which has operated since 1878. By the turn of the century, cycling clubs flourished on both sides of the Atlantic, and touring and racing became widely popular. The Raleigh Bicycle Company was founded in Nottingham, England in 1888. It became the biggest bicycle manufacturing company in the world, making over two million bikes per year.\nBicycles and horse buggies were the two mainstays of private transportation just prior to the automobile, and the grading of smooth roads in the late 19th century was stimulated by the widespread advertising, production, and use of these devices. More than 1\u00a0billion bicycles have been manufactured worldwide as of the early 21st century. Bicycles are the most common vehicle of any kind in the world, and the most numerous model of any kind of vehicle, whether human-powered or motor vehicle, is the Chinese Flying Pigeon, with numbers exceeding 500 million. The next most numerous vehicle, the Honda Super Cub motorcycle, has more than 100 million units made, while most produced car, the Toyota Corolla, has reached 44 million and counting.\nUses.\nBicycles are used for transportation, bicycle commuting, and utility cycling. They are also used professionally by mail carriers, paramedics, police, messengers, and general delivery services. Military uses of bicycles include communications, reconnaissance, troop movement, supply of provisions, and patrol, such as in bicycle infantries.\nThey are also used for recreational purposes, including bicycle touring, mountain biking, physical fitness, and play. Bicycle sports include racing, BMX racing, track racing, criterium, roller racing, sportives and time trials. Major multi-stage professional events are the Giro d'Italia, the Tour de France, the Vuelta a Espa\u00f1a, the Tour de Pologne, and the Volta a Portugal. They are also used for entertainment and pleasure in other ways, such as in organised mass rides, artistic cycling and freestyle BMX.\nTechnical aspects.\nThe bicycle has undergone continual adaptation and improvement since its inception. These innovations have continued with the advent of modern materials and computer-aided design, allowing for a proliferation of specialized bicycle types, improved bicycle safety, and riding comfort.\nTypes.\nBicycles can be categorized in many different ways: by function, by number of riders, by general construction, by gearing or by means of propulsion. The more common types include utility bicycles, mountain bicycles, racing bicycles, touring bicycles, hybrid bicycles, cruiser bicycles, and BMX bikes. Less common are tandems, low riders, tall bikes, fixed gear, folding models, amphibious bicycles, cargo bikes, recumbents and electric bicycles.\nUnicycles, tricycles and quadracycles are not strictly bicycles, as they have respectively one, three and four wheels, but are often referred to informally as \"bikes\" or \"cycles\".\nDynamics.\nA bicycle stays upright while moving forward by being steered so as to keep its center of mass over the wheels. This steering is usually provided by the rider, but under certain conditions, may be provided by the bicycle itself.\nThe combined center of mass of a bicycle and its rider must lean into a turn to successfully navigate it. This lean is induced by a method known as countersteering, which can be performed by the rider turning the handlebars directly with the hands or indirectly by leaning the bicycle.\nShort-wheelbase or tall bicycles, when braking, can generate enough stopping force at the front wheel to flip longitudinally. The act of purposefully using this force to lift the rear wheel and balance on the front without tipping over is a trick known as a stoppie, endo, or front wheelie.\nPerformance.\nThe bicycle is extraordinarily efficient in both biological and mechanical terms. The bicycle is the most efficient human-powered means of transportation in terms of energy a person must expend to travel a given distance. From a mechanical viewpoint, up to 99% of the energy delivered by the rider into the pedals is transmitted to the wheels, although the use of gearing mechanisms may reduce this by 10\u201315%. In terms of the ratio of cargo weight a bicycle can carry to total weight, it is also an efficient means of cargo transportation.\nA human traveling on a bicycle at low to medium speeds of around uses only the power required to walk. Air drag, which is proportional to the square of speed, requires dramatically higher power outputs as speeds increase. If the rider is sitting upright, the rider's body creates about 75% of the total drag of the bicycle/rider combination. Drag can be reduced by seating the rider in a more aerodynamically streamlined position. Drag can also be reduced by covering the bicycle with an aerodynamic fairing. The fastest recorded unpaced speed on a flat surface is .\nIn addition, the carbon dioxide generated in the production and transportation of the food required by the bicyclist, per mile traveled, is less than &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204410 that generated by energy efficient motorcars.\nParts.\nFrame.\nThe great majority of modern bicycles have a frame with upright seating that looks much like the first chain-driven bike. These upright bicycles almost always feature the \"diamond frame\", a truss consisting of two triangles: the front triangle and the rear triangle. The front triangle consists of the head tube, top tube, down tube, and seat tube. The head tube contains the headset, the set of bearings that allows the fork to turn smoothly for steering and balance. The top tube connects the head tube to the seat tube at the top, and the down tube connects the head tube to the bottom bracket. The rear triangle consists of the seat tube and paired chain stays and seat stays. The chain stays run parallel to the chain, connecting the bottom bracket to the rear dropout, where the axle for the rear wheel is held. The seat stays connect the top of the seat tube (at or near the same point as the top tube) to the rear fork ends.\nHistorically, women's bicycle frames had a top tube that connected in the middle of the seat tube instead of the top, resulting in a lower standover height at the expense of compromised structural integrity, since this places a strong bending load in the seat tube, and bicycle frame members are typically weak in bending. This design, referred to as a \"step-through frame\" or as an \"open frame\", allows the rider to mount and dismount in a dignified way while wearing a skirt or dress. While some women's bicycles continue to use this frame style, there is also a variation, the \"mixte\", which splits the top tube laterally into two thinner top tubes that bypass the seat tube on each side and connect to the rear fork ends. The ease of stepping through is also appreciated by those with limited flexibility or other joint problems. Because of its persistent image as a \"women's\" bicycle, step-through frames are not common for larger frames.\nStep-throughs were popular partly for practical reasons and partly for social mores of the day. For most of the history of bicycles' popularity women have worn long skirts, and the lower frame accommodated these better than the top-tube. Furthermore, it was considered \"unladylike\" for women to open their legs to mount and dismount\u2014in more conservative times women who rode bicycles at all were vilified as immoral or immodest. These practices were akin to the older practice of riding horse sidesaddle.\nAnother style is the recumbent bicycle. These are inherently more aerodynamic than upright versions, as the rider may lean back onto a support and operate pedals that are on about the same level as the seat. The world's fastest bicycle is a recumbent bicycle but this type was banned from competition in 1934 by the Union Cycliste Internationale.\nHistorically, materials used in bicycles have followed a similar pattern as in aircraft, the goal being high strength and low weight. Since the late 1930s, alloy steels have been used for frame and fork tubes in higher quality machines. By the 1980s, aluminum welding techniques had improved to the point that aluminum tube could safely be used in place of steel. Since then aluminum alloy frames and other components have become popular due to their light weight, and most mid-range bikes are now principally aluminum alloy of some kind. More expensive bikes use carbon fibre due to its significantly lighter weight and profiling ability, allowing designers to make a bike both stiff and compliant by manipulating the lay-up. Virtually all professional racing bicycles now use carbon fibre frames, as they have the best strength to weight ratio. A typical modern carbon fiber frame can weigh less than .\nOther exotic frame materials include titanium and advanced alloys. Bamboo, a natural composite material with high strength-to-weight ratio and stiffness has been used for bicycles since 1894. Recent versions use bamboo for the primary frame with glued metal connections and parts, priced as exotic models.\nDrivetrain and gearing.\nThe \"drivetrain\" begins with pedals which rotate the cranks, which are held in axis by the bottom bracket. Most bicycles use a chain to transmit power to the rear wheel. A very small number of bicycles use a shaft drive to transmit power, or special belts. Hydraulic bicycle transmissions have been built, but they are currently inefficient and complex.\nSince cyclists' legs are most efficient over a narrow range of pedaling speeds, or cadence, a variable gear ratio helps a cyclist to maintain an optimum pedalling speed while covering varied terrain. Some, mainly utility, bicycles use hub gears with between 3 and 14 ratios, but most use the generally more efficient d\u00e9railleur system, by which the chain is moved between different cogs called chainrings and sprockets to select a ratio. A d\u00e9railleur system normally has two d\u00e9railleurs, or mechs, one at the front to select the chainring and another at the back to select the sprocket. Most bikes have two or three chainrings, and from 5 to 12 sprockets on the back, with the number of theoretical gears calculated by multiplying front by back. In reality, many gears overlap or require the chain to run diagonally, so the number of usable gears is fewer.\nAn alternative to chaindrive is to use a synchronous belt. These are toothed and work much the same as a chain\u2014popular with commuters and long distance cyclists they require little maintenance. They cannot be shifted across a cassette of sprockets, and are used either as single speed or with a hub gear.\nDifferent gears and ranges of gears are appropriate for different people and styles of cycling. Multi-speed bicycles allow gear selection to suit the circumstances: a cyclist could use a high gear when cycling downhill, a medium gear when cycling on a flat road, and a low gear when cycling uphill. In a lower gear, every turn of the pedals leads to fewer rotations of the rear wheel. This allows the energy required to move the same distance to be distributed over more pedal turns, reducing fatigue when riding uphill, with a heavy load, or against strong winds. A higher gear allows a cyclist to make fewer pedal turns to maintain a given speed, but with more effort per turn of the pedals.\nWith a \"chain drive\" transmission, a \"chainring\" attached to a crank drives the chain, which in turn rotates the rear wheel via the rear sprocket(s) (cassette or freewheel). There are four gearing options: two-speed hub gear integrated with chain ring, up to 3 chain rings, up to 12 sprockets, hub gear built into rear wheel (3-speed to 14-speed). The most common options are either a rear hub or multiple chain rings combined with multiple sprockets (other combinations of options are possible but less common).\nSteering.\nThe handlebars connect to the stem that connects to the fork that connects to the front wheel, and the whole assembly connects to the bike and rotates about the steering axis via the headset bearings. Three styles of handlebar are common. \"Upright handlebars\", the norm in Europe and elsewhere until the 1970s, curve gently back toward the rider, offering a natural grip and comfortable upright position. \"Drop handlebars\" \"drop\" as they curve forward and down, offering the cyclist best braking power from a more aerodynamic \"crouched\" position, as well as more upright positions in which the hands grip the brake lever mounts, the forward curves, or the upper flat sections for increasingly upright postures. Mountain bikes generally feature a 'straight handlebar' or 'riser bar' with varying degrees of sweep backward and centimeters rise upwards, as well as wider widths which can provide better handling due to increased leverage against the wheel.\nSeating.\nSaddles also vary with rider preference, from the cushioned ones favored by short-distance riders to narrower saddles which allow more room for leg swings. Comfort depends on riding position. With comfort bikes and hybrids, cyclists sit high over the seat, their weight directed down onto the saddle, such that a wider and more cushioned saddle is preferable. For racing bikes where the rider is bent over, weight is more evenly distributed between the handlebars and saddle, the hips are flexed, and a narrower and harder saddle is more efficient. Differing saddle designs exist for male and female cyclists, accommodating the genders' differing anatomies and sit bone width measurements, although bikes typically are sold with saddles most appropriate for men. Suspension seat posts and seat springs provide comfort by absorbing shock but can add to the overall weight of the bicycle.\nA recumbent bicycle has a reclined chair-like seat that some riders find more comfortable than a saddle, especially riders who suffer from certain types of seat, back, neck, shoulder, or wrist pain. Recumbent bicycles may have either under-seat or over-seat steering.\nBrakes.\nBicycle brakes may be rim brakes, in which friction pads are compressed against the wheel rims; hub brakes, where the mechanism is contained within the wheel hub, or disc brakes, where pads act on a rotor attached to the hub. Most road bicycles use rim brakes, but some use disc brakes. Disc brakes are more common for mountain bikes, tandems and recumbent bicycles than on other types of bicycles, due to their increased power, coupled with an increased weight and complexity.\nWith hand-operated brakes, force is applied to brake levers mounted on the handlebars and transmitted via Bowden cables or hydraulic lines to the friction pads, which apply pressure to the braking surface, causing friction which slows the bicycle down. A rear hub brake may be either hand-operated or pedal-actuated, as in the back pedal \"coaster brakes\" which were popular in North America until the 1960s.\nTrack bicycles do not have brakes, because all riders ride in the same direction around a track which does not necessitate sharp deceleration. Track riders are still able to slow down because all track bicycles are fixed-gear, meaning that there is no freewheel. Without a freewheel, coasting is impossible, so when the rear wheel is moving, the cranks are moving. To slow down, the rider applies resistance to the pedals, acting as a braking system which can be as effective as a conventional rear wheel brake, but not as effective as a front wheel brake.\nSuspension.\nBicycle suspension refers to the system or systems used to \"suspend\" the rider and all or part of the bicycle. This serves two purposes: to keep the wheels in continuous contact with the ground, improving control, and to isolate the rider and luggage from jarring due to rough surfaces, improving comfort.\nBicycle suspensions are used primarily on mountain bicycles, but are also common on hybrid bicycles, as they can help deal with problematic vibration from poor surfaces. Suspension is especially important on recumbent bicycles, since while an upright bicycle rider can stand on the pedals to achieve some of the benefits of suspension, a recumbent rider cannot.\nBasic mountain bicycles and hybrids usually have front suspension only, whilst more sophisticated ones also have rear suspension. Road bicycles tend to have no suspension.\nWheels and tires.\nThe wheel axle fits into fork ends in the frame and fork. A pair of wheels may be called a wheelset, especially in the context of ready-built \"off the shelf\", performance-oriented wheels.\nTires vary enormously depending on their intended purpose. Road bicycles use tires wide, most often completely smooth, or slick, and inflated to high pressure to roll fast on smooth surfaces. Off-road tires are usually between wide, and have treads for gripping in muddy conditions or metal studs for ice.\nGroupset.\nGroupset generally refers to all of the components that make up a bicycle excluding the bicycle frame, fork, stem, wheels, tires, and rider contact points, such as the saddle and handlebars.\nAccessories.\nSome components, which are often optional accessories on sports bicycles, are standard features on utility bicycles to enhance their usefulness, comfort, safety and visibility. Fenders with spoilers (mudflaps) protect the cyclist and moving parts from spray when riding through wet areas. In some countries (e.g. Germany, UK), fenders are called mudguards. The chainguards protect clothes from oil on the chain while preventing clothing from being caught between the chain and crankset teeth. Kick stands keep bicycles upright when parked, and bike locks deter theft. Front-mounted baskets, front or rear luggage carriers or racks, and panniers mounted above either or both wheels can be used to carry equipment or cargo. Pegs can be fastened to one, or both of the wheel hubs to either help the rider perform certain tricks, or allow a place for extra riders to stand, or rest. Parents sometimes add rear-mounted child seats, an auxiliary saddle fitted to the crossbar, or both to transport children. Bicycles can also be fitted with a hitch to tow a trailer for carrying cargo, a child, or both.\nToe-clips and toestraps and clipless pedals help keep the foot locked in the proper pedal position and enable cyclists to pull and push the pedals. Technical accessories include cyclocomputers for measuring speed, distance, heart rate, GPS data etc. Other accessories include lights, reflectors, mirrors, racks, trailers, bags, water bottles and cages, and bell. Bicycle lights, reflectors, and helmets are required by law in some geographic regions depending on the legal code. It is more common to see bicycles with bottle generators, dynamos, lights, fenders, racks and bells in Europe. Bicyclists also have specialized form fitting and high visibility clothing.\nChildren's bicycles may be outfitted with cosmetic enhancements such as bike horns, streamers, and spoke beads. Training wheels are sometimes used when learning to ride, but a dedicated balance bike teaches independent riding more effectively.\nBicycle helmets can reduce injury in the event of a collision or accident, and a suitable helmet is legally required of riders in many jurisdictions. Helmets may be classified as an accessory or as an item of clothing.\nBike trainers are used to enable cyclists to cycle while the bike remains stationary. They are frequently used to warm up before races or indoors when riding conditions are unfavorable.\nStandards.\nA number of formal and industry standards exist for bicycle components to help make spare parts exchangeable and to maintain a minimum product safety.\nThe International Organization for Standardization (ISO) has a special technical committee for cycles, TC149, that has the scope of \"Standardization in the field of cycles, their components and accessories with particular reference to terminology, testing methods and requirements for performance and safety, and interchangeability\".\nThe European Committee for Standardization (CEN) also has a specific Technical Committee, TC333, that defines European standards for cycles. Their mandate states that EN cycle standards shall harmonize with ISO standards. Some CEN cycle standards were developed before ISO published their standards, leading to strong European influences in this area. European cycle standards tend to describe minimum safety requirements, while ISO standards have historically harmonized parts geometry.\nMaintenance and repair.\nLike all devices with mechanical moving parts, bicycles require a certain amount of regular maintenance and replacement of worn parts. A bicycle is relatively simple compared with a car, so some cyclists choose to do at least part of the maintenance themselves. Some components are easy to handle using relatively simple tools, while other components may require specialist manufacturer-dependent tools.\nMany bicycle components are available at several different price/quality points; manufacturers generally try to keep all components on any particular bike at about the same quality level, though at the very cheap end of the market there may be some skimping on less obvious components (e.g. bottom bracket).\nMaintenance.\nThe most basic maintenance item is keeping the tires correctly inflated; this can make a noticeable difference as to how the bike feels to ride. Bicycle tires usually have a marking on the sidewall indicating the pressure appropriate for that tire. Bicycles use much higher pressures than cars: car tires are normally in the range of , whereas bicycle tires are normally in the range of .\nAnother basic maintenance item is regular lubrication of the chain and pivot points for derailleurs and brake components. Most of the bearings on a modern bike are sealed and grease-filled and require little or no attention; such bearings will usually last for or more. The crank bearings require periodic maintenance, which involves removing, cleaning and repacking with the correct grease.\nThe chain and the brake blocks are the components which wear out most quickly, so these need to be checked from time to time, typically every or so. Most local bike shops will do such checks for free. Note that when a chain becomes badly worn, it will also wear out the rear cogs/cassette and eventually the chain ring(s), so replacing a chain when only moderately worn will prolong the life of other components.\nOver the longer term, tires do wear out, after ; a rash of punctures is often the most visible sign of a worn tire.\nRepair.\nVery few bicycle components can actually be repaired; replacement of the failing component is the normal practice.\nThe most common roadside problem is a puncture of the tire's inner tube. A patch kit may be employed to fix the puncture or the tube can be replaced, though the latter solution comes at a greater cost and waste of material. Some brands of tires are much more puncture-resistant than others, often incorporating one or more layers of Kevlar; the downside of such tires is that they may be heavier and more difficult to fit and remove.\nTools.\nThere are specialized bicycle tools for use both in the shop and at the roadside. Many cyclists carry tool kits. These may include a tire patch kit (which, in turn, may contain any combination of a hand pump or CO2 pump, tire levers, spare tubes, self-adhesive patches, or tube-patching material, an adhesive, a piece of sandpaper or a metal grater (for roughening the tube surface to be patched) and sometimes even a block of French chalk), wrenches, hex keys, screwdrivers, and a chain tool. Special, thin wrenches are often required for maintaining various screw-fastened parts, specifically, the frequently lubricated ball-bearing \"cones\". There are also cycling-specific multi-tools that combine many of these implements into a single compact device. More specialized bicycle components may require more complex tools, including proprietary tools specific for a given manufacturer.\nSocial and historical aspects.\nThe bicycle has had a considerable effect on human society, in both the cultural and industrial realms.\nIn daily life.\nAround the turn of the 20th century, bicycles reduced crowding in inner-city tenements by allowing workers to commute from more spacious dwellings in the suburbs. They also reduced dependence on horses. Bicycles allowed people to travel for leisure into the country, since bicycles were three times as energy efficient as walking and three to four times as fast.\nIn built-up cities around the world, urban planning uses cycling infrastructure like bikeways to reduce traffic congestion and air pollution. A number of cities around the world have implemented schemes known as bicycle sharing systems or community bicycle programs. The first of these was the White Bicycle plan in Amsterdam in 1965. It was followed by yellow bicycles in La Rochelle and green bicycles in Cambridge. These initiatives complement public transport systems and offer an alternative to motorized traffic to help reduce congestion and pollution. In Europe, especially in the Netherlands and parts of Germany and Denmark, bicycle commuting is common. In Copenhagen, a cyclists' organization runs a Cycling Embassy that promotes biking for commuting and sightseeing. The United Kingdom has a tax break scheme (IR 176) that allows employees to buy a new bicycle tax free to use for commuting.\nIn the Netherlands, all train stations offer free bicycle parking, or a more secure parking place for a small fee, with the larger stations also offering bicycle repair shops. Cycling is so popular that the parking capacity may be exceeded, while in some places such as Delft, the capacity is usually exceeded. In Trondheim in Norway, the Trampe bicycle lift has been developed to encourage cyclists by giving assistance on a steep hill. Buses in many cities have bicycle carriers mounted on the front.\nThere are towns in some countries where bicycle culture has been an integral part of the landscape for generations, even without much official support. That is the case of \u00cdlhavo, in Portugal.\nIn cities where bicycles are not integrated into the public transportation system, commuters often use bicycles as elements of a mixed-mode commute, where the bike is used to travel to and from train stations or other forms of rapid transit. Some students who commute several miles drive a car from home to a campus parking lot, then ride a bicycle to class. Folding bicycles are useful in these scenarios, as they are less cumbersome when carried aboard. Los Angeles removed a small amount of seating on some trains to make more room for bicycles and wheel chairs.\nSome US companies, notably in the tech sector, are developing both innovative cycle designs and cycle-friendliness in the workplace. Foursquare, whose CEO Dennis Crowley \"pedaled to pitch meetings ... [when he] was raising money from venture capitalists\" on a two-wheeler, chose a new location for its New York headquarters \"based on where biking would be easy\". Parking in the office was also integral to HQ planning. Mitchell Moss, who runs the Rudin Center for Transportation Policy &amp; Management at New York University, said in 2012: \"Biking has become the mode of choice for the educated high tech worker\".\nBicycles offer an important mode of transport in many developing countries. Until recently, bicycles have been a staple of everyday life throughout Asian countries. They are the most frequently used method of transport for commuting to work, school, shopping, and life in general. In Europe, bicycles are commonly used. They also offer a degree of exercise to keep individuals healthy.\nBicycles are also celebrated in the visual arts. An example of this is the Bicycle Film Festival, a film festival hosted all around the world.\nFemale emancipation.\nThe safety bicycle gave women unprecedented mobility, contributing to their emancipation in Western nations. As bicycles became safer and cheaper, more women had access to the personal freedom that bicycles embodied, and so the bicycle came to symbolize the New Woman of the late 19th century, especially in Britain and the United States. The bicycle craze in the 1890s also led to a movement for so-called rational dress, which helped liberate women from corsets and ankle-length skirts and other restrictive garments, substituting the then-shocking bloomers.\nThe bicycle was recognized by 19th-century feminists and suffragists as a \"freedom machine\" for women. American Susan B. Anthony said in a \"New York World\" interview on 2 February 1896: \"I think it has done more to emancipate woman than any one thing in the world. I rejoice every time I see a woman ride by on a wheel. It gives her a feeling of self-reliance and independence the moment she takes her seat; and away she goes, the picture of untrammelled womanhood.\" In 1895 Frances Willard, the tightly laced president of the Woman's Christian Temperance Union, wrote \"A Wheel Within a Wheel: How I Learned to Ride the Bicycle, with Some Reflections by the Way\", a 75-page illustrated memoir praising \"Gladys\", her bicycle, for its \"gladdening effect\" on her health and political optimism. Willard used a cycling metaphor to urge other suffragists to action.\nIn 1985, Georgena Terry started the first women-specific bicycle company. Her designs featured frame geometry and wheel sizes chosen to better fit women, with shorter top tubes and more suitable reach.\nEconomic implications.\nBicycle manufacturing proved to be a training ground for other industries and led to the development of advanced metalworking techniques, both for the frames themselves and for special components such as ball bearings, washers, and sprockets. These techniques later enabled skilled metalworkers and mechanics to develop the components used in early automobiles and aircraft.\nWilbur and Orville Wright, a pair of businessmen, ran the Wright Cycle Company which designed, manufactured and sold their bicycles during the bike boom of the 1890s.\nThey also served to teach the industrial models later adopted, including mechanization and mass production (later copied and adopted by Ford and General Motors), vertical integration (also later copied and adopted by Ford), aggressive advertising (as much as 10% of all advertising in US periodicals in 1898 was by bicycle makers), lobbying for better roads (which had the side benefit of acting as advertising, and of improving sales by providing more places to ride), all first practiced by Pope. In addition, bicycle makers adopted the annual model change (later derided as planned obsolescence, and usually credited to General Motors), which proved very successful.\nEarly bicycles were an example of conspicuous consumption, being adopted by the fashionable elites. In addition, by serving as a platform for accessories, which could ultimately cost more than the bicycle itself, it paved the way for the likes of the Barbie doll.\nBicycles helped create, or enhance, new kinds of businesses, such as bicycle messengers, traveling seamstresses, riding academies, and racing rinks. Their board tracks were later adapted to early motorcycle and automobile racing. There were a variety of new inventions, such as spoke tighteners, and specialized lights, socks and shoes, and even cameras, such as the Eastman Company's Poco. Probably the best known and most widely used of these inventions, adopted well beyond cycling, is Charles Bennett's Bike Web, which came to be called the jock strap.\nThey also presaged a move away from public transit that would explode with the introduction of the automobile.\nJ. K. Starley's company became the Rover Cycle Company Ltd. in the late 1890s, and then renamed the Rover Company when it started making cars. Morris Motors Limited (in Oxford) and \u0160koda also began in the bicycle business, as did the Wright brothers. Alistair Craig, whose company eventually emerged to become the engine manufacturers Ailsa Craig, also started from manufacturing bicycles, in Glasgow in March 1885.\nIn general, US and European cycle manufacturers used to assemble cycles from their own frames and components made by other companies, although very large companies (such as Raleigh) used to make almost every part of a bicycle (including bottom brackets, axles, etc.) In recent years, those bicycle makers have greatly changed their methods of production. Now, almost none of them produce their own frames.\nMany newer or smaller companies only design and market their products; the actual production is done by Asian companies. For example, some 60% of the world's bicycles are now being made in China. Despite this shift in production, as nations such as China and India become more wealthy, their own use of bicycles has declined due to the increasing affordability of cars and motorcycles. One of the major reasons for the proliferation of Chinese-made bicycles in foreign markets is the lower cost of labor in China.\nIn line with the European financial crisis of that time, in 2011 the number of bicycle sales in Italy (1.75\u00a0million) passed the number of new car sales.\nEnvironmental impact.\nOne of the profound economic implications of bicycle use is that it liberates the user from motor fuel consumption. (Ballantine, 1972) The bicycle is an inexpensive, fast, healthy and environmentally friendly mode of transport. Ivan Illich stated that bicycle use extended the usable physical environment for people, while alternatives such as cars and motorways degraded and confined people's environment and mobility. Currently, two billion bicycles are in use around the world. Children, students, professionals, laborers, civil servants and seniors are pedaling around their communities. They all experience the freedom and the natural opportunity for exercise that the bicycle easily provides. Bicycle also has lowest carbon intensity of travel.\nManufacturing.\nThe global bicycle market is $61\u00a0billion in 2011. As of 2009[ [update]], 130 million bicycles were sold every year globally and 66% of them were made in China.\nLegal requirements.\nEarly in its development, as with automobiles, there were restrictions on the operation of bicycles. Along with advertising, and to gain free publicity, Albert A. Pope litigated on behalf of cyclists.\nThe 1968 Vienna Convention on Road Traffic of the United Nations considers a bicycle to be a vehicle, and a person controlling a bicycle (whether actually riding or not) is considered an operator or driver. The traffic codes of many countries reflect these definitions and demand that a bicycle satisfy certain legal requirements before it can be used on public roads. In many jurisdictions, it is an offense to use a bicycle that is not in a roadworthy condition.\nIn some countries, bicycles must have functioning front and rear lights when ridden after dark.\nSome countries require cyclists to wear helmets, as this may protect riders from head trauma. Countries which require adult cyclists to wear helmets include Spain, New Zealand and Australia. Mandatory helmet wearing is one of the most controversial topics in the cycling world, with proponents arguing that it reduces head injuries and thus is an acceptable requirement, while opponents argue that by making cycling seem more dangerous and cumbersome, it reduces cyclist numbers on the streets, creating an overall negative health effect (fewer people cycling for their own health, and the remaining cyclists being more exposed through a reversed safety in numbers effect).\nTheft.\nBicycles are popular targets for theft, due to their value and ease of resale. The number of bicycles stolen annually is difficult to quantify as a large number of crimes are not reported. Around 50% of the participants in the Montreal International Journal of Sustainable Transportation survey were subjected to a bicycle theft in their lifetime as active cyclists. Most bicycles have serial numbers that can be recorded to verify identity in case of theft.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3974", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3974", "title": "Biopolymer", "text": "Polymer produced by a living organism\nBiopolymers are natural polymers produced by the cells of living organisms. Like other polymers, biopolymers consist of monomeric units that are covalently bonded in chains to form larger molecules. There are three main classes of biopolymers, classified according to the monomers used and the structure of the biopolymer formed: polynucleotides, polypeptides, and polysaccharides. The polynucleotides, RNA and DNA, are long polymers of nucleotides. Polypeptides include proteins and shorter polymers of amino acids; some major examples include collagen, actin, and fibrin. Polysaccharides are linear or branched chains of sugar carbohydrates; examples include starch, cellulose, and alginate. Other examples of biopolymers include natural rubbers (polymers of isoprene), suberin and lignin (complex polyphenolic polymers), cutin and cutan (complex polymers of long-chain fatty acids), melanin, and polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs).\nIn addition to their many essential roles in living organisms, biopolymers have applications in many fields including the food industry, manufacturing, packaging, and biomedical engineering.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n IUPAC definition\nbiopolymers: Macromolecules (including proteins, nucleic acids and polysaccharides) formed by living organisms.\nBiopolymers versus synthetic polymers.\nA major defining difference between biopolymers and synthetic polymers can be found in their structures. All polymers are made of repetitive units called monomers. Biopolymers often have a well-defined structure, though this is not a defining characteristic (example: lignocellulose): The exact chemical composition and the sequence in which these units are arranged is called the primary structure, in the case of proteins. Many biopolymers spontaneously fold into characteristic compact shapes (see also \"protein folding\" as well as secondary structure and tertiary structure), which determine their biological functions and depend in a complicated way on their primary structures. Structural biology is the study of the structural properties of biopolymers. In contrast, most synthetic polymers have much simpler and more random (or stochastic) structures. This fact leads to a molecular mass distribution that is missing in biopolymers. In fact, as their synthesis is controlled by a template-directed process in most \"in vivo\" systems, all biopolymers of a type (say one specific protein) are all alike: they all contain similar sequences and numbers of monomers and thus all have the same mass. This phenomenon is called monodispersity in contrast to the polydispersity encountered in synthetic polymers. As a result, biopolymers have a dispersity of 1.\nConventions and nomenclature.\nPolypeptides.\nThe convention for a polypeptide is to list its constituent amino acid residues as they occur from the amino terminus to the carboxylic acid terminus. The amino acid residues are always joined by peptide bonds. Protein, though used colloquially to refer to any polypeptide, refers to larger or fully functional forms and can consist of several polypeptide chains as well as single chains. Proteins can also be modified to include non-peptide components, such as saccharide chains and lipids.\nNucleic acids.\nThe convention for a nucleic acid sequence is to list the nucleotides as they occur from the 5' end to the 3' end of the polymer chain, where 5' and 3' refer to the numbering of carbons around the ribose ring which participate in forming the phosphate diester linkages of the chain. Such a sequence is called the primary structure of the biopolymer.\nPolysaccharides.\nPolysaccharides (sugar polymers) can be linear or branched and are typically joined with glycosidic bonds. The exact placement of the linkage can vary, and the orientation of the linking functional groups is also important, resulting in \u03b1- and \u03b2-glycosidic bonds with numbering definitive of the linking carbons' location in the ring. In addition, many saccharide units can undergo various chemical modifications, such as amination, and can even form parts of other molecules, such as glycoproteins.\nStructural characterization.\nThere are a number of biophysical techniques for determining sequence information. Protein sequence can be determined by Edman degradation, in which the N-terminal residues are hydrolyzed from the chain one at a time, derivatized, and then identified. Mass spectrometer techniques can also be used. Nucleic acid sequence can be determined using gel electrophoresis and capillary electrophoresis. Lastly, mechanical properties of these biopolymers can often be measured using optical tweezers or atomic force microscopy. Dual-polarization interferometry can be used to measure the conformational changes or self-assembly of these materials when stimulated by pH, temperature, ionic strength or other binding partners.\nCommon biopolymers.\nCollagen: Collagen is the primary structure of vertebrates and is the most abundant protein in mammals. Because of this, collagen is one of the most easily attainable biopolymers, and used for many research purposes. Because of its mechanical structure, collagen has high tensile strength and is a non-toxic, easily absorbable, biodegradable, and biocompatible material. Therefore, it has been used for many medical applications such as in treatment for tissue infection, drug delivery systems, and gene therapy.\nSilk fibroin: Silk Fibroin (SF) is another protein rich biopolymer that can be obtained from different silkworm species, such as the mulberry worm Bombyx mori. In contrast to collagen, SF has a lower tensile strength but has strong adhesive properties due to its insoluble and fibrous protein composition. In recent studies, silk fibroin has been found to possess anticoagulation properties and platelet adhesion. Silk fibroin has been additionally found to support stem cell proliferation in vitro.\nGelatin: Gelatin is obtained from type I collagen consisting of cysteine, and produced by the partial hydrolysis of collagen from bones, tissues and skin of animals. There are two types of gelatin, Type A and Type B. Type A collagen is derived by acid hydrolysis of collagen and has 18.5% nitrogen. Type B is derived by alkaline hydrolysis containing 18% nitrogen and no amide groups. Elevated temperatures cause the gelatin to melts and exists as coils, whereas lower temperatures result in coil to helix transformation. Gelatin contains many functional groups like NH2, SH, and COOH which allow for gelatin to be modified using nanoparticles and biomolecules. Gelatin is an Extracellular Matrix protein which allows it to be applied for applications such as wound dressings, drug delivery and gene transfection.\nStarch: Starch is an inexpensive biodegradable biopolymer and copious in supply. Nanofibers and microfibers can be added to the polymer matrix to increase the mechanical properties of starch improving elasticity and strength. Without the fibers, starch has poor mechanical properties due to its sensitivity to moisture. Starch being biodegradable and renewable is used for many applications including plastics and pharmaceutical tablets.\nCellulose: Cellulose is very structured with stacked chains that result in stability and strength. The strength and stability comes from the straighter shape of cellulose caused by glucose monomers joined by glycogen bonds. The straight shape allows the molecules to pack closely. Cellulose is very common in application due to its abundant supply, its biocompatibility, and is environmentally friendly. Cellulose is used vastly in the form of nano-fibrils called nano-cellulose. Nano-cellulose presented at low concentrations produces a transparent gel material. This material can be used for biodegradable, homogeneous, dense films that are very useful in the biomedical field.\nAlginate: Alginate is the most copious marine natural polymer derived from brown seaweed. Alginate biopolymer applications range from packaging, textile and food industry to biomedical and chemical engineering. The first ever application of alginate was in the form of wound dressing, where its gel-like and absorbent properties were discovered. When applied to wounds, alginate produces a protective gel layer that is optimal for healing and tissue regeneration, and keeps a stable temperature environment. Additionally, there have been developments with alginate as a drug delivery medium, as drug release rate can easily be manipulated due to a variety of alginate densities and fibrous composition.\nBiopolymer applications.\nThe applications of biopolymers can be categorized under two main fields, which differ due to their biomedical and industrial use.\nBiomedical.\nBecause one of the main purposes for biomedical engineering is to mimic body parts to sustain normal body functions, due to their biocompatible properties, biopolymers are used vastly for tissue engineering, medical devices and the pharmaceutical industry. Many biopolymers can be used for regenerative medicine, tissue engineering, drug delivery, and overall medical applications due to their mechanical properties. They provide characteristics like wound healing, and catalysis of bioactivity, and non-toxicity. Compared to synthetic polymers, which can present various disadvantages like immunogenic rejection and toxicity after degradation, many biopolymers are normally better with bodily integration as they also possess more complex structures, similar to the human body.\nMore specifically, polypeptides like collagen and silk, are biocompatible materials that are being used in ground-breaking research, as these are inexpensive and easily attainable materials. Gelatin polymer is often used on dressing wounds where it acts as an adhesive. Scaffolds and films with gelatin allow for the scaffolds to hold drugs and other nutrients that can be used to supply to a wound for healing.\nAs collagen is one of the more popular biopolymers used in biomedical science, here are some examples of their use:\nCollagen based drug delivery systems: collagen films act like a barrier membrane and are used to treat tissue infections like infected corneal tissue or liver cancer. Collagen films have all been used for gene delivery carriers which can promote bone formation.\nCollagen sponges: Collagen sponges are used as a dressing to treat burn victims and other serious wounds. Collagen based implants are used for cultured skin cells or drug carriers that are used for burn wounds and replacing skin.\nCollagen as haemostat: When collagen interacts with platelets it causes a rapid coagulation of blood. This rapid coagulation produces a temporary framework so the fibrous stroma can be regenerated by host cells. Collagen based haemostat reduces blood loss in tissues and helps manage bleeding in organs such as the liver and spleen.\nChitosan is another popular biopolymer in biomedical research. Chitosan is derived from chitin, the main component in the exoskeleton of crustaceans and insects and the second most abundant biopolymer in the world. Chitosan has many excellent characteristics for biomedical science. Chitosan is biocompatible, it is highly bioactive, meaning it stimulates a beneficial response from the body, it can biodegrade which can eliminate a second surgery in implant applications, can form gels and films, and is selectively permeable. These properties allow for various biomedical applications of chitosan.\nChitosan as drug delivery: Chitosan is used mainly with drug targeting because it has potential to improve drug absorption and stability. In addition, chitosan conjugated with anticancer agents can also produce better anticancer effects by causing gradual release of free drug into cancerous tissue.\nChitosan as an anti-microbial agent: Chitosan is used to stop the growth of microorganisms. It performs antimicrobial functions in microorganisms like algae, fungi, bacteria, and gram-positive bacteria of different yeast species.\nChitosan composite for tissue engineering: Chitosan powder blended with alginate is used to form functional wound dressings. These dressings create a moist, biocompatible environment which aids in the healing process. This wound dressing is also biodegradable and has porous structures that allows cells to grow into the dressing. Furthermore, thiolated chitosans (see thiomers) are used for tissue engineering and wound healing, as these biopolymers are able to crosslink via disulfide bonds forming stable three-dimensional networks.\nIndustrial.\nFood: Biopolymers are being used in the food industry for things like packaging, edible encapsulation films and coating foods. Polylactic acid (PLA) is very common in the food industry due to is clear color and resistance to water. However, most polymers have a hydrophilic nature and start deteriorating when exposed to moisture. Biopolymers are also being used as edible films that encapsulate foods. These films can carry things like antioxidants, enzymes, probiotics, minerals, and vitamins. The food consumed encapsulated with the biopolymer film can supply these things to the body.\nPackaging: The most common biopolymers used in packaging are polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs), polylactic acid (PLA), and starch. Starch and PLA are commercially available and biodegradable, making them a common choice for packaging. However, their barrier properties (either moisture-barrier or gas-barrier properties) and thermal properties are not ideal. Hydrophilic polymers are not water resistant and allow water to get through the packaging which can affect the contents of the package. Polyglycolic acid (PGA) is a biopolymer that has great barrier characteristics and is now being used to correct the barrier obstacles from PLA and starch.\nWater purification: Chitosan has been used for water purification. It is used as a flocculant that only takes a few weeks or months rather than years to degrade in the environment. Chitosan purifies water by chelation. This is the process in which binding sites along the polymer chain bind with the metal ions in the water forming chelates. Chitosan has been shown to be an excellent candidate for use in storm and wastewater treatment.\nAs materials.\nSome biopolymers- such as PLA, naturally occurring zein, and poly-3-hydroxybutyrate can be used as plastics, replacing the need for polystyrene or polyethylene based plastics.\nSome plastics are now referred to as being 'degradable', 'oxy-degradable' or 'UV-degradable'. This means that they break down when exposed to light or air, but these plastics are still primarily (as much as 98 per cent) oil-based and are not currently certified as 'biodegradable' under the European Union directive on Packaging and Packaging Waste (94/62/EC). Biopolymers will break down, and some are suitable for domestic composting.\nBiopolymers (also called renewable polymers) are produced from biomass for use in the packaging industry. Biomass comes from crops such as sugar beet, potatoes, or wheat: when used to produce biopolymers, these are classified as non food crops. These can be converted in the following pathways:\nSugar beet &gt; Glyconic acid &gt; Polyglyconic acid\nStarch &gt; (fermentation) &gt; Lactic acid &gt; Polylactic acid (PLA)\nBiomass &gt; (fermentation) &gt; Bioethanol &gt; Ethene &gt; Polyethylene\nMany types of packaging can be made from biopolymers: food trays, blown starch pellets for shipping fragile goods, thin films for wrapping.\nEnvironmental impacts.\nBiopolymers can be sustainable, carbon neutral and are always renewable, because they are made from plant or animal materials which can be grown indefinitely. Since these materials come from agricultural crops, their use could create a sustainable industry. In contrast, the feedstocks for polymers derived from petrochemicals will eventually deplete. In addition, biopolymers have the potential to cut carbon emissions and reduce CO2 quantities in the atmosphere: this is because the CO2 released when they degrade can be reabsorbed by crops grown to replace them: this makes them close to carbon neutral.\nAlmost all biopolymers are biodegradable in the natural environment: they are broken down into CO2 and water by microorganisms. These biodegradable biopolymers are also compostable: they can be put into an industrial composting process and will break down by 90% within six months. Biopolymers that do this can be marked with a 'compostable' symbol, under European Standard EN 13432 (2000). Packaging marked with this symbol can be put into industrial composting processes and will break down within six months or less. An example of a compostable polymer is PLA film under 20\u03bcm thick: films which are thicker than that do not qualify as compostable, even though they are \"biodegradable\". In Europe there is a home composting standard and associated logo that enables consumers to identify and dispose of packaging in their compost heap.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3975", "revid": "139093", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3975", "title": "2001 United Kingdom general election", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:row hover highlight/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe 2001 United Kingdom general election was held on Thursday 7 June 2001, four years after the previous election on 1 May 1997, to elect 659 members to the House of Commons. The governing Labour Party led by Prime Minister Tony Blair was re-elected to serve a second term in government with another landslide victory with a 166-seat majority, returning 412 members of Parliament versus 418 from the previous election, a net loss of six seats, although with a significantly lower turnout than before\u201459.4%, compared to 71.6% at the previous election. \nThe number of votes Labour received fell by nearly three million. Blair went on to become the only Labour prime minister to serve two consecutive full terms in office. As Labour retained almost all of their seats won in the 1997 landslide victory, the media dubbed the 2001 election \"the quiet landslide\". There was little change outside Northern Ireland, with 620 out of the 641 seats in Great Britain electing candidates from the same party as they did in 1997. A strong economy contributed to the Labour victory.\nThe opposition Conservative Party under William Hague's leadership was still deeply divided on the issue of Europe and the party's policy platform had drifted considerably to the right. The party put the issue of European monetary union, in particular the prospect of the UK joining the Eurozone, at the centre of its campaign but failed to resonate with the electorate. The Conservatives briefly had a narrow lead in the polls during the 2000 fuel strikes but Labour successfully resolved them by year end. Furthermore, a series of publicity stunts that backfired also harmed Hague, and he immediately announced his resignation as party leader when the election result was clear, formally stepping down three months later, therefore becoming the first leader of the Conservative Party in the House of Commons since Austen Chamberlain nearly eighty years prior not to serve as prime minister.\nThe election was largely a repeat of the 1997 general election, with Labour losing only six seats overall and the Conservatives making a net gain of one seat (gaining nine seats but losing eight). The Conservatives gained a seat in Scotland, which ended the party's status as an \"England-only\" party in the prior parliament, but failed again to win any seats in Wales. Although they did not gain many seats, three of the few new MPs elected were future Conservative Prime Ministers David Cameron and Boris Johnson and future Conservative Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne; Osborne would serve in the same Cabinet as Cameron from 2010 to 2016. The Liberal Democrats led by Charles Kennedy made a net gain of six seats.\nChange was seen in Northern Ireland, with the moderate unionist Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) losing four seats to the more hardline Democratic Unionist Party (DUP). A similar transition appeared in the nationalist community, with the moderate Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) losing votes to the more staunchly republican and abstentionist Sinn F\u00e9in.\nExceptionally low voter turnout, which fell below 60% for the first time since 1918, also marked this election. The election was broadcast live on BBC One and presented by David Dimbleby, Jeremy Paxman, Andrew Marr, Peter Snow, and Tony King. The 2001 general election was notable for being the first in which pictures of the party logos appeared on the ballot paper. Prior to this, the ballot paper had only displayed the candidate's name, address, and party name.\nNotable departing MPs included former Prime Ministers Edward Heath (also Father of the House) and John Major, former Deputy Prime Minister Michael Heseltine, former Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown, former Cabinet ministers Tony Benn, Tom King, John Morris, Mo Mowlam, John MacGregor and Peter Brooke, Teresa Gorman, and then Mayor of London Ken Livingstone.\nBackground.\nThe elections were marked by voter apathy, with turnout falling to 59.4%, the lowest (and first under 70%) since the Coupon Election of 1918. Throughout the election the Labour Party had maintained a significant lead in the opinion polls and the result was deemed to be so certain that some bookmakers paid out for a Labour majority before election day. However, the opinion polls the previous autumn had shown the first Tory lead (though only by a narrow margin) in the opinion polls for eight years as they benefited from the public anger towards the government over the fuel protests which had led to a severe shortage of motor fuel.\nBy the end of 2000, however, the dispute had been resolved and Labour were firmly back in the lead of the opinion polls. In total, a mere 29 parliamentary seats changed hands at the 2001 Election.\n2001 also saw the rare election of an independent. Richard Taylor of Independent Kidderminster Hospital and Health Concern (usually now known simply as \"Health Concern\") unseated a government MP, David Lock, in Wyre Forest. There was also a high vote for British National Party leader Nick Griffin in Oldham West and Royton, in the wake of recent race riots in the town of Oldham.\nIn Northern Ireland, the election was far more dramatic and marked a move by unionists away from support for the Good Friday Agreement, with the moderate unionist Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) losing to the more hardline Democratic Unionist Party (DUP). This polarisation was also seen in the nationalist community, with the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) vote losing out to more left-wing and republican Sinn F\u00e9in. It also saw a tightening of the parties as the small UK Unionist Party lost its only seat.\nCampaign.\nThe election had been expected on 3 May, to coincide with local elections, but on 2 April 2001, the local elections were postponed to 7 June because of rural movement restrictions imposed in response to the foot-and-mouth outbreak that had started in February.\nOn 8 May, Prime Minister Tony Blair announced that the general election would be held on the 7 June as expected, on the same day as the local elections. Blair made the announcement in a speech at St Saviour's and St Olave's Church of England School in Bermondsey, London rather than on the steps of Downing Street.\nFor Labour, the last four years had run relatively smoothly. The party had successfully defended all their by election seats, and many suspected a Labour win was inevitable from the start.\nMany in the party, however, were afraid of voter apathy, which was epitomised in a poster of \"Hague with Margaret Thatcher's hair\", captioned \"Get out and vote. Or they get in.\" Despite recessions in mainland Europe and the United States, due to the bursting of global tech bubbles, Britain was notably unaffected and Labour however could rely on a strong economy as unemployment continued to decline toward election day, putting to rest any fears of a Labour government putting the economic situation at risk.\nFor William Hague, however, the Conservative Party had still not fully recovered from the loss in 1997. The party was still divided over Europe, and talk of a referendum on joining the Eurozone was rife, and as a result \"Save The Pound\" was one of the key slogans deployed in the Conservatives' campaign. As Labour remained at the political centre, the Conservatives moved to the right. A policy gaffe by Oliver Letwin over public spending cuts left the party with an own goal that Labour soon exploited.\nThatcher gave a speech to the Conservative Election Rally in Plymouth on 22 May 2001, calling New Labour \"rootless, empty, and artificial.\" She also added to Hague's troubles when speaking out strongly against the Euro to applause. Hague himself, although a witty performer at Prime Minister's Questions, was dogged in the press and reminded of his speech, given at the age of 16, at the 1977 Conservative Conference. \"The Sun\" newspaper only added to the Conservatives' woes by backing Labour for a second consecutive election, calling Hague a \"dead parrot\" during the Conservative Party's conference in October 1998.\nThe Conservatives campaigned on a strongly right-wing platform, emphasising the issues of Europe, immigration and tax, the fabled \"Tebbit Trinity\". They also released a poster showing a heavily pregnant Tony Blair, stating \"Four years of Labour and he still hasn't delivered\". However, Labour countered by asking where the proposed tax cuts were going to come from, and decried the Tory policy as \"cut here, cut there, cut everywhere\", in reference to the widespread belief that the Conservatives would make major cuts to public services in order to fund tax cuts. Labour also capitalised on the strong economic conditions of the time, and another major line of attack (primarily directed towards Michael Portillo, now Shadow Chancellor after returning to Parliament via a by-election) was to warn of a return to \"Tory Boom and Bust\" under a Conservative administration.\nCharles Kennedy contested his first election as leader of the Liberal Democrats.\nDuring the election Sharron Storer, a resident of Birmingham, criticised Prime Minister Tony Blair in front of television cameras about conditions in the National Health Service. The widely televised incident happened on 16 May during a campaign visit by Blair to the Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Birmingham. Sharron Storer's partner, Keith Sedgewick, a cancer patient with non-Hodgkin lymphoma and therefore highly susceptible to infection, was being treated at the time in the bone marrow unit, but no bed could be found for him and he was transferred to the casualty unit for his first 24 hours. On the evening of the same day Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott punched a protestor after being hit by an egg on his way to an election rally in Rhyl, North Wales.\nResults.\nThe election result was effectively a repeat of 1997, as the Labour Party retained an overwhelming majority, with the BBC announcing the victory at 02:58 on the early morning of 8 June. Having presided over relatively serene political, economic and social conditions, the feeling of prosperity in the United Kingdom had been maintained into the new millennium, and Labour would have a free hand to assert its ideals in the subsequent parliament. Despite the victory, voter apathy was a major issue, as turnout fell below 60%, 12 percentage points down on 1997. All three of the main parties saw their total votes fall, with Labour's total vote dropping by 2.8 million on 1997, the Conservatives 1.3 million, and the Liberal Democrats 428,000. Some suggested this dramatic fall was a sign of the general acceptance of the status quo and the likelihood of Labour's majority remaining unassailable.\nFor the Conservatives, the huge loss they had sustained in 1997 was repeated. Despite gaining nine seats, they lost seven to the Liberal Democrats, and one even to Labour (South Dorset). William Hague was quick to announce his resignation, doing so at 07:44 outside the Conservative Party headquarters. Some believed that Hague had been unlucky; although most considered him to be a talented orator and an intelligent statesman, he had come up against the charismatic Tony Blair in the peak of his political career, and it was no surprise that little progress was made in reducing Labour's majority after a relatively smooth parliament.\nStaying at what they considered rock bottom, however, showed that the Conservatives had failed to improve their negative public image, had remained somewhat disunited over Europe, and had not regained the trust that they had lost in the 1990s. Hague's focus on the \"Save The Pound\" campaign narrative had failed to gain any traction; Labour's successful countertactic was to be repeatedly vague over the issue of future monetary union \u2013 and said that the UK would only consider joining the Eurozone \"when conditions were right\". But in Scotland, despite flipping one seat from the Scottish National Party, their vote collapse continued. They failed to retake former strongholds in Scotland as the Nationalists consolidated their grip on the Northeastern portion of the country.\nThe Liberal Democrats could point to steady progress under their new leader, Charles Kennedy, gaining more seats than the main two parties\u2014albeit only six overall\u2014and maintaining the performance of a pleasing 1997 election, where the party had doubled its number of seats from 20 to 46. While they had yet to become electable as a government, they underlined their growing reputation as a worthwhile alternative to Labour and Conservative, offering plenty of debate in Parliament and representing more than a mere protest vote.\nThe SNP failed to gain any new seats and lost a seat to the Conservatives by just 79 votes. In Wales, Plaid Cymru both gained a seat from Labour and lost one to them.\nIn Northern Ireland the Ulster Unionists, despite gaining North Down, lost five other seats.\n&lt;section begin=\"UK General Election 2001\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3978", "revid": "21586532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3978", "title": "Book of Mormon", "text": "Sacred text of the Latter Day Saint movement\nThe Book of Mormon is a religious text of the Latter Day Saint movement, first published in 1830 by Joseph Smith as The Book of Mormon: An Account Written by the Hand of Mormon upon Plates Taken from the Plates of Nephi.\nThe book is one of the earliest and most well-known unique writings of the Latter Day Saint movement. The denominations of the Latter Day Saint movement typically regard the text primarily as scripture (sometimes as one of four standard works) and secondarily as a record of God's dealings with ancient inhabitants of the Americas. Most Latter Day Saints view the book as a record of actual history, though perspectives vary by denomination: some emphasize its spiritual inspiration rather than literal history, while others\u2014particularly the LDS Church\u2014regard it as both literal history and the central \"keystone\" of their faith. Independent archaeological, historical, and scientific communities have discovered little evidence to support the existence of the civilizations described therein. Characteristics of the language and content point toward a nineteenth-century origin of the Book of Mormon. Various academics and apologetic organizations connected to the Latter Day Saint movement nevertheless argue that the book is an authentic account of the pre\u2013Columbian exchange world.\nThe Book of Mormon has a number of doctrinal discussions on subjects such as the fall of Adam and Eve, the nature of the Christian atonement, eschatology, agency, priesthood authority, redemption from physical and spiritual death, the nature and conduct of baptism, the age of accountability, the purpose and practice of communion, personalized revelation, economic justice, the anthropomorphic and personal nature of God, the nature of spirits and angels, and the organization of the latter day church. The pivotal event of the book is an appearance of Jesus Christ in the Americas shortly after his resurrection. Common teachings of the Latter Day Saint movement hold that the Book of Mormon fulfills numerous biblical prophecies by ending a global apostasy and signaling a restoration of Christian gospel.\nThe Book of Mormon is divided into smaller books \u2014 which are usually titled after individuals named as primary authors \u2014 and in most versions, is divided into chapters and verses. Its English text imitates the style of the King James Version of the Bible. The Book of Mormon has been fully or partially translated into at least 112 languages.\nOrigin.\nAccording to Smith's account and the book's narrative, the Book was originally engraved in otherwise unknown characters on golden plates by ancient prophets; the last prophet to contribute to the book, Moroni, had buried it in what is present-day Manchester, New York, and then appeared in a vision to Smith in 1827, revealing the location of the plates and instructing him to translate the plates into English. A different view is that Smith authored the Book, drawing on material and ideas from his contemporary 19th-century environment, rather than translating an ancient record.\nConceptual emergence.\nAccording to Joseph Smith, in 1823, when he was seventeen years old, an angel of God named Moroni appeared to him and said that a collection of ancient writings was buried in a nearby hill in present-day Wayne County, New York, engraved on golden plates by ancient prophets. The writings were said to describe a people whom God had led from Jerusalem to the Western Hemisphere 600 years before the birth of Jesus. Smith said this vision occurred on the evening of September 21, 1823, and that on the following day, via divine guidance, he located the burial location of the plates on this hill and was also instructed by Moroni to meet him at the same hill on September 22 of the following year to receive further instructions, which repeated annually until 1827. By the following night, Smith had told his entire immediate family about this angelic encounter and his brother William reported that the family \"believed all he [Joseph Smith] said\" about the angel and plates.\nSmith and his family reminisced that as part of what Smith believed was angelic instruction, Moroni provided Smith with a \"brief sketch\" of the \"origin, progress, civilization, laws, governments... righteousness and iniquity\" of the \"aboriginal inhabitants of the country\" (referring to the Nephites and Lamanites who figure in the Book of Mormon's primary narrative). Smith sometimes shared what he said he had learned through such angelic encounters with his family as well.\nIn Smith's account, Moroni allowed him, accompanied by his wife Emma Hale Smith, to take the plates on September 22, 1827, four years after his initial visit to the hill, and directed him to translate them into English. Smith said the angel Moroni strictly instructed him to not let anyone else see the plates without divine permission. Neighbors, some of whom had collaborated with Smith in earlier treasure-hunting enterprises, tried several times to steal the plates from Smith while he and his family guarded them.\nDictation.\nAs Smith and contemporaries reported, the English manuscript of the Book of Mormon was produced by scribes recording Smith's dictation throughout multiple sessions between 1828 and 1829. The dictation of the extant Book of Mormon was completed in 1829 in between 53 and 74 working days.\nDescriptions of the way in which Smith dictated the Book of Mormon vary. Smith himself called the Book of Mormon a translated work, but in public he generally described the process itself only in vague terms, saying he translated by a miraculous gift from God. According to some accounts from his family and friends at the time, early on, Smith copied characters off the plates as part of a process of learning to translate an initial corpus. For the majority of the process, Smith dictated the text by voicing strings of words which a scribe would write down; after the scribe confirmed they had finished writing, Smith would continue.\nSmith, all claimed that Joseph dictated by translating the ancient text through the use of the Urim and Thummim that accompanied the plates, prepared by the Lord for the purpose of translation. This \"Urim and Thummim,\" named after the biblical divination stones, also called \"Nephite interpreters\" were described as two clear seer stones which Smith said he could look through in order to translate, bound together by a metal rim and attached to a breastplate.\nOther accounts say that Smith used a seer stone he already possessed placed inside of a hat to darken the area around the stone. \nBeginning around 1832, both the interpreters and Smith's own seer stone were at times referred to as the \"Urim and Thummim\", and Smith sometimes used the term interchangeably with \"spectacles\". Emma Smith's and David Whitmer's accounts describe Smith using the interpreters while dictating to Martin Harris, and switching to only using his seer stone(s) in subsequent translation. Religious studies scholar Grant Hardy summarizes Smith's known dictation process as follows: \"Smith looked at a seer stone placed in his hat and then dictated the text of the Book of Mormon to scribes\". Early on, Smith sometimes separated himself from his scribe with a blanket between them, as he did while Martin Harris, a neighbor, scribed his dictation in 1828. At other points in the process, such as when Oliver Cowdery or Emma Smith scribed, the plates were left covered up but in the open. During some dictation sessions, the plates were entirely absent.In 1828, while scribing for Smith, Martin Harris, at the prompting of his wife Lucy Harris, repeatedly asked Smith to loan him the manuscript pages of the dictation thus far. Smith reluctantly acceded to Harris's requests. Within weeks, Harris lost the manuscript, which was most likely stolen by a member of his extended family. After the loss, Smith recorded that he lost the ability to translate and that Moroni had taken back the plates to be returned only after Smith repented. Smith later stated that God allowed him to resume translation, but directed that he begin precisely where he had left off (in what is now called the Book of Mosiah), without retranslating what had been in the lost manuscript.\nBetween September 18128 and April 1829, Smith would resumee dictating the Book of Mormon with his wife, Emma Smith, scribing in addition to occasional help from his brother Samuel Smith, though transcription accomplished was limited. In April 1829, Oliver Cowdery met Smith and, believing Smith's account of the plates, began scribing for Smith in what became a \"burst of rapid-fire translation\". In May, Joseph and Emma Smith along with Cowdery moved in with the Whitmer family, sympathetic neighbors, in an effort to avoid interruptions as they proceeded with producing the manuscript.\nWhile living with the Whitmers, Smith said he received permission to allow eleven specific others to see the uncovered golden plates and, in some cases, handle them. Their written testimonies are known as the Testimony of Three Witnesses, who described seeing the plates in a visionary encounter with an angel, and the Testimony of Eight Witnesses, who described handling the plates as displayed by Smith. Statements signed by them have been published in most editions of the Book of Mormon. In addition to both these eleven witnesses and Smith himself, several others described encountering the plates by holding or moving them wrapped in cloth, albeit without seeing the plates themselves. Their accounts of the plates tend to describe a series of thin, metallic, gold-colored sheets (the \"plates\") bound together by wires in the shape of a book.\nThe manuscript was completed in June 1829. E. B. Grandin published the Book of Mormon in Palmyra, New York. It would go on sale in his bookstore on March 26, 1830. Smith said he returned the plates to Moroni upon the publication of the book.\nViews on composition.\nMultiple theories of naturalistic composition have been proposed. In the twenty-first century, the leading naturalist interpretations of the text and its origins hold that Smith authored it himself, whether consciously or subconsciously. Smith appears to have sincerely believed in the Book of Mormon's validity as an authentic, sacred history.\nAccording to a recent survey, the majority (50%-62%) of members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) were confident that the Book of Mormon is a literal, historic record translated by Smith from actual ancient plates through divine revelation. The LDS Church, the largest Latter Day Saint denomination, maintains this as its official position.\nMethods.\nThe Book of Mormon as a written text is the transcription of what scholars Grant Hardy and William L. Davis calls an \"extended oral performance\", considered by Davis to be \"comparable in length and magnitude to classic oral epics, such as Homer's \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\"\". Eyewitnesses said Smith never referred to notes or other documents while dictating, while Smith's followers and those close to him insisted that he lacked the literary and narrative skills necessary to consciously and single-handedly produce a text like the Book of Mormon. Some naturalistic interpretations have therefore compared Smith's dictation to automatic writing arising from the subconscious. However, Ann Taves considers this description problematic for overemphasizing \"lack of control\" when historical and comparative study instead suggests Smith \"had a highly focused awareness\" and \"a considerable degree of control over the experience\" of dictation.\nIndependent scholar William L. Davis posits that Smith, upon his supposed encounter with an angel in 1823, \"carefully developed his ideas about the narratives\" of the Book of Mormon for several years by making outlines, whether mental or based on private notes, until he began the process of dictation in 1828. Smith's oral recitations about Nephites to his family could have been an opportunity to work out ideas and practice oratory. Smith had indeed received some formal education as a lay Methodist exhorter. In this interpretation, Smith believed the dictation he produced reflected an ancient history, but assembled the narrative in his own words.\nInspirations.\nEarly observers, presuming Smith incapable of writing something as long or as complex as the Book of Mormon, often searched for a possible source from which he might have plagiarized. In the nineteenth century, one popular hypothesis was that Smith collaborated with Sidney Rigdon to plagiarize an unpublished manuscript written by Solomon Spalding, which he then turned into the Book of Mormon. Since 1945, historians have considered the Spalding manuscript source hypothesis debunked, when Fawn M. Brodie thoroughly disproved the theory in her critical biography of Smith.\nSince the early twentieth century, historians have suggested Smith was inspired by \"View of the Hebrews\", an 1823 book which propounded the Hebraic Indian theory, similar in their association of American Indians with ancient Israelites and description of clashes between two dualistically opposed civilizations (\"View\" as speculation about American Indian history and the Book of Mormon as its narrative). Whether or not \"View\" influenced the Book of Mormon is the subject of debate. A pseudo-anthropological treatise, \"View\" presented allegedly empirical evidence in support of its hypothesis, that American Indians are dependents of one or several of the lost tribes of Israel. By contrast, the Book of Mormon is written as a narrative, and Christian themes predominate rather than supposedly Indigenous parallels. Additionally, while \"View\" supposes that Indigenous American peoples descended from the Ten Lost Tribes, a hypothesis which the Book of Mormon actively rejects; the peoples in the later narrative have an \"ancient Hebrew\" origin but do not descend from the lost tribes. Therefore, the Book of Mormon would, if anything, function as a response in direct opposition to the Hebraic Indian theory as presented in \"View\", rather than an uncritical repetition of its contents.\nThe Book of Mormon may creatively reconfigure, without plagiarizing, parts of the popular 1678 Christian allegory \"The Pilgrim's Progress\" written by John Bunyan\".\" For example, the Book of Mormon's martyr narrative of Abinadi shares a complex matrix of descriptive language with Faithful's martyr narrative in \"Progress\". Some other Book of Mormon narratives, such as the dream of Lehi in the book's opening, also resemble story arcs from \"Progress\" in addition to elements of other works by Bunyan, such as \"The Holy War\" and \"Grace Abounding\".\nHistorical scholarship also suggests it is plausible for Smith to have produced the Book of Mormon himself, based on his knowledge of the Bible and enabled by a democratizing religious culture interspersed by intense periods of popular Christian revivalism, namely the Second Great Awakening.\nContent.\nPresentation.\nThe presentation and content of the Book of Mormon is divisive. It was written in a Jacobean style of English similar to that seen in the King James Bible, despite being penned 2 centuries later. The novelist Jane Barnes considered the book \"difficult to read\", and according to religious studies scholar Grant Hardy, the text is characterized by an \"awkward, repetitious form of English\" with a \"nonmainstream literary aesthetic\". Terryl Givens describes the book as narratively and structurally complex, and historian Daniel Walker Howe called it \"a powerful epic written on a grand scale\" that \"should rank among the great achievements of American literature\". However, Mark Twain was far less favorable, describing it as \"chloroform in print\" and \"merely a prosy detail of imaginary history... followed by a tedious plagiarism of the New Testament.\"\nThe Book of Mormon presents its text through multiple narrators who are explicitly identified as figures within the book's own narrative. Many details included in the text reveal a strong and emphatic interest in a self-contained form of historiography: the various narrators describe the process of reading, redacting, writing, and exchanging records. The prose is accompanied relevant sermons delivered by figures from the narrative, which are presented as verbatim. Interspersed throughout the text, these internal orations make up just over 40 percent of the Book of Mormon. Periodically, the book's primary narrators will reflexively describe themselves as creating the book, references that have been described \"almost postmodern\" in their self-consciousness. Historian Laurie Maffly-Kipp explains that \"the mechanics of editing and transmitting thereby become an important feature of the text\". Barnes calls the Book of Mormon a \"scripture about writing and its influence in a post-modern world of texts\" as well as \"a statement about different voices, and possibly the problem of voice, in sacred literature\".\nOrganization.\nThe Book of Mormon is organized as a compilation of smaller books, named either after its primary named narrator, or a prominent character featured therein. The narrative begins with the First Book of Nephi (1 Nephi) and ends with the Book of Moroni.\nThe book's sequence is primarily chronological, arranged according to the sequential order of the events depicted. However, there are some exceptions to this, including the Words of Mormon and the Book of Ether. The Words of Mormon contains editorial commentary by Mormon, while The Book of Ether is presented as the narrative of an earlier group of people who had come to the American continent before the migration described in 1 Nephi. First Nephi through Omni are written in a first-person narrative, as are Mormon and Moroni. The remainder of the Book of Mormon is written in a third-person historical tone, said to be compiled and abridged by Mormon (with Moroni abridging the Book of Ether and writing the latter part of Mormon and the Book of Moroni).\nMost modern editions of the book have been divided into chapters and verses. Most editions of the book also contain supplementary material, including the \"Testimony of Three Witnesses\" and the \"Testimony of Eight Witnesses\" which appeared in the original 1830 edition and has been included in every official Latter-day Saint edition thereafter.\nNarrative.\nThe books from First Nephi to Omni are described as originating from \"the small plates of Nephi\". This account begins in ancient Jerusalem around 600 BC, telling the story of a man named Lehi, his family, and several others as they are led by God from Jerusalem shortly before the fall of that city to the Babylonians. The book describes their journey across the Arabian peninsula by land, and then to a \"promised land\" by ship, presumably an unspecified location in the Americas. These books recount the group's dealings from approximately 600 BC to about 130 BC, during which time the community grows and splits into two waring groups: the Nephites and the Lamanites. This internecine conflict features heavily throughout the rest of the narrative.\nFollowing this section is the Words of Mormon, a small book that introduces Mormon, the principal narrator for the remainder of the text. The narration describes the proceeding content (Book of Mosiah through to chapter 7 of the internal Book of Mormon) as being Mormon's abridgment of \"the large plates of Nephi\", existing records that detailed the people's history up to Mormon's own time in the 4th century AD. One section of Mormon's narrative is the Book of Third Nephi, which describes a visit by Jesus to the people of ancient America sometime after his resurrection and ascension in the New Testament. Historian John Turner calls this episode \"the climax of the entire scripture\". After this visit, the Nephites and Lamanites unite to form a harmonious, peaceful society which endures for several generations before once again breaking into warring factions again, ending in the victory of the Lamanites and the destruction of the Nephites. In the narrative, Mormon himself is a Nephite living during this period of this war, and is killed before finishing the book. From that point, his son Moroni takes over as narrator, describing himself taking his father's record into his charge and finishing its writing.\nBefore the very end of the book, Moroni describes an abridgment (called the Book of Ether) of a record from a much earlier people from a distant and long forgotten past. This includes a subplot describing a group of families who God leads away from the Tower of Babel after it falls. Led by a man named Jared and his brother, described as a prophet of God, these Jaredites travel to the \"promised land\" and establish a society there. After successive violent reversals between rival monarchs and factions, their society collapses around the time that Lehi's family arrive in the promised land further south.\nThe narrative returns to Moroni's present (Book of Moroni), in which he transcribes a few short documents, meditates on and addresses the book's audience, finishes the record, and buries the plates upon which they are narrated to be inscribed upon, before implicitly dying as his father did, in what allegedly would have been the early 5th century AD.\nTeachings.\nJesus.\nOn its title page, the Book of Mormon describes its central purpose as being the \"convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations.\" Although much of the Book of Mormon's internal chronology takes place prior to the birth of Jesus, prophets in the book frequently see him in vision and preach about him, and the people in the narrative worship Jesus as \"pre-Christian Christians.\" For example, the book's first narrator, Nephi, describes having a vision of the birth, ministry, and death of Jesus nearly 600 years prior to the nativity. Late in the book, a narrator refers to converted peoples as \"children of Christ\". By depicting ancient prophets and peoples as familiar with Jesus as a Savior, the Book of Mormon universalizes Christian salvation as being accessible across all time and places regardless of their spatial and/or temporal proximity to Christ himself. By implying that even more ancient peoples were familiar with Jesus Christ, the book presents a \"polygenist Christian history\" in which Christianity has multiple origins.\nIn the climax of the book, Jesus visits some early inhabitants of the Americas after his resurrection in an extended bodily theophany. During this ministry, he reiterates many teachings from the New Testament, re-emphasizes salvific baptism, and introduces the ritual consumption of bread and wine \"in remembrance of [his] body\", a teaching that became the basis for modern Latter-day Saints' \"memorialist\" view of their sacrament ordinance (analogous to communion). Jesus's ministry in the Book of Mormon resembles his portrayal in the Gospel of John, as Jesus similarly teaches without parables and preaches faith and obedience as a central message.\nBarnes argues that the Book of Mormon depicts Jesus as a \"revolutionary new character\", different from that of the New Testament in a portrayal that is \"constantly, subtly revising the Christian tradition\". According to historian John Turner, the Book of Mormon's depiction provides \"a twist\" on Christian trinitarianism, as Jesus in the Book of Mormon is distinct from God the Father\u2014as he prays to God during a post-resurrection visit with the Nephites\u2014while also emphasizing that Jesus and God have \"divine unity,\" with other parts of the book referring to Jesus as \"the Father and the Son\". Beliefs among the churches of the Latter Day Saint movement range between social trinitarianism (such as among Latter-day Saints) and traditional trinitarianism (such as in Community of Christ).\nPlan of salvation.\nThe Christian concept of God's plan of salvation for humanity is a frequently recurring theme of the Book of Mormon. While the Bible does not directly outline a plan of salvation, the Book of Mormon explicitly refers to the concept thirty times using a variety of terms such as \"plan of salvation\", \"plan of happiness\", and \"plan of redemption\". The Book of Mormon's plan of salvation doctrine describes life as a probationary time for people to learn the gospel of Christ through revelation given to prophets and have the opportunity to choose whether or not to obey God. Jesus' atonement then makes repentance possible, enabling the righteous to enter a heavenly state after a final judgment.\nAlthough most of Christianity traditionally considers the fall of man to be a negative development for humanity, the Book of Mormon instead portrays the fall as a foreordained step in God's plan of salvation, necessary to securing human agency, eventual righteousness, and bodily joy through physical experience. This positive interpretation of the Adam and Eve story contributes to the Book of Mormon's emphasis \"on the importance of human freedom and responsibility\" to choose salvation.\nDialogic revelation.\nIn the Book of Mormon, revelation from God typically manifests as a dialogue between God and one or more persons, characterizing the deity as an anthropomorphic being who hears prayers and provides direct answers to questions. Multiple narratives in the book portray revelation as a dialogue in which petitioners and deity engage one another in a mutual exchange whereby God's contribution originates from outside the mortal recipient. The Book of Mormon also emphasizes regular prayer as a significant component of devotional life, depicting it as a central means through which such dialogic revelation can take place. While the Old Testament of the Christian Bible links revelation specifically to prophetic authority, the Book of Mormon's portrayal democratizes the idea of revelation, depicting it as the right of every person. Figures such as Nephi and Ammon receive visions and revelatory direction prior to or without ever becoming prophets, while Laman and Lemuel are rebuked for hesitating to pray for revelation. Also in contrast with traditional Christian concept of revelation is the Book of Mormon's broader range of revelatory content. In the Book of Mormon, figures petition God for revelatory answers to doctrinal questions and ecclesiastical crises as well as for inspiration to guide hunts, military campaigns, and matters of state. The Book of Mormon depicts revelation as an active and sometimes laborious experience. For example, the Book of Mormon's Brother of Jared learns to act not merely as a petitioner with questions for God but also as an interlocutor with \"a specific proposal\" for God to consider as part of a guided process of miraculous assistance.\nApocalyptic reversal and Indigenous or nonwhite liberation.\nThe Book of Mormon's \"eschatological content\" lends to a \"theology of Native and/or nonwhite liberation\", in the words of American studies scholar Jared Hickman. The Book of Mormon's narrative content includes prophecies describing how although Gentiles (generally interpreted as being whites of European descent) would conquer the Indigenous residents of the Americas (imagined in the Book of Mormon as being a remnant of descendants of the Lamanites), this conquest would only precede the Native Americans' revival and resurgence as a God-empowered people. The Book of Mormon narrative's prophecies envision a Christian eschaton in which Indigenous people are destined to rise up as the true leaders of the continent, manifesting in a new utopia to be called \"Zion\". White Gentiles would have an opportunity to repent of their sins and join themselves to the Indigenous remnant, but if white Gentile society fails to do so, the Book of Mormon's content foretells a future \"apocalyptic reversal\" in which Native Americans will destroy white American society and replace it with a godly, Zionic society. This prophecy commanding whites to repent and become supporters of American Indians even bears \"special authority as an utterance of Jesus\" Christ himself during a messianic appearance at the book's climax.\nFurthermore, the Book of Mormon's \"formal logic\" criticizes the theological supports for racism and white supremacy prevalent in the antebellum United States by enacting a textual apocalypse. The book's apparently white Nephite narrators fail to recognize and repent of their own sinful, hubristic prejudices against the seemingly darker-skinned Lamanites in the narrative. In their pride, the Nephites repeatedly backslide into producing oppressive social orders, such that the book's narrative performs a sustained critique of colonialist racism. The book concludes with its own narrative implosion in which Lamanites suddenly succeed over and destroy Nephites in a literary turn seemingly designed to jar the average antebellum white American reader into recognizing the \"utter inadequacy of his or her rac(ial)ist common sense\".\nReligious significance.\nEarly Mormonism.\nAdherents of the early Latter Day Saint movement frequently read the Book of Mormon as a corroboration of and supplement to the Bible, persuaded by its resemblance to the King James Version's form and language. For these early readers, the Book of Mormon confirmed the Bible's scriptural veracity and resolved then-contemporary theological controversies the Bible did not seem to adequately address, such as the appropriate mode of baptism, the role of prayer, and the nature of the Christian atonement. Early church administrative design also drew inspiration from the Book of Mormon. Oliver Cowdery and Joseph Smith, respectively, used the depiction of the Christian church in the Book of Mormon as a template for their \"Articles of the Church\" and \"Articles and Covenants of the Church\".\nThe Book of Mormon was also significant in the early movement as a sign, proving Joseph Smith's claimed prophetic calling, signalling the \"restoration of all things\", and ending what was believed to have been an apostasy from true Christianity. Early Latter Day Saints tended to interpret the Book of Mormon through a millenarian lens and consequently believed the book portended Christ's imminent Second Coming. And during the movement's first years, observers identified converts with the new scripture they propounded, nicknaming them \"Mormons\".\nEarly Mormons also cultivated their own individual relationships with the Book of Mormon. Reading the book became an ordinary habit for some, and some would reference passages by page number in correspondence with friends and family. Historian Janiece Johnson explains that early converts' \"depth of Book of Mormon usage is illustrated most thoroughly through intertextuality\u2014the pervasive echoes, allusions, and expansions on the Book of Mormon text that appear in the early converts' own writings.\" Early Latter Day Saints alluded to Book of Mormon narratives, incorporated Book of Mormon turns of phrase into their writing styles, and even gave their children Book of Mormon names.\nJoseph Smith.\nLike many other early adherents of the Latter Day Saint movement, Smith referenced Book of Mormon scriptures in his preaching relatively infrequently and cited the Bible more often. In 1832, Smith dictated a revelation that condemned the \"whole church\" for treating the Book of Mormon lightly, although even after doing so Smith still referenced the Book of Mormon less often than the Bible. Nevertheless, in 1841 Joseph Smith characterized the Book of Mormon as \"the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of [the] religion\". Although Smith quoted the book infrequently, he accepted the Book of Mormon narrative world as his own.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) accepts the Book of Mormon as one of the four sacred texts in its scriptural canon called the \"standard works\". Church leaders and publications have \"strongly affirm[ed]\" Smith's claims of the book's significance to the faith. According to the church's \"Articles of Faith\"\u2014a document written by Joseph Smith in 1842 and canonized by the church as scripture in 1880\u2014members \"believe the Bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctly,\" and they \"believe the Book of Mormon to be the word of God,\" without qualification. In their evangelism, Latter-day Saint leaders and missionaries have long emphasized the book's place in a causal chain which held that if the Book of Mormon was \"verifiably true revelation of God,\" then it justified Smith's claims to prophetic authority to restore the New Testament church.\nLatter-day Saints have also long believed the Book of Mormon's contents confirm and fulfill biblical prophecies. For example, \"many Latter-day Saints\" consider the biblical patriarch Jacob's description of his son Joseph as \"a fruitful bough... whose branches run over a wall\" a prophecy of Lehi's posterity\u2014described as descendants of Joseph\u2014overflowing into the New World. Latter-day Saints also believe the Bible prophesies of the Book of Mormon as an additional testament to God's dealings with humanity.\nIn the 1980s, the church placed greater emphasis on the Book of Mormon as a central text of the faith. In 1982, it added the subtitle \"Another Testament of Jesus Christ\" to its official editions of the Book of Mormon. Ezra Taft Benson, the church's thirteenth president (1985\u20131994), especially emphasized the Book of Mormon. Referencing Smith's 1832 revelation, Benson said the church remained under condemnation for treating the Book of Mormon lightly.\nSince the late 1980s, Latter-day Saint leaders have encouraged church members to read from the Book of Mormon daily, and in the twenty-first century, many Latter-day Saints use the book in private devotions and family worship. Literary scholar Terryl Givens observes that for Latter-day Saints, the Book of Mormon is \"the principal scriptural focus\", a \"cultural touchstone, and \"absolutely central\" to worship, including in weekly services, Sunday School, youth seminaries, and more.\nApproximately 90 to 95% of all Book of Mormon printings have been affiliated with the church. As of October 2020, it has published more than 192 million copies of the Book of Mormon.\nCommunity of Christ.\nThe Community of Christ (formerly the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints or RLDS Church) views the Book of Mormon as scripture which provides an additional witness of Jesus Christ in support of the Bible. The Community of Christ publishes two versions of the book. The first is the Authorized Edition, first published by the then-RLDS Church in 1908, whose text is based on comparing the original printer's manuscript and the 1837 Second Edition (or \"Kirtland Edition\") of the Book of Mormon. Its content is similar to the Latter-day Saint edition of the Book of Mormon, but the versification is different. The Community of Christ also publishes a \"New Authorized Version\" (also called a \"reader's edition\"), first released in 1966, which attempts to modernize the language of the text by removing archaisms and standardizing punctuation.\nUse of the Book of Mormon varies among Community of Christ membership. The church describes it as scripture and includes references to the Book of Mormon in its official lectionary. In 2010, representatives told the National Council of Churches that \"the Book of Mormon is in our DNA\". The book remains a symbol of the denomination's belief in continuing revelation from God. Nevertheless, its usage in North American congregations declined between the mid-twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Community of Christ theologian Anthony Chvala-Smith describes the Book of Mormon as being akin to a \"subordinate standard\" relative to the Bible, giving the Bible priority over the Book of Mormon, and the denomination does not emphasize the book as part of its self-conceived identity. Book of Mormon use varies in what David Howlett calls \"Mormon heritage regions\": North America, Western Europe, and French Polynesia. Outside these regions, where there are tens of thousands of members, congregations almost never use the Book of Mormon in their worship, and they may be entirely unfamiliar with it. Some in Community of Christ remain interested in prioritizing the Book of Mormon in religious practice and have variously responded to these developments by leaving the denomination or by striving to re-emphasize the book.\nDuring this time, the Community of Christ moved away from emphasizing the Book of Mormon as an authentic record of a historical past. By the late-twentieth century, church president W. Grant McMurray made open the possibility the book was nonhistorical. McMurray reiterated this ambivalence in 2001, reflecting, \"The proper use of the Book of Mormon as sacred scripture has been under wide discussion in the 1970s and beyond, in part because of long-standing questions about its historical authenticity and in part because of perceived theological inadequacies, including matters of race and ethnicity.\" When a resolution was submitted at the 2007 Community of Christ World Conference to \"reaffirm the Book of Mormon as a divinely inspired record\", church president Stephen M. Veazey ruled it out-of-order. He stated, \"while the Church affirms the Book of Mormon as scripture, and makes it available for study and use in various languages, we do not attempt to mandate the degree of belief or use. This position is in keeping with our longstanding tradition that belief in the Book of Mormon is not to be used as a test of fellowship or membership in the church.\"\nGreater Latter Day Saint movement.\nSince the death of Joseph Smith in 1844, there have been approximately seventy different churches that have been part of the Latter Day Saint movement, fifty of which were extant as of 2012. Religious studies scholar Paul Gutjahr explains that \"each of these sects developed its own special relationship with the Book of Mormon\". For example James Strang, who led a denomination in the nineteenth century, reenacted Smith's production of the Book of Mormon by claiming in the 1840s and 1850s to receive and translate new scriptures engraved on metal plates, which became the Voree Plates and the Book of the Law of the Lord.\nWilliam Bickerton led another denomination, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (today called The Church of Jesus Christ), which accepted the Book of Mormon as scripture alongside the Bible although it did not canonize other Latter Day Saint religious texts like the Doctrine and Covenants and Pearl of Great Price. The contemporary Church of Jesus Christ continues to consider the \"Bible and Book of Mormon together\" to be \"the foundation of [their] faith and the building blocks of\" their church.\nNahua-Mexican Latter-day Saint Margarito Bautista believed the Book of Mormon told an Indigenous history of Mexico before European contact, and he identified himself as a \"descendant of Father Lehi\", a prophet in the Book of Mormon. Bautista believed the Book of Mormon revealed that Indigenous Mexicans were a chosen remnant of biblical Israel and therefore had a sacred destiny to someday lead the church spiritually and the world politically. To promote this belief, he wrote a theological treatise synthesizing Mexican nationalism and Book of Mormon content, published in 1935. Anglo-American LDS Church leadership suppressed the book and eventually excommunicated Bautista, and he went on to found a new Mormon denomination. Officially named \"El Reino de Dios en su Plenitud\", the denomination continues to exist in Colonial Industrial, Ozumba, Mexico as a church with several hundred members who call themselves \"Mormons\".\nSeparate editions of the Book of Mormon have been published by a number of churches in the Latter Day Saint movement, along with private individuals and organizations not endorsed by any specific denomination.\nHistoricity.\nMainstream views.\nMainstream archaeological, historical, and scientific communities do not consider the Book of Mormon an ancient record of actual historical events. Principally, the content of the Book of Mormon does not correlate with archaeological, genetic, or linguistic evidence about the past of the Americas or ancient Near East.\nArchaeology.\nThere is no accepted correlation between locations described in the Book of Mormon and known American archaeological sites. Additionally, the Book of Mormon's narrative refers to the presence of animals, plants, metals, and technologies of which archaeological and scientific studies have found little or no evidence in post-Pleistocene, pre-Columbian America. Such anachronistic references include crops such as barley, wheat, and silk; livestock like cattle, donkeys, horses, oxen, and sheep; and metals and technology such as brass, steel, the wheel, and chariots.\nMesoamerica is the preferred setting for the Book of Mormon among many apologists who advocate a limited geography model of Book of Mormon events. However, there is no evidence accepted by non-Mormons in Mesoamerican societies of cultural influence from anything described in the Book of Mormon.\nGenetics.\nUntil the late-twentieth century, most adherents of the Latter Day Saint movement who affirmed Book of Mormon historicity believed the people described in the Book of Mormon text were the exclusive ancestors of all Indigenous peoples in the Americas. DNA evidence proved that to be impossible, as no DNA evidence links any Native American group to ancestry from the ancient Near East as a belief in Book of Mormon peoples as the exclusive ancestors of Indigenous Americans would require. Instead, detailed genetic research indicates that Indigenous Americans' ancestry traces back to Asia, and reveals numerous details about the movements and settlements of ancient Americans which are either lacking in, or contradicted by, the Book of Mormon narrative.\nLinguistics and intertextuality.\nThere are no widely accepted linguistic connections between any Native American languages and Near Eastern languages, and \"the diversity of Native American languages could not have developed from a single origin in the time frame\" that would be necessary to validate a hemispheric view of Book of Mormon historicity. The Book of Mormon states it was written in a language called \"Reformed Egyptian\", clashing with Book of Mormon peoples' purported origin as the descendants of a family from the Kingdom of Judah, where inhabitants would have communicated in Aramaic, not Egyptian. There are no known examples of \"Reformed Egyptian\".\nThe Book of Mormon also includes excerpts from and demonstrates intertextuality with portions of the biblical Book of Isaiah whose widely accepted periods of creation postdate the alleged departure of Lehi's family from Jerusalem circa 600 BCE. No Latter-day Saint arguments for a unified Isaiah or criticisms of the Deutero-Isaiah and Trito-Isaiah understandings have matched the extent of scholarship supporting later datings for authorship.\nLatter Day Saint views.\nMost adherents of the Latter Day Saint movement consider the Book of Mormon to be historically authentic and to describe events that genuinely took place in the ancient Americas. Within the Latter Day Saint movement there are several individuals and apologetic organizations, most of whom are or which are composed of lay Latter-day Saints, that seek to answer challenges to or advocate for Book of Mormon historicity. For example, in response to linguistics and genetics rendering long-popular hemispheric models of Book of Mormon geography impossible, many apologists posit Book of Mormon peoples could have dwelled in a limited geographical region while Indigenous peoples of other descents occupied the rest of the Americas. To account for anachronisms, apologists often suggest Smith's translation assigned familiar terms to unfamiliar ideas. In the context of a miraculously translated Book of Mormon, supporters affirm that anachronistic intertextuality may also have miraculous explanations.\nSome apologists strive to identify parallels between the Book of Mormon and biblical antiquity, such as the presence of several complex chiasmi resembling a literary form used in ancient Hebrew poetry and in the Old Testament. Others attempt to identify parallels between Mesoamerican archaeological sites and locations described in the Book of Mormon, such as John L. Sorenson, according to whom the Santa Rosa archaeological site resembles the city of Zarahemla in the Book of Mormon. When mainstream, non-Mormon scholars examine alleged parallels between the Book of Mormon and the ancient world, however, scholars typically deem them \"chance based upon only superficial similarities\" or \"parallelomania\", the result of having predetermined ideas about the subject.\nDespite the popularity and influence among Latter-day Saints of literature propounding Book of Mormon historicity, not all Mormons who affirm Book of Mormon historicity are universally persuaded by apologetic work. Some claim historicity more modestly, such as Richard Bushman's statement that \"I read the Book of Mormon as informed Christians read the Bible. As I read, I know the arguments against the book's historicity, but I can't help feeling that the words are true and the events happened. I believe it in the face of many questions.\"\nSome denominations and adherents of the Latter Day Saint movement consider the Book of Mormon a work of inspired fiction akin to pseudepigrapha or biblical midrash that constitutes scripture by revealing true doctrine about God, similar to a common interpretation of the biblical Book of Job. Many in Community of Christ hold this view, and the leadership takes no official position on Book of Mormon historicity; among lay members, views vary. Some Latter-day Saints consider the Book of Mormon fictional, although this view is marginal in the denomination at large.\nBeliefs about geographical setting.\nRelated to the work's historicity is consideration of where its events are claimed to have occurred if historical. The LDS Church\u2014the largest denomination in the Latter Day Saint movement\u2014affirms the book as literally historical but does not make a formal claim of where precisely its events took place. Throughout much of the 19th and 20th centuries, Joseph Smith and others in the Latter Day Saint movement claimed that the book's events occurred broadly throughout North and South America. During the twentieth century, Latter-day Saint apologists backed away from this hemispheric belief in favor of believing the book's events took place in a more limited geographic setting within the Americas. This limited geography model gained broader currency in the LDS Church in the 1990s, and in the twenty-first century it is the most popular belief about Book of Mormon geography among those who believe it is historical. In 2006, the LDS Church revised its introduction to LDS editions of the Book of Mormon, which previously read that Lamanites were \"the principal ancestors of the American Indians\", to read that they are \"among the ancestors of the American Indians\". A movement among Latter-day Saints called Heartlanders believes that the Book of Mormon took place specifically within what is presently the United States.\nHistorical context.\nAmerican Indian origins.\nContact with the Indigenous peoples of the Americas prompted intellectual and theological controversy among many Europeans and European Americans who wondered how biblical narratives of world history could account for hitherto unrecognized Indigenous societies. From the seventeenth century through the early nineteenth, numerous European and American writers proposed that ancient Jews, perhaps through the Lost Ten Tribes, were the ancestors of Native Americans. One of the first books to suggest that Native Americans descended from Jews was written by Jewish-Dutch rabbi and scholar Manasseh ben Israel in 1650. Such curiosity and speculation about Indigenous origins persisted in the United States into the antebellum period when the Book of Mormon was published, as archaeologist Stephen Williams explains that \"relating the American Indians to the Lost Tribes of Israel was supported by many\" at the time of the book's production and publication. Although the Book of Mormon did not explicitly identify Native Americans as descendants of the diasporic Israelites in its narrative, nineteenth-century readers consistently drew that conclusion and considered the book theological support for believing American Indians were of Israelite descent.\nEuropean descended settlers took note of earthworks left behind by the Mound Builder cultures and had some difficulty believing that Native Americans, denigrated in racist colonial worldviews and whose numbers had been greatly reduced over the previous centuries, could have produced them. A common theory was that a more \"civilized\" and \"advanced\" people had built them, but were overrun and destroyed by a more savage, numerous group. Some Book of Mormon content resembles this \"mound-builder\" genre pervasive in the nineteenth century. Historian Curtis Dahl wrote, \"Undoubtedly the most famous and certainly the most influential of all Mound-Builder literature is the \"Book of Mormon\" (1830). Whether one wishes to accept it as divinely inspired or the work of Joseph Smith, it fits exactly into the tradition.\" Historian Richard Bushman argues the Book of Mormon does not comfortably fit the Mound Builder genre because contemporaneous writings that speculated about Native origins \"were explicit about recognizable Indian practices\" whereas the \"Book of Mormon deposited its people on some unknown shore\u2014not even definitely identified as America\u2014and had them live out their history\" without including tropes that Euro-Americans stereotyped as Indigenous.\nCritique of the United States.\nThe Book of Mormon can be read as a critique of the United States during Smith's lifetime. Historian of religion Nathan O. Hatch called the Book of Mormon \"a document of profound social protest\", and historian Bushman \"found the book thundering no to the state of the world in Joseph Smith's time.\" In the Jacksonian era of antebellum America, class inequality was a major concern as fiscal downturns and the economy's transition from guild-based artisanship to private business sharpened economic inequality, and poll taxes in New York limited access to the vote, and the culture of civil discourse and mores surrounding liberty allowed social elites to ignore and delegitimize populist participation in public discourse. Against the backdrop of these trends, the Book of Mormon condemned upper class wealth as elitist, and it criticized social norms around public discourse that silenced critique of the country.\nManuscripts.\nJoseph Smith dictated the Book of Mormon to several scribes over a period of 13 months, resulting in three manuscripts. Upon examination of pertinent historical records, the book appears to have been dictated over the course of 57 to 63 days within the 13-month period.\nThe 116 lost pages contained the first portion of the Book of Lehi; it was lost after Smith loaned the original, uncopied manuscript to Martin Harris.\nThe first completed manuscript, called the original manuscript, was completed using a variety of scribes. Portions of the original manuscript were also used for typesetting. In October 1841, the entire original manuscript was placed into the cornerstone of the Nauvoo House, and sealed up until nearly forty years later when the cornerstone was reopened. It was then discovered that much of the original manuscript had been destroyed by water seepage and mold. Surviving manuscript pages were handed out to various families and individuals in the 1880s.\nOnly 28 percent of the original manuscript now survives, including a remarkable find of fragments from 58 pages in 1991. The majority of what remains of the original manuscript is now kept in the LDS Church's archives.\nThe second completed manuscript, called the printer's manuscript, was a copy of the original manuscript produced by Oliver Cowdery and two other scribes. It is at this point that initial copyediting of the Book of Mormon was completed. Observations of the original manuscript show little evidence of corrections to the text. Shortly before his death in 1850, Cowdery gave the printer's manuscript to David Whitmer, another of the Three Witnesses. In 1903, the manuscript was bought from Whitmer's grandson by the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, now known as the Community of Christ. On September 20, 2017, the LDS Church purchased the manuscript from the Community of Christ at a reported price of $35million. The printer's manuscript is now the earliest surviving complete copy of the Book of Mormon. The manuscript was imaged in 1923 and has been made available for viewing online.\nCritical comparisons between surviving portions of the manuscripts show an average of two to three changes per page from the original manuscript to the printer's manuscript. The printer's manuscript was further edited, adding paragraphing and punctuation to the first third of the text.\nThe printer's manuscript was not used fully in the typesetting of the 1830 version of Book of Mormon; portions of the original manuscript were also used for typesetting. The original manuscript was used by Smith to further correct errors printed in the 1830 and 1837 versions of the Book of Mormon for the 1840 printing of the book.\nPrinter's manuscript ownership history.\nIn the late-19th century the extant portion of the printer's manuscript remained with the family of David Whitmer, who had been a principal founder of the Latter Day Saints and who, by the 1870s, led the Church of Christ (Whitmerite). During the 1870s, according to the \"Chicago Tribune\", the LDS Church unsuccessfully attempted to buy it from Whitmer for a record price. Church president Joseph F. Smith refuted this assertion in a 1901 letter, believing such a manuscript \"possesses no value whatever.\" In 1895, Whitmer's grandson George Schweich inherited the manuscript. By 1903, Schweich had mortgaged the manuscript for $1,800 and, needing to raise at least that sum, sold a collection including 72 percent of the book of the original printer's manuscript (John Whitmer's manuscript history, parts of Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible, manuscript copies of several revelations, and a piece of paper containing copied Book of Mormon characters) to the RLDS Church (now the Community of Christ) for $2,450, with $2,300 of this amount for the printer's manuscript.\nIn 2015, this remaining portion was published by the Church Historian's Press in its \"Joseph Smith Papers\" series, in Volume Three of \"Revelations and Translations\"; and, in 2017, the church bought the printer's manuscript for .\nEditions.\nChapter and verse notation systems.\nThe original 1830 publication had no verses (breaking the text into paragraphs instead). The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints' (LDS Church) 1852 edition numbered the paragraphs. Orson Pratt, an apostle of the denomination, divided the text into shorter chapters, organized it into verses, and added paratextual footnotes. In 1920, the LDS Church published a new edition edited by apostle James E. Talmage, who reformatted the text into double columns, imitating the prevailing format of Bibles in the United States. The next new Latter-day saint edition of the book was published in 1981; this edition added new chapter summaries and cross references.\nThe Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (RLDS Church; later renamed to Community of Christ) also published editions of the Book of Mormon. It printed editions at Plano, Illinois and Lamoni, Iowa in 1874. In 1892, the church published a large-print edition that split the original edition's paragraphs into shorter ones. From 1906 to 1908, Reversification Committee appointed by the RLDS Church revised its Book of Mormon text based on manuscript comparison and also reformatted it into shorter verses (though it retained the original chapter lengths); the RLDS Church published this version as the Revised Authorized edition, printing it beginning in April 1909.\nHistoric editions.\nThe following editions no longer in publication marked major developments in the text or reader's helps printed in the Book of Mormon.\nNon-English translations.\nThe Latter-day Saints version of the Book of Mormon has been translated into 83 languages and selections have been translated into an additional 25 languages. In 2001, the LDS Church reported that all or part of the Book of Mormon was available in the native language of 99 percent of Latter-day Saints and 87 percent of the world's total population.\nTranslations into languages without a tradition of writing (e.g., Kaqchikel, Tzotzil) have been published as audio recordings and as transliterations with Latin characters. Translations into American Sign Language are available as video recordings.\nTypically, translators are Latter-day Saints who are employed by the church and translate the text from the original English. Each manuscript is reviewed several times before it is approved and published.\nIn 1998, the church stopped translating selections from the Book of Mormon and announced that instead each new translation it approves will be a full edition.\nRepresentations in media.\nArtists have depicted Book of Mormon scenes and figures in visual art since the beginnings of the Latter Day Saint movement. The nonprofit Book of Mormon Art Catalog documents the existence of at least 2,500 visual depictions of Book of Mormon content. According to art historian Jenny Champoux, early artwork of the Book of Mormon relied on European iconography; eventually, a distinctive \"Latter-day Saint style\" developed.\nEvents of the Book of Mormon are the focus of several films produced by the LDS Church, including \"The Life of Nephi\" (1915), \"How Rare a Possession\" (1987) and \"The Testaments of One Fold and One Shepherd\" (2000). Depictions of Book of Mormon narratives in films not officially commissioned by the church (sometimes colloquially known as Mormon cinema) include \"The Book of Mormon Movie, Vol. 1: The Journey\" (2003) and \"Passage to Zarahemla\" (2007).\nIn \"one of the most complex uses of Mormonism in cinema,\" Alfred Hitchcock's film \"Family Plot\" portrays a funeral service in which a priest (apparently non-Mormon, by his appearance) reads Second Nephi https://, a passage describing Jesus Christ having victory over death.\nIn 2011, a long-running satirical musical titled \"The Book of Mormon\", written by \"South Park\" creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone in collaboration with Robert Lopez, premiered on Broadway, winning nine Tony Awards, including Best Musical. Its London production won the Olivier Award for best musical. The musical is not principally about Book of Mormon content and tells an original story about Latter-day Saint missionaries in the twenty-first century.\nIn 2019, the church began producing a series of live-action adaptations of various stories within the Book of Mormon, titled Book of Mormon Videos, which it distributed on its website and YouTube channel.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3979", "revid": "33517622", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3979", "title": "Baptists", "text": "Denomination of Protestant Christianity\nBaptists are a Protestant tradition of Christianity distinguished by baptizing only believers (believer's baptism) and doing so by total immersion. Modern Baptist churches generally subscribe to the doctrines of soul competency (the responsibility and accountability of every person before God), \"sola fide\" (justification by faith alone), \"sola scriptura\" (the Bible as the sole infallible authority) and congregationalist ecclesiastical polity. Baptists generally recognize at least two sacraments or ordinances: Baptism and the Lord's Supper.\nDiverse from their beginnings, those identifying as Baptists today may differ widely from one another in what they believe, how they worship, their attitudes toward other Christians, and their understanding of what is important in Christian discipleship. Baptist missionaries have spread various Baptist churches to every continent. The largest Baptist communion of churches is the Baptist World Alliance, and there are many different groupings of Baptist churches and Baptist congregations.\nBaptists are traced back to Dissenters from the Church of England in Great Britain. A nonconformist church was formed in Gainsborough led by the cleric John Smyth. The Gainsborough congregation and the Scrooby congregation went into exile in Amsterdam in 1608. In accordance with their exegesis of the New Testament, they came to reject infant baptism and instituted baptism only of professing believers. Thomas Helwys returned the congregation to England, where he formulated a distinctive philosophical request that the church and the state be kept separate in matters of law, so that individuals might have liberty of conscience. Baptists spread across England, where the General Baptists considered Christ's atonement to extend to all people, while the Particular Baptists believed that it extended only to the elect. The Second London Confession of Faith of 1689 is the greatest creedal document for Particular Baptists, whereas the Orthodox Creed of 1679 is the one widely accepted by General Baptists.\nOrigins.\nBaptist historian Bruce Gourley outlines four main views of Baptist origins:\nEnglish Dissenters view.\nBaptist churches trace their history to English Dissenters, in 17th century England, 75 years after the formation of the Church of England, during the English Protestant Reformation. This view of Baptist origins is the most historically accurate and is widely accepted. It was a time of considerable political and religious turmoil. Both individuals and churches were willing to give up their theological roots if they became convinced that a more biblical \"truth\" had been discovered.\nDuring the Reformation, the Church of England (Anglicans) separated from the Roman Catholic Church. There were some Christians who were not content with the achievements of the mainstream Protestant Reformation. There also were Protestants who were disappointed that the Church of England had not made corrections of what some considered to be errors and abuses, being the most critical of the church's direction. They became known as \"Puritans\". Most Puritans in the 16th century were conformists, staying in the Anglican Church and trying to make constructive changes from within. Other Puritans left the established church because of this Puritan dissatisfaction, and these became known as Separatists, Dissenters, or Nonconformists.\nIn 1579, Faustus Socinus founded the Unitarian Polish Brethren in Poland-Lithuania, which was a tolerant country. The Unitarians taught baptism by immersion. After their expulsion from the Commonwealth in 1658, many of them fled to the Netherlands. In the Netherlands, the Unitarians introduced immersion baptism to the Dutch Mennonites.\nBaptist churches have their origins with John Smyth, Thomas Helwys, and John Murton in the Kingdom of England and the Dutch Republic. Because they shared beliefs with the Congregationalists, they went into exile in 1608 with other believers who held the same positions. They believe that the Bible is to be the primary guide and that credobaptism is what the Bible teaches. In 1609, the year considered to be the foundation of the Baptist tradition, these exiled Dissenters baptized believers and their church became the first Baptist church.\nIn 1609, while still there, Smyth wrote a tract titled \"The Character of the Beast\". In it he expressed two propositions: first, infants are not to be baptized; and second, unbelievers are to be admitted into the true Church by baptism.\" Hence, his conviction was that a scriptural church should consist only of regenerate believers who had been baptized confessing faith and past sins. They rejected the doctrine of infant baptism.\nShortly thereafter, in 1610, Smyth was expelled from the church. Ultimately, Smyth became committed to believers' baptism as the only biblical baptism. He was convinced on the basis of his interpretation of Scripture that infants would not be damned if they died in infancy. Smyth, convinced that his self-baptism was invalid, applied with the Waterland Mennonites for union. He died before achieving it, and some of his supporters became Mennonites. Helwys and Murton others kept their commitment to credobaptism that would originate in the Baptist tradition. The modern Baptist denomination is an outgrowth of the Amsterdam English church. Baptists rejected the name \"Anabaptist\" when they were called that by opponents in derision because they considered Anabaptists as heretics. McBeth writes that as late as the 18th century, many Baptists referred to themselves as \"the Christians commonly\u2014though \"falsely\"\u2014called Anabaptists.\"\nHelwys took over the leadership, leading the church back to England in 1612, and he published the first Baptist confession of faith: the Helwys Declaration of Faith, or \"A Declaration of Faith of English People\", in 1611. He settled the church in Spitalfields, East London, in 1612. it became known as the first General Baptist church\nAnother milestone in the early development of the Baptist tradition was in 1638 with John Spilsbury, a Calvinist minister who later helped to promote the practice of baptism by immersion (as opposed to affusion or aspersion). According to Tom Nettles, professor of historical theology at Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, \"Spilsbury's cogent arguments for a gathered, disciplined congregation of believers baptized by immersion as constituting the New Testament church gave expression to and built on insights that had emerged within separatism, advanced in the life of John Smyth and the suffering congregation of Thomas Helwys, and matured in Particular Baptists.\"\nAnabaptist influence view.\nA minority view is that early 17th century Baptists were influenced by or even directly connected to continental Anabaptists. Representatives of this theory include A.C. Underwood and William R. Estep. Gourley writes that among some contemporary Baptist scholars, who emphasize the faith of the community over soul liberty, the Anabaptist theory is making a comeback. This view was also taught by the Reformed historian Philip Schaff. According to this view, Baptists shared common beliefs and practices with Dutch Waterlander Mennonites (one of many Anabaptist groups) including believer's baptism, belief in religious liberty and church-state separation, and similarities on soteriology.\nIt is certain that the Baptists in the Dutch Republic had contacts with the Mennonite Anabaptists, and John Smyth later even joined the Anabaptist movement, while those who remained as Baptists did so under Thomas Helwys. However, although it is possible that Helwys was subordinately influenced by Dutch Anabaptism, he still rejected multiple of their doctrines such as Melchiorite Christology and had a more high role for the civil magistrate. However, any influence Helwys and the General Baptists could have had would not necessarily translate to influence on Reformed Baptist theology, as although they share the same name, they are often viewed as having a distinct origin. Nevertheless, some historians have proposed for some Anabaptist influence on Reformed Baptists in addition to General Baptists, such as by proposing influence from a natively existing English Anabaptist population, rather than from Dutch Anabaptists. It has been sometimes speculated that a natively existing Anabaptist population in England gave rise to multiple English dissenting groups, including Particular Baptists. It has been noticed that there is some evidence for a native English Anabaptist population, and some historical records refer to two Anabaptists that were executed in England under Henry VII in 1575. However, many historians dismiss any links between the particular Baptists and Anabaptists, and there does not exist explicit evidences of Anabaptist influence on Particular Baptists.\nDespite this, relations between Baptists and Anabaptists were early strained, which makes it difficult to support the Anabaptist view consensually. In 1624, the five existing Baptist churches of London issued an epistle of anathema to the Anabaptists for what they considered heresies, and throughout the centuries Baptists strongly rejected the nomenclature of \"Anabaptist\". Furthermore, the Gainsborough church exiled in Amsterdam, under Helwys' leadership, rejected unification with the Waterlander Anabaptists after a brief period of association; and Helwys exposed negatively their beliefs and practices, considering them as heretical. Nonetheless, many modern Baptists have much more positive views of Anabaptism, emphasizing the agreements in many core areas of theology.\nSuccessionist and perpetuity view.\nTraditional Baptist historians write from the perspective that Baptists had existed since the time of Christ. Proponents of the Baptist successionist or perpetuity view consider the Baptist movement to have existed independently from Roman Catholicism and prior to the Protestant Reformation. This view has been characterized as \"apologetic and polemical\" and \"without consideration of a critical, scientific methodology\".\nThe perpetuity view is often identified with \"The Trail of Blood\", a booklet of five lectures by James Milton Carroll published in 1931. Other Baptist writers who advocated the successionist theory of Baptist origins are John T. Christian and Thomas Crosby. This view was held by English Baptist preacher Charles Spurgeon as well as Jesse Mercer, the namesake of Mercer University. In 1898 William Whitsitt was pressured to resign his presidency of the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary for denying Baptist successionism.\nBaptist origins in the United Kingdom.\nIn 1612 Helwys returned to England and settled the Amsterdam church in London, to support the Puritan reforms. A number of Nonconformist Baptist churches were formed, and they became known as the General Baptists. The Particular Baptists were established when a group of Dissenters adopted credobaptism in the 1630s. The Particular Baptists consisted of seven churches by 1644 and had drafted up a confession of faith called the First London Confession of Faith.\nBaptist origins in North America.\nBoth Roger Williams and John Clarke are variously credited as founding the earliest Baptist churches in North America. In 1638 Williams established a Baptist church in Providence, Rhode Island, and Clarke established another Baptist church in Newport, Rhode Island. According to a Baptist historian who has researched the matter extensively, \"There is much debate over the centuries as to whether the Providence or Newport church deserved the place of 'first' Baptist congregation in America. Exact records for both congregations are lacking.\"\nThe First Great Awakening energized the Baptists, where they experienced spectacular growth. Baptists became the largest Christian community in many southern states, including among the enslaved Black population.\nBaptist missionary work in Canada began in the British colony of Nova Scotia (present day Nova Scotia and New Brunswick) in the 1760s. The first official record of a Baptist church in Canada was Horton Baptist Church (now Wolfville) in Wolfville, Nova Scotia on 29 October 1778. The church was established with the assistance of the New Light evangelist Henry Alline. Many of Alline's followers, after his death, converted and strengthened the Baptist presence in the Atlantic region. Two major groups of Baptists formed the basis of the churches in the Maritimes. These were referred to as Regular Baptist (Calvinist in their doctrine) and Free Will Baptists (Arminian in their doctrine).\nIn May 1845, many Baptist churches in the South of United States seceded from the Triennial Convention, the national Baptist organization established in 1814, over slavery. The Home Mission Society prevented slaveholders from being appointed as missionaries. These churches founded their own convention: the Southern Baptist Convention. The Triennial Convention remained mostly (though not entirely) northern in composition. The Triennial Convention was reorganized in 1907 as the now called American Baptist Churches USA (ABCUSA). In 2015, Baptists in the U.S. number 50 million people and constitute roughly one-third of American Protestants.\nBaptist origins in Germany.\nThe first Baptist church in Hamburg, known as the Union of Evangelical Free Churches in Germany, was founded by the German missionary Johann Gerhard Oncken in 1834. Founded in 1849, the Union of United Congregations of Baptized Christians in Germany and Denmark merged in 1942 with the Union of Free Church Christians, which originated in the Brethren movement, and thereby took its present name. According to a census published by the association in 2023, it claimed 786 churches and 75,767 members.\nThe Evangeliumschristen-Baptisten ('Evangelical Christians-Baptists') are mostly of Russian-German origin. They were formed in 1944 from the merger of Evangeliums-Christen with the Baptists. Later, other evangelical free churches joined them. In contrast to their Eastern European countries of origin, no unified union of Evangelical Christians-Baptists was founded in Germany. Some of the newly formed congregations have come together in congregational associations such as Bruderschaft der Freien Evangeliums Christen Gemeinden ('the Brotherhood of Free Evangelical Christian Congregations') or the ('Working Group of Evangelical Congregations'). Another part is connected with German Baptists through the in the Union of Evangelical Free Churches or is united with Mennonite Brethren congregations in the Bund Taufgesinnter Gemeinden ('Union of Baptist-Minded Congregations'). In addition, there are also congregations outside of congregational associations. The congregations in the Bund Taufgesinnter Gemeinden ('Union of Baptist-Minded Congregations'; BTG) have partly Baptist, partly Mennonite roots. The federation was formed in 1989 from the merger of originally six Baptist-oriented congregations, which were primarily located in the region of Ostwestfalen-Lippe. The BTG has about 6000 members spread over 30 congregations. The Bibelseminar ('Bible seminary'), the theological training center of this association of congregations, is located in Bonn and offers a regular study program as well as a theological correspondence course and a theological evening school.\nThe International Baptist Convention goes back to church plantings by American soldiers. In Germany, 25 English-speaking congregations belong to it. From its beginnings in Wiesbaden and Frankfurt, a loose working group was formed in 1958, the Association of Baptists in Continental Europe, which was joined by other congregations and, from 1961, supported by the North American congregational association of the Southern Baptist Convention. In 1964, the Association adopted its current name.\nBaptist origins in Finland.\nPreacher Karl Justin Mathias M\u00f6llersv\u00e4rd was the first to preach Baptist teachings in Finland and sparked a revival, though he did not stay long due to fierce opposition. The movement, however, continued to grow. In 1855, a resident of \u00c5land returned from Stockholm with material about Baptist beliefs written by former Lutheran priest Anders Wiberg. Farmer Johan Erik \u00d6stling was inspired to travel to Stockholm the next year and be baptized, making him the first Finnish Baptist. Several baptisms were performed in F\u00f6gl\u00f6, \u00c5land the following year; they joined with those who had already been baptized in Sweden to found the first Finnish Baptist church in 1856 in F\u00f6gl\u00f6.\nLutheran priest Henrik Heikel, who spoke with the Baptists to learn more about their beliefs, played a key role in the church's spread. Heikel moved to mainland Finland with his family in 1860. Peders\u00f6re in Ostrobothnia was to become their home as he was installed as priest of the Lutheran church there. The family maintained contact with the Baptists in \u00c5land; after his death in 1867, his son Viktor and daughter Anna were baptized as Baptists by Wiberg in Stockholm. Their conversions led to many more after Anna returned with literature and began to hold meetings. The family received a visit from a Baptist pastor, Adolf Herman Val\u00e9n, who had been at the hearing with Heikel ten years earlier; they held meetings together and his preaching led to more conversions to the movement. He was the first Baptist to preach on the mainland. The first Baptist baptisms on the mainland were performed the same year, with Maria Ekqvist and Petter Storm\u00e5ns being the first to be baptized. The movement continued to grow in the following years and a Swedish-speaking congregation was founded in Jakobstad (Finnish: ), near Peders\u00f6re, in 1870, by thirteen people including four members of the Heikel family. That year, the Conventicle Act was also repealed in Finland. (In 1891 the Jakobstad Baptist church underwent a split due to differing views, particularly over open or closed communion.) Ostrobothnia has since remained a hub of the Baptist movement in Finland. Today, the only two Swedish-speaking Baptist churches outside the region are located in Helsinki and Karis.\nThe Baptist movement did not take long to reach the Finnish-speaking population as well. Some of the people who had been baptized in Ostrobothnia were bilingual and began to preach in Finnish, founding several Finnish-speaking churches. Henrik Nars, from Purmo, was one such preacher. In 1870, a solely Finnish-speaking sailor named Henriksson evangelized in the southwestern Finnish countryside of Satakunta after being converted in England. The Luvia Baptist congregation near Pori (Swedish: ) traces its origin, also dated 1870, to his work. In 1871, John Hymander, also a Finnish speaker, who had been a priest in the Lutheran church for 40 years, left his position in Parikkala in South Karelia and was baptized by the Baptists in Stockholm. He was known to have had a friendly relationship with the Heikel family. Several in Hymander's family soon followed in baptism and a Baptist church was founded in Parikkala in 1872. More Finnish-speaking Baptist churches were soon founded in Jurva (1879), Turku (1884), Kuopio (1886), Tampere (1890), and Ylistaro (1894). The Finnish Baptist Union was officially formed in 1903.\nReverend Erik Jansson was also a key figure in the church's spread beginning in the 1880s. After joining evangelist Dwight L. Moody's church in Chicago, Jansson returned to Finland and later joined the Baptist church in 1881. He became pastor of the Petalax Baptist Church, which at times had over 400 members and baptized 1000 people. After the Swedish Baptists had exclusively supported the development work in Finland over the first few decades, the Home Mission Society of the American Baptist Churches USA contributed financially starting around 1889.\nAccording to Statistics Finland's demographic statistics, the number of Baptists in Finland was 2,305 at the end of 2024.\nBaptist origins in Ukraine.\nThe Baptist churches in Ukraine were preceded by the German Anabaptist and Mennonite communities, who had been living in southern Ukraine since the 16th century, and who practiced adult believer's baptism. The first Baptist baptism (adult baptism by full immersion) in Ukraine took place in 1864 on the river Inhul in the Yelizavetgrad region (now Kropyvnytskyi region), in a German settlement. In 1867, the first Baptist churches were organized in that area. From there, the Baptist tradition spread across the south of Ukraine and then to other regions as well.\nOne of the first Baptist communities was registered in Kyiv in 1907, and in 1908 the First All-Russian Convention of Baptists was held there, as Ukraine was still controlled by the Russian Empire. The All-Russian Union of Baptists was established in Yekaterinoslav (now Dnipro) in southern Ukraine. At the end of the 19th century, there were between 100,000 and 300,000 Baptists in Ukraine. An independent All-Ukrainian Baptist Union of Ukraine was established during the brief period of Ukraine's independence in early 20th-century and once again after the fall of the Soviet Union, the largest of which is currently known as the Evangelical Baptist Union of Ukraine. Prior to its independence in 1991, Ukraine was home to the second largest Baptist community in the world, after the United States, and was called the \"Bible Belt\" of the Soviet Union.\nBaptist churches.\nSome Baptist church congregations choose to be independent of larger church organizations (Independent Baptist). Other Baptist churches choose to be part of an international or national Baptist Christian denomination or association while still adhering to a congregationalist polity. This cooperative relationship allows the development of common organizations, for mission and societal purposes, such as humanitarian aid, schools, theological institutes and hospitals.\nThe majority of Baptist churches are part of national denominations (or 'associations' or 'cooperative groups'), as well as the Baptist World Alliance (BWA), formed in 1905 by 24 Baptist denominations from various countries. The BWA's goals include caring for the needy, leading in world evangelism and defending human rights and religious freedom.\nMissionary organizations.\nMissionary organizations favored the development of the movement on all continents. The BMS World Mission was founded in 1792 at Kettering, England. In United States, International Ministries was founded in 1814, and the International Mission Board was founded in 1845.\nMembership.\nMembership policies vary due to the autonomy of churches, but generally an individual becomes a member of a church through a believer's baptism (which is a public profession of faith in Jesus, followed by immersion baptism). Most Baptists do not believe that baptism is a requirement for salvation but rather a public expression of inner repentance and faith. In general, Baptist churches do not have a stated age restriction on membership, but a believer's baptism requires that an individual be able to freely and earnestly profess their faith.\nIn 2010, an estimated 100 million Christians identified as Baptist or belonging to a Baptist-type church. In 2020, according to the researcher S\u00e9bastien Fath of the CNRS, the Baptist movement has around 170 million believers in the world. According to a census released in 2024, the BWA includes 266 participating fellowships in 134 countries, with 178,000 churches and 51 million baptized members. These statistics may not be fully representative, however, since some churches in the United States have dual or triple national Baptist affiliation, causing a church and its members to be counted possibly by more than one Baptist association, if these associations are members of the BWA.\nAmong the censuses carried out by individual Baptist associations in 2023, those which claimed the most members on each continent were:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nBeliefs.\nChristianity encompasses various movements of Christian theology, the main ones being conservative fundamentalist or moderate, liberal and progressive.\nSince the early days of the Baptist movement, various associations have adopted common confessions of faith as the basis for cooperative work among churches. Each church has a particular confession of faith and a common confession of faith if it is a member of an association of churches. For Reformed Baptists, historically significant Baptist doctrinal documents include the 1689 London Baptist Confession of Faith, the 1742 Philadelphia Baptist Confession, and the 1833 New Hampshire Baptist Confession of Faith. For General Baptists (Freewill Baptists), the Orthodox Creed and the Treatise on the Faith and Practice of the Free Will Baptists are adhered to. Written church covenants which are adopted by some individual Baptist churches, especially Independent Baptist congregations, as a statement of their faith and beliefs.\nBaptist theology is a subset of evangelical theology. It is based on believers' Church doctrine. Baptists, like other Christians, are defined by a school of thought\u2014some of it common to all orthodox and evangelical groups, and a portion of it distinctive to Baptists. Through the years, different Baptist groups have issued confessions of faith\u2014without considering them to be \"creeds\"\u2014to express their particular doctrinal distinctions in comparison to other Christians as well as in comparison to other Baptists. Baptist denominations are traditionally seen as belonging to two parties, General Baptists who uphold Arminian theology, and Particular Baptists who uphold Reformed theology (Calvinism). During the holiness movement, some General Baptists accepted the teaching of a second work of grace and formed denominations that emphasized this belief, such as the Ohio Valley Association of the Christian Baptist Churches of God and the Holiness Baptist Association. Most Baptists are evangelical in doctrine, but their beliefs may vary due to the congregational governance system that gives autonomy to individual local Baptist churches. Historically, Baptists have played a key role in encouraging religious freedom and the doctrine of separation of church and state.\nShared doctrines would include beliefs about one God; the virgin birth of Jesus; miracles; substitutionary atonement for sins through the death, burial, and bodily resurrection of Jesus; the Trinity; the need for salvation (through belief in Jesus Christ as the Son of God, his death and resurrection); grace; the Kingdom of God; last things (eschatology) (Jesus Christ will return personally and visibly in glory to Earth, the dead will be raised and Christ will judge everyone in righteousness); and evangelism and missions.\nMost Baptists hold that no church or ecclesiastical organization has inherent authority over a Baptist church. Churches can properly relate to each other under this polity only through voluntary cooperation, never by any sort of coercion. Furthermore, this Baptist polity calls for freedom from governmental control. Exceptions to this local form of local governance include a few churches that submit to the leadership of a body of elders, as well as the Episcopal Baptists who have an Episcopal system.\nBaptists generally believe in the literal Second Coming of Christ. Beliefs among Baptists regarding the \"end times\" include amillennialism, both dispensational and historic premillennialism, with views such as postmillennialism and preterism receiving some support.\nSome additional distinctive Baptist principles held by many Baptists:\nBeliefs that vary among Baptists.\nSince there is no hierarchical authority and each Baptist church is autonomous, there is no official set of Baptist theological beliefs. These differences exist among associations and even among churches within the associations. Some doctrinal issues on which there is widespread difference among Baptists are:\nExcommunication may be used as a last resort by some denominations and churches for members who do not want to repent of beliefs or behavior at odds with the confession of faith of the community. When an entire congregation is excluded, it is often called disfellowship.\nTypes of Baptists.\nGeneral Baptists.\nGeneral Baptists are Baptists who hold to the doctrine of general atonement, believing that Jesus Christ's vicarious death was an atonement for all humanity\u2014not only for the elect. The first credobaptists in England and Wales were General Baptists. The General Baptists wished further reformation in the Church of England. They produced the Standard Confession of Faith, in 1660, and the Orthodox Creed, in 1679.\nLater, General Baptists became very ecumenical, especially with the Anglican Church, and approached the Classical Arminian soteriology under Thomas Grantham's influence.\nFree Will Baptists in the United States are a sub-group within the General Baptist strand.\nReformed Baptists (Particular Baptists).\nThe Particular Baptists or Reformed Baptists or Calvinistic Baptists are Baptists who hold to the Calvinistic view of salvation. Depending on the denomination, Calvinistic Baptists adhere to varying degrees of Reformed theology, ranging from simply embracing the Five Points of Calvinism, to accepting a modified form of federalism; all Calvinistic Baptists reject the classical Reformed teaching on infant baptism. While the Reformed Baptist confessions affirm views of the nature of baptism similar to those of the classical Reformed, they reject infants as the proper subjects of baptism.\nIn distinction to the General Baptists who emphasized separation from the Church of England, many Particular Baptists sought more ecumenism.\nPrimitive Baptists are a type of Calvinist Baptists who adhere to some type of Reformed beliefs, who came out of the controversy among Baptists on the use of mission boards, tract societies and temperamence societies. Primitive Baptists reject some elements of classical Reformed theology, such as infant baptism, and avoid the term \"Calvinist\". They are still Calvinist in the sense of holding strongly to the Five Points of Calvinism and they explicitly reject Arminianism. They are also characterized by \"intense conservatism\".\nMissionary Baptists.\nThe Missionary Baptists were a group of Baptists that came from the missionary controversy in the United States, where the Missionary Baptists supported the usage of missionaries.\nIndependent Baptists.\nIndependent Baptists are Baptists who arose from local Baptist congregations whose members were concerned about the doctrines of theological liberalism in national Baptist conventions. Independent Baptists are primarily fundamentalist, and although they may differ on multiple issues such as soteriology, dress standards, music, the practice of communion among others, they are homogenous on issues such as opposition to homosexuality, ordination of women, the charismatic movement, evolution and abortion.\nNew Independent Baptists.\nDuring the 21st century, the New Independent Fundamental Baptist movement was founded out of the Independent Baptist movement by Steven Anderson due to perceived liberalism in Independent Baptist churches. However, this movement has been heavily criticized by Independent Baptists due to many doctrinal differences. Some former New IFB pastors in addition to other Baptists have also charged the association with being a cult.\nThe New IFB is characterized by radical exclusivism, and it rejects the major historical creeds of Christianity.\nSeventh Day Baptists.\nSeventh Day Baptists are Baptists who practice seventh-day Sabbatarianism. However, it is not certain when Seventh Day Baptists took denominational form, and they do not claim an unbroken succession of church organization from before the Reformation.\nLandmark Baptists.\nLandmark Baptists are a Baptist movement which originated in the 19th century in United States, with leaders such as J. R. Graves, J. M. Pendleton and A. C. Dayton, although they denied being a new movement, but a continuation of the old-fashioned Baptists. Landmark Baptists believe that the term \"church\" should be reserved for Baptist churches exclusively, arguing that groups such as Methodists or Presbyterians are not churches at all, but only religious societies. They believe that Baptists share an unbroken line of succession from the early church.\nWorship.\nIn Baptist churches, worship service is part of the life of the church and includes praise, worship, of prayers to God, a sermon based on the Bible, offering, and periodically the Lord's Supper. Some churches have services with traditional Christian music, others with contemporary Christian music, and some offer both in separate services. In many churches, there are services adapted for children, even teenagers. Prayer meetings are also held during the week.\nThe architecture is generally sober, and the Latin cross is one of the only spiritual symbols that can usually be seen on the building of a Baptist church and that identifies the place where it belongs.\nEducation.\nBaptist churches established elementary and secondary schools, Bible colleges, colleges and universities as early as the 1680s in England, before continuing in various countries. In 2006, the International Association of Baptist Colleges and Universities was founded in the United States. In 2023, it had 42 member universities.\nSexuality.\nMany churches promote virginity pledges to young Baptist Christians, who are invited to engage in a public ceremony of sexual abstinence until Christian marriage. This pact is often symbolized by a purity ring. Programs like True Love Waits, founded in 1993 by the Southern Baptist Convention, have been developed to support the commitments.\nMost Baptist associations around the world believe only in marriage between a man and a woman. Some Baptist associations do not have official beliefs about marriage in a confession of faith and invoke congregationalism to leave the choice to each church to decide. This is the case for American Baptist Churches USA, Progressive National Baptist Convention (USA), Cooperative Baptist Fellowship (USA), National Baptist Convention, USA, and the Baptist Union of Great Britain. Some Baptist associations support same-sex marriage. This is the case for the Alliance of Baptists (USA), the Canadian Association for Baptist Freedoms, the Alian\u00e7a de Batistas do Brasil, the Fraternidad de Iglesias Bautistas de Cuba, and the Association of Welcoming and Affirming Baptists (international).\nControversies.\nBaptists have faced many controversies in their 400-year history, controversies of the level of crises. Baptist historian Walter Shurden says the word \"crisis\" comes from the Greek word meaning 'to decide.' Shurden writes that contrary to the presumed negative view of crises, some controversies that reach a crisis level may actually be \"positive and highly productive.\" He claims that even schism, though never ideal, has often produced positive results. In his opinion, crises among Baptists each have become decision moments that shape their future.\nMissions crisis.\nEarly in the 19th century, the rise of the modern missions movement, and the backlash against it, led to widespread and bitter controversy among the American Baptists. During this era, the American Baptists were split between missionary and anti-missionary. A substantial secession of Baptists went into the movement led by Alexander Campbell to return to a more fundamental church.\nSlavery crisis.\nUnited States.\nLeading up to the American Civil War, Baptists became embroiled in the controversy over slavery in the United States. Whereas in the First Great Awakening, Methodist and Baptist preachers had opposed slavery and urged manumission, over the decades they made more of an accommodation with the institution. They worked with slaveholders in the South to urge a paternalistic institution. Both denominations made direct appeals to slaves and free Blacks for conversion. The Baptists particularly allowed them to play active roles in congregations. By the mid-19th century, northern Baptists tended to oppose slavery. As tensions increased, in 1844 the Home Mission Society refused to appoint a slaveholder as a missionary who had been proposed by Georgia. It noted that missionaries could not take servants with them, and also that the board did not want to appear to condone slavery.\nIn 1845, a group of churches in favor of slavery and in disagreement with the abolitionism of the Triennial Convention (now American Baptist Churches USA) left to form the Southern Baptist Convention. They believed that the Bible sanctions slavery, and that it was acceptable for Christians to own slaves. They believed slavery was a human institution which Baptist teaching could make less harsh. By this time, many planters were part of Baptist congregations, and some of the denomination's prominent preachers, such as Basil Manly Sr., president of the University of Alabama, were also planters who owned slaves.\nAs early as the late 18th century, Black Baptists began to organize separate churches, associations and mission agencies. Blacks set up some independent Baptist congregations in the South before the Civil War. White Baptist associations maintained some oversight of these churches.\nIn the postwar years, freedmen quickly left white congregations and associations, setting up their own churches. In 1866, the Consolidated American Baptist Convention, formed from Black Baptists of the South and West, helped southern associations set up Black state conventions, which they did in Alabama, Arkansas, Virginia, North Carolina, and Kentucky. In 1880, Black state conventions united in the national Foreign Mission Convention to support Black Baptist missionary work. Two other national Black conventions were formed, and in 1895 they united as the National Baptist Convention. This organization later went through its own changes, spinning off other conventions. It is the largest Black religious organization and the second-largest Baptist organization in the world. Baptists are numerically the most dominant in the Southeast. In 2007, the Pew Research Center's Religious Landscape Survey found that 45% of all African Americans identify with Baptist denominations, with the vast majority of those being within the historically Black tradition.\nIn the American South, the interpretation of the Civil War, the abolition of slavery and the postwar period has differed sharply by race since those years. Americans have often interpreted great events in religious terms. Historian Wilson Fallin contrasts the interpretation of Civil War and Reconstruction in White versus Black memory by analyzing Baptist sermons documented in Alabama. They quickly organized their own congregations and developed their own regional and state associations and, by the end of the 19th century, a national convention.\nWhite preachers in Alabama after Reconstruction expressed the view that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;God had chastised them and given them a special mission \u2013 to maintain orthodoxy, strict biblicism, personal piety, and \"traditional\" race relations. Slavery, they insisted, had not been sinful. Rather, emancipation was a historical tragedy and the end of Reconstruction was a clear sign of God's favor.\nBlack preachers interpreted the Civil War, Emancipation and Reconstruction as \"God's gift of freedom.\" They had a gospel of liberation, having long been identified with the Book of Exodus from slavery in the Old Testament. They took opportunities to exercise their independence, to worship in their own way, to affirm their worth and dignity, and to proclaim the fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man. Most of all, they quickly formed their own churches, associations, and conventions to operate freely without white supervision. These institutions offered self-help and racial uplift, a place to develop and use leadership, and places for the proclamation of the gospel of liberation. As a result, Black preachers said that God would protect and help him and God's people; God would be their rock in a stormy land.\nThe Southern Baptist Convention supported white supremacy and its results: disenfranchising most Blacks and many poor whites at the turn of the 20th century by raising barriers to voter registration, and passage of racial segregation laws that enforced the system of Jim Crow. Its members largely resisted the civil rights movement in the South, which sought to enforce their constitutional rights for public access and voting; and enforcement of midcentury federal civil rights laws.\nIn 1995, the Southern Baptist Convention passed a resolution that recognized the failure of their ancestors to protect the civil rights of African Americans. More than 20,000 Southern Baptists registered for the meeting in Atlanta. The resolution declared that messengers, as SBC delegates are called, \"unwaveringly denounce racism, in all its forms, as deplorable sin\" and \"lament and repudiate historic acts of evil such as slavery from which we continue to reap a bitter harvest.\" It offered an apology to all African Americans for \"condoning and/or perpetuating individual and systemic racism in our lifetime\" and repentance for \"racism of which we have been guilty, whether consciously or unconsciously.\" Although Southern Baptists have condemned racism in the past, this was the first time the convention, predominantly White since the Reconstruction era, had specifically addressed the issue of slavery.\nThe statement sought forgiveness \"from our African-American brothers and sisters\" and pledged to \"eradicate racism in all its forms from Southern Baptist life and ministry.\" In 1995, about 500,000 members of the 15.6-million-member denomination were African Americans and another 300,000 were ethnic minorities. The resolution marked the denomination's first formal acknowledgment that racism played a role in its founding.\nCaribbean islands.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; A healthy Church kills error, and tears evil in pieces! Not so very long ago our nation tolerated slavery in our colonies. Philanthropists endeavored to destroy slavery, but when was it utterly abolished? It was when Wilberforce roused the Church of God, and when the Church of God addressed herself to the conflict\u2014then she tore the evil thing to pieces! \u2013 C.H. Spurgeon an outspoken British Baptist opponent of slavery in 'The Best War Cry' (1883)\nElsewhere in the Americas, in the Caribbean in particular, Baptist missionaries and members took an active role in the anti-slavery movement. In Jamaica, for example, William Knibb, a prominent British Baptist missionary, worked toward the emancipation of slaves in the British West Indies (which took place in full in 1838). Knibb supported the creation of \"Free Villages\" and sought funding from English Baptists to buy land for freedmen to cultivate; the Free Villages were envisioned as rural communities to be centered around a Baptist church where emancipated slaves could farm their own land. Thomas Burchell, missionary minister in Montego Bay, was active in this movement, gaining funds from Baptists in England to buy land for what became known as Burchell Free Village.\nPrior to emancipation, Baptist deacon Samuel Sharpe, who served with Burchell, organized a general strike of slaves seeking better conditions. It developed into a major rebellion of as many as 60,000 slaves, which became known as the Christmas Rebellion or the Baptist War. It was put down by government troops within two weeks. During and after the rebellion, an estimated 200 slaves were killed outright, with more than 300 judicially executed later by prosecution in the courts, sometimes for minor offenses.\nBaptists were active after emancipation in promoting the education of former slaves; for example, Jamaica's Calabar High School, named after the port of Calabar in Nigeria, was founded by Baptist missionaries. At the same time, during and after slavery, slaves and free Blacks formed their own Spiritual Baptist movements\u2014breakaway spiritual movements which theology often expressed resistance to oppression.\nLandmark crisis.\nSouthern Baptist Landmarkism sought to reset the ecclesiastical separation which had characterized the old Baptist churches, in an era when inter-denominational union meetings were the order of the day. James Robinson Graves was an influential Baptist of the 19th century and the primary leader of this movement. While some Landmarkers eventually separated from the Southern Baptist Convention, the movement continued to influence the Convention into the 20th and 21st centuries.\nModernist crisis.\nThe rise of theological modernism in the late 19th and early 20th centuries also greatly affected Baptists. The Landmark movement has been described as a reaction among Southern Baptists in the United States against incipient modernism. In England, Charles Spurgeon fought against modernistic views of the Scripture in the Downgrade Controversy and severed his church from the Baptist Union as a result.\nThe Northern Baptist Convention in the United States had internal conflict over modernism in the early 20th century, ultimately embracing it. Two new conservative associations of congregations that separated from the convention were founded as a result: the General Association of Regular Baptist Churches in 1933 and the Conservative Baptist Association of America in 1947.\nFollowing similar conflicts over modernism, the Southern Baptist Convention adhered to conservative theology as its official position. In the late 20th century, Southern Baptists who disagreed with this direction founded two new groups: the liberal Alliance of Baptists in 1987 and the more moderate Cooperative Baptist Fellowship in 1991. Originally both schisms continued to identify as Southern Baptist, but over time they \"became permanent new families of Baptists.\"\nCriticism.\nIn his 1963 book, \"Strength to Love\", Baptist pastor Martin Luther King Jr. criticized some Baptist churches for their anti-intellectualism, especially because of the lack of theological training among pastors.\nIn 2018, Baptist theologian Russell D. Moore criticized some Baptists in the United States for their moralism emphasizing strongly the condemnation of certain personal sins, but being silent on the social injustices that afflict entire populations, such as racism. In 2020, the North American Baptist Fellowship, a region of the Baptist World Alliance, officially made a commitment to social justice and spoke out against institutionalized discrimination in the American justice system. In 2022, the Baptist World Alliance adopted a resolution encouraging Baptist churches and associations that have historically contributed to the sin of slavery to engage in restorative justice.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
