{"id": "1029", "revid": "48463355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1029", "title": "Albert Schweitzer", "text": "German-French theologian and philosopher (1875\u20131965)\nLudwig Philipp Albert Schweitzer (; 14 January 1875\u00a0\u2013 4 September 1965) was a German polymath from Alsace. He was a theologian, organist, musicologist, writer, humanitarian, philosopher, and physician. As a Lutheran minister, Schweitzer challenged both the secular view of the historical Jesus as depicted by the historical-critical method current at this time, as well as the traditional Christian view. His contributions to the interpretation of Pauline Christianity concern the role of Paul's mysticism of \"being in Christ\" as primary and the doctrine of justification by faith as secondary.\nHe received the 1952 Nobel Peace Prize for his philosophy of \"Reverence for Life\", becoming the eighth Frenchman to be awarded that prize. His philosophy was expressed in many ways, but most famously in founding and sustaining the H\u00f4pital Albert Schweitzer in Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9, French Equatorial Africa (now Gabon). As a music scholar and organist, he studied the music of German composer Johann Sebastian Bach and influenced the Organ Reform Movement (\"Orgelbewegung\").\nEarly years.\nSchweitzer was born on 14 January 1875 in Kaysersberg in Alsace, in what had less than four years previously become the Imperial Territory of Alsace-Lorraine in the German Empire. He later became a citizen of France after World War I, when Alsace became French territory again. He was the son of Ad\u00e8le (n\u00e9e Schillinger) and Louis Th\u00e9ophile Schweitzer. He spent his childhood in Gunsbach, also in Alsace, where his father, the local Lutheran-Evangelical pastor of the EPCAAL, taught him how to play music. The tiny village would become home to the Association Internationale Albert Schweitzer (AIAS).\nThe medieval parish church of Gunsbach was shared by the Protestant and Catholic congregations, which held their prayers in different areas at different times on Sundays. This compromise arose after the Protestant Reformation and the Thirty Years' War. Schweitzer, the pastor's son, grew up in this exceptional environment of religious tolerance, and developed the belief that true Christianity should always work towards a unity of faith and purpose.\nSchweitzer's first language was the Alsatian dialect of German. At the Mulhouse gymnasium he received his \"Abitur\" (the certificate at the end of secondary education) in 1893. He studied organ in Mulhouse from 1885 to 1893 with Eug\u00e8ne Munch, organist at the Protestant cathedral, who inspired Schweitzer with his enthusiasm for the music of German composer Richard Wagner. In 1893, he played for the French organist Charles-Marie Widor (at Saint-Sulpice, Paris), for whom Johann Sebastian Bach's organ music contained a mystic sense of the eternal. Widor, deeply impressed, agreed to teach Schweitzer without fee, and a great and influential friendship thus began.\nFrom 1893 Schweitzer studied Protestant theology at the Kaiser Wilhelm University in Strasbourg. There he also received instruction in piano and counterpoint from professor Gustav Jacobsthal, and associated closely with Ernest Munch, the brother of his former teacher, organist of St William church, who was also a passionate admirer of J. S. Bach's music. Schweitzer served his one-year compulsory military service in 1894. Schweitzer saw many operas of Richard Wagner in Strasbourg under Otto Lohse, and in 1896 he managed to afford a visit to the Bayreuth Festival to see Wagner's and \"Parsifal\", both of which impressed him.\nIn 1898, he returned to Paris to write a PhD dissertation on \"The Religious Philosophy of Kant\" at the Sorbonne, and to study in earnest with Widor. Here he often met with the elderly Aristide Cavaill\u00e9-Coll. He also studied piano at that time with Marie Ja\u00ebll. In 1899, Schweitzer spent the summer semester at the University of Berlin and eventually obtained his theology degree at the University of Strasbourg. He published his PhD thesis at the University of T\u00fcbingen in 1899.\nIn 1905, Schweitzer began his study of medicine at the University of Strasbourg, culminating in the degree of M.D. in 1913.\nMusic.\nSchweitzer rapidly gained prominence as a musical scholar and organist, dedicated also to the rescue, restoration and study of historic pipe organs. With theological insight, he interpreted the use of pictorial and symbolical representation in J. S. Bach's religious music. In 1899, he astonished Widor by explaining figures and motifs in Bach's Chorale Preludes as painter-like tonal and rhythmic imagery illustrating themes from the words of the hymns on which they were based. They were works of devotional contemplation in which the musical design corresponded to literary ideas, conceived visually. Widor had not grown up with knowledge of the old Lutheran hymns.\nThe exposition of these ideas, encouraged by Widor and Munch, became Schweitzer's last task, and appeared in the masterly study \"J. S. Bach: Le Musicien-Po\u00e8te\", written in French and published in 1905. There was great demand for a German edition, but, instead of translating it, he decided to rewrite it. The result was two volumes (\"J. S. Bach\"), which were published in 1908 and translated into English by Ernest Newman in 1911. Ernst Cassirer, a contemporaneous German philosopher, called it \"one of the best interpretations\" of Bach.\nDuring its preparation, Schweitzer became a friend of Cosima Wagner, then resident in Strasbourg, with whom he had many theological and musical conversations, exploring his view of Bach's descriptive music, and playing the major Chorale Preludes for her at the Temple Neuf. Schweitzer's interpretative approach greatly influenced the modern understanding of Bach's music. He became a welcome guest at the Wagners' home, Wahnfried. He also corresponded with composer Clara Faisst, who became a good friend.\nHis 1906 pamphlet \"The Art of Organ Building and Organ Playing in Germany and France\", republished with an appendix on the state of the organ-building industry in 1927, effectively launched the 20th-century \"Orgelbewegung\", which turned away from romantic extremes and rediscovered baroque principles\u2014although this sweeping reform movement in organ building eventually went further than Schweitzer had intended. In 1909, he addressed the \"Third Congress of the International Society of Music\" at Vienna on the subject. Having circulated a questionnaire among players and organ-builders in several European countries, he produced a very considered report.\nThis provided the basis for the \"International Regulations for Organ Building\". He envisaged instruments in which the French late-romantic full-organ sound should work integrally with the English and German romantic reed pipes, and with the classical Alsace Silbermann organ resources and baroque flue pipes, all in registers regulated (by stops) to access distinct voices in fugue or counterpoint capable of combination without loss of distinctness: different voices singing the same music together.\nSchweitzer also studied piano under Isidor Philipp, head of the piano department at the Paris Conservatory.\nIn 1905, Widor and Schweitzer were among the six musicians who founded the Paris Bach Society, a choir dedicated to performing J. S. Bach's music, for whose concerts Schweitzer took the organ part regularly until 1913. He was also appointed organist for the Bach Concerts of the Orf\u00e9o Catal\u00e0 at Barcelona, Spain, and often travelled there for that purpose. He and Widor collaborated on a new edition of Bach's organ works, with detailed analysis of each work in English, French, and German. Schweitzer, who insisted that the score should show Bach's notation with no additional markings, wrote the commentaries for the Preludes and Fugues, and Widor those for the Sonatas and Concertos: six volumes were published in 1912\u201314. Three more, to contain the Chorale Preludes with Schweitzer's analyses, were to be worked on in Africa, but these were never completed, perhaps because for him they were inseparable from his evolving theological thought.\nOn departure for Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9 in 1913, he was presented with a pedal piano, a piano with pedal attachments to operate like an organ pedal-keyboard. Built especially for the tropics, it was delivered by river in a huge dug-out canoe to Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9, packed in a zinc-lined case. At first, he regarded his new life as a renunciation of his art, and fell out of practice, but after some time he resolved to study and learn by heart the works of Bach, Mendelssohn, Widor, C\u00e9sar Franck, and Max Reger systematically. It became his custom to play during the lunch hour and on Sunday afternoons. Schweitzer's pedal piano was still in use at Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9 in 1946. According to a visitor, Dr. Gaine Cannon, of Balsam Grove, N.C., the old, dilapidated piano-organ was still being played by Dr. Schweitzer in 1962, and stories told that \"his fingers were still lively\" on the old instrument at 88 years of age.\nSir Donald Tovey dedicated his conjectural completion of Bach's \"The Art of Fugue\" to Schweitzer.\nSchweitzer's recordings of organ music, and his innovative recording technique, are described below.\nOne of his pupils was conductor and composer Hans M\u00fcnch.\nTheology.\nIn 1899, Schweitzer became a deacon at the church of Saint Nicholas in Strasbourg. In 1900, with the completion of his licentiate in theology, he was ordained as priest, and that year he witnessed the Oberammergau Passion Play. In the following year, he became provisional Principal of the Theological College of Saint Thomas, from which he had just graduated, and in 1903 his appointment was made permanent.\nIn 1906, he published \"Geschichte der Leben-Jesu-Forschung\" (History of Life-of-Jesus research). This book, which established his reputation, was first published in English in 1910 as \"The Quest of the Historical Jesus\". Under this title the book became famous in the English-speaking world. A second German edition was published in 1913, containing theologically significant revisions and expansions: this revised edition did not appear in English until 2001. In 1931, he published \"Mystik des Apostels Paulus\" (\"The Mysticism of Paul the Apostle\"). A second edition was published in 1953.\n\"The Quest of the Historical Jesus\" (1906).\nIn \"The Quest\", Schweitzer criticised the liberal view put forward by liberal and romantic scholars during the first quest for the historical Jesus. Schweitzer maintained that the life of Jesus must be interpreted in the light of Jesus' own convictions, which reflected late Jewish eschatology and apocalypticism. Schweitzer writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Jesus of Nazareth who came forward publicly as the Messiah, who preached the ethic of the kingdom of God, who founded the kingdom of heaven upon earth and died to give his work its final consecration never existed. He is a figure designed by rationalism, endowed with life by liberalism, and clothed by modern theology in a historical garb. This image has not been destroyed from outside; it has fallen to pieces...\nInstead of these liberal and romantic views, Schweitzer wrote that Jesus and his followers expected the imminent end of the world.\nSchweitzer cross-referenced the many New Testament verses declaring imminent fulfilment of the promise of the World's ending within the lifetime of Jesus's original followers. \nHe wrote that in his view, in the Gospel of Mark, Jesus speaks of a \"tribulation\", with his \"coming in the clouds with great power and glory.\" In Mark 13:30 \nJesus says \"This generation will not pass away until all these things have taken place.\" In Matthew 16:28 Jesus says \u201cTruly I tell you, some who are standing here will not taste death before they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom.\u201d Obviously, Jesus and his followers truly believed that he would return within the disciples lifetime and specifically states the timeframe that it will happen, but it has not! \"This generation shall not pass, till all these things be fulfilled\" (Matthew, 24:34) or, \"have taken place\" (Luke 21:32). Similarly, in 1st Peter 1:20, \"Christ, who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world but was manifest in these last times for you\", as well as \"But the end of all things is at hand\" (1 Peter 4:7) and \"Surely, I come quickly.\" (Revelation 22:20). Either Jesus, his disciples and/or the noted chapter authors were and remain seriously mistaken; the promised second return timeframe has long ago passed.\nSchweitzer concluded his treatment of Jesus with what has been called the most famous words of twentieth-century theology:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"He comes to us as One unknown, without a name, as of old, by the lake-side, He came to those men who knew him not. He speaks to us the same word: 'Follow thou me' and sets us to the task which He has to fulfill for our time. He commands. And to those who obey Him, whether they be wise or simple, He will reveal Himself in the toils, the conflicts, the sufferings which they shall pass through in His fellowship, and as an ineffable mystery, they shall learn in their own experience Who He is.\"\n\"The Mysticism of Paul the Apostle\" (1931).\nIn \"The Mysticism of Paul the Apostle\", Schweitzer first distinguishes between two categories of mysticism: primitive and developed. Primitive mysticism \"has not yet risen to a conception of the universal, and is still confined to naive views of earthly and super-earthly, temporal and eternal\". Additionally, he argues that this view of a \"union with the divinity, brought about by efficacious ceremonies, is found even in quite primitive religions\".\nOn the other hand, a more developed form of mysticism can be found in the Greek mystery-cults that were popular in first-century A.D. society. These included the cults of Attis, Osiris, and Mithras. A developed form of mysticism is attained when the \"conception of the universal is reached and a man reflects upon his relation to the totality of being and to Being in itself\". Schweitzer claims that this form of mysticism is more intellectual and can be found \"among the Brahmans and in the Buddha, in Platonism, in Stoicism, in Spinoza, Schopenhauer, and Hegel\".\nNext, Schweitzer poses the question: \"Of what precise kind then is the mysticism of Paul?\" He locates Paul between the two extremes of primitive mysticism and developed mysticism. Paul stands high above primitive mysticism, due to his intellectual writings, but never speaks of being one with God or being in God. Instead, he conceives of sonship to God as \"mediated and effected by means of the mystical union with Christ\". He summarizes Pauline mysticism as \"being in Christ\" rather than \"being in God\".\nPaul's imminent eschatology, from his background in Jewish eschatology, causes him to believe that the kingdom of God has not yet come and that Christians are now living in the time of Christ. Christ-mysticism holds the field until God-mysticism becomes possible, which is in the near future. Therefore, Schweitzer argues that Paul is the only theologian who does not claim that Christians can have an experience of \"being-in-God\". Rather, Paul uses the phrase \"being-in-Christ\" to illustrate how Jesus is a mediator between the Christian community and God. Additionally, Schweitzer explains how the experience of \"being-in-Christ\" is not a \"static partaking in the spiritual being of Christ, but as the real co-experiencing of His dying and rising again\". The \"realistic\" partaking in the mystery of Jesus is only possible within the solidarity of the Christian community.\nOne of Schweitzer's major arguments in \"The Mysticism of Paul the Apostle\" is that Paul's mysticism, marked by his phrase \"being in Christ\", gives the clue to the whole of Pauline theology. Rather than reading justification by faith as the main topic of Pauline thought, which has been the most popular argument set forward by Martin Luther, Schweitzer argues that Paul's emphasis was on the mystical union with God by \"being in Christ\". Jaroslav Pelikan, in his foreword to \"The Mysticism of Paul the Apostle\", points out that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the relation between the two doctrines was quite the other way around: 'The doctrine of the redemption, which is mentally appropriated through faith, is only a fragment from the more comprehensive mystical redemption-doctrine, which Paul has broken off and polished to give him the particular refraction which he requires.\nPaul's \"realism\" versus Hellenistic \"symbolism\".\nSchweitzer contrasts Paul's \"realistic\" dying and rising with Christ to the \"symbolism\" of Hellenism. Although Paul is widely influenced by Hellenistic thought, he is not controlled by it. Schweitzer explains that Paul focused on the idea of fellowship with the divine being through the \"realistic\" dying and rising with Christ rather than the \"symbolic\" Hellenistic act of becoming like Christ through deification. After baptism, Christians are continually renewed throughout their lifetimes due to participation in the dying and rising with Christ (most notably through the Sacraments). On the other hand, the Hellenist \"lives on the store of experience which he acquired in the initiation\" and is not continually affected by a shared communal experience.\nAnother major difference between Paul's \"realism\" and Hellenistic \"symbolism\" is the exclusive nature of the former and the inclusive nature of the latter. Schweitzer unabashedly emphasizes the fact that \"Paul's thought follows predestinarian lines\". He explains, \"only the man who is elected thereto can enter into relation with God\". Although every human being is invited to become a Christian, only those who have undergone the initiation into the Christian community through baptism can share in the \"realistic\" dying and rising with Christ.\nMedicine.\nAt the age of 30, in 1905, Schweitzer answered the call of The Society of the Evangelist Missions of Paris, which was looking for a physician. The committee of this missionary society was not ready to accept his offer, considering his Lutheran theology to be \"incorrect\". He could easily have obtained a place in a German evangelical mission, but wished to follow the original call despite the doctrinal difficulties. Amid a hail of protests from his friends, family and colleagues, he resigned from his post and re-entered the university as a student in a three-year course towards the degree of Doctorate in Medicine, a subject in which he had little knowledge or previous aptitude. He planned to spread the Gospel by the example of his Christian labour of healing, rather than through the verbal process of preaching, and believed that this service should be acceptable within any branch of Christian teaching.\nEven in his study of medicine, and through his clinical course, Schweitzer pursued the ideal of the philosopher-scientist. By extreme application and hard work, he completed his studies successfully at the end of 1911. His medical degree dissertation was another work on the historical Jesus, \"Die psychiatrische Beurteilung Jesu. Darstellung und Kritik\" (The psychiatric evaluation of Jesus. Description and criticism), published in English in 1948 as \"The Psychiatric Study of Jesus. Exposition and Criticism\". He defended Jesus' mental health in it. In June 1912, he married Helene Bresslau, municipal inspector for orphans and daughter of the Jewish pan-Germanist historian Harry Bresslau.\nIn 1912, now armed with a medical degree, Schweitzer made a definite proposal to go as a physician to work at his own expense in the Paris Missionary Society's mission at Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9 on the Ogoou\u00e9 river, in what is now Gabon, in Africa, then a French colony. He refused to attend a committee to inquire into his doctrine, but met each committee member personally and was at last accepted. Through concerts and other fund-raising, he was ready to equip a small hospital.\nIn early 1913, he and his wife set off to establish a hospital, the H\u00f4pital Albert Schweitzer, near an existing mission post. The site was nearly 200 miles, 14 days by raft, upstream from the mouth of the Ogoou\u00e9 at Port Gentil (Cape Lopez). It was accessible to external communications, but downstream of most tributaries, so that internal communications within Gabon converged towards Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9.\nIn the first nine months, he and his wife had about 2,000 patients to examine, some travelling many days and hundreds of kilometres to reach him. In addition to injuries, he was often treating severe sandflea and crawcraw infections, \"yaws\", tropical eating sores, heart disease, tropical dysentery, tropical malaria, sleeping sickness, leprosy, fevers, strangulated hernias, necrosis, abdominal tumours and chronic constipation and nicotine poisoning, while also attempting to deal with deliberate poisonings, fetishism and fear of cannibalism among the Mbahouin.\nSchweitzer's wife, Helene Schweitzer, served as an anaesthetist for surgical operations. After briefly occupying a shed formerly used as a chicken hut, in late 1913 they built their first hospital of corrugated iron, with a consulting room and operating theatre and with a dispensary and sterilising room. The waiting room and dormitory were built, like native huts, of unhewn logs along a path leading to the boat landing. The Schweitzers had their own bungalow and employed as their assistant Joseph, a French-speaking Mpongwe, who first came to Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9 as a patient.\nAfter World War I broke out in July 1914, Schweitzer and his wife, German citizens in a French colony when the countries were at war, were put under supervision by the French military at Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9, where Schweitzer continued his work. In 1917, exhausted by over four years' work and by tropical anaemia, they were taken to Bordeaux and interned first in Garaison and then from March 1918 in Saint-R\u00e9my-de-Provence. In July 1918, after being transferred to his home in Alsace, he was a free man again. At this time Schweitzer, born a German citizen, had his parents' former pre-1871 French citizenship reinstated, and became a French citizen.\nWorking as a medical assistant and assistant-pastor in Strasbourg, he advanced his project on the philosophy of civilization, which had occupied his mind since 1900. By 1920, his health recovering, he was giving organ recitals and doing other fund-raising work to repay borrowings and raise funds for returning to Gabon. In 1922, he delivered the Dale Memorial Lectures in the University of Oxford, and from these in the following year appeared Volumes I and II of his great work, \"The Decay and Restoration of Civilization\" and \"Civilization and Ethics\". The two remaining volumes, on \"The World-View of Reverence for Life \" and a fourth on the Civilized State, were never completed.\nIn 1924, Schweitzer returned to Africa without his wife, but with an Oxford undergraduate, Noel Gillespie, as his assistant. Everything was heavily decayed, and building and doctoring progressed together for months. He now had salvarsan for treating syphilitic ulcers and framboesia. Additional medical staff, nurse (Miss) Kottmann and Dr. Victor Nessmann, joined him in 1924, and Dr. Mark Lauterberg in 1925; the growing hospital was staffed by native orderlies. Later Dr. Trensz replaced Nessmann, and Martha Lauterberg and Hans Muggenstorm joined them. Joseph also returned. In 1925\u20136, new hospital buildings were constructed, and also a ward for white patients, so that the site became like a village. The onset of famine and a dysentery epidemic created fresh problems.\nMuch of the building work was carried out with the help of local people and patients. Drug advances for sleeping sickness included Germanin and tryparsamide. Trensz conducted experiments showing that the non-amoebic strain of dysentery was caused by a paracholera vibrion (facultative anaerobic bacteria). With the new hospital built and the medical team established, Schweitzer returned to Europe in 1927, this time leaving a functioning hospital at work.\nHe was there again from 1929 to 1932. Gradually his opinions and concepts became acknowledged, not only in Europe, but worldwide. There was a further period of work in 1935. In January 1937, he returned to Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9 and continued working there throughout World War II.\nHospital conditions.\nIn 1953, the journalist James Cameron visited Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9, when Schweitzer was 78, and found significant flaws in the practices and attitudes of Schweitzer and his staff. The hospital suffered from squalor and was without modern amenities, and Schweitzer had little contact with the local people. Cameron did not make public what he had seen at the time: according to a BBC dramatisation, he made the unusual journalistic decision to withhold the story, and resisted the expressed wish of his employers to publish an expos\u00e9.\nThe poor conditions of the hospital in Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9 were also famously criticized by Nigerian professor and novelist Chinua Achebe in his essay on Joseph Conrad's novel \"Heart of Darkness\": \"In a comment which has often been quoted Schweitzer says: 'The African is indeed my brother but my junior brother.' And so he proceeded to build a hospital appropriate to the needs of junior brothers with standards of hygiene reminiscent of medical practice in the days before the germ theory of disease came into being.\"\nSchweitzer's biographer Edgar Berman, who was a volunteer surgeon at Lambarene for several months and had extended conversations with Schweitzer, has a different perspective. Schweitzer felt that patients were better off, and the hospital functioned better given the severe lack of funding, if patients' families lived on the hospital grounds during treatment. Surgical survival rates were, Berman asserts, as high as in many fully equipped western hospitals. The volume of patients needing care, the difficulty of obtaining materials and supplies, and the scarcity of trained medical staff willing to work long hours in the remote setting for almost no pay all argued for a spartan setting with an emphasis on high medical standards nevertheless.\nSchweitzer's views.\nColonialism.\nSchweitzer considered his work as a medical missionary in Africa to be his response to Jesus' call to become \"fishers of men\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Who can describe the injustice and cruelties that in the course of centuries they [the coloured peoples] have suffered at the hands of Europeans?... If a record could be compiled of all that has happened between the white and the coloured races, it would make a book containing numbers of pages which the reader would have to turn over unread because their contents would be too horrible.\nSchweitzer was one of colonialism's harshest critics. In a sermon that he preached on 6 January 1905, before he had told anyone of his plans to dedicate the rest of his life to work as a physician in Africa, he said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Our culture divides people into two classes: civilized men, a title bestowed on the persons who do the classifying; and others, who have only the human form, who may perish or go to the dogs for all the 'civilized men' care.\nOh, this 'noble' culture of ours! It speaks so piously of human dignity and human rights and then disregards this dignity and these rights of countless millions and treads them underfoot, only because they live overseas or because their skins are of different colour or because they cannot help themselves. This culture does not know how hollow and miserable and full of glib talk it is, how common it looks to those who follow it across the seas and see what it has done there, and this culture has no right to speak of personal dignity and human rights...\nI will not enumerate all the crimes that have been committed under the pretext of justice. People robbed native inhabitants of their land, made slaves of them, let loose the scum of mankind upon them. Think of the atrocities that were perpetrated upon people made subservient to us, how systematically we have ruined them with our alcoholic 'gifts', and everything else we have done... We decimate them, and then, by the stroke of a pen, we take their land so they have nothing left at all...\nIf all this oppression and all this sin and shame are perpetrated under the eye of the German God, or the American God, or the British God, and if our states do not feel obliged first to lay aside their claim to be 'Christian'\u2014then the name of Jesus is blasphemed and made a mockery. And the Christianity of our states is blasphemed and made a mockery before those poor people. The name of Jesus has become a curse, and our Christianity\u2014yours and mine\u2014has become a falsehood and a disgrace, if the crimes are not atoned for in the very place where they were instigated. For every person who committed an atrocity in Jesus' name, someone must step in to help in Jesus' name; for every person who robbed, someone must bring a replacement; for everyone who cursed, someone must bless.\nAnd now, when you speak about missions, let this be your message: We must make atonement for all the terrible crimes we read of in the newspapers. We must make atonement for the still worse ones, which we do not read about in the papers, crimes that are shrouded in the silence of the jungle night...In a second memoir, he exalted colonialism as a moral good: When the indigenous people express their discontent for being dominated by the whites, I tell them that without us they would no longer exist, since they would have killed each other off or would have ended up in the cooking-pot of the Pahouins [also known as the Fang, a leading Gabonese tribe]. They cannot rebut this argument. In general, despite the mischief for which the whites are guilty in their work of colonisation everywhere, they can however assert that they have brought peace to conquered peoples.\nPaternalism.\nSchweitzer was nonetheless still sometimes accused of being paternalistic in his attitude towards Africans. For instance, he thought that Gabonese independence came too early, without adequate education or accommodation to local circumstances. Edgar Berman quotes Schweitzer as having said in 1960, \"No society can go from the primeval directly to an industrial state without losing the leavening that time and an agricultural period allow.\" Schweitzer believed dignity and respect must be extended to blacks, while also sometimes characterizing them as children.\nHe summarized his views on European-African relations by saying \"With regard to the negroes, then, I have coined the formula: 'I am your brother, it is true, but your elder brother.'\" Chinua Achebe has criticized him for this characterization, though Achebe acknowledges that Schweitzer's use of the word \"brother\" at all was, for a European of the early 20th century, an unusual expression of human solidarity between Europeans and Africans. Schweitzer eventually emended and complicated this notion with his later statement that \"The time for speaking of older and younger brothers has passed\".\nAmerican journalist John Gunther visited Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9 in the 1950s and reported Schweitzer's patronizing attitude towards Africans. He also noted the lack of Africans trained to be skilled workers. By comparison, his English contemporary Albert Ruskin Cook in Uganda had been training nurses and midwives since the 1910s, and had published a manual of midwifery in the local language of Luganda. After three decades in Africa, Schweitzer still depended on Europe for nurses.\nIn line with his well-documented racial views, he once summarized: A word in conclusion about the relations between the whites and the blacks. What must be the general character of the intercourse between them? Am I to treat the black man as my equal or my inferior? I must show him that I can respect the dignity of the human personality in every one, and this attitude in me he must be able to see for himself; but the essential thing is that there should be a real feeling of brotherliness. How far this is to find complete expression in the sayings and doings of daily life must be settled by circumstances. The negro is a child, and with children nothing can be done without the use of authority. We must therefore so arrange the circumstances of daily life that my natural authority can find expression. With regard to the negroes, then, I have coined the formula: \u201cI am your brother, it is true, but your elder brother.\u201d\nReverence for life.\nThe keynote of Schweitzer's personal philosophy, which he considered to be his greatest contribution to mankind, was the idea of \"Reverence for Life\" (). He thought that Western civilization was decaying because it had abandoned affirmation of life as its ethical foundation.\nIn the Preface to \"Civilization and Ethics\" (1923) he argued that Western philosophy from Descartes to Kant had set out to explain the objective world expecting that humanity would be found to have a special meaning within it. But no such meaning was found, and the rational, life-affirming optimism of the Age of Enlightenment began to evaporate. A rift opened between this world-view, as material knowledge, and the life-view, understood as Will, expressed in the pessimist philosophies from Schopenhauer onward. Scientific materialism, advanced by Herbert Spencer and Charles Darwin, portrayed an objective world process devoid of ethics, entirely an expression of the will-to-live.\nSchweitzer wrote, \"True philosophy must start from the most immediate and comprehensive fact of consciousness, and this may be formulated as follows: 'I am life which wills to live, and i exist in the midst of life which wills to live.'\" In nature one form of life must always prey upon another. However, human consciousness holds an awareness of, and sympathy for, the will of other beings to live. An ethical human strives to escape from this contradiction so far as possible.\nThough we cannot perfect the endeavour we should strive for it: the will-to-live constantly renews itself, for it is both an evolutionary necessity and a spiritual phenomenon. Life and love are rooted in this same principle, in a personal spiritual relationship to the universe. Ethics themselves proceed from the need to respect the wish of other beings to exist as one does towards oneself. Even so, Schweitzer found many instances in world religions and philosophies in which the principle was denied, not least in the European Middle Ages, and in the Indian Brahminic philosophy.\nFor Schweitzer, mankind had to accept that objective reality is ethically neutral. It could then affirm a new Enlightenment through spiritual rationalism, by giving priority to volition or ethical will as the primary meaning of life. Mankind had to choose to create the moral structures of civilization: the worldview must derive from the life-view, not vice versa. Respect for life, overcoming coarser impulses and hollow doctrines, leads the individual to live in the service of other people and of every living creature. In contemplation of the will-to-life, respect for the life of others becomes the highest principle and the defining purpose of humanity.\nSuch was the theory which Schweitzer sought to put into practice in his own life. According to some authors, Schweitzer's thought, and specifically his development of reverence for life, was influenced by Indian religious thought and in particular the Jain principle of ahimsa, or non-violence. Albert Schweitzer noted the contribution of Indian influence in his book \"Indian Thought and Its Development\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The laying down of the commandment to not kill and to not damage is one of the greatest events in the spiritual history of mankind. Starting from its principle, founded on world and life denial, of abstention from action, ancient Indian thought\u00a0\u2013 and this is a period when in other respects ethics have not progressed very far\u00a0\u2013 reaches the tremendous discovery that ethics know no bounds. So far as we know, this is for the first time clearly expressed by Jainism.\nFurther on ahimsa and the reverence for life in the same book, he elaborates on the ancient Indian didactic work of the Tirukkural, which he observed that, like the Buddha and the Bhagavad Gita, \"stands for the commandment not to kill and not to damage\". Translating several couplets from the work, he remarked that the Kural insists on the idea that \"good must be done for its own sake\" and said, \"There hardly exists in the literature of the world a collection of maxims in which we find so much lofty wisdom.\"\nDr. Schweitzer had a great love of cats. \"There are two means of refuge from the miseries of life: music and cats\" he stated.\nLater life.\nAfter the birth of their daughter (Rhena Schweitzer Miller), Albert's wife, Helene Schweitzer was no longer able to live in Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9 due to her health. In 1923, the family moved to K\u00f6nigsfeld im Schwarzwald, Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, where he was building a house for the family. This house is now maintained as a Schweitzer museum.\nFrom 1939 to 1948, he stayed in Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9, unable to return to Europe because of the war. Three years after the end of World War II, in 1948, he returned for the first time to Europe and kept travelling back and forth (and once to the US) as long as he was able. During his return visits to his home village of Gunsbach, Schweitzer continued to use the family house, which after his death became an archive and museum of his life and work. His life was portrayed in the 1952 movie \"Il est minuit, Docteur Schweitzer\", starring Pierre Fresnay as Albert Schweitzer and Jeanne Moreau as his nurse Marie. Schweitzer inspired actor Hugh O'Brian when O'Brian visited in Africa. O'Brian returned to the United States and founded the Hugh O'Brian Youth Leadership Foundation (HOBY).\nSchweitzer was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize of 1952, accepting the prize with the speech, \"The Problem of Peace\". With the $33,000 prize money, he started the leprosarium at Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9. From 1952 until his death he worked against nuclear tests and nuclear weapons with Albert Einstein, Otto Hahn and Bertrand Russell. In 1957 and 1958, he broadcast four speeches over Radio Oslo, which were published in \"Peace or Atomic War\".\nIn 1957, Schweitzer was one of the founders of The Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy. On 23 April 1957, Schweitzer made his \"Declaration of Conscience\" speech; it was broadcast to the world over Radio Oslo, pleading for the abolition of nuclear weapons. His speech ended, \"The end of further experiments with atom bombs would be like the early sunrays of hope which suffering humanity is longing for.\"\nWeeks prior to his death, an American film crew was allowed to visit Schweitzer and Drs. Muntz and Friedman, both Holocaust survivors, to record his work and daily life at the hospital. The film \"The Legacy of Albert Schweitzer\", narrated by Henry Fonda, was produced by Warner Brothers and aired once. It resides in their vault today in deteriorating condition. Although several attempts have been made to restore and re-air the film, all access has been denied.\nIn 1955, he was made an honorary member of the Order of Merit (OM) by Queen Elizabeth II. He was also a chevalier of the Military and Hospitaller Order of Saint Lazarus of Jerusalem.\nSchweitzer died on 4 September 1965 at his beloved hospital in Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9, now in independent Gabon. His grave, on the banks of the Ogoou\u00e9 River, is marked by a cross he made himself.\nHis cousin Anne-Marie Schweitzer Sartre was the mother of Jean-Paul Sartre. Her father, Charles Schweitzer, was the older brother of Albert Schweitzer's father, Louis Th\u00e9ophile.\nSchweitzer is often cited in vegetarian literature as being an advocate of vegetarianism in his later years. Schweitzer was not a vegetarian in his earlier life. For example, in 1950, biographer Magnus C. Ratter commented that Schweitzer never \"commit[ted] himself to the anti-vivisection, vegetarian, or pacifist positions, though his thought leads in this direction\". Biographer James Bentley has written that Schweitzer became a vegetarian after his wife's death in 1957 and he was \"living almost entirely on lentil soup\". In contrast to this, historian David N. Stamos has written that Schweitzer was not a vegetarian in his personal life nor imposed it on his missionary hospital, but he did help animals and was opposed to hunting. Stamos noted that Schweitzer held the view that evolution ingrained humans with an instinct for meat, so it was useless in trying to deny it.\nThe \"Albert Schweitzer Fellowship\" was founded in 1940 by Schweitzer to unite US supporters in filling the gap in support for his Hospital when his European supply lines were cut off by war, and continues to support the Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9 Hospital today. Schweitzer considered his ethic of Reverence for Life, not his hospital, his most important legacy, saying that his Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9 Hospital was just \"my own improvisation on the theme of Reverence for Life. Everyone can have their own Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9\".\nToday, the ASF helps large numbers of young Americans in health-related professional fields find or create \"their own Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9\" in the US or internationally. ASF selects and supports nearly 250 new US and Africa Schweitzer Fellows each year from over 100 of the leading US schools of medicine, nursing, public health, and every other field with some relation to health, including music, law, and divinity. The peer-supporting lifelong network of \"Schweitzer Fellows for Life\" numbered over 2,000 members in 2008, and is growing by nearly 1,000 every four years. Nearly 150 of these Schweitzer Fellows have served at the Hospital in Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9, for three-month periods during their last year of medical school.\nSchweitzer's writings and life are often quoted, resulting in a number of eponyms, such as the 'Schweitzer technique' (discussed below), and the 'Schweitzer effect'. The 'Schweitzer effect' refers to his statement that 'Example is not the main thing in influencing others; it is the only thing'. This eponym is used in medical education to highlight the relationship between lived experience/example and medical students' opinions on professional behaviours.\nInternational Albert Schweitzer Prize.\nThe prize was first awarded on 29 May 2011 to Eugen Drewermann and the physician couple Rolf and Raphaela Maibach in K\u00f6nigsfeld im Schwarzwald, where Schweitzer's former residence now houses the Albert Schweitzer Museum.\nSound recordings.\nRecordings of Schweitzer playing the music of Bach are available on CD. In 1934 and 1935 he resided in Britain, delivering the Gifford Lectures at Edinburgh University, and those on \"Religion in Modern Civilization\" at Oxford and London. He had originally conducted trials for recordings for His Master's Voice on the organ of the old Queen's Hall in London. These records did not satisfy him, the instrument being too harsh.\nIn mid-December 1935, he began to record for Columbia Records on the organ of All Hallows, Barking-by-the-Tower, London. At his suggestion the sessions were transferred to the church of Ste Aur\u00e9lie in Strasbourg, on a mid-18th-century organ by Johann Andreas Silbermann (brother of Gottfried), an organ-builder greatly revered by Bach, which had been restored by the Lorraine organ-builder Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric H\u00e4rpfer shortly before the First World War. These recordings were made in the course of a fortnight in October 1936.\nSchweitzer technique.\nSchweitzer developed a technique for recording the performances of Bach's music; or perhaps engineers developed it to record his performances. Known as the \"Schweitzer technique\", it is a slight improvement on what is commonly known as mid-side. The mid-side sees a figure-8 microphone pointed off-axis, perpendicular to the sound source. Then a single cardioid microphone is placed on axis, bisecting the figure-8 pattern. The signal from the figure-8 is muted, panned hard left and right, one of the signals being flipped out of polarity.\nIn the Schweitzer method, the figure-8 is replaced by two small diaphragm condenser microphones pointed directly away from each other. The information that each capsule collects is unique, unlike the identical out-of-polarity information generated from the figure-8 in a regular mid-side. The on-axis microphone is often a large diaphragm condenser. The technique has since been used to record many modern instruments.\nColumbia recordings.\nAltogether his early Columbia discs included 25 records of Bach and eight of C\u00e9sar Franck. The Bach titles were mainly distributed as follows:\nLater recordings were made at Parish church, G\u00fcnsbach: These recordings were made by C. Robert Fine during the time Dr. Schweitzer was being filmed in G\u00fcnsbach for the documentary \"Albert Schweitzer\". Fine originally self-released the recordings but later licensed the masters to Columbia.\nThe above were released in the United States as Columbia Masterworks boxed set SL-175.\nPortrayals and dedication.\nDramatisations of Schweitzer's life include:\nThe Greek author Nikos Kazantzakis dedicated his novel The Poor Man of Assisi to him.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1030", "revid": "46306269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1030", "title": "Austrian school of economics", "text": "School of economic thought\nThe Austrian school is a heterodox school of economic thought that advocates strict adherence to methodological individualism, the concept that social phenomena result primarily from the motivations and actions of individuals along with their self-interest. Austrian-school theorists hold that economic theory should be exclusively derived from basic principles of human action.\nThe Austrian school originated in 1871 in Vienna with the work of Carl Menger, Eugen von B\u00f6hm-Bawerk, Friedrich von Wieser, and others. It was methodologically opposed to the Historical school, in a dispute known as \"Methodenstreit\", or methodology quarrel. Current-day economists working in this tradition are located in many countries, but their work is still referred to as Austrian economics. Among the theoretical contributions of the early years of the Austrian school are the subjective theory of value, marginalism in price theory and the formulation of the economic calculation problem.\nIn the 1970s, the Austrian school attracted some renewed interest after Friedrich August von Hayek shared the 1974 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences with Gunnar Myrdal.\nHistory.\nEtymology.\nThe Austrian school owes its name to members of the German historical school of economics, who argued against the Austrians during the late 19th-century \"Methodenstreit\" (\"methodology struggle\"), in which the Austrians defended the role of theory in economics as distinct from the study or compilation of historical circumstance. In 1883, Menger published \"Investigations into the Method of the Social Sciences with Special Reference to Economics\", which attacked the methods of the historical school. Gustav von Schmoller, a leader of the historical school, responded with an unfavorable review, coining the term \"Austrian school\" in an attempt to characterize the school as outcast and provincial. The label endured and was adopted by the adherents themselves.\nPrecursors.\nThe Salamanca School of economic thought, emerging in 16th-century Spain and the French School of economic thought, emerging in 19th-century France are often regarded as an early precursor to the Austrian School of Economics due to its development of the subjective theory of value and its advocacy for free-market principles. Scholars from the University of Salamanca, such as Francisco de Vitoria and Luis de Molina, argued that the value of goods was determined by individual preferences rather than intrinsic factors, foreshadowing later Austrian ideas. They also emphasized the importance of supply and demand in setting prices and maintaining sound money, laying the groundwork for modern economic concepts that the Austrian School would later refine and expand upon.\nFirst wave.\nThe school originated in Vienna in Austria-Hungary. Carl Menger's 1871 book \"Principles of Economics\" is generally considered the founding of the Austrian school. The book was one of the first modern treatises to advance the theory of marginal utility. The Austrian school was one of three founding currents of the marginalist revolution of the 1870s, with its major contribution being the introduction of the subjectivist approach in economics.\nDespite such claim, John Stuart Mill had used \"value in use\" in this sense in 1848 in \"Principles of Political Economy\", where he wrote: \"Value in use, or as Mr. De Quincey calls it, \"teleologic\" value, is the extreme limit of value in exchange. The exchange value of a thing may fall short, to any amount, of its value in use; but that it can ever exceed the value in use, implies a contradiction; it supposes that persons will give, to possess a thing, more than the utmost value which they themselves put upon it as a means of gratifying their inclinations.\"\nWhile marginalism was generally influential, there was also a more specific school that began to coalesce around Menger's work, which came to be known as the \"psychological school\", \"Vienna school\", or \"Austrian school\". Menger's contributions to economic theory were closely followed by those of Eugen von B\u00f6hm-Bawerk and Friedrich von Wieser. These three economists became what is known as the \"first wave\" of the Austrian school. B\u00f6hm-Bawerk wrote extensive critiques of Karl Marx in the 1880s and 1890s and was part of the Austrians' participation in the late 19th-century , during which they attacked the Hegelian doctrines of the historical school.\nEarly 20th century.\nFrank Albert Fetter (1863\u20131949) was a leader in the United States of Austrian thought. He obtained his PhD in 1894 from the University of Halle and then was made Professor of Political Economy and Finance at Cornell University in 1901. Several important Austrian economists trained at the University of Vienna in the 1920s and later participated in private seminars held by Ludwig von Mises. These included Gottfried Haberler, Friedrich Hayek, Fritz Machlup, Karl Menger (son of Carl Menger), Oskar Morgenstern, Paul Rosenstein-Rodan, Abraham Wald, and Michael A. Heilperin, among others, as well as the sociologist Alfred Sch\u00fctz.\nLater 20th century.\nBy the mid-1930s, most economists had embraced what they considered the important contributions of the early Austrians. Fritz Machlup quoted Hayek's statement that \"the greatest success of a school is that it stops existing because its fundamental teachings have become parts of the general body of commonly accepted thought\". Sometime during the middle of the 20th century, Austrian economics became disregarded or derided by mainstream economists because it rejected model building and mathematical and statistical methods in the study of economics. Mises' student Israel Kirzner recalled that in 1954, when Kirzner was pursuing his PhD, there was no separate Austrian school as such. When Kirzner was deciding which graduate school to attend, Mises had advised him to accept an offer of admission at Johns Hopkins because it was a prestigious university and Fritz Machlup taught there.\nAfter the 1940s, Austrian economics can be divided into two schools of economic thought and the school split to some degree in the late 20th century. One camp of Austrians, exemplified by Mises, regards neoclassical methodology to be irredeemably flawed; the other camp, exemplified by Friedrich Hayek, accepts a large part of neoclassical methodology and is more accepting of government intervention in the economy. Henry Hazlitt wrote economics columns and editorials for a number of publications and wrote many books on the topic of Austrian economics from the 1930s to the 1980s. Hazlitt's thinking was influenced by Mises. His book \"Economics in One Lesson\" (1946) sold over a million copies and he is also known for \"The Failure of the \"New Economics\"\" (1959), a line-by-line critique of John Maynard Keynes's \"General Theory\".\nThe reputation of the Austrian school rose in the late 20th century due in part to the work of Israel Kirzner and Ludwig Lachmann at New York University and to renewed public awareness of the work of Hayek after he won the 1974 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences. Hayek's work was influential in the revival of \"laissez-faire\" thought in the 20th century.\nSplit among contemporary Austrians.\nEconomist Leland Yeager discussed the late 20th-century rift and referred to a discussion written by Murray Rothbard, Hans-Hermann Hoppe, Joseph Salerno and others in which they attack and disparage Hayek. Yeager stated: \"To try to drive a wedge between Mises and Hayek on [the role of knowledge in economic calculation], especially to the disparagement of Hayek, is unfair to these two great men, unfaithful to the history of economic thought\". He went on to call the rift subversive to economic analysis and the historical understanding of the fall of Eastern European communism.\nIn a 1999 book published by the Ludwig von Mises Institute, Hoppe asserted that Rothbard was the leader of the \"mainstream within Austrian Economics\" and contrasted Rothbard with Nobel Laureate Friedrich Hayek, whom he identified as a British empiricist and an opponent of the thought of Mises and Rothbard. Hoppe acknowledged that Hayek was the most prominent Austrian economist within academia, but stated that Hayek was an opponent of the Austrian tradition which led from Carl Menger and B\u00f6hm-Bawerk through Mises to Rothbard. Austrian economist Walter Block says that the Austrian school can be distinguished from other schools of economic thought through two categories\u2014economic theory and political theory. According to Block, while Hayek can be considered an Austrian economist, his views on political theory clash with the libertarian political theory which Block sees as an integral part of the Austrian school.\nBoth criticism from Hoppe and Block to Hayek apply to Carl Menger, the founder of the Austrian school. Hoppe emphasizes that Hayek, which for him is from the English empirical tradition, is an opponent of the supposed rationalist tradition of the Austrian school; Menger made strong critiques to rationalism in his works in similar vein as Hayek's. He emphasized the idea that there are several institutions which were not deliberately created, have a kind of \"superior wisdom\" and serve important functions to society. He also talked about Edmund Burke and the English tradition to sustain these positions.\nWhen saying that the libertarian political theory is an integral part of the Austrian school and supposing Hayek is not a libertarian, Block excludes Menger from the Austrian school, too, since Menger seems to defend broader state activity than Hayek\u2014for example, progressive taxation and extensive labour legislation.\nEconomists of the Hayekian view are affiliated with the Cato Institute, George Mason University (GMU) and New York University, among other institutions. They include Peter Boettke, Roger Garrison, Steven Horwitz, Peter Leeson and George Reisman. Economists of the Mises\u2013Rothbard view include Walter Block, Hans-Hermann Hoppe, Jes\u00fas Huerta de Soto and Robert P. Murphy, each of whom is associated with the Mises Institute and some of them also with academic institutions. According to Murphy, a \"truce between (for lack of better terms) the GMU Austro-libertarians and the Auburn Austro-libertarians\" was signed around 2011.\nInfluence.\nMany theories developed by \"first wave\" Austrian economists have long been absorbed into mainstream economics. These include Carl Menger's theories on marginal utility, Friedrich von Wieser's theories on opportunity cost and Eugen von B\u00f6hm-Bawerk's theories on time preference, as well as Menger and B\u00f6hm-Bawerk's criticisms of Marxian economics.\nFormer American Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan said that the founders of the Austrian school \"reached far into the future from when most of them practiced and have had a profound and, in my judgment, probably an irreversible effect on how most mainstream economists think in this country\". In 1987, Nobel Laureate James M. Buchanan told an interviewer: \"I have no objections to being called an Austrian. Hayek and Mises might consider me an Austrian but, surely some of the others would not\".\nCurrently, universities with a significant Austrian presence are George Mason University, New York University, Grove City College, Loyola University New Orleans, Monmouth College, and Auburn University in the United States; King Juan Carlos University in Spain; and Universidad Francisco Marroqu\u00edn in Guatemala. Austrian economic ideas are also promoted by privately funded organizations such as the Mises Institute and the Cato Institute.\nTheory.\nThe Austrian school theorizes that the subjective choices of individuals including individual knowledge, time, expectation and other subjective factors cause all economic phenomena. Austrians seek to understand the economy by examining the social ramifications of individual choice, an approach called methodological individualism. It differs from other schools of economic thought, which have focused on aggregate variables, equilibrium analysis, and societal groups rather than individuals.\nIn the 20th and 21st centuries, economists with a methodological lineage to the early Austrian school developed many diverse approaches and theoretical orientations. Ludwig von Mises organized his version of the subjectivist approach, which he called \"praxeology\", in a book published in English as \"Human Action\" in 1949. In it, Mises stated that praxeology could be used to deduce \"a priori\" theoretical economic truths and that deductive economic thought experiments could yield conclusions which follow irrefutably from the underlying assumptions. He wrote that conclusions could not be inferred from empirical observation or statistical analysis and argued against the use of probabilities in economic models.\nSince Mises' time, some Austrian thinkers have accepted his praxeological approach while others have adopted alternative methodologies. For example, Fritz Machlup, Friedrich Hayek and others did not take Mises' strong \"a priori\" approach to economics. Ludwig Lachmann, a radical subjectivist, also largely rejected Mises' formulation of Praxeology in favor of the \"verstehende Methode\" (\"interpretive method\") articulated by Max Weber.\nIn the 20th century, various Austrians incorporated models and mathematics into their analysis. Austrian economist Steven Horwitz argued in 2000 that Austrian methodology is consistent with macroeconomics and that Austrian macroeconomics can be expressed in terms of microeconomic foundations. Austrian economist Roger Garrison writes that Austrian macroeconomic theory can be correctly expressed in terms of diagrammatic models. In 1944, Austrian economist Oskar Morgenstern presented a rigorous schematization of an ordinal utility function (the Von Neumann\u2013Morgenstern utility theorem) in \"Theory of Games and Economic Behavior\".\nFundamental tenets.\nIn 1981, Fritz Machlup listed the typical views of Austrian economic thinking as such:\nHe included two additional tenets held by the Mises branch of Austrian economics:\nContributions to economic thought.\nOpportunity cost.\nThe opportunity cost doctrine was first explicitly formulated by the Austrian economist Friedrich von Wieser in the late 19th century. Opportunity cost is the cost of any activity measured in terms of the value of the next best alternative foregone (that is not chosen). It is the sacrifice related to the second best choice available to someone, or group, who has picked among several mutually exclusive choices. Although a more ephemeral scarcity, expectations of the future must also be considered. Quantified as time preference, opportunity cost must also be valued with respect to one's preference for present versus future investments.\nOpportunity cost is a key concept in mainstream economics and has been described as expressing \"the basic relationship between scarcity and choice\". The notion of opportunity cost plays a crucial part in ensuring that resources are used efficiently.\nCapital and interest.\nThe Austrian theory of capital and interest was first developed by Eugen von B\u00f6hm-Bawerk. He stated that interest rates and profits are determined by two factors, namely supply and demand in the market for final goods and time preference.\nB\u00f6hm-Bawerk's theory equates capital intensity with the degree of roundaboutness of production processes. B\u00f6hm-Bawerk also argued that the law of marginal utility necessarily implies the classical law of costs. However, many Austrian economists such as Ludwig von Mises, Israel Kirzner, Ludwig Lachmann, and Jes\u00fas Huerta de Soto entirely reject a productivity explanation for interest rates, viewing the average period of production as an unfortunate remnant of damaged classical economic thought on B\u00f6hm-Bawerk.\nInflation.\nIn Mises's definition, inflation is an increase in the supply of money: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHayek claimed that inflationary stimulation exploits the lag between an increase in money supply and the consequent increase in the prices of goods and services: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And since any inflation, however modest at first, can help employment only so long as it accelerates, adopted as a means of reducing unemployment, it will do so for any length of time only while it accelerates. \"Mild\" steady inflation cannot help\u2014it can lead only to outright inflation. That inflation at a constant rate soon ceases to have any stimulating effect, and in the end merely leaves us with a backlog of delayed adaptations, is the conclusive argument against the \"mild\" inflation represented as beneficial even in standard economics textbooks.\nEven prominent Austrian economists have been confused since Austrians define inflation as 'increase in money supply' while most people including most economists define inflation as 'rising prices'.\nEconomic calculation problem.\nThe economic calculation problem refers to a criticism of planned economies which was first developed by Ludwig von Mises with his essay \"economic calculation in the socialist commonwealth\" in the spring of 1920. Mises subsequently discussed his idea with his student Friedrich Hayek, who expanded it in various works including \"The Road to Serfdom\". What the calculation problem essentially states is that without price signals, the factors of production cannot be allocated in the most efficient way possible, rendering planned economies inefficacious.\nMax Weber reached a similar conclusion as Mises in his magnum opus \"Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft\", posthumously published in 1921, discussing the impossibility of centralized planning of a complex economic system.\nAustrian theory emphasizes the organizing power of markets. Hayek stated that market prices reflect information, the totality of which is not known to any single individual, which determines the allocation of resources in an economy. Because socialist systems lack the individual incentives and price discovery processes by which individuals act on their personal information, Hayek argued that socialist economic planners lack all of the knowledge required to make optimal decisions. Those who agree with this criticism view it as a refutation of socialism, showing that socialism is not a viable or sustainable form of economic organization. The debate rose to prominence in the 1920s and 1930s and that specific period of the debate has come to be known by historians of economic thought as the socialist calculation debate.\nMises argued in a 1920 essay \"Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth\" that the pricing systems in socialist economies were necessarily deficient because if the government owned the means of production, then no prices could be obtained for capital goods as they were merely internal transfers of goods in a socialist system and not \"objects of exchange\", unlike final goods. Therefore, they were unpriced and hence the system would be necessarily inefficient since the central planners would not know how to allocate the available resources efficiently. This led him to write \"that rational economic activity is impossible in a socialist commonwealth\".\nBusiness cycles.\nThe Austrian theory of the business cycle (ABCT) focuses on banks' issuance of credit as the cause of economic fluctuations. Although later elaborated by Hayek and others, the theory was first set forth by Mises, who posited that fractional reserve banks extend credit at artificially low interest rates, causing businesses to invest in relatively roundabout production processes which leads to an artificial \"boom\". Mises stated that this artificial \"boom\" then led to a misallocation of resources which he called \"malinvestment\" \u2013 which eventually must end in a \"bust\".\nMises surmised that government manipulation of money and credit in the banking system throws savings and investment out of balance, resulting in misdirected investment projects that are eventually found to be unsustainable, at which point the economy has to rebalance itself through a period of corrective recession. Austrian economist Fritz Machlup summarized the Austrian view by stating, \"monetary factors cause the cycle but real phenomena constitute it.\" This may be unrealistic since successful entrepreneurs will realise that interest rates are artificially low and will adjust their investment decisions based on projected long term interest rates. \nFor Austrians, the only prudent strategy for government is to leave money and the financial system to the free market's competitive forces to eradicate the business cycle's inflationary booms and recessionary busts, allowing markets to keep people's saving and investment decisions in place for well-coordinated economic stability and growth.\nA Keynesian would suggest government intervention during a recession to inject spending into the economy when people will not. However, the heart of Austrian macroeconomic theory assumes the government \"fine tuning\" through expansions and contractions in the money supply orchestrated by the government are actually the cause of business cycles because of the differing impact of the resulting interest rate changes on different stages in the structure of production. Austrian economist Thomas Woods further supports this view by arguing it is not consumption, but rather production that should be emphasized. A country cannot become rich by consuming, and therefore, by using up all their resources. Instead, production is what enables consumption as a possibility in the first place, since a producer would be working for nothing, if not for the desire to consume.\nCentral banks.\nAccording to Ludwig von Mises, central banks enable the commercial banks to fund loans at artificially low interest rates, thereby inducing an unsustainable expansion of bank credit and impeding any subsequent contraction and argued for a gold standard as a monetary reform to constrain growth in fiduciary media. Friedrich Hayek took a different perspective not focusing on gold but focusing on regulation of the banking sector via strong central banking.\nSome economists argue money is endogenous, and argue that this refutes the Austrian Business Cycle Theory. However, this would simply shift the brunt of the blame from central banks to private banks when it comes to credit expansion; the fundamental underlying issue would be the same, and a free-market full-reserve system would still be the fix.\nBitcoin and cryptocurrencies.\nSome economists assert that Bitcoin's theoretical foundations can be traced back to the Austrian school of economics through its embrace of core Austrian principles such as decentralization, individual sovereignty, sound money, and resistance to fiat money. In the 21st century, some libertarian political scientists argue that Friedrich Hayek would have supported Bitcoin and cryptocurrencies due to their resistance to political pressure and their alignment with Hayek's emphasis on sound money and competition in currencies. They also argue that cryptocurrency and Bitcoin serve as a \"Hayekian escape\", a method that people can use to escape the government's currency monopoly, particularly during periods of hyperinflation. In some ways, Bitcoin is at odds with certain Austrian principles such as Mises' regression theorem, which holds that money must originate from a commodity with prior use value. Bitcoin demonstrates that it is possible for digital scarcity and market trust alone to create a functioning medium of exchange. \nMany proponents of Bitcoin and cryptocurrency have been inspired by Austrian economics. For example Saifedean Ammous and Nick Szabo both use Austrian principles to explain why the Rai stones of Yap failed as a sound money but why Bitcoin succeeds. The Rai stones embodied many of the properties of sound money, such as durability, general acceptance, and \"the high cost of acquiring new stones\" which made them difficult to debase. However, when colonists visited the island in the 1870s, they were able to bring in new Rai stones with far less effort, which inflated the supply and devalued the currency. Ammous and Szabo argue that Bitcoin's 21 million cap prevents similar debasement. Ammous also criticizes Keynesian economics asserting that it discounts long-term consequences for perceived short term gain. Erik Voorhees was also inspired to become involved in cryptocurrency, in part, through Austrian economics, having Ron Paul sign his copy of Murray Rothbard\u2019s \u201c\"Man, Economy and State\".\u201d\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1032", "revid": "1318882493", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1032", "title": "Abscess", "text": "Localized collection of pus in body tissue\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nAn abscess is a collection of pus that has built up within the tissue of the body, usually caused by bacterial infection. Signs and symptoms of abscesses include redness, pain, warmth, and swelling. The swelling may feel fluid-filled when pressed. The area of redness often extends beyond the swelling. Carbuncles and boils are types of abscess that often involve hair follicles, with carbuncles being larger. A cyst is related to an abscess, but it contains a material other than pus, and a cyst has a clearly defined wall. Abscesses can also form internally on internal organs and after surgery.\nThey are usually caused by a bacterial infection. Often many different types of bacteria are involved in a single infection. In many areas of the world, the most common bacteria present are \"methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus\". Skin abscesses in particular are overwhelmingly caused by \"S. aureus\". Rarely, parasites can cause abscesses; this is more common in the developing world. Diagnosis of a skin abscess is usually made based on what it looks like and is confirmed by cutting it open. Ultrasound imaging may be useful in cases in which the diagnosis is not clear. In abscesses around the anus, computer tomography (CT) may be important to look for deeper infection.\nStandard treatment for most skin or soft tissue abscesses is cutting it open and drainage. There appears to be some benefit from also using antibiotics. A small amount of evidence supports not packing the cavity that remains with gauze after drainage. Closing this cavity right after draining it rather than leaving it open may speed healing without increasing the risk of the abscess returning. Sucking out the pus with a needle is often not sufficient.\nSkin abscesses are common and have become more common in recent years. Risk factors include intravenous drug use, with rates reported as high as 65% among users. In 2005, 3.2 million people went to American emergency departments for abscesses. In Australia, around 13,000 people were hospitalized in 2008 with the condition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nAbscesses may occur in any kind of tissue but most frequently within the skin surface (where they may be superficial pustules known as boils or deep skin abscesses), in the lungs, brain, teeth, kidneys, and tonsils. Major complications may include spreading of the abscess material to adjacent or remote tissues, and extensive regional tissue death (gangrene).\nThe main symptoms and signs of a skin abscess are redness, heat, swelling, pain, and loss of function. There may also be high temperature (fever) and chills. If superficial, abscesses may be fluctuant when palpated; this wave-like motion is caused by movement of the pus inside the abscess.\nAn internal abscess is more difficult to identify and depends on the location of the abscess and the type of infection. General signs include pain in the affected area, a high temperature, and generally feeling unwell.\nInternal abscesses rarely heal themselves, so prompt medical attention is indicated if such an abscess is suspected. An abscess can potentially be fatal depending on where it is located.\nCauses.\nRisk factors for abscess formation include intravenous drug use. Another possible risk factor is a prior history of disc herniation or other spinal abnormality, though this has not been proven.\nAbscesses are caused by bacterial infection, parasites, or foreign substances.\nBacterial infection is the most common cause, particularly \"Staphylococcus aureus\". The more invasive methicillin-resistant \"Staphylococcus aureus\" (MRSA) may also be a source of infection, though it is much rarer. Among spinal subdural abscesses, methicillin-sensitive \"S. aureus\" is the most common organism involved.\nRarely parasites can cause abscesses, and this is more common in the developing world. Specific parasites known to do this include dracunculiasis and myiasis. In immunocompromised people, and particularly those with AIDS,\"Toxoplasma gondii\" is a frequent cause of widespread abscesses throughout the body, including in the brain.\nSkin abscess.\nAn abscess may form anywhere that bacteria can get through the skin, including insect bites, lacerations, puncture wounds, scrapes, IV injection sites, and other small surface-level injuries. The overwhelming majority of skin abscesses are caused by \"Staphylococcus aureus\" (methicillin-susceptible or methicillin-resistant) with some studies showing over 90% of documented and cultured skin abscesses being caused by this organism.\nAnorectal abscess.\nAnorectal abscesses can be caused by non-specific obstruction and ensuing infection of the glandular crypts inside of the anus or rectum. Other causes include cancer, trauma, or inflammatory bowel diseases.\nIncisional abscess.\nAn \"incisional abscess\" develops as a complication secondary to a surgical incision. It presents as redness and warmth at the margins of the incision with purulent drainage from it. If the diagnosis is uncertain, the wound should be aspirated with a needle, with aspiration of pus confirming the diagnosis and availing for Gram stain and bacterial culture.\nInternal abscess.\nAbscesses can form inside the body. The cause can be from trauma, surgery, an infection, or a pre-existing condition.\nPathophysiology.\nAn abscess is a buildup of pus surrounded by normal body tissue. In most cases, abscesses are caused by an infectious species of bacteria, and they function to wall off the infection from uninfected tissues.\nOrganisms or foreign materials destroy the local cells, which results in the release of cytokines. The cytokines trigger an inflammatory response, which draws large numbers of white blood cells to the area and increases the regional blood flow.\nThe final structure of the abscess is an abscess wall, or capsule, that is formed by the adjacent healthy cells in an attempt to keep the pus from infecting neighboring structures. However, such encapsulation tends to prevent immune cells from attacking bacteria in the pus, or from reaching the causative organism or foreign object.\nDiagnosis.\nAn abscess is a localized collection of pus (purulent inflammatory tissue) caused by suppuration buried in a tissue, an organ, or a confined space, lined by the pyogenic membrane. Ultrasound imaging can help in a diagnosis.\nClassification.\nAbscesses may be classified as either \"skin abscesses\" or \"internal abscesses\". Skin abscesses are common; internal abscesses tend to be harder to diagnose and more serious. Skin abscesses are also called cutaneous or subcutaneous abscesses.\nIV drug use.\nFor those with a history of intravenous drug use, an X-ray is recommended before treatment to verify that no needle fragments are present. If there is also a fever present in this population, infectious endocarditis should be considered.\nDifferential.\nAbscesses should be differentiated from empyemas, which are accumulations of pus in a preexisting, rather than a newly formed, anatomical cavity.\nOther conditions that can cause similar symptoms include: cellulitis, a sebaceous cyst, and necrotising fasciitis. Cellulitis typically also has an erythematous reaction, but does not confer any purulent drainage.\nTreatment.\nThe standard treatment for an uncomplicated skin or soft tissue abscess is the act of opening and draining. There does not appear to be any benefit from also using antibiotics in most cases. A small amount of evidence did not find a benefit from packing the abscess with gauze.\nIncision and drainage.\nThe abscess should be inspected to identify if foreign objects are the cause, which may require their removal. If foreign objects are not the cause, incising and draining the abscess is standard treatment. In most cases, a localized injection of lidocaine and epinephrine precedes the incision, to suppress pain.\nAntibiotics.\nMost people who have an uncomplicated skin abscess should not use antibiotics. Antibiotics in addition to standard incision and drainage is recommended in persons with severe abscesses, many sites of infection, rapid disease progression, the presence of cellulitis, symptoms indicating bacterial illness throughout the body, or a health condition causing immunosuppression. People who are very young or very old may also need antibiotics. If the abscess does not heal only with incision and drainage, or if the abscess is in a place that is difficult to drain, such as the face, hands, or genitals, then antibiotics may be indicated.\nIn those cases of abscess which do require antibiotic treatment, \"Staphylococcus aureus\" bacteria are a common cause and an anti-staphylococcus antibiotic such as flucloxacillin or dicloxacillin is used. The Infectious Diseases Society of America advises that the draining of an abscess is not enough to address community-acquired methicillin-resistant \"Staphylococcus aureus\" (MRSA), and in those cases, traditional antibiotics may be ineffective. Alternative antibiotics effective against community-acquired MRSA often include clindamycin, doxycycline, minocycline, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. The American College of Emergency Physicians advises that typical cases of abscess from MRSA get no benefit from having antibiotic treatment in addition to the standard treatment.\nCulturing the wound is not needed if standard follow-up care can be provided after the incision and drainage. Performing a wound culture is unnecessary because it rarely gives information that can be used to guide treatment.\nPacking.\nIn North America, after drainage, an abscess cavity is usually packed, often with special iodoform-treated cloth. This is done to absorb and neutralize any remaining exudate as well as to promote draining and prevent premature closure. Prolonged draining is thought to promote healing. The hypothesis is that though the heart's pumping action can deliver immune and regenerative cells to the edge of an injury, an abscess is by definition a void in which no blood vessels are present. Packing is thought to provide a wicking action that continuously draws beneficial factors and cells from the body into the void that must be healed. Discharge is then absorbed by cutaneous bandages, and further wicking is promoted by changing these bandages regularly. However, evidence from emergency medicine literature reports that packing wounds after draining, especially smaller wounds, causes pain to the person and does not decrease the rate of recurrence, nor bring faster healing, or fewer physician visits.\nLoop drainage.\nMore recently, several North American hospitals have opted for less-invasive loop drainage over standard drainage and wound packing. In one study of 143 pediatric outcomes, a failure rate of 1.4% was reported in the loop group versus 10.5% in the packing group (P&lt;.030), while a separate study reported a 5.5% failure rate among the loop group.\nPrimary closure.\nClosing an abscess immediately after draining it appears to speed healing without increasing the risk of recurrence. This may not apply to anorectal abscesses, as while they may heal faster, there may be a higher rate of recurrence than those left open.\nAppendiceal abscess.\nAppendiceal abscesses are complications of appendicitis, where there is an infected mass on the appendix. This condition is estimated to occur in 2\u201310% of appendicitis cases and is usually treated by surgical removal of the appendix (appendicectomy).\nPrognosis.\nEven without treatment, skin abscesses rarely result in death, as they will naturally break through the skin. Other types of abscesses are more dangerous. Brain abscesses may be fatal if untreated. When treated, the mortality rate reduces to 5\u201310%, but is higher if the abscess ruptures.\nEpidemiology.\nSkin abscesses are common and have become more common in recent years. Risk factors include intravenous drug use, with rates reported as high as 65% among users. In 2005, in the United States, 3.2 million people went to the emergency department for an abscess. In Australia, around 13,000 people were hospitalized in 2008 for the disease.\nSociety and culture.\nThe Latin medical aphorism \"ubi pus, ibi evacua\" expresses \"where there is pus, there evacuate it\" and is classical advice in the culture of Western medicine.\nNeedle exchange programmes often administer or provide referrals for abscess treatment to injection drug users as part of a harm reduction public health strategy.\nEtymology.\nAn abscess is so called \"abscess\" because there is an \"abscessus\" (a going away or departure) of portions of the animal tissue from each other to make room for the suppurated matter lodged between them.\nThe word carbuncle is believed to have originated from the Latin: \"carbunculus\", originally a small coal; diminutive of \"carbon-\", \"carbo\": charcoal or ember, but also a carbuncle stone, \"precious stones of a red or fiery colour\", usually garnets.\nOther types.\nThe following types of abscess are listed in the medical dictionary:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1035", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1035", "title": "Aal", "text": ""}
{"id": "1036", "revid": "36742351", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1036", "title": "Aalborg Municipality", "text": "Municipality in North Jutland, Denmark\n\u00c5lborg Municipality () is a municipality in North Jutland Region on the Jutland peninsula in northern Denmark. The municipality straddles the Limfjord, the waterway which connects the North Sea and the Kattegat east-to-west, and which separates the main body of the Jutland peninsula from the island of Vendsyssel-Thy north-to-south. It has a land area of and a population of 224,612 (1. January 2025).\nIt is also the name of the municipality's main city Aalborg and the site of its municipal council, as well as the name of a seaport.\nThe municipality and the town have chosen to retain the traditional spelling of the name as \"Aalborg\", although the new spelling \"\u00c5lborg\" is used in other contexts, such as \u00c5lborg Bight (\"\u00c5lborg Bugt\"), the body of water which lies to the east of the Jutland peninsula.\nMunicipal reform of 2007.\nAs of 1 January 2007 Aalborg municipality joined with the municipalities of Hals, Nibe, and Sejlflod to form a new Aalborg municipality. The former Aalborg municipality, including the island of Egholm, covered an area of , with a total population of 192,353 (2005). Its last mayor was Henning G. Jensen, a member of the Social Democrats (\"\") political party. The former municipality was bordered by Sejlflod and Hals to the east, Dronninglund and Br\u00f8nderslev to the north, Aabybro and Nibe to the west, and St\u00f8vring and Sk\u00f8rping to the south. It belonged to North Jutland County.\nGeography.\nSurroundings.\nThe waters in the Limfjord splitting the municipality are called Langerak to the east and \"Gj\u00f8l Bredning\" to the west. The island of Egholm is located in \"Gj\u00f8l Bredning\", and is connected by ferry to the city of Aalborg at its southern shore.\nThe area is typical for the north of Jutland. To the west, the Limfjord broadens into an irregular lake (salt water), with low, marshy shores and many islands. Northwest is Store Vildmose (\"Greater Wild bog\"), a swamp where a mirage is sometimes seen in summer. Southeast lies the similar Lille Vildmose (\"Lesser Wild bog\"). Store Vildmose was drained and farmed in the beginning of the 20th century, and Lille Vildmose is now the largest moor in Denmark.\nUrban areas in Aalborg Municipality.\nAalborg City has a total population of 123,432. The metropolitan area is a conurbation of the Aalborg urban area in Himmerland (102,312) and the urban area in (21,120).\nEconomy.\nNorth Flying has its head office on the property of Aalborg Airport in , Aalborg Municipality.\nPolitics.\nMunicipal council.\nAalborg's municipal council consists of 31 members, elected every four years.\nBelow are the municipal councils elected since the Municipal Reform of 2007.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nAalborg is twinned with 34 cities, more than any other city in Denmark. Every four years, Aalborg gathers young people from most of its twin towns for a week of sports, known as Ungdomslegene (Youth Games).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1038", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1038", "title": "Aarhus", "text": "City in Central Denmark Region, Denmark\nAarhus (, ; ; officially spelled \u00c5rhus from 1948 until 1 January 2011) is the second-largest city in Denmark and the seat of Aarhus Municipality. It is located on the eastern shore of Jutland in the Kattegat sea and approximately northwest of Copenhagen.\nDating back to the late 8th century, Aarhus was founded as a harbour settlement at the mouth of the Aarhus River and quickly became a trade hub. The first Christian church was built here around the year 900 and later in the Viking Age the town was fortified with defensive ramparts. The bishopric of Aarhus grew steadily stronger and more prosperous, building several religious institutions in the town during the early Middle Ages. Trade continued to improve, although it was not until 1441 that Aarhus was granted market town privileges, and the population of Aarhus remained relatively stable until the 19th century. The city began to grow significantly as trade prospered in the mid-18th century, but not until the mid-19th century did the Industrial Revolution bring real growth in population. The first railway line in Jutland was built here in 1862. In 1928, the first university in Jutland was founded in Aarhus and today it is a university city and the largest centre for trade, services, industry, and tourism in Jutland.\nAarhus Cathedral is the longest cathedral in Denmark with a total length of . The Church of our Lady (\"Vor Frue Kirke\") was originally built in 1060, making it the oldest stone church in Scandinavia. The City Hall, designed by Arne Jacobsen and Erik M\u00f8ller, was completed in 1941 in a modern Functionalist style. Aarhus Theatre, the largest provincial theatre in Denmark, opposite the cathedral on Bispetorvet, was built by Hack Kampmann in the Art Nouveau style and completed in 1916. Musikhuset Aarhus (concert hall) and Det Jyske Musikkonservatorium (Royal Academy of Music, Aarhus/Aalborg) are also of note, as are its museums including the open-air museum Den Gamle By, the art museum ARoS Aarhus Kunstmuseum, the Moesg\u00e5rd Museum and the gender museum K\u00d8N. The city's major cultural institutions include Den Gamle By, ARoS Aarhus Kunstmuseum, the Moesg\u00e5rd Museum, K\u00d8N, Musikhuset Aarhus and Aarhus Theatre. Known as \"\" (lit. City of Smiles) it is the Danish city with the youngest demographics and home to Scandinavia's largest university, Aarhus University. Commercially, the city is the principal container port in the country, and major Danish companies such as Vestas, Arla Foods, Salling Group, and Jysk have their headquarters there.\nEtymology.\nAarhus is a compound of the two Old Norse words; , genitive of (\"river\", Modern Danish ), and (\"mouth\") referencing the city's location at the mouth of (Aarhus River).\nSpelling.\nIn Valdemar's Census Book (1231) the city was called \"Arus\", and in Icelandic it was known as , later written as Aars. The spelling \"Aarhus\" is first found in 1406 and gradually became the norm in the 17th\u00a0century. With the Danish spelling reform of 1948, \"Aa\" was changed to \"\u00c5\". Some Danish cities resisted the change but Aarhus city council opted to change the name. In 2010, the city council voted to change the name back from to again with effect from 1 January 2011.\nIt is still grammatically correct to write geographical names with the letter \u00c5 and local councils are allowed to use the Aa spelling as an alternative and most newspapers and public institutions will accept either. Some official authorities such as the Danish Language Committee, publisher of the Danish Orthographic Dictionary, still retain as the main name, providing as a second option in brackets and some institutions are still using explicitly in their official name, such as the local newspaper and the schools and . \"Aa\" was used by some major institutions between 1948 and 2011 as well, such as Aarhus University or the largest local sports club, (AGF), which has never used the \"\u00c5\" spelling. Certain geographically affiliated names have been updated to reflect the name of the city, such as the Aarhus River, changed from to .\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nFounded in the early Viking Age, Aarhus is one of the oldest cities in Denmark, along with Ribe and Hedeby. The original Aros settlement was situated on the northern shores of a fjord by the mouth of the Aarhus River, right where the city center is today. It quickly became a hub for sea-going trade due to its position on intersecting trade routes in the Danish straits and the fertile countryside. The trade, however, was not nearly as prominent as that in Ribe and Hedeby during the Viking Age, and it was primarily linked to Norway as evidenced by archaeological finds. A shipbuilding yard from the Viking Age was uncovered upriver in 2002 by archaeologists. It was located at a place formerly known as \"Snekkeeng\", or Snekke Meadow in English ('Snekke' is a type of longship), east of the Brabrand Lake close to Viby, and it was in use for more than 400 years from the late 700s till around the mid-1200s.\nArchaeological evidence indicates that Aarhus was a town as early as the last quarter of the 8th\u00a0century. Discoveries after a 2003 archaeological dig included half-buried longhouses, firepits, glass pearls and a road dated to the late 700s. Several excavations in the inner city since the 1960s have revealed wells, streets, homes and workshops, and inside the buildings and adjoining archaeological layers, everyday utensils like combs, jewellery and basic multi-purpose tools from approximately the year 900 have been unearthed. The early town was fortified with defensive earthen ramparts in the first part of the 900s, possibly in the year 934 on order from king Gorm the Old. The fortifications were later improved and expanded by his son Harald Bluetooth, encircling the settlement much like the defence structures found at Viking ring fortresses elsewhere. Together with the town's geographical placement, this suggests that Aros became an important military centre in the Viking Age. There are also strong indications of a former royal residence from the same period in Viby, a few kilometres south of the Aarhus city centre.\nThe centre of Aarhus was originally a pagan burial site until Aarhus's first Christian church, Holy Trinity Church, a timber structure, was built upon it during the reign of Frode, King of Jutland, around 900. The bishopric of Aarhus dates back to at least 948 when Adam of Bremen reported that the missionary bishop Reginbrand of Aros attended the synod of Ingelheim in Germany, but the late Viking Age during the Christianisation of Scandinavia was a turbulent and violent time with several naval attacks on the town, such as Harald Hardrada's assault around 1050, when the Holy Trinity Church was burned to the ground. Despite the conflicts, Aarhus continued to prosper from the trade and the finding of six runestones in and around Aarhus indicates the city had some significance around the year 1000, as only wealthy nobles traditionally used them. The bishopric diocese was obliterated for almost a hundred years after Reginbrand in 988, but in 1060 a new bishop Christian was ordained and he founded a new church in Aarhus, \"Sankt Nicolai Domkirke\" (St. Nicholas Cathedral), this time in stone. It was erected outside the town fortifications, and stood finished in 1070 at the site where Church of Our Lady stands today, but only an underground crypt remains.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe growing influence of the Church during the Middle Ages gradually turned Aarhus, with its bishopric, into a prosperous religious centre. Many public and religious buildings were built in and around the town; notably Aarhus Cathedral was initiated in the late 12th\u00a0century by the influential bishop Peder Vognsen, and around 1200, Aros had a total of four churches. The 13th century also marks a thorough reorganisation, erasing most of the town's original layout with new streets, relocations, dismantling and new constructions. The Church clearly had the upper hand in the Aarhus region during medieval times, and the large bishopric of Aarhus prospered and expanded territory, reaching as far as Viborg in extent. In 1441, Christopher III issued the oldest known charter granting market town status, although similar privileges may have existed as far back as the 12th\u00a0century. The charter is the first official recognition of the town as a regional power and is by some considered Aarhus's birth certificate.\nThe commercial and religious status spurred town growth, and in 1477 the defensive earthen ramparts, which had ringed the town since the Viking Age, were abandoned to accommodate expansion. Parts of the ramparts still exist today and can be experienced as steep slopes at the riverside, and they have also survived in some place names of the inner city, including the streets of Volden (The Rampart) and Graven (The Moat). Aarhus grew to become one of the largest cities in the country by the early 16th\u00a0century. In 1657, octroi was imposed in larger Danish cities which changed the layout and face of Aarhus over the following decades. Wooden city walls were erected to prevent smuggling, with gates and toll booths on the major thoroughfares, Mejlgade and Studsgade. The city gates funnelled most traffic through a few streets where merchant quarters were built.\nIn the 17th\u00a0century, Aarhus entered a period of recession as it suffered blockades and bombardments during the Swedish wars and trade was dampened by the preferential treatment of the capital by the state. Not until the middle of the 18th\u00a0century did growth return, in large part due to trade with the large agricultural catchment areas around the city; grain, particularly, proved to be a remunerative export. The first factories were established at this time, as the Industrial Revolution reached the country, and in 1810 the harbour was expanded to accommodate growing trade.\nIndustrialisation.\nAarhus began to prosper in the 1830s as the industrial revolution reached the city and factories with steam-driven machinery became more productive. In 1838, the electoral laws were reformed leading to elections for the 15 seats on the city council. The rules were initially very strict, allowing only the wealthiest citizens to run. In the 1844 elections, only 174 citizens qualified out of a total population of more than 7,000. The first city council, mainly composed of wealthy merchants and industrialists, quickly looked to improve the harbour, situated along the Aarhus River. Larger ships and growing freight volumes made a river harbour increasingly impractical. In 1840, the harbour was moved to the coast, north of the river, where it became the largest industrial harbour outside Copenhagen over the following 15 years. From the outset, the new harbour was controlled by the city council, as it is to this day.\nDuring the First Schleswig War, Aarhus was occupied by German troops from 21 June to 24 July 1849. The city was spared any fighting, but in Vejlby north of the city a cavalry skirmish known as Rytterf\u00e6gtningen took place which stopped the German advance through Jutland. The war and occupation left a notable impact on the city as many streets, particularly on Frederiksbjerg, are named after Danish officers of the time. Fifteen years later, in 1864, the city was occupied again, this time for seven months, during the Second Schleswig War.\nIn spite of wars and occupation, the city continued to expand and develop. In 1851, the octroi was abolished and the city walls were removed to provide easier access for trade. Regular steamship links with Copenhagen had begun with the \"Jylland\" in 1825\u201326 and the \"Dania\" (1827\u201336), and in 1862 Jutland's first railway was established between Aarhus and Randers.\nIn the second half of the 19th\u00a0century, industrialisation came into full effect and a number of new industries emerged around production and refinement of agricultural products, especially oil and butter. Many companies from this time would come to leave permanent iconic marks on Aarhus. The Ceres Brewery was established in 1856 and served as Aarhus's local brewery for more than 150 years, gradually expanding into an industrial district known as \"Ceres-grunden\" (lit.: the Ceres-ground). In 1896, local farmers and businessmen created Korn- og Foderstof Kompagniet (KFK), focused on grain and feedstuffs. KFK established departments all over the country, while its headquarters remained in Aarhus where its large grain silos still stand today. Otto M\u00f8nsted created the Danish Preserved Butter Company in 1874, focusing on butter export to England, China and Africa and later founded the Aarhus Butterine Company in 1883, the first Danish margarine factory. His company became an important local employer, with factory employees increasing from 100 in 1896 to 1,000 in 1931, partaking in the effective transformation of the city from a regional trade hub to an industrial centre. Other new factories of note included the dockyard Aarhus Flydedok and the oil mill \u00c5rhus Oliefabrik.\nAarhus became the largest provincial city in the country by the turn of the century and the city marketed itself as the \"Capital of Jutland\". The population increased from 15,000 in 1870 to 52,000 in 1901 and, in response, the city annexed large land areas to develop new residential quarters such as Tr\u00f8jborg, Frederiksbjerg and Marselisborg. Many of its cultural institutions were also established at this time such as Aarhus Theatre (1900), the original State Library (1902), Aarhus University (1928) and several hospitals.\nSecond World War.\nOn 9 April 1940, Nazi Germany invaded Denmark, occupying Aarhus the following day; the occupation lasted for five years. This was a destructive period with major disasters, loss of life and economic depression. The Port of Aarhus became a hub for supplies to the Baltics and Norway, while the surrounding rail network supplied the Atlantic Wall in west Jutland and cargo headed for Germany. Combined, these factors resulted in a strong German presence, especially in 1944\u201345.\nSmall resistance groups first appeared in 1941\u201342 but the first to co-ordinate with the Freedom Council was the Samsing Group, responsible for most operations from early 1943. The Samsing group, along with others in and around Aarhus, was dismantled in June 1944 when Grethe \"Thora\" Bartram turned her family and acquaintances over to German authorities. In response, requests for assistance were sent to contacts in England and in October 1944 the Royal Air Force bombed the Gestapo headquarters successfully destroying archives and obstructing the ongoing investigation.\nIn the summer of 1944 the Copenhagen-based resistance group Holger Danske helped establish the 5 Kolonne group and an SOE agent arrived from England to liaison with the L-groups. Subsequently, resistance operations escalated which was countered with Schalburgtage terror operations by the Peter group. The increasingly destructive occupation was compounded when an ammunition barge exploded in July 1944, destroying much of the harbour area. On 5 May 1945 German forces in Denmark surrendered but during the transitional period fighting broke out resulting in 22 dead. On 8 May the British Royal Dragoons entered the city.\nPost-World War II years.\nIn the 1970s and 1980s the city entered a period of rapid economic growth and the service sector overtook trade, industry and crafts as the leading sector of employment for the first time. Workers gradually began commuting to the city from most of east and central Jutland as the region became more interconnected. The student population tripled between 1965 and 1977 turning the city into a Danish centre of research and education. The growing and comparably young population initiated a period of creativity and optimism; Gaffa and the KaosPilot school were founded in 1983 and 1991 respectively, and Aarhus was at the centre of a renaissance in Danish rock and pop music launching bands and musicians such as TV2, Gnags, Thomas Helmig, Bamses Venner, Anne Dorte Michelsen, Mek Pek and Shit &amp; Chanel. The 1980s was a time of challenges for the Danish economy that included inflation, youth unemployment, and severe state budget cuts, and not much construction happened. Aarhus Concert Hall from 1982 is among the few notable buildings from this period.\n21st century.\nSince the turn of the millennium, Aarhus has seen an unprecedented building boom with many new institutions, infrastructure projects, city districts and recreational areas. Several of the construction projects are among the largest in Europe, such as the New University Hospital (DNU) and the harbourfront redevelopment.\nBoth the skyline and land use of the inner city is changing, as former industrial sites are being redeveloped into new city districts and neighbourhoods. Starting in 2008, the former docklands known as \"De Byn\u00e6re Havnearealer\" (The Peri-urban Harbour-areas), and closest to the city seaside, are being converted to new mixed-use districts. It is among the largest harbourfront projects in Europe. The northern part dubbed \"Aarhus \u00d8\" (Aarhus Docklands) is almost finished as of 2018, while the southern district dubbed \"Sydhavnskvarteret\" (The South-harbour neighbourhood) is only starting to be developed. The adjacent site of Frederiks Plads at the former DSB repair facilities have been under construction since 2014 as a new business and residential quarter. The main bus terminal close by is planned to be moved to the central railway station and the site will be redeveloped to a new residential neighbourhood. Elsewhere in the inner city, the site of the former Ceres breweries was redeveloped in 2012\u20132019 as a new mixed use neighbourhood known as CeresByen.\nConstruction of Aarhus Letbane, the first light rail system in the country, commenced in 2013, and the first increment was finished in December 2017. Since then, the lightrail service has been expanded with two intercity sections to the towns of Odder and Gren\u00e5, respectively, and also includes a northward leg to the suburb of Lisbjerg. The light rail system is planned to tie many other suburbs closer to central Aarhus in the future, with the next phase including local lines to Brabrand in the east and Hinnerup to the north.\nAccelerating growth since the early 2000s, brought the inner urban area to roughly 260,000 inhabitants by 2014. The rapid growth is expected to continue until at least 2030 when Aarhus municipality has set an ambitious target for 375,000 inhabitants.\nGeography.\nAarhus is located at the Bay of Aarhus facing the Kattegat sea in the east with the peninsulas of Mols and Helgen\u00e6s across the bay to the northeast. Mols and Helgen\u00e6s are both part of the larger regional peninsula of Djursland. A number of larger cities and towns is within easy reach from Aarhus by road and rail, including Randers ( by road north), Gren\u00e5 (northeast), Horsens ( south) and Silkeborg ( east).\nTopography.\nAt Aarhus's location, the Bay of Aarhus provides a natural harbour with a depth of quite close to the shore. Aarhus was founded at the mouth of a brackish water fjord, but the original fjord no longer exists, as it has gradually narrowed into what is now the Aarhus River and the Brabrand Lake, due to natural sedimentation. The land around Aarhus was once covered by forests, remains of which exist in parts of Marselisborg Forest to the south and Riis Skov to the north. Several lakes extend west from the inner city as the landscape merges with the larger region of S\u00f8h\u00f8jlandet with heights exceeding at Himmelbjerget between Skanderborg and Silkeborg. The highest natural point in Aarhus Municipality is Jelsh\u00f8j at 128 metres above sea level, in the southern district of H\u00f8jbjerg. The hilltop is home to a Bronze Age barrow shrouded in local myths and legends.\nThe hilly area around Aarhus consists of a morainal plateau from the last ice age, broken by a complex system of tunnel valleys. The most prominent valleys of this network are the Aarhus Valley in the south, stretching inland east\u2013west with the Aarhus River, Brabrand Lake, \u00c5rslev Lake and T\u00e5strup Lake, and the Eg\u00e5 Valley to the north, with the stream of Eg\u00e5en, Eg\u00e5 Engs\u00f8, the bog of Geding-Kasted Mose and Geding Lake. Most parts of the two valleys have been drained and subsequently farmed, but in the early 2000s some of the drainage was removed and parts of the wetlands were restored for environmental reasons. The valley system also includes the stream of Lyngbyg\u00e5rd \u00c5 in the west and valleys to the south of the city, following erosion channels from the pre-quaternary. By contrast, the Aarhus River Valley and the Giber River Valley are late glacial meltwater valleys. The coastal cliffs along the Bay of Aarhus consist of shallow Tertiary clay from the Eocene and Oligocene (57 to 24 million years ago).\nClimate.\nAarhus has a temperate oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\") and the weather is constantly influenced by major weather systems from all four ordinal directions, resulting in unstable conditions throughout the year. Temperature varies a great deal across the seasons with a mild spring in April and May, warmer summer months from June to August, frequently rainy and windy autumn months in October and September and cooler winter months, often with frost and occasional snow, from December to March. The city centre experiences the same climatic effects as other larger cities with higher wind speeds, more fog, less precipitation and higher temperatures than the surrounding, open land.\nWestern winds from the Atlantic and North Sea are dominant resulting in more precipitation in western Denmark. In addition, Jutland rises sufficiently in the centre to lift air to higher, colder altitudes contributing to increased precipitation in eastern Jutland. Combined, these factors make east and south Jutland comparatively wetter than other parts of the country. Average temperature over the year is with February being the coldest month () and August the warmest (). Temperatures in the sea can reach in June to August, but it is not uncommon for beaches to register locally.\nThe geography in the area affects the local climate of the city with the Aarhus Bay imposing a temperate effect on the low-lying valley floor where central Aarhus is located. Brabrand Lake to the west further contributes to this effect and as a result, the valley has a comparably mild, temperate climate. The sandy ground on the valley floor dries up quickly after winter and warms faster in the summer than the surrounding hills of moist-retaining boulder clay. These conditions affect crops and plants that often bloom 1\u20132 weeks earlier in the valley than on the northern and southern hillsides.\nBecause of the northern latitude, the number of daylight hours varies considerably between summer and winter. On the summer solstice, the sun rises at 04:26 and sets at 21:58, providing 17 hours 32 minutes of daylight. On the winter solstice, it rises at 08:37 and sets at 15:39 with 7 hours and 2 minutes of daylight. The difference in length of days and nights between summer and winter solstices is 10 hours and 30 minutes.\nPolitics and administration.\nAarhus is the seat of Aarhus Municipality, and Aarhus City Council (\"Aarhus Byr\u00e5d\") is also the municipal government with headquarters in Aarhus City Hall. The Mayor of Aarhus since 2024 is Anders Winnerskjold of the Social Democrats.\nMunicipal elections are held every fourth year on the third Tuesday of November with the next election in 2025. The city council consists of 31 members elected for four-year terms. When an election has determined the composition of the council, it elects a mayor, two deputy mayors and five aldermen from their ranks. Anyone who is eligible to vote and who resides within the municipality can run for a seat on the city council provided they can secure endorsements and signatures from 50 inhabitants of the municipality.\nThe first publicly elected mayor of Aarhus was appointed in 1919. In the 1970 Danish Municipal Reform the current Aarhus municipality was created by merging 20 municipalities. Aarhus was the seat of Aarhus County until the 2007 Danish municipal reform, which substituted the Danish counties with five regions and replaced Aarhus County with Central Denmark Region (\"Region Midtjylland\"), seated in Viborg.\nSubdivisions.\nAarhus Municipality has 45 electoral wards and polling stations in four electoral districts for the Folketing (national Parliament). The diocese of Aarhus has four deaneries composed of 60 parishes within Aarhus municipality. Aarhus municipality contains 21 postal districts and some parts of another 9. The urban area of Aarhus and the immediate suburbs are divided into the districts Aarhus C, Aarhus N, Aarhus V, Viby J, H\u00f8jbjerg and Brabrand.\nEnvironmental planning.\nAarhus has increasingly been investing in environmental planning and, in accordance with national policy, aims to be CO2-neutral and independent of fossil fuels for heating by 2030. The municipal power plants were adapted for this purpose in the 2010s. In 2015, the municipality took over three private straw-fired heating plants and the year after, a new 77 MW combined heat and power biomass plant at Lisbjerg Power Station was completed, while Studstrup Power Station finished a refit to move from coal to wood chips. The projects made Aarhus Municipality selfsufficient with green CO2-neutral electricity and district heating in 2017. In conjunction with the development of the Docklands district, there are plans for a utility-scale seawater heat pump which will take advantage of fluctuating electricity prices to supply the district heating system. From 2015 to 2023, the city implemented energy-saving LED technology in street lighting across the municipality. Apart from reducing the city's CO2 emissions, it saves 30% on the electricity bill, thereby making it a self-financed project over a 20-year period. In 2023, the municipal government planned a number of geothermal heating facilities, aiming to provide CO2-free and sustainable district heating to 20% of citizens. The first facility was realised in 2025.\nThe municipality aims for a coherent and holistic administration of the water cycle to protect against, and clean up previous, pollution as well as encourage green growth and self-sufficiency. The main issues are excessive nutrients, adapting to increased (and increasing) levels of precipitation brought on by climate change, and securing the water supply. These goals have manifested in a number of large water treatment projects often in collaboration with private partners. In the 2000s, underground rainwater basins were built across the city while the two lakes \u00c5rslev Engs\u00f8 and Eg\u00e5 Engs\u00f8 were created in 2003 and 2006 respectively. The number of sewage treatment plants is planned to be reduced from 17 to 2 by 2025, as the treatment plants in Marselisborg and Eg\u00e5 are scheduled for expansion to take over all waste water treatment. They have already been refitted for biogas production to become net producers of electricity and heat. To aid the new treatment plants, and avoid floodings, sewage and stormwater throughout the municipality is planned to be separated into two different drainage systems. Construction began in 2017 in several areas, but it is a long process that is scheduled to be finished by 2085.\nAfforestation projects have been undertaken to prevent groundwater pollution, secure drinking water, sequester CO2, increase biodiversity, create an attractive countryside, provide easy access to nature and offer outdoor activities to the public. In 2000, the first project, the New Forests of Aarhus, was completed, which aimed to double the forest cover in the municipality and, in 2009, another phase was announced to double forest cover once more before the year 2030. The afforestation plans were realised as a local project in collaboration with private landowners, under a larger national agenda. Other projects to expand natural habitats include a rewilding effort in Geding-Kasted Bog and continuous monitoring of the four Natura 2000 areas in the municipality.\nDemographics.\nAarhus has a population of 261,570 on for a density of 2,874/km2 (7,444/sq mi). Aarhus municipality has a population of 330,639 on 468\u00a0km2 with a density of 706/km2 (1,829/sq mi). Less than a fifth of the municipal population resides beyond city limits and almost all live in an urban area. The population of Aarhus is both younger and better-educated than the national average which can be attributed to the high concentration of educational institutions. More than 40% of the population have an academic degree while only some 14% have no secondary education or trade. The largest age group is 20- to 29-year-olds and the average age is 37.5, making it the youngest city in the country and one of its youngest municipalities. Women have slightly outnumbered men for many years.\nThe city is home to 75 different religious groups and denominations, most of which are Christian or Muslim with a smaller number of Buddhist, Hindu, and Jewish communities. Since the 1990s there has been a marked growth in diverse new spiritual groups although the total number of followers remains small. The majority of the population are members of the Protestant state church, Church of Denmark, which is by far the largest religious institution both in the city and the country as a whole. Some 20% of the population are not officially affiliated with any religion, a percentage that has been slowly rising for many years.\nDuring the 1990s there was significant immigration from Turkey and in the 2000s, there was a fast growth in the overall immigrant community, from 27,783 people in 1999 to 40,431 in 2008. The majority of immigrants have roots outside Europe and the developed world, comprising some 25,000 people from 130 different nationalities, with the largest groups coming from the Middle East and North Africa. Some 15,000 have come from within Europe, with Poland, Germany, Romania and Norway being the largest contributors.\nMany immigrants have established themselves in the suburbs of Brabrand, Hasle and Viby, where the percentage of inhabitants with foreign origins has risen by 66% since 2000. This has resulted in a few so-called ghettos, defined as residential areas with more than half of inhabitants from non-Western countries and with relatively high levels of poverty and/or crime. Gellerup is the most notable neighbourhood in that respect. The ghetto-labelling has been criticised as unnecessarily stigmatising and counterproductive for social and economical development of the related areas.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of Aarhus is predominantly knowledge- and service-based, strongly influenced by the University of Aarhus and the large healthcare industry. The service sector dominates the economy and is growing as the city transitions away from manufacturing. Trade and transportation remain important sectors, benefiting from the large port and central position on the rail network. Manufacturing has been in slow but steady decline since the 1960s while agriculture has long been a marginal sector within the municipality. The municipality is home to 175,000 jobs with some 100,000 in the private sector and the rest split between state, region and municipality. The region is a major agricultural producer, with many large farms in the outlying districts. People commute to Aarhus from as far away as Randers, Silkeborg and Skanderborg and almost a third of those employed within the Aarhus municipality commute from neighbouring communities. Aarhus is a centre for retail in the Nordic and Baltic countries, with expansive shopping centres, the busiest commercial street in the country and a dense urban core with many speciality shops.\nThe job market is knowledge- and service-based, and the largest employment sectors are healthcare and social services, trade, education, consulting, research, industry and telecommunications. The municipality has more high- and middle-income jobs, and fewer low-income jobs, than the national average. Today, the majority of the largest companies in the municipality are in the sectors of trade, transport and media. The wind power industry has strong roots in Aarhus and the larger region of Central Jutland, and nationally, most of the revenue in the industry is generated by companies in the greater Aarhus area. The wind industry employs about a thousand people within the municipality, making it a central component in the local economy. The biotech industry is well-established in the city, with many small- and medium-sized companies mainly focused on research and development, and multiple international Big Tech companies are represented in the city, including Uber, Google, and IBM.\nSeveral major companies are headquartered in Aarhus, including four of the ten largest in the country. These include Arla Foods, one of the largest dairy groups in Europe, Salling Group, Denmark's largest retailer, Jysk, a worldwide retailer of household goods, Vestas, a global wind turbine manufacturer, Terma A/S, a major defence and aerospace manufacturer, Per Aarsleff, a civil engineering company and several large retail companies. Other large employers of note include Krifa, Systematic A/S,), and Bestseller A/S. Since the early 2000s, the city has experienced an influx of larger companies, relocating here from other parts of the Jutland peninsula.\nPort of Aarhus.\nThe Port of Aarhus is one of the largest industrial ports in northern Europe with the largest container terminal in Denmark, processing more than 50% of Denmark's container traffic and accommodating the largest container vessels in the world. It is a municipal self-governing port with independent finances. The facilities handle some 9.5\u00a0million tonnes of cargo a year (2012). Grain is the principal export, while feedstuffs, stone, cement and coal are among the chief imports. Since 2012 the port has faced increasing competition from the Port of Hamburg and freight volumes have decreased somewhat from the peak in 2008.\nThe ferry terminal presents the only alternative to the Great Belt Link for passenger transport between Jutland and Zealand. It has served different ferry companies since the first steamship route to Copenhagen opened in 1830. Currently, Mols-Linien operates the route and annually transports some two million passengers and a million vehicles. Additional roll-on/roll-off cargo ferries serve Finland and Kalundborg on a weekly basis and smaller outlying Danish ports at irregular intervals. Since the early 2000s the port has increasingly become a destination for cruise lines operating in the Baltic Sea.\nTourism.\nThe ARoS Art Museum, the Old Town Museum and Tivoli Friheden are among Denmark's top tourist attractions. With a combined total of almost 1.4\u00a0million visitors they represent the driving force behind tourism but other venues such as Moesg\u00e5rd Museum and Kvindemuseet are also popular. The city's extensive shopping facilities are also said to be a major attraction for tourists, as are festivals, especially NorthSide and SPOT. Many visitors arrive on cruise ships: in 2012, 18 vessels visited the port with over 38,000 passengers.\nIn the 2010s, there was a significant expansion of tourist facilities, culminating in the opening of the 240-room Comwell Hotel in July 2014, which increased the number of hotel rooms in the city by 25%. Some estimates put the number of visitors spending at least one night as high as 750,000 a year, most of them Danes from other regions, with the remainder coming mainly from Norway, Sweden, northern Germany and the United Kingdom. Overall, they spend roughly DKK 3\u00a0billion (\u20ac402\u00a0million) in the city each year. The primary motivation for tourists choosing Aarhus as a destination is experiencing the city and culture, family and couples vacation or as a part of a round trip in Denmark. The average stay is little more than three days on average.\nThere are more than 30 tourist information spots across the city. Some of them are staffed, while others are online, publicly accessible touchscreens. The official tourist information service in Aarhus is organised under VisitAarhus, a corporate foundation initiated in 1994 by Aarhus Municipality and local commercial interest organisations.\nResearch parks.\nThe largest research park in Aarhus is INCUBA Science Park, focused on IT and biomedical research, It is based on Denmark's first research park, \"Forskerpark Aarhus\" (Research Park Aarhus), founded in 1986, which in 2007 merged with another research park to form INCUBA Science Park. The organisation is owned partly by Aarhus University and private investors and aims to foster close relationships between public institutions and startup companies. It is physically divided across 4 locations after a new department was inaugurated in Navitas Park in 2015, which it will share with the Aarhus School of Marine and Technical Engineering and AU Engineering. Another major centre for knowledge is Agro Food Park in Skejby, established to facilitate co-operation between companies and public institutions working within food science and agriculture. In January 2017 Arla Foods will open the global innovation centre \"Arla Nativa\" in Agro Food Park and in 2018 Aarhus University is moving the \"Danish Centre for Food and Agriculture\" there as well. In 2016, some 1000 people worked at Agro Food Park, spread across 50 companies and institutions and in August 2016 Agro Food Park management published plans to expand facilities from 92,000 m2 to .\nIn addition, Aarhus is home to the Aarhus School of Architecture, one of two Danish Ministry of Education institutions that provide degree programs in architecture, and some of the largest architecture firms in the Nordic countries such as Schmidt Hammer Lassen Architects, Arkitema Architects and C. F. M\u00f8ller Architects. Taken together these organisations form a unique concentration of expertise and knowledge in architecture outside Copenhagen, which the Danish Ministry of Business and Growth refers to as (the architecture cluster). To promote the \"cluster\", the School of Architecture will be given new school buildings centrally in the new Freight Station Neighbourhood, planned for development in the 2020s. In the interim, the city council supports a culture, business and education centre in the area, which may continue in the future neighbourhood in some form. The future occupants of the neighbourhood will be businesses and organisations selected for their ability to be involved in the local community, and it is hoped that the area will evolve into a hotspot for creativity and design.\nCityscape.\nAarhus has developed in stages, from the Viking Age to modern times, all visible in the city landscape today. Many architectural styles are represented in different parts of the city such as Romanesque, Gothic, Renaissance, Baroque, Rococo, National Romantic, Nordic Classicism, Neoclassical, Empire and Functionalism. The city has developed around the main transport hubs \u2013 the river, the harbour, and later the railway station \u2013 and as a result, the oldest parts are also the most central and busiest today.\nThe streets of Volden (The Rampart) and Graven (The Moat) testify to the defences of the initial Viking town, and \"All\u00e9gaderingen\" (comprising the roads \"S\u00f8nder All\u00e9\", \"Vester All\u00e9\", and \"N\u00f8rre All\u00e9\") in Midtbyen roughly follows the boundaries of that settlement. The street network in the inner city formed during the Middle Ages with narrow, curved streets and low, dense housing by the river and the coast. \"Vesterport\" (Westward Gate) still bears the name of the medieval city gate and the narrow alleyways \"Posthussm\u00f8gen\" and \"Telefonsm\u00f8gen\" are remnants of toll stations from that time. The inner city has the oldest preserved buildings, especially the Latin Quarter, with houses dating back to the early 17th\u00a0century in Mejlgade and Skolegade. Medieval merchants' mansions with courtyards can be seen in Klostergade, Studsgade and Skolegade. By far, the largest part of the present-day city was built during and after the industrialisation of the late 1800s, and the most represented architectural styles today are historicism and modernism, especially the subgenre of Danish functionalism of which there are many fine examples. The building boom of the 2000s has imprinted itself heavily on the cityscape of Aarhus with redeveloped and entirely new neighbourhoods (also in the inner city), of which the redeveloped harbourfront is the largest project. The public space of the inner city is in an extended process of revitalisation; the Aarhus River has been reopened and city squares has been redesigned and new ones added. The transport system has been transformed with the addition of a new electrified light rail, bicycle roads, and a general redirection of motorized traffic around the inner city. The skyline is changing with several dominant high-rises popping up, especially in the inner city.\nDevelopments.\nIn recent years, Aarhus has experienced a construction boom, including entirely new city districts. The largest construction project is the redevelopment of the former docklands; comprising several sections, of which the northern docklands (\"Aarhus \u00d8\") is the biggest. The new city district of Aarhus \u00d8 began development in 2007, when Aarhus Municipality took over the first areas of the former docklands and started the redevelopment by building new canals and preparing building sites for further construction. The first housing project (the Z House) began construction the year after. The new district is made up of mostly privately owned housing blocks, but with shops, restaurants, and cultural attractions in between. Many of the buildings are designed by renowned architectural firms such as CEBRA, JDS Architects, and Bjarke Ingels Group, and includes the tallest building in Denmark; the Lighthouse highrise at 143 meters.&lt;ref name=\"Lighthouse Building / 3XN\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The district is largely finished, but still under development as of 2025. In December 2023, construction of the \"Sydhavnskvarteret\" began; a new city district, and redevelopment, of the southern section of the former docklands. This new district will include businesses and cultural institutions, but with mixed housing in between.\nOther new, but smaller, districts in development across Aarhus, includes CeresByen, \"Brokvarteret\", \"\u00c5byen\", and \"Amtssygehuskvarteret\" in the city center, and major construction around Lisbjerg, and Lystrup north of the city. Nearly all of the health care units across Aarhus has been closed and merged in the huge New University Hospital (DNU) in Skejby, north of city, finished in 2020. This opened the opportunity to redevelop large parts of the inner city, including the new borough of \"Amtssygehuskvarteret\". Parts of the central railway yard is also in a process of repurposing an development, giving rise to projects like the new cultural institution of Godsbanen.\nThe \"Aarhus Letbane\" light rail mass transport system is yet another huge ongoing construction project. It is an important piece in the electrification of the transport sector of Aarhus. The first line opened in 2017, and construction of new lines has continued since then.\nLandmarks.\nAarhus Cathedral (\"\u00c5rhus Domkirke\") in the centre of Aarhus, is the longest and tallest church in Denmark at and in length and height respectively. Originally built as a Romanesque basilica in the 13th\u00a0century, it was rebuilt and enlarged as a Gothic cathedral in the late 15th and early 16th centuries. Even though the cathedral stood finished around 1300, it took more than a century to build; the associated cathedral school of \"Aarhus Katedralskole\" was already founded in 1195 and ranks as the 44th oldest school in the world. Another important and historic landmark in the inner city, is the Church of Our Lady (\"Vor Frue Kirke\") also from the 13th\u00a0century in Romanesque and Gothic style. It is smaller and less impressive, but it was the first cathedral of Aarhus and founded on an even older church constructed in 1060; the oldest stone church in Scandinavia.\nLangelandsgade Kaserne in National Romantic Style from 1889 is the oldest former military barracks left in the country, now home to the university Department of Aesthetics and Communication since 1989.\nMarselisborg Palace (\"Marselisborg Slot\"), designed by Hack Kampmann in Neoclassical and Art Nouveau styles, was donated by the city to Prince Christian and Princess Alexandrine as a wedding present in 1898. The Aarhus Custom House (\"Toldkammeret\") from 1898, is said to be Hack Kampmann's finest work.\nTivoli Friheden (Tivoli Freedom) opened in 1903 and has since been the largest amusement park in the city and a tourist attraction. Aarhus Theatre from 1916 in the Art Nouveau style is the largest provincial theatre in Denmark. The early buildings of Aarhus University, especially the main building completed in 1932, designed by Kay Fisker, Povl Stegmann and by C.F. M\u00f8ller have gained an international reputation for their contribution to functionalist architecture. The City Hall (\"Aarhus R\u00e5dhus\") from 1941 with an iconic tower clad in marble, was designed by Arne Jacobsen and Erik M\u00f8ller in a modern Functionalist style.\nThe Aarhus River was reopened in 2005, after a longtime road cover since 1930. The reopening was finished in 2015 and includes a redevelopment of the riverside, which has become a central landmark for the city.\nRecent landmarks across the city includes entire new city districts, such as Aarhus \u00d8, CeresByen, and Brokvarteret. At the Aarhus \u00d8 district, the Lighthouse high-rise housing project from 2023 stands out as the tallest building in Denmark at 143 m (as of 2025). Another notable high-rise landmark is the Archouse co-living highrise, also from 2023, in Aarhus N at 94 meters. It is not an architectural marvel, but is built on one of the highest points in the city, so it can be seen from afar.\nParks, nature, and recreation.\nThe beech forests of Riis Skov and Marselisborg Forests occupy the hills along the coast to the north and south, and apart from the city centre, sandy beaches form the coastline of the entire municipality. There are two public sea baths, the northern \"Den Permanente\" below Riis Skov and close to the harbour area, and the southern Ballehage Beach in the Marselisborg Forests. As in most of Denmark, there are no private beaches in the municipality, but access to \"Den Permanente\" requires a membership, except in the summer.\nThe relatively mild, temperate marine climate, allows for outdoor recreation year round, including walking, hiking, cycling, and outdoor team sports. Mountain biking is usually restricted to marked routes. Watersports like sailing, kayaking, motor boating, etc. are also popular, and since the bay rarely freezes up in winter, they can also be practised most of the year. Recreational and transportational pathways for pedestrians and cyclists, radiate from the city centre to the countryside, providing safety from motorised vehicles and a more tranquil experience. This includes the 19 kilometre long pathway of \"Brabrandstien\", encircling the Brabrand Lake. The long-range hiking route Aarhus-Silkeborg, starts off from Brabrandstien.\nAarhus has an unusually high number of parks and green spaces, 134 of them, covering a total area of around . The central Botanical Gardens (\"Botanisk Have\") from 1875 are a popular destination, as they include The Old Town open-air museum and host a number of events throughout the year. Originally used to cultivate fruit trees and other useful plants for the local citizens, there are now a significant collection of trees and bushes from different habitats and regions of the world, including a section devoted to native Danish plants. Recently renovated tropical and subtropical greenhouses, exhibit exotic plants from throughout the world. Also in the city centre is the undulating University Park, recognised for its unique landscaped design with large old oak trees. The Memorial Park (\"Mindeparken\") at the coast below Marselisborg Palace, offers a panoramic view across the Bay of Aarhus and is popular with locals for outings, picnics or events. Other notable parks include the small central City Hall Park (\"R\u00e5dhusparken\") and Marienlyst Park (\"Marienlystparken\"). Marienlyst Park is a relatively new park from 1988, situated in Hasle out of the inner city and is less crowded, but it is the largest park in Aarhus, including woodlands, large open grasslands and soccer fields.\nMarselisborg Forests and Riis Skov, has a long history of recreational activities of all kinds, including several restaurants, hotels and opportunities for green exercise. There are marked routes here for jogging, running and mountain biking and large events are hosted regularly. This includes running events, cycle racing and orienteering, the annual Classic Race Aarhus with historic racing cars, all attracting thousands of people. Marselisborg Deer Park (\"Marselisborg Dyrehave\") in Marselisborg Forests, comprises of fenced woodland pastures with free-roaming sika and roe deer. Below the Moesg\u00e5rd Museum in the southern parts of the Marselisborg Forests, is a large historical landscape of pastures and woodlands, presenting different eras of Denmark's prehistory. Sections of the forest comprise trees and vegetation representing specific climatic epochs from the last Ice Age to the present. Dotted across the landscape are reconstructed Stone Age and Bronze Age graves, buildings from the Iron Age, Viking Age and medieval times, with grazing goats, sheep and horses in between.\nCulture.\nAarhus is home to many annual cultural events and festivals, museums, theatres, and sports events of both national and international importance, and presents some of the largest cultural attractions in Denmark. There is a long tradition of music from all genres, and many Danish bands have emerged from Aarhus. Libraries, cultural centres and educational institutions present free or easy opportunities for the citizens to participate in, engage in, or be creative with cultural events and productions of all kinds.\nSince 1938, Aarhus has marketed itself as \"Smilets by\" (City of smiles) which has become both an informal moniker and official slogan. In 2011, the city council opted to change the slogan to \"Aarhus. Danish for Progress\" but it was unpopular and abandoned after just a few years. Other slogans that have occasionally been used are \"Byen ved havet\" (City by the sea), \"Mellem bugt og b\u00f8geskov\" (Between bay and beechwood) and \"Verdens mindste storby\" (World's smallest big city). Aarhus is featured in popular songs such as \"Hjem til Aarhus\" by P\u00e5 Slaget 12, \"Lav sol over Aarhus\" by Gnags, \"8000 Aarhus C\" by Flemming J\u00f8rgensen, \"Pigen ud af Aarhus\" by Tina Dickow and \"Slingrer ned ad Vestergade\" by Gnags. In 1919, the number \"Sangen til Aarhus\" (Song to Aarhus) had become a popular hit for a time, but the oldest and perhaps best known \"national anthem\" for the city is the classical \"Aarhus Tappenstreg\" from 1872 by Carl Christian M\u00f8ller which is occasionally played at official events or at performances by local marching bands and orchestras.\nMuseums.\nAarhus has a range of museums, including two of the largest in the country, measured by the number of paying guests, \"Den Gamle By\" and \"ARoS Aarhus Kunstmuseum\". \"Den Gamle By\" (The Old Town), officially \"Danmarks K\u00f8bstadmuseum\" (Denmark's Market Town Museum), presents Danish townscapes from the 16th\u00a0century to the 1970s with individual areas focused on different time periods. 75 historic buildings collected from different parts of the country have been brought here to create a small town in its own right.\nARoS Aarhus Kunstmuseum, the city's main art museum, is one of the largest art museums in Scandinavia with a collection covering Danish art from the 18th\u00a0century to the present day as well as paintings, installations and sculptures representing international art movements and artists from all over the world. The iconic glass structure on the roof, \"Your Rainbow Panorama\", was designed by Olafur Eliasson and features a promenade offering a colourful panorama of the city.\nThe Moesg\u00e5rd Museum specialises in archaeology and ethnography in collaboration with Aarhus University with exhibits on Denmark's prehistory, including weapon sacrifices from Illerup \u00c5dal and the Grauballe Man. Kvindemuseet, the Women's Museum, from 1984 contains collections of the lives and works of women in Danish cultural history. The Occupation Museum (\"Bes\u00e6ttelsesmuseum\") presents exhibits illustrating the German occupation of the city during the Second World War; the University Park on the campus of Aarhus University includes the Natural History Museum with 5,000 species of animals, many in their natural surroundings; and the Steno Museum is a museum of the history of science and medicine with a planetarium. Kunsthal Aarhus (Aarhus Art Hall) hosts exhibitions of contemporary art including painting, sculpture, photography, performance art, film and video. Strictly speaking it is not a museum but an arts centre, one of the oldest in Europe, built and founded in 1917.\nLibraries and community centres.\nPublic libraries in Denmark are also cultural and community centres. They play an active role in cultural life and host many events, exhibitions, discussion groups, workshops, educational courses and facilitate everyday cultural activities for and by the citizens. In June 2015, the large central library and cultural centre of Dokk1 opened at the harbour front. Dokk1 also includes civil administrations and services, commercial office rentals and a large underground robotic car park and aims to be a landmark for the city and a public meeting place. The building of Dokk1 and the associated squares and streetscape is also collectively known as Urban Mediaspace Aarhus and it is the largest construction project Aarhus municipality has yet undertaken. Apart from this large main library, some neighbourhoods in Aarhus have a local library engaged in similar cultural and educational activities, but on a more local scale.\nThe State Library (\"Statsbiblioteket\") at the university campus has status of a national library. The city is a member of the ICORN organisation (International Cities of Refuge Network) in an effort to provide a safe haven to authors and writers persecuted in their countries of origin.\nThere are several cultural and community centres throughout the city. This includes Folkestedet in the central \u00c5parken, facilitating events for and by non-commercial associations, organisations and clubs, and activities for the elderly, the nearby Godsbanen at the railway yard, with workshops, events and exhibitions, and Globus1 in Brabrand facilitating sports and various cultural activities.\nPerforming arts.\nThe city enjoys strong musical traditions, both classical and alternative, underground and popular, with educational and performance institutions such as the concert halls of Musikhuset, the opera of Den Jyske Opera, Aarhus Symfoniorkester (Aarhus Symphony Orchestra) and Det Jyske Musikkonservatorium (Royal Academy of Music, Aarhus/Aalborg). Musikhuset is the largest concert hall in Scandinavia, with seating for more than 3,600 people. Other major music venues include VoxHall, rebuilt in 1999, and the associated venue of Atlas, Train nightclub at the harbourfront, and Godsbanen, a former rail freight station.\nThe acting scene in Aarhus is diverse, with many groups and venues engaged in a broad span of genres, from animation theatre and children's theatre to classical theatre and improvisational theatre. Aarhus Teater is the oldest and largest venue with mostly professional classical acting performances. Svalegangen, the second largest theatre, is more experimental with its performances and other notable groups and venues includes Entr\u00e9Scenen, Katapult, Gruppe 38, Helsing\u00f8r Teater, Det Andet Teater and Teater Refleksion as well as dance venues like Bora Bora. The cultural center of Godsbanen includes several scenes and stages and the Concert Halls of \"Musikhuset\" also stage theatrical plays regularly and is home to the children's theatre Filuren and a comedy club. The city hosts a biannual international theatre festival, International Living Theatre (ILT), with the next event being scheduled for 2021.\nSince 2010 the music production centre of PROMUS (\"Produktionscentret for Rytmisk Musik\") has supported the rock scene in the city along with the publicly funded ROSA (\"Dansk Rock Samr\u00e5d\"), which promotes Danish rock music in general.\nAarhus is known for its musical history. Fuelled by a relatively young population jazz clubs sprang up in the 1950s which became a tour stop for many iconic American Jazz musicians. By the 1960s, the music scene diversified into rock and other genres and in the 1970s and 1980s, Aarhus became a centre for rock music, fostering iconic bands such as Klich\u00e9, TV-2 and Gnags and artists such as Thomas Helmig and Anne Linnet. Acclaimed bands since the 1970s include Under Byen, Michael Learns to Rock, Nephew, Carpark North, Spleen United, VETO, Hatesphere and Illdisposed in addition to individual performers such as Medina and Tina Dico.\nEvents and festivals.\nAarhus hosts many annual or recurring festivals, concerts and events, with the festival of Aarhus Festuge as the most popular and wide-ranging, along with large sports events. Aarhus Festuge is the largest multicultural festival in Scandinavia, always based on a special theme and takes place every year for ten days between late August and early September, transforming the inner city with festive activities and decorations of all kinds.\nThere are numerous music festivals; the eight-day Aarhus Jazz Festival features jazz in many venues across the city. It was founded in 1988 and usually takes place in July every year, occasionally August or September. There are several annually recurring music festivals for contemporary popular music in Aarhus. NorthSide Festival presents well-known bands every year in mid-June on large outdoor scenes. It is a relatively new event, founded in 2010, but grew from a one-day event to a three-day festival in its first three years, now with 35,000 paying guests in 2015. Spot festival is aiming to showcase up-and-coming Danish and Scandinavian talents at selected venues of the inner city. The outdoor Gr\u00f8n Koncert music festival takes place every year in many cities across Denmark, including Aarhus. GrimFest is a small, but notable, summer music festival held in Skjoldh\u00f8jkilen, Brabrand.\nAarhus also hosts recurring events dedicated to specific art genres. International Living Theatre (ILT) is a bi-annual festival, established in 2009, with performing arts and stage art on a broad scale. The festival has a vision of showing the best plays and stage art experiences of the world, while at the same time attracting thespians and stage art interested people from both Aarhus and Europe at large. LiteratureXchange is a new annual festival from 2018, focused on literature from around the world as well as regional talents. The city actively promotes its gay and lesbian community and celebrates the annual Aarhus Pride gay pride festival while Aarhus Festuge usually includes exhibits, concerts and events designed for the LGBT communities.\nNotable events of a local scope include the university boat-race, held in the University Park since 1991, which has become a local spectator event attracting some 20,000 people. The boat race pits costumed teams from the university departments against each other in inflatable boats in a challenge to win the \"Gyldne B\u00e6kken\" (Golden Chamber Pot) trophy. The annual lighting of the Christmas lights on the Salling department store in S\u00f8ndergade has also become an attraction in recent times, packing the pedestrianised city centre with thousands of revellers. Significant dates such as Saint Lucy's Day, \"Sankt Hans\" (Saint John's Eve) and Fastelavn are traditionally celebrated with numerous events across the city.\nFood, drink, and nightlife.\nAarhus has a large variety of restaurants and eateries offering food from cultures all over the world, especially Mediterranean and Asian, but also international gourmet cuisine, traditional Danish food and New Nordic Cuisine. Among the oldest restaurants are \"R\u00e5dhuscafeen\" (lit. The City Hall Caf\u00e9), opened in 1924, serving a menu of traditional Danish meals, and \"Peter Gift\" from 1906, a tavern with a broad beer selection and a menu of sm\u00f8rrebr\u00f8d and other Danish dishes. In Aarhus, New Nordic can be experienced at \"K\u00e4hler Villa Dining\", \"H\u00e6rv\u00e6rk\" and \"Domestic\", but local produce can be had at many places, especially at the twice-weekly food markets in Frederiksbjerg. Aarhus and Central Denmark Region was selected as European Region of Gastronomy in 2017. The city (and municipality) is a member of the D\u00e9lice Network, an international non-profit organisation nurturing and facilitating knowledge exchange in gastronomy.\nAppraised high-end restaurants serving international gourmet cuisine include Frederiksh\u00f8j, Substans, Gastrom\u00e9, Det Glade Vanvid, Nordisk Spisehus, Restaurant Varna, Restaurant ET, G\u00e4st, Brasserie Belli, M\u00f8f. Restaurants in Aarhus were the first in provincial Denmark to receive Michelin stars since 2015, when Michelin inspectors ventured outside Copenhagen for the first time.\nVendors of street food are numerous throughout the centre, often selling from small trailers on permanent locations formally known as \"P\u00f8lsevogne\" (lit. sausage wagons), traditionally serving a Danish variety of hot dogs, sausages and other fast food. There are increasingly more outlets inspired by other cultural flavours such as sushi, kebab and currywurst.\nThe city centre is packed with caf\u00e9s, especially along the river and the Latin quarter. Some of them also include an evening restaurant, such as \"Caf\u00e9 Casablanca\", \"Caf\u00e9 Carlton\", \"Caf\u00e9 Cross\" and \"Gyngen\". Aarhus Street Food from 2016, Markedshallen Nikolinehus from 2022, and Banken Food Hall from 2024, are three indoor food courts in the inner city, comprising a variety of street food restaurants, caf\u00e9s and bars.\nAarhus has a robust and diverse nightlife. The action tends to concentrate in the inner city, with the pedestrianised riverside, Frederiksgade, the Latin Quarter, and J\u00e6gerg\u00e5rdsgade on Frederiksbjerg as the most active centres at night, but things are stirring elsewhere around the city too. The nightlife scene offers everything from small joints with cheap alcohol and a homely atmosphere to fashionable nightclubs serving champagne and cocktails or small and large music venues with bars, dance floors and lounges. A short selection of well-established places where you can have a drink and socialise, include the large homely Irish pub \"Tir na n\u00d3g\" with occasional live music, and a separate cocktail bar; relaxed \"RIS RAS Filliongongong\", offering waterpipes and an award-winning beer selection; \"Sharks Poolhall\" nightclub with televised sports events and joyful billiard players; the fashionable but hard to find \"Gedulgt\" nightclub speak-easy, high-end cocktail bar; cosy \"Vinstuen\" bar with a cheap menu of basic drinks, beer, and table football; British-style \"Sherlock Holmes\" pub stuffed with Sherlock Holmes paraphernalia; and \"LouLou\" nightclub dance lounge at the riverside. A few nightlife spots are aimed at gays and lesbians specifically, including Gbar (nightclub) and Caf\u00e9 Sappho.\nThe \"\u00c5rhus Set\" (Danish: \u00c5rhus S\u00e6t) is a set of drinks often ordered together, named for the city and consisting of two beverages, one Ceres Top beer and one shot Arnbitter, both originally from Aarhus. Ordering \"a set\" suffices in most bars and pubs. Aarhus Bryghus is a local craft brewery with a sizeable production. The brewery is located in the southern district of Viby and a large variety of their craft brews are available there, in most larger well-assorted stores in the city, and in some bars and restaurants as well. They also export.\nLocal dialect.\nThe Aarhus dialect, commonly called \"Aarhusiansk\" (Aarhusian in English), is a Jutlandic dialect in the Mid-Eastern Jutland dialect area, traditionally spoken in and around Aarhus. Aarhusian, as with most local dialects in Denmark, has diminished in use through the 20th century and most Danes today speak some version of Standard Danish with slight regional features. Aarhusian, however, still has a strong presence in older segments of the population and in areas with high numbers of immigrants. Some examples of common, traditional and unique Aarhusian words are: \"tr\u00e6ls\" ('tiresome'), \"noller\" ('silly' or 'dumb') and \"d\u00e6lme\" (excl. 'damn me!'). The dialect is notable for single-syllable words ending in \"d\" being pronounced with st\u00f8d while the same letter in multiple-syllable words is pronounced as \"j\", i.e., Odder is pronounced \"Ojjer\". Like other dialects in East Jutland, it has two grammatical genders, similar to Standard Danish, but different from West Jutlandic dialects, which have only one. In 2009, the University of Aarhus compiled a list of contemporary public figures who best exemplify the dialect, including Jacob Haugaard, Thomas Helmig, Steffen Brandt, Stig T\u00f8fting, Flemming J\u00f8rgensen, Tina Dickow and Camilla Martin. In popular culture, the dialect features prominently in Niels Malmros's movie \"Aarhus by Night\" and in 90s comedy sketches by Jacob Haugaard and Finn N\u00f8rbygaard.\nSports.\nAarhus has three major men's professional sports teams: the Superliga team Aarhus Gymnastikforening (AGF), Danish Handball League's Aarhus GF H\u00e5ndbold, and Danish Basketball League's Bakken Bears. Notable or historic clubs include Aarhus 1900, Aarhus Fremad, Idr\u00e6tsklubben Skovbakken and Aarhus Sejlklub. Aarhus Idr\u00e6tspark has hosted matches in the premiere Danish soccer league since it was formed in 1920 and matches for the national men's soccer team in 2006 and 2007. The five sailing clubs routinely win national and international titles in a range of disciplines and the future national watersports stadium will be located on the Aarhus Docklands in the city centre. The Bakken Bears won the Danish basketball championships in 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014.\nThe municipality actively supports sports organisations in and around the city, providing public organisations that aim to attract major sporting events and strengthen professional sports. The National Olympic Committee and Sports Confederation of Denmark counts some 380 sports organisations within the municipality and about one third of the population are members of one. Soccer is by far the most popular sport followed by Gymnastics, Handball and Badminton.\nIn recent decades, many free and public sports facilities have sprung up across the city, such as street football, basketball, climbing walls, skateboarding and beach volley. Several natural sites also offer green exercise, with exercise equipment installed along the paths and tracks reserved for mountain biking. The landscaped area of Skjoldh\u00f8jkilen is a prime example.\nAarhus has hosted many sporting events including the 2010 European Women's Handball Championship, the 2014 European Men's Handball Championship, the 2013 Men's European Volleyball Championships, the 2005 European Table Tennis Championships, the Denmark Open in badminton, the UCI Women's Road Cycling World Cup, the 2006 World Orienteering Championships, the 2006 World Artistic Gymnastics Championships and the GF World Cup (women's handball). On average, Aarhus is hosting one or two international sailing competitions every year. In 2008, the city hosted the ISAF Youth Sailing World Championships and in 2018 it was host to the ISAF Sailing World Championships, the world championship for the 12 Olympic sailing disciplines.\nEducation.\nAarhus is the principal centre for education in the Jutland region. It draws students from a large area, especially from the western and southern parts of the peninsula. The relatively large influx of young people and students creates a natural base for cultural activities. Aarhus has the greatest concentration of students in Denmark, fully 12% of citizens attending short, medium or long courses of study. In addition to around 25 institutions of higher education, several research forums have evolved to assist in the transfer of expertise from education to business. The city is home to more than 52,000 students.\nSince 2012, Aarhus University (AU) has been the largest university in Denmark by number of students enrolled. It is ranked among the top 100 universities in the world by several of the most influential and respected rankings. The university has approximately 41,500 Bachelor and Master students enrolled as well as about 1,500 PhD students. It is possible to engage in higher academic studies in many areas, from the traditional spheres of natural science, humanities and theology to more vocational academic areas like engineering and dentistry.\nAarhus Tech is one of the largest technical colleges in Denmark, teaching undergraduate study programmes in English, including vocational education and training (VET), continuing vocational training (CVT), and human resource development. Business Academy Aarhus is among the largest business academies in Denmark and offers undergraduate and some academic degrees, in IT, business and technical fields. The academic level technical aspects are covered in a collaboration with Aarhus Tech, Aarhus School of Marine and Technical Engineering and Aarhus Educational Centre for Agriculture. The Danish School of Media and Journalism (DMJX) is the oldest and largest of the colleges, offering journalism courses since 1946, with approximately 1,700 students as of 2014. DMJX has been an independent institution since 1974, conducting research and teaching at undergraduate level, and in 2004, master's courses in journalism was established in a collaboration with Aarhus University. The latter is offered through the Centre for University studies in journalism, granting degrees through the university.\nThe Royal Academy of Music in Aarhus (\"Det Jyske Musikkonservatorium\") is a conservatoire, established under the auspices of the Danish Ministry of Culture in 1927. In 2010, it merged administratively with the Royal Academy of Music in Aalborg, which was founded in 1930. Under the patronage of His Royal Highness Crown Prince Frederik, it offers graduate level studies in areas such as music teaching, and solo and professional musicianship. VIA University College was established in January 2008 and is one of eight new regional organisations offering bachelor courses of all kinds, throughout the Central Denmark Region. It offers over 50 higher educations, taught in Danish or sometimes in English, with vocational education and it participates in various research and development projects. Aarhus School of Architecture (\"Arkitektskolen Aarhus\") was founded in 1965. Along with the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts of Copenhagen, it is responsible for the education of architects in Denmark. With an enrolment of approximately 900 students, it teaches in five main departments: architecture and aesthetics, urban and landscape, architectonic heritage, design and architectural design.\nTransport.\nAarhus has two ring roads; Ring 1, roughly encircling the central district of Aarhus C, and the outlying Ring 2. Six major intercity motorways radiate from the city centre, connecting with nearby cities Gren\u00e5, Randers, Viborg, Silkeborg, Skanderborg and Odder.\nIn the inner city, motorised traffic is highly regulated, larger parts are pedestrianised and in the 2000s, a system of roads prioritised for cyclists have been implemented, connecting to suburban areas.\nThe main railway station in Aarhus is Aarhus Central Station located in the city centre. DSB has connections to destinations throughout Denmark and also services to Flensburg and Hamburg in Germany.\nAarhus Letbane is a local electric tram-train system that opened in December 2017, connecting the central station and the inner city with the University Hospital in Skejby and also replaced local railway services to Grenaa and Odder in late 2018. It was the first electric light rail system in Denmark and more routes are planned to open in coming years. Tickets for the light rail are also available in local yellow bus lines.\nMost city bus lines go through the inner city and pass through either Park All\u00e9 or Baneg\u00e5rdspladsen, or both, right at the central station. Regional and Inter-city buses terminate at Aarhus Bus Terminal, just east of the central station. FlixBus provides long-distance buses that travel to other cities in Denmark and Europe.\nFerries administered by Danish ferry company Mols-Linien transports passengers and motorvehicles between Aarhus and Sj\u00e6llands Odde on Zealand. The ferries comprises \"HSC KatExpress 1\" and \"HSC KatExpress 2\", the world's largest diesel-powered catamarans, and \"HSC Max Mols\".\nAarhus Airport is located on Djursland, north-east of Aarhus near Tirstrup, and provides links to both Copenhagen and international destinations. The larger Billund Airport is situated south-west of Aarhus. There has been much discussion about constructing a new airport closer to the city for many years, but so far no plans have been realised. In August 2014, the city council officially initiated a process to assert the viability of a new international airport. A small seaplane now operates four flights daily between Aarhus harbour and Copenhagen harbour.\nAarhus has a free bike sharing system, Aarhus Bycykler (Aarhus City Bikes). The bicycles are available from 1 April to 30 October at 57 stands throughout the city and can be obtained by placing a DKK 20 coin in a release slot, like caddies in a supermarket. The coin can be retrieved when the bike is returned to a stand. Bicycles can also be hired from many shops.\nHealthcare.\nAarhus is home to Aarhus University Hospital, one of six Danish \"Super Hospitals\" officially established in 2007 when the regions reformed the Danish healthcare sector. The university hospital is the result of a series of mergers in the 2000s between the local hospitals of Skejby Sygehus, the Municipal Hospital, the County Hospital, Marselisborg Hospital and Risskov Psychiatric Hospital. It is today the largest hospital in Denmark with a combined staff of some 10,000 and 1,150 patient beds, and has been ranked the best hospital in Denmark consecutively since 2008. In 2012, construction of a new large hospital building began, known as Det Nye Universitetshospital (DNU) or 'The New University Hospital' in English, and it is centralising and accommodating all of the former departments, ending in 2019. The new hospital is divided in four clinical centres, a service centre and one administrative unit along with twelve research centres.\nPrivate hospitals specialised in different areas from plastic surgery to fertility treatments operate in Aarhus as well. \"Ciconia Aarhus Private Hospital\" founded in 1984 is a leading Danish fertility clinic and the first of its kind in Denmark. Ciconia has provided for the birth of 6,000 children by artificial insemination and continually conducts research into the field of fertility. \"Aagaard Clinic\", established in 2004, is another private fertility and gynaecology clinic which since 2004 has undertaken fertility treatments that has resulted in 1550 births. Aarhus Municipality also offers a number of specialised services in the areas of nutrition, exercise, sex, smoking and drinking, activities for the elderly, health courses and lifestyle.\nMedia.\nThe first daily newspaper to appear in Aarhus was \"\u00c5rhus Stiftstidende\", established in 1794 as \"Aarhuus Stifts Adresse-Contoirs Tidender\", with a moderately conservative approach. Once one of Denmark's largest, it was a leading provincial newspaper for a time, but after the Second World War it increasingly faced competition from \"Demokraten\" (1884\u20131974) and , both published in Aarhus. In 1998, it merged with \"Randers Amtsavis\" and is now run by Midtjyske Medier, part of Berlingske Media. The daily newspaper of was established in 1871 in Aarhus, and takes a generally right-wing editorial approach. With a reputation as a serious news publication, the paper has always included news from Jutland in particular, but somewhat less so since its promotion as a national newspaper in the 1960s. Today it is one of the three bestselling serious newspapers in Denmark, the others being \"Berlingske\" and \"Politiken\". Jyllands-Posten publishes \"JP Aarhus\", a section dedicated to news in and around Aarhus, and hosted a free cityguide website from 2010 to 2016. The Copenhagen-based media company of \"Politiken\", also publishes several free local papers once a week in parts of Denmark and Sweden. In Aarhus, they publish a total of five local newspapers; \"Aarhus Midt\", \"Aarhus Nord\", \"Aarhus Vest\", \"Aarhus Syd\" and \"Aarhus Onsdag\". \"Aarhus Onsdag\" (Aarhus Wednesday) is financed completely by advertisements and available in both paperform and online. It was bought from \"\u00c5rhus Stiftstidende\" in June 2017, but has been published for many years previous.\nDanmarks Radio has a large department in Aarhus with over 200 employees. It runs the DR \u00d8stjylland radio programme, provides local contributions to DR P4, and produces local regional television programmes. In 1999, TV 2 moved its Jutland headquarters from Randers to Skejby in northern Aarhus. The station broadcasts regional news and current affairs television and radio programmes. Since 2012, it has run its own TV channel, TV 2 \u00d8stjylland. Aarhus has its own local TV channel TVAarhus, transmitting since 1984. After an agreement on 1 July 2014, TVAarhus can be watched by 130,000 households in Aarhus, making it the largest cable-transmitted local TV channel in Denmark.\nWith over 1,700 students, the Danish School of Media and Journalism (\"Danmarks Medie- og Journalisth\u00f8jskole\") is the country's largest and oldest school of journalism. The school works closely with Aarhus University, where the first journalism course was established in 1946. In 2004, the two institutions established the Centre for University Studies in Journalism, which offers master's courses.\nInternational relations.\nAarhus is home to 32 consulates:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAarhus practices twinning on the municipal level. For the twin towns, see twin towns of Aarhus Municipality.\nCitations.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "1043", "revid": "11308236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1043", "title": "Northern cavefish", "text": "Species of fish\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe northern cavefish or northern blindfish (Amblyopsis spelaea) is found in caves through Kentucky and southern Indiana. The International Union for Conservation of Nature lists the species as near threatened.\nThe life cycle of northern cavefish includes a protolarval stage. In this stage, eggs and those that have recently hatched into protolarvae are kept by the mother internally in a gill chamber. Juveniles become free swimming and can leave. The northern cavefish lives to a maximum age of at least ten years and reaches sexual maturity at approximately six years of age. Some estimates suggest that specimens may live up to 30-40 years in environments with stable food supplies.\nDuring a 2013 study of \"Amblyopsis spelaea\", scientists found that the species was divided into two distinct evolutionary lineages: one north of the Ohio River, in Indiana, and one south of the river, in Kentucky. The southern population retained the name \"A. spelaea\" and the northern was re-designated \"Amblyopsis hoosieri\" in a 2014 paper published in the journal \"ZooKeys\". Neither species is found north of the White River, flowing east to west south of Bedford, Indiana.\nThe northern cavefish was under consideration for listing under the Endangered Species Act, however, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service found in 2023 that despite the loss of two metapopulations of \"A. spelaea\", listing was not warranted, as the four metapopulations that still exist had sufficient redundancy of subpopulations to mitigate threats. The metapopulations are divided among two units that are separated by the Rough Creek Fault Zone. Threats to the species include habitat degradation, especially by groundwater contamination from encroaching agricultural operations, cities and industry, forest loss and surface water impoundment.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1046", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1046", "title": "Abatement", "text": "Abatement refers generally to a lessening, diminution, reduction, or moderation; specifically, it may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "1049", "revid": "50252755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1049", "title": "Amateur", "text": "Person who participates in activities on a nonprofessional basis\nAn amateur (from fr\u00a0'one who loves') is generally considered a person who pursues an avocation independent from their source of income. Amateurs and their pursuits are also described as popular, informal, self-taught, user-generated, DIY, and hobbyist.\nHistory.\nHistorically, the amateur was considered to be the ideal balance between pure intent, open mind, and the interest or passion for a subject. That ideology spanned many different fields of interest. It may have its roots in the ancient Greek philosophy of amateur athletes competing in the Olympics. The ancient Greek citizens spent most of their time in other pursuits, but competed according to their natural talents and abilities.\nThe \"gentleman amateur\" was a phenomenon among the gentry of Great Britain from the 17th century until the 20th century. With the start of the Age of Reason, with people thinking more about how the world works around them, (see science in the Age of Enlightenment), things like the cabinets of curiosities, and the writing of the book \"The Christian Virtuoso\", started to shape the idea of the gentleman amateur. He was vastly interested in a particular topic, and studied, observed, and collected things and information on his topic of choice. The Royal Society in Great Britain was generally composed of these \"gentleman amateurs\", and is one of the reasons science today exists the way it does. A few examples of these gentleman amateurs are Francis Bacon, Isaac Newton, and Sir Robert Cotton, 1st Baronet, of Connington.\nAmateurism can be seen in both a negative and positive light. Since amateurs often lack formal training and are self-taught, some amateur work may be considered sub-par. For example, amateur athletes in sports such as basketball, baseball, or football are regarded as possessing a lower level of ability than professional athletes. On the other hand, an amateur may be in a position to approach a subject with an open mind (as a result of the lack of formal training) and in a financially disinterested manner. An amateur who dabbles in a field out of interest rather than as a profession, or possesses a general but superficial interest in any art or a branch of knowledge, is often referred to as a dilettante.\nOlympics.\nThrough most of the 20th century the Olympics allowed only amateur athletes to participate and this amateur code was strictly enforced, Jim Thorpe was stripped of track and field medals for having taken expense money for playing baseball in 1912.\nLater on, the nations of the Communist Bloc entered teams of Olympians who were all nominally students, soldiers, or working in a profession, but many of whom were in reality paid by the state to train on a full-time basis.\nNear the end of the 1960s, the Canadian Amateur Hockey Association (CAHA) felt their amateur players could no longer be competitive against the Soviet team's full-time athletes and the other constantly improving European teams. They pushed for the ability to use players from professional leagues but met opposition from the International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF) and the International Olympic Committee (IOC). At the IIHF Congress in 1969, the IIHF decided to allow Canada to use nine non-NHL professional hockey players at the 1970 World Championships in Montreal and Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. The decision was reversed in January 1970 after IOC President Avery Brundage said that ice hockey's status as an Olympic sport would be in jeopardy if the change was made. In response, Canada withdrew from all international ice hockey competitions and officials stated that they would not return until \"open competition\" was instituted. G\u00fcnther Sabetzki became president of the IIHF in 1975 and helped to resolve the dispute with the CAHA. In 1976, the IIHF agreed to allow \"open competition\" between all players in the World Championships. However, NHL players were still not allowed to play in the Olympics, because of the unwillingness of the NHL to take a break mid-season and the IOC's amateur-only policy.\nBefore the 1984 Winter Olympics, a dispute formed over what made a player a professional. The IOC had adopted a rule that made any player who had signed an NHL contract but played less than ten games in the league eligible. However, the United States Olympic Committee maintained that any player contracted with an NHL team was a professional and therefore not eligible to play. The IOC held an emergency meeting that ruled NHL-contracted players were eligible, as long as they had not played in any NHL games. This made five players on Olympic rosters\u2014one Austrian, two Italians and two Canadians\u2014ineligible. Players who had played in other professional leagues\u2014such as the World Hockey Association\u2014were allowed to play. Canadian hockey official Alan Eagleson stated that the rule was only applied to the NHL and that professionally contracted players in European leagues were still considered amateurs. Murray Costello of the CAHA suggested that a Canadian withdrawal was possible. In 1986, the IOC voted to allow all athletes to compete in Olympic Games starting in 1988, but let the individual sport federations decide if they wanted to allow professionals.\nAfter the 1972 retirement of IOC President Brundage, the Olympic amateurism rules were steadily relaxed, amounting only to technicalities and lip service, until being completely abandoned in the 1990s (in the United States, the Amateur Sports Act of 1978 prohibits national governing bodies from having more stringent standards of amateur status than required by international governing bodies of respective sports. The act caused the breakup of the Amateur Athletic Union as a wholesale sports governing body at the Olympic level).\nOlympic regulations regarding amateur status of athletes were eventually abandoned in the 1990s with the exception of wrestling, where the amateur fight rules are used because professional wrestling is largely staged with predetermined outcomes. Starting from the 2016 Summer Olympics, professionals were allowed to compete in boxing, though amateur fight rules are still used for the tournament.\nContribution of amateurs.\nMany amateurs make valuable contributions in the field of computer programming through the open source movement. Amateur dramatics is the performance of plays or musical theater, often to high standards, but lacking the budgets of professional West End or Broadway performances. Astronomy, chemistry, history, linguistics, and the natural sciences are among the fields that have benefited from the activities of amateurs. Gregor Mendel was an amateur scientist who never held a position in his field of study. Radio astronomy was founded by Grote Reber, an amateur radio operator. Radio itself was greatly advanced by Guglielmo Marconi, a young Italian man who started out by tinkering with a coherer and a spark coil as an amateur electrician. Pierre de Fermat was a highly influential mathematician whose primary vocation was law.\nIn the 2000s and 2010s, the distinction between amateur and professional has become increasingly blurred, especially in areas such as computer programming, music and astronomy. The term amateur professionalism, or pro-am, is used to describe these activities.\nList of amateur pursuits.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1051", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1051", "title": "Alexis Carrel", "text": "French surgeon and biologist (1873\u20131944)\nAlexis Carrel (; 28 June 1873 \u2013 5 November 1944) was a French surgeon and biologist who spent most of his scientific career in the United States. He was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1912 for pioneering vascular suturing techniques. He invented the first perfusion pump with Charles Lindbergh opening the way to organ transplantation. Carrel was also a pioneer in tissue culture, transplantology and thoracic surgery. He is known for his leading role in implementing eugenic policies in Vichy France.\nBiography.\nBorn in Sainte-Foy-l\u00e8s-Lyon, Rh\u00f4ne, Carrel was raised in a devout Catholic family and was educated by Jesuits, though he had become an agnostic by the time he became a university student. He studied medicine at the University of Lyon.\nWorking as an intern at a Lyon hospital, he developed a technique for suturing small blood vessels using extremely fine needles. He published his first scientific article about this method in 1902.\nIn 1902, Carrel underwent a transformative experience that led him from being a skeptic of the reported visions and miracles at Lourdes to a believer in spiritual cures. This conversion came about after he witnessed the inexplicable healing of Marie Bailly, who then identified Carrel as the principal witness of her cure. Despite facing opposition from his peers in the medical community, Carrel refused to dismiss a supernatural explanation for the event. His beliefs proved to be a hindrance to his career and reputation in academic medicine in France, and as a result he left France for Canada. Carrel would write a book about the case \"The Voyage to Lourdes\", which was released four years after his death.\nShortly after arriving in Canada, he accepted a position at the University of Chicago. While there he collaborated with American physician Charles Claude Guthrie in work on vascular suture and the transplantation of blood vessels and organs as well as the head. Carrel would be awarded the 1912 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for these efforts.\nIn 1906, he joined the newly formed Rockefeller Institute of Medical Research in New York where he spent the rest of his career. There he did significant work on tissue cultures with pathologist Montrose Thomas Burrows.\nIn World War I, Carrel served as a major in the French Army medical Corps. During this time he developed the popular Carrel-Dakin method for treating wounds.\nIn the 1930s, Carrel and Charles Lindbergh became close friends not only because of the years they worked together but also because they shared personal, political, and social views. Lindbergh initially sought out Carrel to see if his sister-in-law's heart, damaged by rheumatic fever, could be repaired. When Lindbergh saw the crudeness of Carrel's machinery, he offered to build new equipment for the scientist. Eventually they built the first perfusion pump, an invention instrumental to the development of organ transplantation and open heart surgery. Lindbergh considered Carrel his closest friend, and said he would preserve and promote Carrel's ideals after his death.\nIn 1939, Carrel returned to France and took a position with the French Ministry of Health. Due to his close proximity with Jacques Doriot's fascist Parti Populaire Fran\u00e7ais (PPF) during the 1930s and his role in implementing eugenics policies during Vichy France, he was accused after the Liberation of collaboration, but died before the trial.\nIn his later life he returned to his Catholic roots. In 1939, he met with Trappist monk Alexis Presse on a recommendation. Although Carrel was skeptical about meeting with a priest, Presse ended up having a profound influence on the rest of Carrel's life. In 1942, he said \"I believe in the existence of God, in the immortality of the soul, in Revelation and in all the Catholic Church teaches.\" He summoned Presse to administer the Catholic Sacraments on his death bed in November 1944.\nFor much of his life, Carrel and his wife spent their summers on the \u00cele Saint-Gildas, which they owned. After he and Lindbergh became close friends, Carrel persuaded him to also buy a neighboring island, the Ile Illiec, where the Lindberghs often resided in the late 1930s.\nContributions to science.\nVascular suture.\nCarrel was a young surgeon who was deeply affected by the 1894 assassination of the French president, Sadi Carnot, who died from a severed portal vein that surgeons believed was irreparable. This tragedy inspired Carrel to develop new techniques for suturing blood vessels, such as the \"triangulation\" technique using three stay-sutures to minimize damage to the vascular wall during suturing. Carrel learned this technique from an embroideress, and later incorporated it into his work. According to Julius Comroe, Carrel performed every feat and developed every technique in vascular surgery using experimental animals between 1901 and 1910, leading to his great success in reconnecting arteries and veins and performing surgical grafts. These achievements earned him the Nobel Prize in 1912.\nWound antisepsis.\nDuring World War I (1914\u20131918), Carrel and the English chemist Henry Drysdale Dakin developed the Carrel\u2013Dakin method of treating wounds with an antiseptic solution based on chlorine, known as Dakin's solution. This method, which involved wound debridement and irrigation with a high volume of antiseptic fluid, was a significant medical advancement in the absence of antibiotics. For his contributions, Carrel was awarded the L\u00e9gion d'honneur. The Carrel\u2013Dakin method became widely used in hospitals. The mechanical irrigation technique developed by Carrel is still used today.\nOrgan transplants.\nCarrel co-authored a book with pilot Charles Lindbergh, \"The Culture of Organs.\" Together, they developed the perfusion pump in the mid-1930s, which made it possible for organs to remain viable outside of the body during surgical procedures. This innovation is considered to be a significant advancement in the fields of open-heart surgery and organ transplantation, and it paved the way for the development of the artificial heart, which became a reality many years later. Although some critics accused Carrel of exaggerating Lindbergh's contributions to gain publicity, other sources indicate that Lindbergh played a significant role in the device's development. In recognition of their groundbreaking work, both Carrel and Lindbergh appeared on the cover of Time magazine on June 13, 1938.\nTissue culture and cellular senescence.\nCarrel developed methods to keep animal tissues alive in culture. He was interested in the phenomenon of senescence or aging. He believed that all cells continued to grow indefinitely, which became a widely accepted view in the early 20th century. In 1912, Carrel began an experiment at the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research, where he cultured tissue from an embryonic chicken heart in a stoppered Pyrex flask of his own design. He supplied the culture with nutrients regularly and maintained it for over 20 years, longer than a chicken's normal lifespan. This experiment received significant popular and scientific attention, but it was never successfully replicated.\nIn the 1960s, Leonard Hayflick and Paul Moorhead proposed the concept of the Hayflick limit, which states that differentiated cells undergo only a limited number of divisions before dying. Hayflick suggested that Carrel's daily feeding of nutrients continually introduced new living cells to the culture, resulting in anomalous results. J. A. Witkowski argued that the deliberate introduction of new cells into the culture, possibly without Carrel's knowledge, could also explain the results.\nDespite the doubts surrounding Carrel's experiment, it remains an important part of scientific history, and his work on tissue culture had a significant impact on the development of modern medicine.\nHonors.\nCarrel was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 1909 and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1914. Carrel was a member of learned societies in the U.S., Spain, Russia, Sweden, the Netherlands, Belgium, France, Vatican City, Germany, Italy, and Greece, and was elected twice, in 1924 and 1927, as an honorary member of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR. He also received honorary doctorates from Queen's University of Belfast, Princeton University, Brown University, and Columbia University.\nIn 1972, the Swedish Post Office honored Carrel with a stamp that was part of its Nobel stamp series. Seven years later, in 1979, the lunar crater Carrel was named after him as a tribute to his breakthroughs. In February 2002, to celebrate the 100th anniversary of Charles Lindbergh's birth, the Lindbergh-Carrel Prize was established by the Medical University of South Carolina at Charleston. Michael DeBakey and nine other scientists were the first recipients of the prize, a bronze statuette, named \"Elisabeth\" after Elisabeth Morrow, the sister of Lindbergh's wife Anne Morrow who died from heart disease. Lindbergh's frustration with the limitations of medical technology, specifically the lack of an artificial heart pump for heart surgery, led him to reach out to Carrel.\n\"Man, the Unknown\" (1935, 1939).\nIn 1935, Carrel's book, \"L'Homme, cet inconnu\" (Man, the Unknown), became a best-seller. The book attempted to comprehensively outline what is known, and unknown, of the human body and human life \"in light of discoveries in biology, physics, and medicine\", to shed light on the problems of the modern world, and to provide possible routes to a better life for human beings.\nIn the book, Carrel argued that humans of \"poor quality\" were outbreeding those of good quality and causing the \"enfeeblement of the white races.\" He advocated for an elite group of intellectuals to guide mankind and to incorporate eugenics into the social framework. He argued for an aristocracy that would come from individuals of potential and advocated for euthanasia for criminals and the criminally insane. Notably, Carrel's endorsement of euthanasia for criminals and the criminally insane was published in the mid-1930s, prior to the implementation of death camps and gas chambers in Nazi Germany.\nIn the 1936 German introduction of his book, Carrel added praise for the Nazi regime at the publisher's request, which did not appear in other language editions. After the second world war the book and his role with the Vichy regime would stain his reputation such that his name was removed from streets in more than 20 French cities and the Alexis Carrel Medical Faculty in Lyon was renamed in 1996.\nFrench Foundation for the Study of Human Problems.\nIn 1937, Carrel joined the Centre d'Etudes des Probl\u00e8mes Humains, which was led by Jean Coutrot. Coutrot's goal was to develop what he called an \"economic humanism\" through \"collective thinking.\" However, in 1941, Carrel went on to advocate for the creation of the French Foundation for the Study of Human Problems (Fondation Fran\u00e7aise pour l'Etude des Probl\u00e8mes Humains). This foundation was created by decree of the Vichy regime in 1941, and Carrel served as a \"regent.\" Carrel's connections to the cabinet of Vichy France president Philippe P\u00e9tain, specifically French industrial physicians Andr\u00e9 Gros and Jacques M\u00e9n\u00e9trier, helped pave the way for the creation of the foundation.\nThe foundation played a significant role in the establishment of the field of occupational medicine, which was institutionalized by the Provisional Government of the French Republic (GPRF) through the 11 October 1946 law. The foundation's efforts were not limited to occupational medicine and extended to other areas such as demographics, economics, nutrition, habitation, and opinion polls. Notable figures associated with the foundation's work include Robert Gessain, Paul Vincent, Jean Bourgeois-Pichat, Fran\u00e7ois Perroux, Jean Sutter, and Jean Stoetzel. The foundation achieved several notable accomplishments throughout its history. It played a crucial role in the promotion of the 16 December 1942 Act, which mandated the use of a prenuptial certificate before marriage. This certificate aimed to ensure the good health of spouses, particularly regarding sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) and \"life hygiene.\" Additionally, the institute created the livret scolaire, a document that recorded the grades of French secondary school students, allowing for the classification and selection of students based on academic performance.\nGwen Terrenoire's book, \"\"Eugenics in France (1913\u20131941): a review of research findings\",\" describes the Foundation for the Study of Human Problems as a pluridisciplinary center that employed approximately 300 researchers, primarily statisticians, psychologists, and physicians, from the summer of 1942 until the end of autumn 1944. Following the liberation of Paris, Alexis Carrel, the founder, was suspended by the Minister of Health, and he died in November 1944. The Foundation underwent a purge and emerged shortly afterward as the Institut national d'\u00e9tudes d\u00e9mographiques (INED), which is still active today. Although Carrel had died, most of his team transferred to INED, which was headed by demographer Alfred Sauvy, who coined the term \"Third World.\" Other team members joined the Institut national d'hygi\u00e8ne (National Hygiene Institute), later known as INSERM.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1055", "revid": "39088972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1055", "title": "All Souls' Day", "text": "Day for commemoration of all the faithful departed\nAll Souls' Day, also called The Commemoration of All the Faithful Departed, is a day of prayer and remembrance for the faithful departed, observed by Christians on 2 November. In Western Christianity, including Roman Catholicism and certain parts of Lutheranism and Anglicanism, All Souls' Day is the third day of Allhallowtide, after All Saints' Day (1 November) and All Hallows' Eve (31 October). Before the standardization of Western Christian observance on 2 November by St. Odilo of Cluny in the 10th century, many Roman Catholic congregations celebrated All Souls' Day on various dates during the Easter season as it is still observed in the Eastern Orthodox Church, the Eastern Catholic churches and the Eastern Lutheran churches. Churches of the East Syriac Rite (Assyrian Church of the East, Ancient Church of the East, Syro-Malabar Catholic Church, Chaldean Catholic Church, Syriac Catholic Church) commemorate all the faithful departed on the Friday before Lent. As with other days of the Allhallowtide season, popular practices for All Souls' Day include attending Mass offered for the souls of the faithful departed, as well as Christian families visiting graveyards in order to pray and decorate their family graves with garlands, flowers, candles and incense. Given that many Christian cemeteries are interdenominational in nature, All Souls' Day observances often have an ecumenical dimension, with believers from various Christian denominations praying together and cooperating to adorn graves.\nIn other languages.\nKnown in Latin as \"Commemoratio Omnium Fidelium Defunctorum\", All Souls' Day is known\nBackground.\nIn Evangelical-Lutheranism and Anglicanism, the \"faithful\" refers to \"all true believers on earth and in heaven, both living and dead\" and during Allhallowtide, the \"faithful departed\" (the Church Triumphant) are revered (cf. communion of saints). In Evangelical Lutheranism, \"the whole people of God in Christ Jesus\" are seen as saints and All Souls' Day commemorates those believers who have died as the 'faithful departed'.\nIn the Catholic Church, \"the faithful\" refers essentially to baptized Catholics; \"all souls\" commemorates the church penitent of souls in purgatory, whereas \"all saints\" commemorates the church triumphant of saints in heaven. In the liturgical books of the Latin Church it is called the \"Commemoration of All the Faithful Departed\" (). The Catholic Church teaches that the purification of the souls in purgatory can be assisted by the actions of the faithful on earth. Its teaching is based also on the practice of prayer for the dead mentioned as far back as 2 Maccabees 12:42\u201346. The theological basis for the feast is the doctrine that the souls which, on departing from the body, are not perfectly cleansed from venial sins, or have not fully atoned for past transgressions, are debarred from the Beatific vision, and that the faithful on earth can help them by prayers, alms, deeds, and especially by the sacrifice of the Holy Mass.\nThe United Protestant tradition emphasizes \"the Christian belief in bodily resurrection and eternal life\" in observances of All Souls' Day.\nAll Souls' Day is seen by many Christian leaders are one in which ecumenism is celebrated, given that believers from various denominations collectively visit Christian cemeteries that are interdenominational in nature. Christians from the Catholic, Lutheran, Reformed, Anglican, Methodist and Baptist denominations often come together to clean, repair and then decorate graveyards together. The use of candles by Christians symbolized the light of Christ and the use of lamps at the tombs of Christian martyrs dates back to the early Christian period. Ecumenical prayer services are often held at Christian cemeteries on All Souls' Day.\nObservance by Christian denomination.\nWestern Christianity.\nHistory.\nIn Western Christianity, there is ample evidence of the custom of praying for the dead in the inscriptions of the catacombs, with their constant prayers for the peace of the souls of the departed and in the early liturgies, which commonly contain commemorations of the dead. Tertullian, Cyprian and other early Western Fathers witness to the regular practice of praying for the dead among the early Christians.\nIn the sixth century, it was customary in Benedictine monasteries to hold a commemoration of the deceased members at Whitsuntide. In the time of St. Isidore of Seville (d. 636) who lived in what is today Spain, the Monday after Pentecost was designated to remember the deceased. At the beginning of the ninth century, Abbot Eigil of Fulda set 17 December as commemoration of all deceased in part of what is today Germany.\nAccording to Widukind of Corvey (c. 975), there also existed a ceremony praying for the dead on 1 October in Saxony. But it was the day after All Saints' Day that Saint Odilo of Cluny chose when in the 11th century he instituted for all the monasteries dependent on the Abbey of Cluny an annual commemoration of all the faithful departed, to be observed with alms, prayers, and sacrifices for the relief of the suffering souls in purgatory. Odilo decreed that those requesting a Mass be offered for the departed should make an offering for the poor, thus linking almsgiving with fasting and prayer for the dead.\nThe 2 November date and customs spread from the Cluniac monasteries to other Benedictine monasteries and thence to the Western Church in general. The Diocese of Li\u00e8ge was the first diocese to adopt the practice under Bishop Notger (d. 1008). 2 November was adopted in Italy and Rome in the thirteenth century.\nIn the 15th century the Dominicans instituted a custom of each priest offering three Masses on the Feast of All Souls. During World War I, given the great number of war dead and the many destroyed churches where Mass could no longer be said, Pope Benedict XV, granted all priests the privilege of offering three Masses on All Souls' Day.\nRoman Catholicism.\nIf 2 November falls on a Sunday, All Souls' Day is observed on that day. In the Liturgy of the Hours of All Souls' Day, the sequence \"Dies irae\" can be used \"ad libitum\". Every priest is allowed to celebrate three holy Masses on All Souls' Day.\nIn , used by members of the Anglican Ordinariates, the minor propers (Introit, Gradual, Tract, Sequence, Offertory, and Communion) are those used for Renaissance and Classical musical requiem settings, including the Dies Irae. This permits the performance of traditional requiem settings in the context of the Divine Worship Form of the Roman Rite on All Souls' Day as well as at funerals, votive celebrations of all faithful departed, and anniversaries of deaths.\nIn the ordinary form of the Roman Rite, as well as in the Personal Ordinariates established by Benedict XVI for former Anglicans, it remains on 2 November if this date falls on a Sunday; in the 1962\u20131969 form of the Roman Rite, use of which is still authorized, it is transferred to Monday, 3 November.\nAccording to the sacred tradition of the Catholic Church, from 1 to 8 November it is possible to gain a plenary indulgence for the benefit of the souls of the departed who are in Purgatory. According to the \"Enchiridion of Indulgences\", a plenary indulgence applicable only to the souls in purgatory (commonly called \"the poor souls\") is granted to the faithful who devoutly visit a cemetery (graveyard) and pray for the dead. The plenary indulgence can be gained between the second and ninth days of Allhallowtide (November 1\u20138); a partial indulgence is granted on other days of the year. In order to gain the plenary indulgence, the Christian must have received confession and absolution and the eucharist twenty days before or after visiting the graveyard, in addition to praying for the intentions of the Pope.\nA plenary indulgence, applicable only to the poor souls, can be obtained by visiting a church, chapel or oratory on All Souls' Day and praying the Lord's Prayer there, along with the Apostle's Creed, Athanasian Creed or Nicene Creed. Alternatively, Christians can pray the Lauds or Vespers of the Office of the Dead and the Eternal Rest prayer for the dead.\nEvangelical-Lutheran Churches.\nAll Souls Day is observed in the Evangelical-Lutheran Churches. During Luther's lifetime, All Souls' Day was widely observed in Saxony; ecclesiastically in the Lutheran Church, the day was merged with and is often seen as an extension of All Saints' Day, with many Lutherans still visiting and decorating graves on all the days of Allhallowtide, including All Souls' Day. In the Lutheran Churches, \"the whole people of God in Christ Jesus\" are seen as saints and All Souls' Day commemorates those believers who have died as the 'faithful departed'. Just as it is the custom of French people, of all ranks and creeds, to decorate the graves of their dead on the \"jour des morts\", Germans come to the graveyards on All Souls' Day with offerings of flowers and special grave lights. In Sweden, an Evangelical-Lutheran country, \"people gather in churches lit with candles and decorated with wreaths to remember their loved ones\" and \"also visit cemeteries and leave special lanterns on people's graves that burn well into the night.\" An Evangelical Lutheran prayer said on All Souls' Day is as follows:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnglican Communion.\nIn the Church of England it is called The Commemoration of the Faithful Departed and is an optional celebration; Anglicans view All Souls' Day as an extension of the observance of All Saints' Day and it serves to \"remember those who have died\", in connection with the theological doctrines of the resurrection of the body and the Communion of Saints.\nIn the Anglican Communion, All Souls' Day is known liturgically as the Commemoration of All Faithful Departed, and is an optional observance seen as \"an extension of All Saints' Day\", the latter of which marks the second day of Allhallowtide. Historically and at present, several Anglican churches are dedicated to All Souls. During the English Reformation, the observance of All Souls' Day lapsed, although a new Anglican theological understanding of the day has \"led to a widespread acceptance of this commemoration among Anglicans\". Patricia Bays, with regard to the Anglican view of All Souls' Day, wrote that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All Souls Day \u2026 is a time when we particularly remember those who have died. The prayers appointed for that day remind us that we are joined with the Communion of Saints, that great group of Christians who have finished their earthly life and with who we share the hope of resurrection from the dead. \nAs such, Anglican parishes \"now commemorate all the faithful departed in the context of the All Saints' Day celebration\", in keeping with this fresh perspective. Contributing to the revival was the need \"to help Anglicans mourn the deaths of millions of soldiers in World War I\". Members of the Guild of All Souls, an Anglican devotional society founded in 1873, \"are encouraged to pray for the dying and the dead, to participate in a requiem of All Souls' Day and say a Litany of the Faithful Departed at least once a month\".\nAt the Reformation the celebration of All Souls' Day was fused with All Saints' Day in the Church of England or, in the judgement of some, it was \"deservedly abrogated\". It was reinstated in certain parishes in connection with the Oxford Movement of the 19th century and is acknowledged in United States Anglicanism in the \"Holy Women, Holy Men\" calendar and in the Church of England with the 1980 \"Alternative Service Book\". It features in \"Common Worship\" as a Lesser Festival called \"Commemoration of the Faithful Departed (All Souls' Day)\".\nReformed churches.\nCertain Reformed (Continental Reformed, Presbyterian, and Congregationalist) churches observe All Souls' Day. In All Souls' Day observances by the Reformed Churches, the theological doctrine of \"the Christian belief in bodily resurrection and eternal life\" is emphasized, along with a remembrance of the faithful departed. Additionally, dead are remembered on the feast of Totensonntag (Totenfest), the last Sunday before Advent. It was introduced in 1816, in Prussia, and in addition to the Reformed, it is observed by Lutherans in addition to Allhallowtide, particularly in areas with a large Germanic presence.\nMethodist churches.\nIn the Methodist Church, saints refer to all Christians and therefore, on All Saints' Day, the Church Universal, as well as the deceased members of a local congregation are honoured and remembered. In Methodist congregations that celebrate the liturgy on All Souls' Day, the observance, as with Anglicanism and Lutheranism, is viewed as an extension of All Saints' Day and as such, Methodists \"remember our loved ones who had died\" in their observance of this feast.\nEastern Catholic, Eastern Lutheran and Eastern Orthodox.\nSaturday of Souls (or Soul Saturday) is a day set aside for the commemoration of the dead within the liturgical year of the Eastern Orthodox, Eastern Lutheran and Byzantine Catholic Churches. Saturday is a traditional day of prayer for the dead, because Christ lay dead in the Tomb on Saturday.\nThese days are devoted to prayer for departed relatives and others among the faithful who would not be commemorated specifically as saints. The Divine Services on these days have special hymns added to them to commemorate the departed. There is often a Panikhida (Memorial Service) either after the Divine Liturgy on Saturday morning or after Vespers on Friday evening, for which Koliva (a dish made of boiled wheatberries or rice and honey) is prepared and placed on the Panikhida table. After the Service, the priest blesses the Koliva. It is then eaten as a memorial by all present.\nRadonitsa.\nAnother Memorial Day in the East, Radonitsa, does not fall on a Saturday, but on either Monday or Tuesday of the second week after Pascha (Easter). Radonitsa does not have special hymns for the dead at the Divine Services. Instead a Panikhida will follow the Divine Liturgy, and then all will bring paschal foods to the cemeteries to greet the departed with the joy of the Resurrection.\nEast Syriac tradition.\nEast Syriac churches including the Syro Malabar Church and Chaldean Catholic Church commemorates the feast of departed faithful on the last Friday of Epiphany season (which means Friday just before start of Great Lent). The season of Epiphany remembers the revelation of Christ to the world. Each Friday of Epiphany season, the church remembers important evangelistic figures.\nIn the Syro Malabar Church, the Friday before the parish festival is also celebrated as feast of departed faithful when the parish remembers the activities of forebears who worked for the parish and faithful. They also request the intercession of all departed souls for the faithful celebration of parish festival. In East Syriac liturgy, the church remembers departed souls including saints on every Friday throughout the year since the Christ was crucified and died on Friday.\nPopular customs.\nOn All Souls' Day, Christians of various denominational backgrounds, including Catholics, Lutherans, Anglicans and Methodists, among others, often help one another clean the graves of cemeteries, along with adorning them with flowers. The General Secretary of the Church of North India described the ecumenism present in All Souls' Day, stating that \"This coming together shows Christian unity\". With respect to the economy, vendors \"sell flowers, candles and incense sticks\" to those visiting the graveyards, who are Christians of the Catholic and Protestant traditions. Prayer services with representatives from different Christian denomination for All Souls' Day are held at graveyards for those visiting them.\nAll Souls' Day emphasizes \"the Christian belief in bodily resurrection and eternal life\". Some All Souls' Day traditions are associated with the doctrine of the poor souls of purgatory (in Roman Catholicism) or the intermediate state (in Protestantism and Orthodoxy). Church bell tolling is done in honour of the dead. Lighting candles serves variously to kindle a light for the poor souls, honour the dead, as well as to ward off demons. Soul cakes are given to children going souling\u2014going from door to door to pray for the dead (cf. \"trick-or-treating\", \"P\u00e3o-por-Deus\").\nEurope.\nAll Souls' Day is celebrated in many European countries with vigils, candles, the decoration of graves, and special prayers as well as many regional customs. Examples of regional customs include leaving cakes for departed loved ones on the table and keeping the room warm for their comfort in Tirol and the custom in Brittany, where people flock to the cemeteries at nightfall to kneel, bareheaded, at the graves of their loved ones and anoint the hollow of the tombstone with holy water or to pour libations of milk on it. At bedtime, supper is left on the table for the souls. All Souls' Day is known in Maltese as \"Jum il-Mejtin\", and is accompanied a traditional supper including roasted pig, based on a custom of letting a pig loose on the streets with a bell around its neck, to be fed by the entire neighborhood and cooked on that day to feed the poor. In Linz, funereal musical pieces known as aequales were played from tower tops on All Souls' Day and the evening before. In the Czech Republic and Slovakia All Souls' Day is called Du\u0161i\u010dky, or \"little souls\". Traditionally, candles are left on graves on Du\u0161i\u010dky. In Sicily and other regions of southern Italy, All Souls' Day is celebrated as the \"Festa dei Morti\" or \"U juornu rii morti\", the \"Commemoration of the Dead\" or the \"Day of the Dead\", which according to Joshua Nicolosi of the \"Sicilian Post\" could be seen \"halfway between Christian and pagan traditions\". Families visit and clean grave sites, home altars are decorated with family photos and votive candles, and children are gifted a special basket or \"cannistru\" of chocolates, pomegranate, and other gifts from their ancestors. Because of the gifting of sugary sweets and the emphasis on sugar puppet decorations, the Commemoration Day has spurred local Sicilian events such as the \"Notte di Zucchero\" (\"Night of Sugar\") in which communities celebrate the dead. (lit.\u2009'piada of the dead'), a sweet focaccia topped with raisins, almonds, walnuts, and pine nuts, is traditionally eaten in November for All Souls' Day in the environs of Rimini, in Emilia-Romagna.\nIndian subcontinent.\nIn the Indian subcontinent (India, Pakistan and Bangladesh), Christians hold prayer services in which they pray for the faithful departed, especially remembering their loved ones. Christians of various denominations visit cemeteries and adorn graves with flower petals, garlands, candles and incense sticks.\nPhilippines.\nIn the Philippines, Hallow mas is variously called \"\"Und\u00e1s\", \"Todos los Santos\"\" (Spanish, \"All Saints\"), and sometimes \"Araw ng mga Patay / Yumao\" (Tagalog, \"Day of the dead / those who have passed away\"), which incorporates All Saints' Day and All Souls' Day. Filipinos traditionally observe this day by visiting the family dead to clean and repair their tombs. Offerings of prayers, flowers, candles, and food. Chinese Filipinos additionally burn incense and \"kim\". Many also spend the day and ensuing night holding reunions at the cemetery with feasts and merriment.\nReferences.\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1057", "revid": "7436027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1057", "title": "Anatole France", "text": "French author and journalist (1844\u20131924)\n' (; born ' ; 16 April 1844 \u2013 12 October 1924) was a French poet, journalist, and novelist with several best-sellers. Ironic and skeptical, he was considered in his day the ideal French man of letters. He was a member of the Acad\u00e9mie Fran\u00e7aise, and won the 1921 Nobel Prize in Literature \"in recognition of his brilliant literary achievements, characterized as they are by a nobility of style, a profound human sympathy, grace, and a true Gallic temperament\".\nFrance is also widely believed to be the model for narrator Marcel's literary idol Bergotte in Marcel Proust's \"In Search of Lost Time\".\nEarly years.\nThe son of a bookseller, France, a bibliophile, spent most of his life around books. His father's bookstore specialized in books and papers on the French Revolution and was frequented by many writers and scholars. France studied at the Coll\u00e8ge Stanislas, a private Catholic school, and after graduation he helped his father by working in his bookstore. After several years, he secured the position of cataloguer at Bacheline-Deflorenne and at Lemerre. In 1876, he was appointed librarian for the French Senate.\nLiterary career.\nFrance began his literary career as a poet and a journalist. In 1869, \"Le Parnasse contemporain\" published one of his poems, \"\". In 1875, he sat on the committee in charge of the third \"Parnasse contemporain\" compilation. As a journalist, from 1867, he wrote many articles and notices. He became known with the novel \" (1881). Its protagonist, skeptical old scholar Sylvester Bonnard, embodied France's own personality. The novel was praised for its elegant prose and won him a prize from the Acad\u00e9mie Fran\u00e7aise. \nIn ' (1893) France ridiculed belief in the occult, and in ' (1893), France captured the atmosphere of the \". He was elected to the Acad\u00e9mie Fran\u00e7aise in 1896.\nFrance took a part in the Dreyfus affair. He signed \u00c9mile Zola's manifesto supporting Alfred Dreyfus, a Jewish army officer who had been falsely convicted of espionage. France wrote about the affair in his 1901 novel \"Monsieur Bergeret\".\nFrance's later works include \"Penguin Island\" (\",\" 1908) which satirizes human nature by depicting the transformation of penguins into humans \u2013 after the birds have been baptized by mistake by the almost-blind Abbot Mael. It is a satirical history of France, starting in medieval times, going on to the author's own time with special attention to the Dreyfus affair and concluding with a dystopian future. \"The Gods Are Athirst\" (\"\", 1912) is a novel, set in Paris during the French Revolution, about a true-believing follower of Maximilien Robespierre and his contribution to the bloody events of the Reign of Terror of 1793\u201394. It is a wake-up call against political and ideological fanaticism and explores various other philosophical approaches to the events of the time. \"The Revolt of the Angels (\", 1914) is often considered France's most profound and ironic novel. Loosely based on the Christian understanding of the War in Heaven, it tells the story of Arcade, the guardian angel of Maurice d'Esparvieu. Bored because Bishop d'Esparvieu is sinless, Arcade begins reading the bishop's books on theology and becomes an atheist. He moves to Paris, meets a woman, falls in love, and loses his virginity causing his wings to fall off, joins the revolutionary movement of fallen angels, and meets the Devil, who realizes that if he overthrew God, he would become just like God. Arcade realizes that replacing God with another is meaningless unless \"in ourselves and in ourselves alone we attack and destroy Ialdabaoth.\" \"Ialdabaoth\", according to France, is God's secret name and means \"the child who wanders\".\nHe was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1921. He died on 13 October 1924 and is buried in the Neuilly-sur-Seine Old Communal Cemetery near Paris.\nOn 31 May 1922, France's entire works were put on the \"Index Librorum Prohibitorum\" (\"List of Prohibited Books\") of the Catholic Church. He regarded this as a \"distinction\". This Index was abolished in 1966.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1877, France married Val\u00e9rie Gu\u00e9rin de Sauville, a granddaughter of Jean-Urbain Gu\u00e9rin, a miniaturist who painted Louis XVI. Their daughter Suzanne was born in 1881 (and died in 1918).\nFrance's relations with women were always turbulent, and in 1888 he began a relationship with Madame Arman de Caillavet, who conducted a celebrated literary salon of the Third Republic. The affair lasted until shortly before her death in 1910.\nAfter his divorce, in 1893, France had many liaisons, notably with an American, Laura Gagey, who committed suicide in 1911 after he abandoned her.\nIn 1920, France married for the second time, his housekeeper Emma Lapr\u00e9votte.\nFrance had socialist sympathies and was an outspoken supporter of the 1917 Russian Revolution. In 1920, he gave his support to the newly founded French Communist Party. In his book \"The Red Lily\", France famously wrote, \"The law, in its majestic equality, forbids rich and poor alike to sleep under bridges, to beg in the streets, and to steal loaves of bread.\"\nReputation.\nThe English writer George Orwell defended France and declared that his work remained very readable, and that \"it is unquestionable that he was attacked partly from political motives\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1058", "revid": "48998989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1058", "title": "Andr\u00e9 Gide", "text": "French author and Nobel laureate (1869\u20131951)\nAndr\u00e9 Paul Guillaume Gide (; 22 November 1869 \u2013 19 February 1951) was a French author whose writing spanned a wide variety of styles and topics. He was awarded the 1947 Nobel Prize in Literature. Gide's career ranged from his beginnings in the symbolist movement to criticising imperialism between the two World Wars. Author of more than 50 books, he was described in his \"New York Times\" obituary as \"France's greatest contemporary man of letters\" and \"judged the greatest French writer of this century by the literary cognoscenti.\"\nKnown for his fiction as well as his autobiographical works, Gide expressed the conflict and eventual reconciliation of the two sides of his personality (characterized by a Protestant austerity and a transgressive sexual adventurousness, respectively). As a self-professed pederast, he used his writing to explore his struggle to be fully oneself, including owning one's sexual nature, without betraying one's values. His political activity was shaped by the same ethos. While sympathetic to Communism in the early 1930s, like many intellectuals, after his 1936 journey to the USSR he supported the anti-Stalinist left; during the 1940s he shifted towards more traditional values and repudiated Communism as an idea that breaks with the traditions of Christian civilization.\nEarly life.\nGide was born in Paris on 22 November 1869 into a middle-class Protestant family. His father Jean Paul Guillaume Gide was a professor of law at University of Paris; he died in 1880, when the boy was 11 years old. His mother was Juliette Maria Rondeaux. His uncle was political economist Charles Gide. His paternal family traced its roots to Italy. The ancestral Guidos had moved to France and other western and northern European countries after converting to Protestantism during the 16th century and facing persecution in Catholic Italy.\nGide was brought up in isolated conditions in Normandy. He became a prolific writer at an early age, publishing his first novel, \"The Notebooks of Andr\u00e9 Walter\" (French: \"Les Cahiers d'Andr\u00e9 Walter\"), in 1891, at the age of 21.\nIn 1893 and 1894, Gide travelled in Northern Africa. There he came to accept his homosexuality.\nGide befriended Irish playwright Oscar Wilde in Paris, where the latter was in exile. In 1895 the two men met in Algiers. Wilde had the mistaken impression that he had introduced Gide to homosexuality, but Gide had already come to terms with his preferences.\nThe middle years.\nIn 1895, after his mother's death, Gide married his cousin Madeleine Rondeaux, but the marriage remained unconsummated. In 1896, he was elected mayor of La Roque-Baignard, a commune in Normandy.\nGide spent the summer of 1907 in Jersey, with friends Jacques Copeau and Th\u00e9o van Rysselberghe and their families. He rented a room in La Valeuse Cottage in St Brelade. Whilst there he worked on the second chapter of \"Strait Is the Gate\" (French: \"La Porte \u00e9troite\"), and van Rysselberghe painted his portrait.\nIn 1908, Gide helped found the literary magazine \"Nouvelle Revue Fran\u00e7aise\" (\"The New French Review\").\nDuring World War I, Gide visited England. One of his friends there was artist William Rothenstein. Rothenstein described Gide's visit to his Gloucestershire home in his autobiography:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Andr\u00e9 Gide was in England during the war...He came to stay with us for a time, and brought with him a young nephew, whose English was better than his own. The boy made friends with my son John, while Gide and I discussed everything under the sun. Once again I delighted in the range and subtlety of a Frenchman's intelligence; and I regretted my long severance from France. Nobody understood art more profoundly than Gide, no one's view of life was more penetrating. ...\nGide had a half satanic, half monk-like mien; he put one in mind of portraits of Baudelaire. Withal there was something exotic about him. He would appear in a red waistcoat, black velvet jacket and beige-coloured trousers and, in lieu of collar and tie, a loosely knotted scarf. ...\nThe heart of man held no secrets for Gide. There was little that he didn't understand, or discuss. He suffered, as I did, from the banishment of truth, one of the distressing symptoms of war. The Germans were not all black, and the Allies all white, for Gide.\nIn 1916, Gide was about 47 years old when he took Marc All\u00e9gret, age 15, as a lover. Marc was one of five children of \u00c9lie All\u00e9gret and his wife. Gide had become friends with the senior All\u00e9gret during his own school years when Gide's mother had hired All\u00e9gret as a tutor for her son. \u00c9lie All\u00e9gret had been best man at Gide's wedding. After Gide fled with Marc to London, his wife Madeleine burned all his correspondence in retaliation\u2014\"the best part of myself\", Gide later said.\nIn 1918, Gide met and befriended Dorothy Bussy; they were friends for more than 30 years, and she translated many of his works into English.\nGide also became close friends with the critic Charles Du Bos. Together they were part of the \"Foyer Franco-Belge\", in which capacity they worked to find employment, food and housing for Franco-Belgian refugees who arrived in Paris after the 1914 German invasion of Belgium. Their friendship later declined due to Du Bos's perception that Gide had disavowed or betrayed his spiritual faith, in contrast to Du Bos's own return to faith.\nDu Bos's essay \"Dialogue avec Andr\u00e9 Gide\" was published in 1929. The essay, informed by Du Bos's Catholic convictions, condemned Gide's homosexuality. Gide and Du Bos's mutual friend Ernst Robert Curtius criticised the book in a letter to Gide, writing that the fact that Du Bos \"judges you according to Catholic morals suffices to neglect his complete indictment. It can only touch those who think like him and are convinced in advance. He has abdicated his intellectual liberty.\"\nIn the 1920s, Gide became an inspiration for such writers as Albert Camus and Jean-Paul Sartre. In 1923, he published a book on Fyodor Dostoyevsky. When he defended homosexuality in the public edition of \"Corydon\" (1924), he received so much condemnation that he was blocked from being nominated to the Acad\u00e9mie Fran\u00e7aise. He later considered this his most important work.\nIn 1923, Gide sired a daughter, Catherine, by Elisabeth van Rysselberghe, a much younger woman. He had known her for a long time, as she was the daughter of his friends Maria Monnom and Th\u00e9o van Rysselberghe, a Belgian neo-impressionist painter. This caused the only crisis in the long-standing relationship between All\u00e9gret and Gide, and damaged his friendship with Th\u00e9o van Rysselberghe. This was possibly Gide's only sexual relationship with a woman, and it was very brief. Catherine was his only descendant by blood. He liked to call Elisabeth \"La Dame Blanche\" (\"The White Lady\").\nElisabeth eventually left her husband to move to Paris and manage the practical aspects of Gide's life. They had adjoining apartments in Montparnasse. She worshipped him, but evidently they no longer had a sexual relationship.\nIn 1924, he published an autobiography, \"If it Die...\" (French: \"Si le grain ne meurt\"). The same year, he produced the first French-language editions of Joseph Conrad's \"Heart of Darkness\" and \"Lord Jim\".\nAfter 1925, Gide began to campaign for more humane conditions for convicted criminals. His legal wife, Madeleine Gide, died in 1938. He explored their marriage in \"Et nunc manet in te\", his memoir of Madeleine, published in English in the United States in 1952.\nAfrica.\nFrom July 1926 to May 1927, Gide traveled through the colony of French Equatorial Africa with his lover Marc All\u00e9gret. They went to Middle Congo (now the Republic of the Congo), Ubangi-Shari (now the Central African Republic), briefly to Chad, and then to Cameroon. He kept a journal, which he published as \"Travels in the Congo\" (French: \"Voyage au Congo\") and \"Return from Chad\" (French: \"Retour du Tchad\").\nIn this work, he criticized the behavior of French business interests in the Congo and inspired reform. In particular, he strongly criticized the \"Large Concessions\" regime (\"R\u00e9gime des Grandes Concessions\"). The government had conceded part of the colony to French companies, allowing them to exploit the area's natural resources, in particular rubber. He related that native workers were forced to leave their village for several weeks to collect rubber in the forest, and compared their exploitation by the companies to slavery. The book contributed to the growing anti-colonialism movements in France and helped thinkers to reevaluate the effects of colonialism in Africa.\nPolitical views and the Soviet Union.\nDuring the 1930s, Gide briefly became a Communist, or more precisely, a fellow traveler (he never formally joined any Communist party), but as an individualist himself, he advocated the idea of Communist individualism. Despite supporting the Soviet Union, he acknowledged the political repression there. Gide insisted on the release of Victor Serge, a Soviet writer and a member of the Left Opposition who was prosecuted by the Stalinist regime for his views. As a distinguished writer sympathizing with the cause of Communism, he was invited to speak at Maxim Gorky's funeral and to tour the Soviet Union as a guest of the Soviet Union of Writers. He encountered censorship of his speeches and was particularly disillusioned with the state of culture under Soviet Communism. In his work \"Retour de L'U.R.S.S.\" (\"Return from the USSR\", 1936), he broke with such socialist friends as Jean-Paul Sartre; the book was addressed to pro-Soviet readers, to expose them to doubts instead of presenting harsh criticism. While admitting the economic and social achievements of the USSR compared to the Russian Empire, he noted the decay of culture, the erasure of the individuality of Soviet citizens, and the suppression of any dissent:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Then would it not be better to, instead of playing on words, simply to acknowledge that the revolutionary spirit (or even simply the critical spirit) is no longer the correct thing, that it is not wanted any more? What is wanted now is compliance, conformism. What is desired and demanded is approval of all that is done in the USSR; and an attempt is being made to obtain an approval that is not mere resignation, but a sincere, an enthusiastic approval. What is most astounding is that this attempt is successful. On the other hand the smallest protest, the least criticism, is liable to the severest penalties, and in fact is immediately stifled. And I doubt whether in any other country in the world, even Hitler's Germany, thought to be less free, more bowed down, more fearful (terrorized), more vassalized.\u2014\u200a\nGide does not express his attitude towards Stalin, but he describes the signs of his personality cult: \"in each [home], ... the same portrait of Stalin, and nothing else\"; \"portrait of Stalin... , in the same place no doubt where the icon used to be. Is it adoration, love, or fear? I do not know; always and everywhere he is present.\" But Gide wrote that these problems could be solved by raising the cultural level of Soviet society.\nWhen Gide began preparing his manuscript for publication, the Kremlin was immediately informed about it, and soon Gide was visited by the Soviet author Ilya Ehrenburg, who said that he agreed with Gide, but asked to postpone the publication, as the Soviet Union assisted the Republicans in Spain; two days later, Louis Aragon delivered a letter from Jef Last asking to postpone the publication. These efforts failed, and as the book was published, Gide was condemned in the Soviet press and by the \"friends of the USSR\": Nordahl Grieg wrote that Gide wrote the book out of impatience, and that with it he did a favour for the Fascists, who greeted it with joy. In 1937, in response, Gide published \"Afterthoughts on the U. S. S. R.\"; earlier, Gide read Trotsky's \"The Revolution Betrayed\" and met Victor Serge, who gave him more information about the Soviet Union. In \"Afterthoughts\", Gide criticises Soviet society more directly: \"Citrine, Trotsky, Mercier, Yvon, Victor Serge, Leguay, Rudolf and many others have helped me with their documentation. Everything they have taught me so far I had only suspected\u2014it has confirmed and reinforced my fears\". The main points of \"Afterthoughts\" were that the dictatorship of the proletariat became the dictatorship of Stalin, and that the privileged bureaucracy became the new ruling class, which profited by the workers' surplus labour, spending the state budget on projects like the Palace of Soviets or to raise its own standards of living, while the working class lived in extreme poverty; Gide cited the official Soviet newspapers to prove his claims.\nDuring World War II, Gide concluded that \"absolute liberty destroys the individual and also society unless it be closely linked to tradition and discipline\"; he rejected the revolutionary idea of Communism as breaking with traditions, writing, \"if civilization depended solely on those who initiated revolutionary theories, then it would perish, since culture needs for its survival a continuous and developing tradition.\" In \"Thesee\" (1946), he showed that an individual may safely leave the Maze only if \"he had clung tightly to the thread which linked him with the past\". In 1947, he said that although civilizations rise and fall, Christian civilization may be saved from doom \"if we accepted the responsibility of the sacred charge laid on us by our traditions and our past.\" He also said that he remained an individualist and protested against \"the submersion of individual responsibility in organized authority, in that escape from freedom which is characteristic of our age.\"\nGide contributed to the 1949 anthology \"The God That Failed\". He could not write an essay because of his health, so the text was written by Enid Starkie, based on paraphrases of \"Return from the USSR\", \"Afterthoughts\", a discussion in Paris at l'Union pour la Verite in 1935, and his \"Journal\"; Gide approved the text.\n1930s and 1940s.\nIn 1930 Gide published a book about the Blanche Monnier case, \"La S\u00e9questr\u00e9e de Poitiers\", changing little but the protagonists' names. Monnier was a woman kept captive by her mother for more than 25 years.\nIn 1939, Gide became the first living author to be published in the prestigious \"Biblioth\u00e8que de la Pl\u00e9iade\".\nHe left France for Africa in 1942 and lived in Tunis from December 1942 until it was retaken by French, British and American forces in May 1943 and he was able to travel to Algiers, where he stayed until the end of World War II. In 1947, he received the Nobel Prize in Literature \"for his comprehensive and artistically significant writings, in which human problems and conditions have been presented with a fearless love of truth and keen psychological insight\". He devoted much of his last years to publishing his Journal. Gide died in Paris on 19 February 1951. The Roman Catholic Church placed his works on the \"Index of Forbidden Books\" in 1952.\nGide's life as a writer.\nGide's biographer Alan Sheridan summed up Gide's life as a writer and an intellectual:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Gide was, by general consent, one of the dozen most important writers of the 20th century. Moreover, no writer of such stature had led such an interesting life, a life accessibly interesting to us as readers of his autobiographical writings, his journal, his voluminous correspondence and the testimony of others. It was the life of a man engaging not only in the business of artistic creation, but reflecting on that process in his journal, reading that work to his friends and discussing it with them; a man who knew and corresponded with all the major literary figures of his own country and with many in Germany and England; who found daily nourishment in the Latin, French, English and German classics, and, for much of his life, in the Bible; [who enjoyed playing Chopin and other classic works on the piano;] and who engaged in commenting on the moral, political and sexual questions of the day.\n\"Gide's fame rested ultimately, of course, on his literary works. But, unlike many writers, he was no recluse: he had a need of friendship and a genius for sustaining it.\" But his \"capacity for love was not confined to his friends: it spilled over into a concern for others less fortunate than himself.\"\nWritings.\nGide's writing spans many genres. \"As a master of prose narrative, occasional dramatist and translator, literary critic, letter writer, essayist, and diarist, Andr\u00e9 Gide provided twentieth-century French literature with one of its most intriguing examples of the man of letters.\"\nBut as Sheridan points out, \"It is the fiction that lies at the summit of Gide's work.\" \"Here, as in the \"oeuvre\" as a whole, what strikes one first is the variety. Here, too, we see Gide's curiosity, his youthfulness, at work: a refusal to mine only one seam, to repeat successful formulas...The fiction spans the early years of Symbolism, to the \"comic, more inventive, even fantastic\" pieces, to the later \"serious, heavily autobiographical, first-person narratives\"...In France Gide was considered a great stylist in the classical sense, \"with his clear, succinct, spare, deliberately, subtly phrased sentences.\"\nGide's surviving letters run into the thousands. But it is the \"Journal\" that Sheridan calls \"the pre-eminently Gidean mode of expression.\" \"His first novel emerged from Gide's own journal, and many of the first-person narratives read more or less like journals. In \"Les faux-monnayeurs\", Edouard's journal provides an alternative voice to the narrator's.\" \"In 1946, when Pierre Herbert asked Gide which of his books he would choose if only one were to survive,\" Gide replied, \"I think it would be my \"Journal.\"'\" Beginning at the age of 18 or 19, Gide kept a journal of his life, and when it was first made available to the public, it ran to 1,300 pages.\nStruggle for values.\n\"Each volume that Gide wrote was intended to challenge itself, what had preceded it, and what could conceivably follow it. This characteristic, according to Daniel Moutote in his \"Cahiers de Andr\u00e9 Gide\" essay, is what makes Gide's work 'essentially modern': the 'perpetual renewal of the values by which one lives.'\" Gide wrote in his \"Journal\" in 1930: \"The only drama that really interests me and that I should always be willing to depict anew, is the debate of the individual with whatever keeps him from being authentic, with whatever is opposed to his integrity, to his integration. Most often the obstacle is within him. And all the rest is merely accidental.\"\nAs a whole, \"The works of Andr\u00e9 Gide reveal his passionate revolt against the restraints and conventions inherited from 19th-century France. He sought to uncover the authentic self beneath its contradictory masks.\"\nSexual delinquency.\nIn his journal, Gide distinguishes between adult-attracted \"sodomites\" and boy-loving \"pederasts\", categorizing himself as the latter.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n From an interview with film documentarian Nicole V\u00e9dr\u00e8s with Andre Gide:&lt;br&gt;\nV\u00e9dr\u00e8s \"May I ask you an indiscreet question?&lt;br&gt;\nGide \"There are no indiscreet questions, only indiscreet answers.\"&lt;br&gt;\nV\u00e9dr\u00e8s \"Is it true, \"cher Ma\u00eetre\", that you are a homosexual?\"&lt;br&gt;\nGide \"No monsieur, I am \"not\" a homosexual, I am a pederast!\"&lt;br&gt;\u2014from Vedres' documentary \"Life Starts Tomorrow\" (1950)\nGide's journal documents his behavior in the company of Oscar Wilde. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGide's novel \"Corydon\", which he considered his most important work, includes a defense of pederasty. At that time (before 1945), the age of consent for any type of sexual activity was set at 13.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1059", "revid": "26270034", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1059", "title": "Applied statistics", "text": ""}
{"id": "1061", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1061", "title": "Analysis of variance/Random effects models", "text": ""}
{"id": "1062", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1062", "title": "Analysis of variance/Degrees of freedom", "text": ""}
{"id": "1063", "revid": "50472992", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1063", "title": "Algorithms for calculating variance", "text": "Important algorithms in numerical statistics\nAlgorithms for calculating variance play a major role in computational statistics. A key difficulty in the design of good algorithms for this problem is that formulas for the variance may involve sums of squares, which can lead to numerical instability as well as to arithmetic overflow when dealing with large values.\nNa\u00efve algorithm.\nA formula for calculating the variance of an entire population of size \"N\" is:\nformula_1\nUsing Bessel's correction to calculate an unbiased estimate of the population variance from a finite sample of \"n\" observations, the formula is:\nformula_2\nTherefore, a na\u00efve algorithm to calculate the estimated variance is given by the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Framebox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n (SumSq \u2212 (Sum \u00d7 Sum) / n) / (n \u2212 1)\nThis algorithm can easily be adapted to compute the variance of a finite population: simply divide by \"n\" instead of \"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 on the last line.\nBecause SumSq and (Sum\u00d7Sum)/\"n\" can be very similar numbers, cancellation can lead to the precision of the result to be much less than the inherent precision of the floating-point arithmetic used to perform the computation. Thus this algorithm should not be used in practice, and several alternate, numerically stable, algorithms have been proposed. This is particularly bad if the standard deviation is small relative to the mean.\nComputing shifted data.\nThe variance is invariant with respect to changes in a location parameter, a property which can be used to avoid the catastrophic cancellation in this formula.\nformula_3\nwith formula_4 any constant, which leads to the new formula\nformula_5\nthe closer formula_4 is to the mean value the more accurate the result will be, but just choosing a value inside the\nsamples range will guarantee the desired stability. If the values formula_7 are small then there are no problems with the sum of its squares, on the contrary, if they are large it necessarily means that the variance is large as well. In any case the second term in the formula is always smaller than the first one therefore no cancellation may occur.\nIf just the first sample is taken as formula_4 the algorithm can be written in Python programming language as\ndef shifted_data_variance(data):\n if len(data) &lt; 2:\n return 0.0\n K = data[0]\n n = Ex = Ex2 = 0.0\n for x in data:\n n += 1\n Ex += x - K\n Ex2 += (x - K) ** 2\n variance = (Ex2 - Ex**2 / n) / (n - 1)\n # use n instead of (n-1) if want to compute the exact variance of the given data\n # use (n-1) if data are samples of a larger population\n return variance\nThis formula also facilitates the incremental computation that can be expressed as\nK = Ex = Ex2 = 0.0\nn = 0\ndef add_variable(x):\n global K, n, Ex, Ex2\n if n == 0:\n K = x\n n += 1\n Ex += x - K\n Ex2 += (x - K) ** 2\ndef remove_variable(x):\n global K, n, Ex, Ex2\n n -= 1\n Ex -= x - K\n Ex2 -= (x - K) ** 2\ndef get_mean():\n global K, n, Ex\n return K + Ex / n\ndef get_variance():\n global n, Ex, Ex2\n return (Ex2 - Ex**2 / n) / (n - 1)\nTwo-pass algorithm.\nAn alternative approach, using a different formula for the variance, first computes the sample mean,\nformula_9\nand then computes the sum of the squares of the differences from the mean,\nformula_10\nwhere \"s\" is the standard deviation. This is given by the following code:\ndef two_pass_variance(data):\n n = len(data)\n mean = sum(data) / n\n variance = sum((x - mean) ** 2 for x in data) / (n - 1)\n return variance\nThis algorithm is numerically stable if \"n\" is small. However, the results of both of these simple algorithms (\"na\u00efve\" and \"two-pass\") can depend inordinately on the ordering of the data and can give poor results for very large data sets due to repeated roundoff error in the accumulation of the sums. Techniques such as compensated summation can be used to combat this error to a degree.\nWelford's online algorithm.\nIt is often useful to be able to compute the variance in a single pass, inspecting each value formula_11 only once; for example, when the data is being collected without enough storage to keep all the values, or when costs of memory access dominate those of computation. For such an online algorithm, a recurrence relation is required between quantities from which the required statistics can be calculated in a numerically stable fashion.\nThe following formulas can be used to update the mean and (estimated) variance of the sequence, for an additional element \"x\"\"n\". Here, formula_12 denotes the sample mean of the first \"n\" samples formula_13, formula_14 their biased sample variance, and formula_15 their unbiased sample variance.\nformula_16\nformula_17\nformula_18\nThese formulas suffer from numerical instability , as they repeatedly subtract a small number from a big number which scales with \"n\". A better quantity for updating is the sum of squares of differences from the current mean, formula_19, here denoted formula_20:\n formula_21\nThis algorithm was found by Welford, and it has been thoroughly analyzed. It is also common to denote formula_22 and formula_23.\nAn example Python implementation for Welford's algorithm is given below.\ndef update(existing_aggregate, new_value):\n (count, mean, M2) = existing_aggregate\n count += 1\n delta = new_value - mean\n mean += delta / count\n delta2 = new_value - mean\n M2 += delta * delta2\n return (count, mean, M2)\ndef finalize(existing_aggregate):\n (count, mean, M2) = existing_aggregate\n if count &lt; 2:\n return float(\"nan\")\n else:\n (mean, variance, sample_variance) = (mean, M2 / count, M2 / (count - 1))\n return (mean, variance, sample_variance)\nThis algorithm is much less prone to loss of precision due to catastrophic cancellation, but might not be as efficient because of the division operation inside the loop. For a particularly robust two-pass algorithm for computing the variance, one can first compute and subtract an estimate of the mean, and then use this algorithm on the residuals.\nThe parallel algorithm below illustrates how to merge multiple sets of statistics calculated online.\nWeighted incremental algorithm.\nThe algorithm can be extended to handle unequal sample weights, replacing the simple counter \"n\" with the sum of weights seen so far. West (1979) suggests this incremental algorithm:\ndef weighted_incremental_variance(data_weight_pairs):\n w_sum = w_sum2 = mean = S = 0\n for x, w in data_weight_pairs:\n w_sum = w_sum + w\n w_sum2 = w_sum2 + w**2\n mean_old = mean\n mean = mean_old + (w / w_sum) * (x - mean_old)\n S = S + w * (x - mean_old) * (x - mean)\n population_variance = S / w_sum\n # Bessel's correction for weighted samples\n # Frequency weights\n sample_frequency_variance = S / (w_sum - 1)\n # Reliability weights\n sample_reliability_variance = S / (w_sum - w_sum2 / w_sum)\nParallel algorithm.\nChan et al. note that Welford's online algorithm detailed above is a special case of an algorithm that works for combining arbitrary sets formula_24 and formula_25:\nformula_26.\nThis may be useful when, for example, multiple processing units may be assigned to discrete parts of the input.\nChan's method for estimating the mean is numerically unstable when formula_27 and both are large, because the numerical error in formula_28 is not scaled down in the way that it is in the formula_29 case. In such cases, prefer formula_30.\ndef parallel_variance(n_a, avg_a, M2_a, n_b, avg_b, M2_b):\n n = n_a + n_b\n delta = avg_b - avg_a\n M2 = M2_a + M2_b + delta**2 * n_a * n_b / n\n var_ab = M2 / (n - 1)\n return var_ab\nThis can be generalized to allow parallelization with AVX, with GPUs, and computer clusters, and to covariance.\nExample.\nAssume that all floating point operations use standard IEEE 754 double-precision arithmetic. Consider the sample (4, 7, 13, 16) from an infinite population. Based on this sample, the estimated population mean is 10, and the unbiased estimate of population variance is 30. Both the na\u00efve algorithm and two-pass algorithm compute these values correctly.\nNext consider the sample (108\u00a0+\u00a04, 108\u00a0+\u00a07, 108\u00a0+\u00a013, 108\u00a0+\u00a016), which gives rise to the same estimated variance as the first sample. The two-pass algorithm computes this variance estimate correctly, but the na\u00efve algorithm returns 29.333333333333332 instead of 30.\nWhile this loss of precision may be tolerable and viewed as a minor flaw of the na\u00efve algorithm, further increasing the offset makes the error catastrophic. Consider the sample (109\u00a0+\u00a04, 109\u00a0+\u00a07, 109\u00a0+\u00a013, 109\u00a0+\u00a016). Again the estimated population variance of 30 is computed correctly by the two-pass algorithm, but the na\u00efve algorithm now computes it as \u2212170.66666666666666. This is a serious problem with na\u00efve algorithm and is due to catastrophic cancellation in the subtraction of two similar numbers at the final stage of the algorithm.\nHigher-order statistics.\nTerriberry extends Chan's formulae to calculating the third and fourth central moments, needed for example when estimating skewness and kurtosis:\nformula_31\nHere the formula_32 are again the sums of powers of differences from the mean formula_33, giving\n formula_34\nFor the incremental case (i.e., formula_35), this simplifies to:\n formula_36\nBy preserving the value formula_37, only one division operation is needed and the higher-order statistics can thus be calculated for little incremental cost.\nAn example of the online algorithm for kurtosis implemented as described is:\ndef online_kurtosis(data):\n n = mean = M2 = M3 = M4 = 0\n for x in data:\n n1 = n\n n = n + 1\n delta = x - mean\n delta_n = delta / n\n delta_n2 = delta_n**2\n term1 = delta * delta_n * n1\n mean = mean + delta_n\n M4 = M4 + term1 * delta_n2 * (n**2 - 3*n + 3) + 6 * delta_n2 * M2 - 4 * delta_n * M3\n M3 = M3 + term1 * delta_n * (n - 2) - 3 * delta_n * M2\n M2 = M2 + term1\n # Note, you may also calculate variance using M2, and skewness using M3\n # Caution: If all the inputs are the same, M2 will be 0, resulting in a division by 0.\n kurtosis = (n * M4) / (M2**2) - 3\n return kurtosis\nP\u00e9ba\u00ff\nfurther extends these results to arbitrary-order central moments, for the incremental and the pairwise cases, and subsequently P\u00e9ba\u00ff et al.\nfor weighted and compound moments. One can also find there similar formulas for covariance.\nChoi and Sweetman\noffer two alternative methods to compute the skewness and kurtosis, each of which can save substantial computer memory requirements and CPU time in certain applications. The first approach is to compute the statistical moments by separating the data into bins and then computing the moments from the geometry of the resulting histogram, which effectively becomes a one-pass algorithm for higher moments. One benefit is that the statistical moment calculations can be carried out to arbitrary accuracy such that the computations can be tuned to the precision of, e.g., the data storage format or the original measurement hardware. A relative histogram of a random variable can be constructed in the conventional way: the range of potential values is divided into bins and the number of occurrences within each bin are counted and plotted such that the area of each rectangle equals the portion of the sample values within that bin:\n formula_38\nwhere formula_39 and formula_40 represent the frequency and the relative frequency at bin formula_41 and formula_42 is the total area of the histogram. After this normalization, the formula_43 raw moments and central moments of formula_44 can be calculated from the relative histogram:\n formula_45\n formula_46\nwhere the superscript formula_47 indicates the moments are calculated from the histogram. For constant bin width formula_48 these two expressions can be simplified using formula_49:\n formula_50\n formula_51\nThe second approach from Choi and Sweetman is an analytical methodology to combine statistical moments from individual segments of a time-history such that the resulting overall moments are those of the complete time-history. This methodology could be used for parallel computation of statistical moments with subsequent combination of those moments, or for combination of statistical moments computed at sequential times.\nIf formula_52 sets of statistical moments are known:\nformula_53 for formula_54, then each formula_55 can\nbe expressed in terms of the equivalent formula_43 raw moments:\n formula_57\nwhere formula_58 is generally taken to be the duration of the formula_59 time-history, or the number of points if formula_60 is constant.\nThe benefit of expressing the statistical moments in terms of formula_61 is that the formula_52 sets can be combined by addition, and there is no upper limit on the value of formula_52.\n formula_64\nwhere the subscript formula_65 represents the concatenated time-history or combined formula_61. These combined values of formula_61 can then be inversely transformed into raw moments representing the complete concatenated time-history\n formula_68\nKnown relationships between the raw moments (formula_69) and the central moments (formula_70)\nare then used to compute the central moments of the concatenated time-history. Finally, the statistical moments of the concatenated history are computed from the central moments:\n formula_71\nCovariance.\nVery similar algorithms can be used to compute the covariance. \nNa\u00efve algorithm.\nThe na\u00efve algorithm is\nformula_72\nFor the algorithm above, one could use the following Python code:\ndef naive_covariance(data1, data2):\n n = len(data1)\n sum1 = sum(data1)\n sum2 = sum(data2)\n sum12 = sum([i1 * i2 for i1, i2 in zip(data1, data2)])\n covariance = (sum12 - sum1 * sum2 / n) / n\n return covariance\nWith estimate of the mean.\nAs for the variance, the covariance of two random variables is also shift-invariant, so given any two constant values formula_73 and formula_74 it can be written:\nformula_75\nand again choosing a value inside the range of values will stabilize the formula against catastrophic cancellation as well as make it more robust against big sums. Taking the first value of each data set, the algorithm can be written as:\ndef shifted_data_covariance(data_x, data_y):\n n = len(data_x)\n if n &lt; 2:\n return 0\n kx = data_x[0]\n ky = data_y[0]\n Ex = Ey = Exy = 0\n for ix, iy in zip(data_x, data_y):\n Ex += ix - kx\n Ey += iy - ky\n Exy += (ix - kx) * (iy - ky)\n return (Exy - Ex * Ey / n) / n\nTwo-pass.\nThe two-pass algorithm first computes the sample means, and then the covariance:\nformula_76\nformula_77\nformula_78\nThe two-pass algorithm may be written as:\ndef two_pass_covariance(data1, data2):\n n = len(data1)\n mean1 = sum(data1) / n\n mean2 = sum(data2) / n\n covariance = 0\n for i1, i2 in zip(data1, data2):\n a = i1 - mean1\n b = i2 - mean2\n covariance += a * b / n\n return covariance\nA slightly more accurate compensated version performs the full naive algorithm on the residuals. The final sums formula_79 and formula_80 \"should\" be zero, but the second pass compensates for any small error.\nOnline.\nA stable one-pass algorithm exists, similar to the online algorithm for computing the variance, that computes co-moment formula_81:\nformula_82\nThe apparent asymmetry in that last equation is due to the fact that formula_83, so both update terms are equal to formula_84. Even greater accuracy can be achieved by first computing the means, then using the stable one-pass algorithm on the residuals.\nThus the covariance can be computed as\nformula_85\ndef online_covariance(data1, data2):\n meanx = meany = C = n = 0\n for x, y in zip(data1, data2):\n n += 1\n dx = x - meanx\n meanx += dx / n\n meany += (y - meany) / n\n C += dx * (y - meany)\n population_covar = C / n\n # Bessel's correction for sample variance\n sample_covar = C / (n - 1)\nA small modification can also be made to compute the weighted covariance:\ndef online_weighted_covariance(data1, data2, data3):\n meanx = meany = 0\n wsum = wsum2 = 0\n C = 0\n for x, y, w in zip(data1, data2, data3):\n wsum += w\n wsum2 += w * w\n dx = x - meanx\n meanx += (w / wsum) * dx\n meany += (w / wsum) * (y - meany)\n C += w * dx * (y - meany)\n population_covar = C / wsum\n # Bessel's correction for sample variance\n # Frequency weights\n sample_frequency_covar = C / (wsum - 1)\n # Reliability weights\n sample_reliability_covar = C / (wsum - wsum2 / wsum)\nLikewise, there is a formula for combining the covariances of two sets that can be used to parallelize the computation:\nformula_86\nWeighted batched version.\nA version of the weighted online algorithm that does batched updated also exists: let formula_87 denote the weights, and write\nformula_88\nThe covariance can then be computed as\nformula_89"}
{"id": "1064", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1064", "title": "Almond", "text": "Species of nut\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe almond (Prunus amygdalus, syn. Prunus dulcis (Mill.) D.A.Webb, nom. illeg. non \"Prunus dulcis\" Rouchy) is a species of tree from the genus \"Prunus\". Along with the peach, it is classified in the subgenus \"Amygdalus\", distinguished from the other subgenera by corrugations on the shell (endocarp) surrounding the seed.\nThe fruit of the almond is a drupe, consisting of an outer hull and a hard shell with the seed, which is not a true nut. \"Shelling\" almonds refers to removing the shell to reveal the seed. Almonds are sold shelled or unshelled. Blanched almonds are shelled almonds that have been treated with hot water to soften the seedcoat, which is then removed to reveal the white embryo. Once almonds are cleaned and processed, they can be stored for around a year if kept refrigerated; at higher temperatures they will become rancid more quickly. Almonds are used in many cuisines, often featuring prominently in desserts, such as marzipan.\nThe almond tree prospers in a moderate Mediterranean climate with cool winter weather. It is rarely found wild in its original setting. Almonds were one of the earliest domesticated fruit trees, due to the ability to produce quality offspring entirely from seed, without using suckers and cuttings. Evidence of domesticated almonds in the Early Bronze Age has been found in the archeological sites of the Middle East, and subsequently across the Mediterranean region and similar arid climates with cool winters.\nCalifornia produces about 80% of the world's almond supply. Due to high acreage and water demand for almond cultivation, and need for pesticides, California almond production may be unsustainable, especially during the persistent drought and heat from climate change in the 21st century. Droughts in California have caused some producers to leave the industry, leading to lower supply and increased prices.\nDescription.\nThe almond is a deciduous tree growing to in height, with a trunk of up to in diameter. The young twigs are green at first, becoming purplish where exposed to sunlight, then grey in their second year. The leaves are long, with a serrated margin and a petiole.\nThe fragrant flowers are white to pale pink, diameter with five petals, produced singly or in pairs and appearing before the leaves in early spring. Almond trees thrive in Mediterranean climates with warm, dry summers and mild, wet winters. The optimal temperature for their growth is between and the tree buds have a chilling requirement of 200 to 700 hours below to break dormancy.\nAlmonds begin bearing an economic crop in the third year after planting. Trees reach full bearing five to six years after planting. The fruit matures in the autumn, 7\u20138 months after flowering.\nThe almond fruit is long. It is not a nut but a drupe. The outer covering, consisting of an outer exocarp, or skin, and mesocarp, or flesh, fleshy in other members of \"Prunus\" such as the plum and cherry, is instead a thick, leathery, grey-green coat (with a downy exterior), called the hull. Inside the hull is a woody endocarp which forms a reticulated, hard shell (like the outside of a peach pit) called the pyrena. Inside the shell is the edible seed, commonly called a nut. Generally, one seed is present, but occasionally two occur. After the fruit matures, the hull splits and separates from the shell, and an abscission layer forms between the stem and the fruit so that the fruit can fall from the tree. During harvest, mechanised tree shakers are used to expedite fruits falling to the ground for collection.\nTaxonomy.\nScientific name.\nThe almond was named \"Amygdalus communis\" by Carl Linnaeus in his Species plantarum in 1753. For the name 'Amygdalus' he referred to Gaspard Bauhin's \"Pinax\" (1623). In 1801 the species was for the first time placed in the genus \"Prunus\" by August Batsch. In that genus, the name \"Prunus communis\" was no longer available because in 1778 William Hudson had already assigned it to a taxon in which he also included the plum (\"Prunus domestica\"). Batsch thereupon named the species \"Prunus amygdalus\", where 'amygdalus' is the old generic name and should therefore be treated as a noun in apposition. Meanwhile, in 1768, Philip Miller had published the name of what he believed to be a second species of almond: \"Amygdalus dulcis\". He mentioned Linnaeus' \"Amygdalus communis\" as the first species. It was not until 1967 that the combination \"Prunus dulcis\" was published for the almond by David Allardice Webb, on the assumption that \"Amygdalus dulcis\" was nothing more than a synonym of \"Amygdalus communis\", and thus an available name for that species. The epithet \"dulcis\" (1768) is older than \"amygdalus\" (1801) and would therefore have priority. Webb noted that it was unfortunate that a species known for 165 years as \"Prunus amygdalus\" now had to be renamed under the rules of nomenclature. However, it later turned out that in 1967 the name \"Prunus dulcis\" was no longer available for the almond because it had already been used for a cherry in an 1878 publication by L'Abb\u00e9 Rouchy. The oldest valid combination in \"Prunus\" is therefore \"Prunus amygdalus\".\nSweet and bitter almonds.\nThe seeds of \"Prunus amygdalus\" var. \"dulcis\" are predominantly sweet but some individual trees produce seeds that are somewhat more bitter. The genetic basis for bitterness involves a single gene, the bitter flavour furthermore being recessive, both aspects making this trait easier to domesticate. The fruits from \"Prunus amygdalus\" var. \"amara\" are always bitter, as are the kernels from other species of genus \"Prunus\", such as apricot, peach and cherry (although to a lesser extent).\nThe bitter almond is slightly broader and shorter than the sweet almond and contains about 50% of the fixed oil that occurs in sweet almonds. It also contains the enzyme emulsin which, in the presence of water, acts on the two soluble glucosides amygdalin and prunasin yielding glucose, cyanide and the essential oil of bitter almonds, which is nearly pure benzaldehyde, the chemical causing the bitter flavour. Bitter almonds may yield 4\u20139\u00a0milligrams of hydrogen cyanide per almond and contain 42 times higher amounts of cyanide than the trace levels found in sweet almonds. The origin of cyanide content in bitter almonds is via the enzymatic hydrolysis of amygdalin. P450 monooxygenases are involved in the amygdalin biosynthetic pathway. A point mutation in a bHLH transcription factor prevents transcription of the two cytochrome P450 genes, resulting in the sweet kernel trait.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"almond\" is a loanword from Old French or , descended from Late Latin , , modified from Classical Latin , which is in turn borrowed from Ancient Greek () (cf. amygdala, an almond-shaped portion of the brain). Late Old English had \"amygdales\" 'almonds'.\nThe adjective \"amygdaloid\" (literally 'like an almond, almond-like') is used to describe objects which are roughly almond-shaped, particularly a shape which is part way between a triangle and an ellipse. For example, the amygdala of the brain uses a direct borrowing of the Greek term .\nOrigin and distribution.\nThe precise origin of the almond is controversial due to estimates for its emergence across wide geographic regions. Sources indicate that its origins were in an area stretching across Central Asia, Iran, Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, Kurdistan, Afghanistan, and Iraq, or in an eastern Asian subregion between Mongolia and Uzbekistan. In other assessments, both botanical and archaeological evidence indicates that almonds originated and were first cultivated in West Asia, particularly in countries of the Levant. Other estimates specified Iran and Anatolia (present day Turkey) as origin locations of the almond, with botanical evidence for Iran as the main origin centre.\nThe wild form of domesticated almond also grew in parts of the Levant. Almond cultivation was spread by humans centuries ago along the shores of the Mediterranean Sea into northern Africa and southern Europe, and more recently to other world regions, notably California.\nSelection of the sweet type from the many bitter types in the wild marked the beginning of almond domestication. The wild ancestor of the almond used to breed the domesticated species is unknown. The species \"Prunus fenzliana\" may be the most likely wild ancestor of the almond, in part because it is native to Armenia and western Azerbaijan, where it was apparently domesticated. Wild almond species were grown by early farmers, \"at first unintentionally in the garbage heaps, and later intentionally in their orchards\".\nCultivation.\nAlmonds were one of the earliest domesticated fruit trees owing to their ability to be grown from seed, allowing their cultivation to have perhaps predated the advent of grafting. \nDomesticated almonds appear in the Early Bronze Age (3000\u20132000\u00a0BCE), such as the archaeological sites of Numeira (Jordan), or possibly earlier. Another well-known archaeological example of the almond is the fruit found in Tutankhamun's tomb in Egypt (c.\u20091325 BCE), probably imported from the Levant.\nIbn al-'Awwam's 12th-century \"Book on Agriculture\" includes an article on almond tree cultivation in Spain.\nOf the European countries that the Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh reported as cultivating almonds, Germany is the northernmost, though the domesticated form can be found as far north as Iceland.\nVarieties.\nAlmond trees are small to medium-sized but commercial cultivars can be grafted onto a different root-stock to produce smaller trees. Varieties include:\nBreeding.\nBreeding programmes have found the high shell-seal trait.\nPollination.\nThe most widely planted varieties of almond are self-incompatible; hence these trees require pollen from a tree with different genetic characters to produce seeds. Almond orchards therefore must grow mixtures of almond varieties. In addition, the pollen is transferred from flower to flower by insects; therefore commercial growers must ensure there are enough insects to perform this task. The large scale of almond production in the U.S. creates a significant problem of providing enough pollinating insects. Additional pollinating insects are therefore brought to the trees. The pollination of California's almonds is the largest annual managed pollination event in the world, with over 1\u00a0million hives (nearly half of all beehives in the U.S.) being brought to the almond orchards each February.\nMuch of the supply of bees is managed by pollination brokers, who contract with migratory beekeepers from at least 49 states for the event. This business was heavily affected by colony collapse disorder at the turn of the 21st century, causing a nationwide shortage of honey bees and increasing the price of insect pollination. To partially protect almond growers from these costs, researchers at the Agricultural Research Service, part of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), developed self-pollinating almond trees that combine this character with quality characters such as a flavour and yield. Self-pollinating almond varieties exist, but they lack some commercial characters. However, through natural hybridisation between different almond varieties, a new variety that was self-pollinating with a high yield of commercial quality nuts was produced.\nDiseases.\nAlmond trees can be attacked by an array of damaging microbes, fungal pathogens, plant viruses, and bacteria.\nPests.\nPavement ants (\"Tetramorium caespitum\"), southern fire ants (\"Solenopsis xyloni\"), and thief ants (\"Solenopsis molesta\") are seed predators. \"Bryobia rubrioculus\" mites are most known for their damage to this crop.\nSustainability.\nAlmond production in California is concentrated mainly in the Central Valley, where the mild climate, rich soil, abundant sunshine and water supply make for ideal growing conditions. Due to the persistent droughts in California in the early 21st century, it became more difficult to raise almonds in a sustainable manner. The issue is complex because of the high amount of water needed to produce almonds: a single almond requires roughly of water to grow properly. Regulations related to water supplies are changing so some growers have destroyed their current almond orchards to replace with either younger trees or a different crop such as pistachio that needs less water.\nSustainability strategies implemented by the Almond Board of California and almond farmers include:\nProduction.\nIn 2023, world production of almonds was 3.5 million tonnes, led by the United States with 51% of the total, followed by Spain and Australia as secondary producers (table).\nUnited States.\nIn the U.S., production is concentrated in California where and six different almond varieties were under cultivation in 2017, with a yield of of shelled almonds. California production is marked by a period of intense pollination during late winter by rented commercial bees transported by truck across the U.S. to almond groves, requiring more than half of the total U.S. commercial honeybee population. The value of total U.S. exports of shelled almonds in 2016 was $3.2\u00a0billion.\nAll commercially grown almonds sold as food in the U.S. are sweet cultivars. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration reported in 2010 that some fractions of imported sweet almonds were contaminated with bitter almonds, which contain cyanide.\nAustralia.\nAustralia is the largest almond production region in the Southern Hemisphere. Most of the almond orchards are located along the Murray River corridor in New South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia.\nSpain.\nSpain has diverse commercial cultivars of almonds grown in Catalonia, Valencia, Murcia, Andalusia, and Arag\u00f3n regions, and the Balearic Islands. The almond cultivar 'Marcona' is unique, having a kernel that is short, round, relatively sweet, and delicate in texture; it is marketed by name. Its origin is unknown, but has been grown in Spain over centuries.\nToxicity.\nBitter almonds contain some 40 times the trace levels of cyanide found in sweet almonds. Extract of bitter almond was once used medicinally, but even in small doses, its effects are severe or lethal, especially in children; the cyanide must be removed before consumption. The acute oral lethal dose of cyanide for adult humans is reported to be of body weight (approximately 50 bitter almonds), so that for children consuming 5\u201310 bitter almonds may be fatal. Symptoms of eating such almonds include vertigo and other typical cyanide poisoning effects.\nAlmonds may cause allergy or intolerance. Cross-reactivity is common with peach allergens (lipid transfer proteins) and tree nut allergens. Symptoms range from local signs and symptoms (e.g., oral allergy syndrome, contact urticaria) to systemic signs and symptoms including anaphylaxis (e.g., urticaria, angioedema, gastrointestinal and respiratory symptoms).\nAlmonds are susceptible to aflatoxin-producing moulds. Aflatoxins are potent carcinogenic chemicals produced by moulds such as \"Aspergillus flavus\" and \"Aspergillus parasiticus\". The mould contamination may occur from soil, previously infested almonds, and almond pests such as navel-orange worm. High levels of mould growth typically appear as grey to black filament-like growth. It is unsafe to eat mould-infected tree nuts.\nSome countries have strict limits on allowable levels of aflatoxin contamination of almonds and require adequate testing before the nuts can be marketed to their citizens. The European Union, for example, introduced a requirement since 2007 that all almond shipments to the EU be tested for aflatoxin. If aflatoxin does not meet the strict safety regulations, either the entire consignment must be reprocessed to eliminate the aflatoxin or it must be destroyed.\nBreeding programs have found a trait known as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;high shell-seal. High shell-seal provides resistance against these \"Aspergillus\" species and so against the development of their toxins.\nMandatory pasteurization in California.\nAfter tracing cases of salmonellosis to almonds, the USDA approved a proposal by the Almond Board of California to pasteurize almonds sold to the public. After publishing the rule in March 2007, the almond pasteurization program became mandatory for California companies effective 1 September 2007. Raw, untreated California almonds have not been commercially available in the U.S. since then.\nCalifornia almonds labeled \"raw\" must be steam-pasteurized or chemically treated with propylene oxide (PPO). This does not apply to imported almonds or almonds sold from the grower directly to the consumer in small quantities. The treatment also is not required for raw almonds sold for export outside of North America.\nThe Almond Board of California states: \"PPO residue dissipates after treatment\". The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has reported: \"Propylene oxide has been detected in fumigated food products; consumption of contaminated food is another possible route of exposure\". PPO is classified as Group 2B (\"possibly carcinogenic to humans\").\nThe USDA-approved marketing order was challenged in court by organic farmers organized by the Cornucopia Institute, a Wisconsin-based farm policy research group which filed a lawsuit in September 2008. According to the institute, this almond marketing order has imposed significant financial burdens on small-scale and organic growers and damaged domestic almond markets. A federal judge dismissed the lawsuit in early 2009 on procedural grounds. In August 2010, a federal appeals court ruled that the farmers have a right to appeal the USDA regulation. In March 2013, the court vacated the suit on the basis that the objections should have been raised in 2007 when the regulation was first proposed.\nUses.\nNutrition.\nAlmonds are 4% water, 22% carbohydrates, 21% protein, and 50% fat. In a reference amount, almonds supply of food energy. The almond is a nutritionally dense food, providing a rich source (20% or more of the Daily Value, DV) of the B vitamins riboflavin and niacin, vitamin E, and the essential minerals calcium, copper, iron, magnesium, manganese, phosphorus, and zinc. Almonds are a moderate source (10\u201319% DV) of the B\u00a0vitamins thiamine, vitamin B6, and folate, choline, and the essential mineral potassium. They also contain substantial dietary fibre, the monounsaturated fat, oleic acid, and the polyunsaturated fat, linoleic acid. Typical of nuts and seeds, almonds are a source of phytosterols such as beta-sitosterol, stigmasterol, campesterol, sitostanol, and campestanol.\nHealth.\nAlmonds are included as a good source of protein among recommended healthy foods by the USDA. A 2016 review of clinical research indicated that regular consumption of almonds may reduce the risk of heart disease by lowering blood levels of LDL cholesterol.\nCulinary.\nWhile the almond is often eaten on its own, raw or toasted, it is also a component of various dishes. Almonds are available in many forms, such as whole, slivered, and ground into flour. Almond pieces around in size, called \"nibs\", are used for special purposes such as decoration.\nAlmonds are a common addition to breakfast muesli or oatmeal. Colomba di Pasqua is the Easter counterpart of the two well-known Italian Christmas desserts panettone and pandoro.\nDesserts.\nA wide range of classic sweets feature almonds as a central ingredient. Marzipan was developed in the Middle Ages. Since the 19th century almonds have been used to make bread, almond butter, cakes and puddings, candied confections, almond cream-filled pastries, nougat, cookies (macaroons, biscotti and qurabiya), and cakes (financiers, Esterh\u00e1zy torte), and other sweets and desserts.\nThe young, developing fruit of the almond tree can be eaten whole (green almonds) when they are still green and fleshy on the outside and the inner shell has not yet hardened. The fruit is somewhat sour, but is a popular snack in parts of the Middle East, eaten dipped in salt to balance the sour taste. Also in the Middle East they are often eaten with dates. They are available only from mid-April to mid-June in the Northern Hemisphere; pickling or brining extends the fruit's shelf life.\nMarzipan.\nMarzipan, a smooth, sweetened almond paste, is used in a number of elegant cakes and desserts. Princess cake is covered by marzipan (similar to fondant), as is Battenberg cake. In Sicily, sponge cake is covered with marzipan to make cassatella di sant'Agata and cassata siciliana, and marzipan is dyed and crafted into realistic fruit shapes to make frutta martorana. The Andalusian Christmas pastry \"pan de C\u00e1diz\" is filled with marzipan and candied fruit.\nMilk.\nAlmonds can be processed into a milk substitute called almond milk; the nut's soft texture, mild flavour, and light colouring (when skinned) make for an efficient analog to dairy, and a soy-free choice for lactose intolerant people and vegans. Raw, blanched, and lightly toasted almonds work well for different production techniques, some of which are similar to that of soy milk and some of which use no heat, resulting in raw milk.\nAlmond milk, along with almond butter and almond oil, are versatile products used in both sweet and savoury dishes.\nIn Moroccan cuisine, sharbat billooz, a common beverage, is made by blending blanched almonds with milk, sugar and other flavourings.\nFlour and skins.\nAlmond flour or ground almond meal combined with sugar or honey as marzipan is often used as a gluten-free alternative to wheat flour in cooking and baking.\nAlmonds contain polyphenols in their skins consisting of flavonols, flavan-3-ols, hydroxybenzoic acids and flavanones analogous to those of certain fruits and vegetables. These phenolic compounds and almond skin prebiotic dietary fibre have commercial interest as food additives or dietary supplements.\nSyrup.\nHistorically, almond syrup was an emulsion of sweet and bitter almonds, usually made with barley syrup (orgeat syrup) or in a syrup of orange flower water and sugar, often flavoured with a synthetic aroma of almonds. Orgeat syrup is an important ingredient in the Mai Tai and many other Tiki drinks.\nDue to the cyanide found in bitter almonds, modern syrups generally are produced only from sweet almonds. Such syrup products do not contain significant levels of hydrocyanic acid, so are generally considered safe for human consumption.\nOils.\nAlmonds are a rich source of oil, with 50% of kernel dry mass as fat (whole almond nutrition table). In relation to total dry mass of the kernel, almond oil contains 32% monounsaturated oleic acid (an omega-9 fatty acid), 13% linoleic acid (a polyunsaturated omega-6 essential fatty acid), and 10% saturated fatty acid (mainly as palmitic acid). Linolenic acid, a polyunsaturated omega-3 fat, is not present (table). Almond oil is a rich source of vitamin E, providing 261% of the Daily Value per 100 millilitres.\nWhen almond oil is analyzed separately and expressed per 100 grams as a reference mass, the oil provides of food energy, 8 grams of saturated fat (81% of which is palmitic acid), 70 grams of oleic acid, and 17 grams of linoleic acid (oil table).\n\"Oleum amygdalae\", the fixed oil, is prepared from either sweet or bitter almonds, and is a glyceryl oleate with a slight odour and a nutty taste. It is almost insoluble in alcohol but readily soluble in chloroform or ether. Almond oil is obtained from the dried kernel of almonds. Sweet almond oil is used as a carrier oil in aromatherapy and cosmetics while bitter almond oil, containing benzaldehyde, is used as a food flavouring and in perfume.\nIn culture.\nThe almond is highly revered in some cultures. The tree originated in the Middle East. In the Bible, the almond is mentioned ten times, beginning with Genesis 43:11, where it is described as \"among the best of fruits\". In Numbers 17, Levi is chosen from the other tribes of Israel by Aaron's rod, which brought forth almond flowers. The almond blossom supplied a model for the menorah which stood in the Holy Temple, \"Three cups, shaped like almond blossoms, were on one branch, with a knob and a flower; and three cups, shaped like almond blossoms, were on the other \u2026 on the candlestick itself were four cups, shaped like almond blossoms, with its knobs and flowers\" (Exodus 25:33\u201334; 37:19\u201320). In Jeremiah 1:11\u201312, the vision of an almond branch conveys a wordplay in Hebrew between \"shaqed\" (almond) and \"shoqed\" (watching), symbolizing God's vigilant commitment to fulfill His word. Many Sephardic Jews give five almonds to each guest before special occasions like weddings.\nSimilarly, Christian symbolism often uses almond branches as a symbol of the virgin birth of Jesus; paintings and icons often include almond-shaped haloes encircling the Christ Child and as a symbol of Mary. The word \"luz\", which appears in Genesis 30:37, sometimes translated as \"hazel\", may actually be derived from the Aramaic name for almond (Luz), and is translated as such in the New International Version and other versions of the Bible. The Arabic name for almond is \u0644\u0648\u0632 \"lauz\" or \"l\u016bz\". In some parts of the Levant and North Africa, it is pronounced \"loz\", which is very close to its Aramaic origin.\nThe Entrance of the flower (\"La entrada de la flor\") is an event celebrated on 1 February in Torrent, Spain, in which the clavarios and members of the Confrerie of the Mother of God deliver a branch of the first-blooming almond-tree to the Virgin.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1069", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1069", "title": "Demographics of Antigua and Barbuda", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThis article is a demography of the population of Antigua and Barbuda including population density, ethnicity, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\nPopulation size and structure.\nAccording to the 2011 census the estimated resident population of Antigua and Barbuda was 86,295.\nThe estimated population of is , according to .\nStructure of the population.\nTable: Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 27.V.2011):\nTable: Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2021, based on the results of the 2011 Population Census.\nVital statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nEthnic groups.\nThe population of Antigua and Barbuda, is predominantly black (91.0%) or mixed (4.4%). 1.9% of the population is white and 0.7% East Indian. There is also a small Amerindian population: 177 in 1991 and 214 in 2001 (0.3% of the total population). The remaining 1.6% of the population includes people from the Middle East (0.6%) and China (0.2%).\nThe 2001 census disclosed that 19,425, or 30 per cent of the total population of Antigua and Barbuda, reported their place of birth as a foreign country. Over 15,000 of these persons were from other Caribbean states, representing 80 of the total foreign born. The main countries of\norigin were Guyana, Dominica and Jamaica. Approximately 4,500 or 23 per cent of all foreign\nborn came from Guyana, 3,300 or 17 per cent came from Dominica and 2,800 or 14 per cent\ncame from Jamaica. The largest single group from a country outside the region came from the\nUnited States. Of the total of 1,715 persons, nine per cent of the foreign born, came\nfrom the United States while three per cent and one per cent came from the United Kingdom and Canada, respectively. Many of these are the children of Antiguans and Barbudans who had emigrated to these countries, mainly during the 1980s, and subsequently returned.\nLanguages.\nAntiguan and Barbudan Creole, English\nReligion.\nProtestant 68.3% (Anglican 17.6%, Seventh Day Adventist 12.4%, Pentecostal 12.2%, Moravian 8.3%, Methodist 5.6%, Wesleyan Holiness 4.5%, Church of God 4.1%, Baptist 3.6%), Roman Catholic 8.2%, other 12.2%, unspecified 5.5%, none 5.9% (2011 est.)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1070", "revid": "5795946", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1070", "title": "Politics of Antigua and Barbuda", "text": "The politics of Antigua and Barbuda takes place in a framework of a unitary parliamentary representative democratic monarchy, wherein the sovereign of Antigua and Barbuda is the head of state, appointing a governor-general to act as vice-regal representative in the nation. A prime minister is appointed by the governor-general as the head of government, and of a multi-party system; the prime minister advises the governor-general on the appointment of a Council of Ministers. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of the Parliament. The bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate (seventeen-member body appointed by the governor-general) and the House of Representatives (seventeen seats; members are elected by proportional representation to serve five-year terms).\nAntigua and Barbuda has a long history of peaceful changes of government. Since the 1951 general election, the party system has been dominated by the Antigua and Barbuda Labour Party (ABLP), for a long time was dominated by the Bird family, particularly Prime Ministers Vere and Lester Bird. The opposition claimed to be disadvantaged by the ABLP's longstanding monopoly on patronage and its control of the media, especially in the 1999 general election. The opposition United Progressive Party (UPP) won the 2004 election, and its leader Winston Baldwin Spencer was prime minister of Antigua and Barbuda from 2004 to 2014.\nThe elections to the House of Representatives were held on 12 June 2014. The Antigua and Barbuda Labour Party government was elected with fourteen seats. The United Progressive Party had three seats in the House of Representatives. ABLP won 15 of the 17 seats in the 2018 snap election under the leadership of incumbent Prime Minister Gaston Browne.\nConstitutional safeguards include freedom of speech, press, worship, movement, and association. Antigua and Barbuda is a member of the eastern Caribbean court system. The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. Jurisprudence is based on English common law.\nExecutive branch.\nExecutive branch leadership.\nAs head of state, King Charles III is represented in Antigua and Barbuda by a governor-general who acts on the advice of the prime minister and the cabinet.\nLegislative branch.\nAntigua and Barbuda elects on national level a legislature. Parliament has two chambers. The House of Representatives has 19 members: 17 members elected for a five-year term in single-seat constituencies, and 2 ex officio members (president and speaker). The Senate has 17 appointed members. The prime minister is the leader of the majority party in the House and conducts affairs of state with the cabinet. The prime minister and the cabinet are responsible to the Parliament. Elections must be held at least every five years but may be called by the prime minister at any time.\nThere are special legislative provisions to account for Barbuda's low population relative to that of Antigua. Barbuda is guaranteed one member of the House of Representatives and two members of the Senate. In addition, there is a Barbuda Council to govern the internal affairs of the island.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe country is divided into six parishes, Saint George, John, Mary, Paul, Peter, and Phillip which are all on the island of Antigua. Additionally, the islands of Barbuda and Redonda are considered dependencies.\nJudicial branch.\nAntigua and Barbuda is a member of the Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court. This court is headquartered in Saint Lucia, but at least one judge of the Supreme Court resides in Antigua and Barbuda, and presides over the High Court. The current High Court judges are Nicola Byer, Ann-Marie Smith, Jan Drysdale, Rene Williams, and Tunde Bakre as of September 2024.\nAntigua is also a member of the Caribbean Court of Justice, although it has not yet acceded to Part III of the 2001 Agreement Establishing a Caribbean Court of Justice. Its supreme appellate court therefore remains the British Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. Indeed, of the signatories to the Agreement, as of December 2010, only Barbados has replaced appeals to Her Majesty in Council with the Caribbean Court of Justice.\nIn addition to the Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court, Antigua and Barbuda has a Magistrates' Court, which deals with lesser civil and criminal cases.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1072", "revid": "14703151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1072", "title": "Telecommunications in Antigua and Barbuda", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Antigua and Barbuda are via media in the telecommunications industry. \nTelephone.\nTelephones \u2013 main lines in use: 37,500 (2006)\n\"country comparison to the world:\" 168\nTelephones \u2013 mobile cellular: 110,200 (2006) (APUA PCS, Cable &amp; Wireless, Digicel)\n\"country comparison to the world:\" 177\nTelephone system:\n&lt;br&gt;\"domestic:\" good automatic telephone system\n&lt;br&gt;\"international:\" 3 fiber optic submarine cables (2 to Saint Kitts and 1 to Guadeloupe); satellite earth station \u2013 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)\nRadio.\nRadio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 6, shortwave 0 (2002)\nRadios: 36,000 (1997)\nTelevision.\nTelevision broadcast stations: 2 (1997) (including ABS-TV)\nTelevisions: 31,000 (1997)\nInternet.\nInternet Service Providers (ISPs): Flow, Digicel, Antigua Computer Technologies (ACT), and Antigua Public Utilities Authority (APUA INET) \nInternet hosts: 2,215 (2008)\nInternet users: 72,900 (2025)\nCountry codes: AG\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1074", "revid": "47127436", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1074", "title": "Antigua and Barbuda Defence Force", "text": "Armed forces of Antigua and Barbuda\nThe Antigua and Barbuda Defence Force (ABDF) is the armed forces of Antigua and Barbuda. The ABDF has responsibility for several different roles: internal security, prevention of drug smuggling, the protection and support of fishing rights, prevention of marine pollution, search and rescue, ceremonial duties, assistance to government programs, provision of relief during natural disasters, assistance in the maintenance of essential services, and support of the police in maintaining law and order. The force entered its current form on 20 December 1995.\nThe ABDF is one of the world's smallest militaries, consisting of 245 personnel. The first militia in Antigua was established in the 1600s, having fought against the French capture of the island in 1666. The governor oversaw the force, and by 1820 the island had a 945-man militia. The island continued to maintain this force for much of the colonial era, and by 1 September 1981 the Antigua Volunteer Defence Force was renamed to the Antigua and Barbuda Defence Force preceding independence. The force has undergone various reforms, and the present force was reestablished on 1 June 1956.\nOrganisation.\nThe ABDF consists of five branches:\nDefence Board.\nThe Defence Board is in charge of overseeing the leadership, management, and discipline of the Antigua and Barbuda Defence Force as well as all other matters pertaining to it. The Defence Board has the authority to govern its work, how it will carry out its duties, and the responsibilities of its members. It can also assign any member of the Board any authority or duty, by publishing a notice in the Official Gazette; consult with non-members as appropriate, including officers commanding units of the Force, regarding matters pertaining to their units; and the officers are required to attend the meetings as the Board requests; decide on the protocol to be followed in conducting its business; and provide for any other matter that it deems necessary or desirable for achieving the better performance of its functions.\nOfficers.\nA person cannot be appointed to the force unless they have received a recommendation from a board, known as the Commissions Board in the Defence Act. This board is made up of the chairman, who is appointed by the Chief of Defence Staff; the Chairman of the Public Service Commission, or in his absence, the Vice Chairman of the Public Service Commission; and an individual appointed by the Defence Board for a duration determined by the Board. His Majesty has the authority to appoint people to the Antigua and Barbuda Defence Force, and the Governor-General may act in that capacity. A commission may be awarded for a predetermined amount of time or for an unlimited amount of time.\nReserve forces.\nThere are two classes in the Antigua and Barbuda Defence Force Reserve. The soldiers enlisted, deemed to be enlisted, or re-engaged in accordance with this Part for service in that class; the Reserve soldiers of the second class who have, upon written application to the appropriate military authority, been accepted by that authority for service in the first class; and the soldiers transferred to the first class in accordance with section 31 of the Defence Act comprise the first class. The soldiers who are members of the second class by virtue of Part IV of the Defence Act, the officers who are appointed or transferred to that class, and the soldiers who are enlisted, deemed to be enlisted, or re-engaged in accordance with Part IX of the Defence Act for service in that class are all included in the second class.\nEach officer and soldier in the first class of the Reserve is required to report for duty at the location and for the duration determined by the Defence Board. They are also required to meet all training-related requirements. Subject to any general directives from the Defence Board, the requirements of the related section may be disregarded in whole or in part with regard to any unit of the first class of the Reserve, as well as with regard to any individual officer or soldier of the first class of the Reserve, by his commanding officer. Nothing stops a Reserve officer or soldier from participating in optional training in addition to any mandated training.\nThe first class of the Reserve, or as many officers and soldiers of that class as the Board deems necessary, may be called out on temporary duty by the Defence Board when needed. Under section 203, officers and soldiers who are called out for duty are not required to serve for more than ninety days at a time. Because the worker is a Reserve member who is called out in accordance with the section, no employer may fire or give notice of termination to any worker. When an employer violates, they are guilty of a crime and face a maximum fine of $5,000, a maximum sentence of two (2) years in jail, or both. This applies even in cases of summary conviction.\nThe Governor-General may, on the advice of the Prime Minister, by proclamation order that the Reserve, or any class thereof, be called out on permanent service in the event of a state of war, insurrection, hostilities, or public emergency; the Defence Board will then take appropriate action. When called out on permanent duty, every Reserve officer and soldier is eligible to stay on permanent duty until told otherwise. Every officer and soldier belonging to such a class, as the case may be, to the part of any class so called out, shall attend in person at the designated location whenever the whole or any part of the first class of the Reserve is called out on temporary or permanent service; or whenever the whole or any part of the second class of the Reserve is called out on permanent service. The Defence Board shall cause every officer or soldier subject to such call-out to be served with a notice requiring him to attend at the time and place specified in the notice in the event that the first class of the Reserve is called out on temporary service or the Reserve is called out on permanent service.\nAn officer of the Antigua and Barbuda Defence Force may file a summarily complaint against a person who willfully takes away pawns, wrongfully destroys or damages, carelessly loses anything issued to him as an officer or soldier of the Reserve, or willfully refuses or fails to deliver up anything issued to him as an officer or soldier as a debt owed to the Crown. This applies even if the amount exceeds the normal monetary limit on a magistrate's jurisdiction.\nA Reserve soldier may be released at any point during the duration of their service in the Reserve by the appropriate military authority under the prescribed conditions.\nEnlistment and terms of service.\nA recruiting officer will not enlist anyone in the Force unless they are satisfied that the potential recruit has received, comprehended, and wishes to be enlisted after receiving a notice in the prescribed form from anyone who wants to join the regular Force. A recruiting officer is not allowed to enlist a minor under the age of eighteen into the regular force unless written consent has been obtained from at least one parent, from any parent who may have parental rights and powers over the minor, from any person whose whereabouts are known or can be determined with reasonable effort, or from any person who is in fact or legally responsible for the minor. For the purposes of the Defence Act, an individual who is willing to enlist will be considered to have reached, or not reached, the age of eighteen if the recruiting officer is satisfied\u2014either through the production of a certified copy of an entry in the register of births, or by any other evidence that seems sufficient to them. The period of time that an individual may enlist in the regular force is as follows: in the case of an individual who is 18 years of age or older at the time of enlistment, a term of colour service that does not exceed 12 years as prescribed; in this case, the term of service in the Reserve will apply to the portion of the term that is prescribed as a term of colour service, and the remaining portion will apply to a term of service. In the case of an individual who is younger at the time of enlistment, the period of time that is prescribed will begin on the date that the individual reaches the age of eighteen years or a term not to exceed 12 years, as specified, starting on the day he reaches that age and consisting of the portion of it that is prescribed as a term of colour service and the remaining portion as a term in the reserve.\nAny soldier of good character who has served their full term of colour service or who will be serving in the Reserve in two years may, with permission from the appropriate military authority, re-engage for an additional period of colour service and Reserve duty as prescribed; however, the additional period of colour service, when combined with the original period of colour service, may not exceed a total continuous period of 22 years colour service from the date of the soldier's original attestation or the date he became eighteen years old, whichever comes first. Any soldier who has completed 22 years of colour service may, if he so chooses and with the consent of the appropriate military authority, continue to serve in all capacities as if his colour service term had not yet expired. However, on the date that he notifies his commanding officer that he wishes to be discharged, he may be eligible for discharge at the end of the three-month period. Any soldier whose term of colour service expires during a public emergency, war, insurrection, hostilities, or other exigency of duty may be kept in the Force and have their service extended for an additional period of time as directed by the Defence Board and the appropriate military authority.\nEvery regular force soldier who is eligible for discharge will be released as soon as possible, subject to the Defence Act. However, until they are released, they are subject to military law as stipulated by the Act. When a regular force soldier is serving outside of Antigua and Barbuda at the time of his discharge, he has two options: if he wants to be discharged in Antigua and Barbuda, he will be sent there at no cost as soon as possible, and he will be released either when he arrives in Antigua and Barbuda or, if he agrees to a delay in discharge, six months after arriving; else, he will be released where he is currently serving. Releasing a soldier from the regular force requires authorization from the appropriate military authority, unless they are being released in accordance with a court-martial sentence. Upon their release from active duty, all regular force soldiers will receive a certificate of discharge that includes the necessary information. Every regular Force soldier who is scheduled to be transferred to the Reserve may do so in accordance with the Act, but they will remain subject to military law until they are transferred. When a regular Force soldier serving outside of Antigua and Barbuda is scheduled to be transferred to the Reserve, he will be sent there at no cost to him and will be transferred to the Reserve upon arrival, or within six months of his arrival if he agrees to a delay in transfer; he may, however, choose to be transferred to the Reserve without having to return to Antigua and Barbuda. When a regular Force soldier is being transferred to the Reserve, the appropriate military authority has the authority to immediately discharge him without providing a reason.\nA court-martial sentence, a Defence Board order, or an order from an officer not lower than Major or a corresponding rank who has been given permission by the commanding officer may be the only ways that a warrant officer or non-commissioned officer's rank may be lowered. If a regular force warrant officer is demoted to the ranks, he or she may request to be discharged, barring a state of war, insurrection, hostilities, or public emergency. Anytime during the duration of the soldier's term of engagement, the competent military authority may release a regular force soldier for the prescribed reasons. Regular Force soldiers have the right to request their discharge at any point within three months of the date of their first attestation. If they do so, they will be released as soon as possible after paying a sum not to exceed EC$500. However, they will still be subject to military law until their discharge under the Act. A soldier of the regular Force who was a member of a Commonwealth Force at any point within three months prior to the date of his first attestation is exempt from this.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates public domain material from "}
{"id": "1075", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1075", "title": "Antigua and Barbuda/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "1078", "revid": "18916437", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1078", "title": "Antisemitism", "text": "Hostility, prejudice, or discrimination against Jews\nAntisemitism or Jew-hatred is hostility to, prejudice towards, or discrimination against Jews. A person who harbours it is called an antisemite. Whether antisemitism is considered a form of racism depends on the school of thought. Antisemitic tendencies may be motivated primarily by negative sentiment towards Jews as a people or negative sentiment towards Jews with regard to Judaism. In the former case, usually known as racial antisemitism, a person's hostility is driven by the belief that Jews constitute a distinct race with inherent traits or characteristics that are repulsive or inferior to the preferred traits or characteristics within that person's society. In the latter case, known as religious antisemitism, a person's hostility is driven by their religion's perception of Jews and Judaism, typically encompassing doctrines of supersession that expect or demand Jews to turn away from Judaism and submit to the religion presenting itself as Judaism's successor faith\u2014this is a common theme within the other Abrahamic religions. The development of racial and religious antisemitism has historically been encouraged by anti-Judaism, which is distinct from antisemitism itself.\nThere are various ways in which antisemitism is manifested, ranging in the level of severity of Jewish persecution. On the more subtle end, it consists of expressions of hatred or discrimination against individual Jews and may or may not be accompanied by violence. On the most extreme end, it consists of pogroms or genocide, which may or may not be state-sponsored. Although the term \"antisemitism\" did not come into common usage until the 19th century, it is also applied to previous and later anti-Jewish incidents. Historically, most of the world's violent antisemitic events have taken place in Europe, where modern antisemitism began to emerge from antisemitism in Christian communities during the Middle Ages. Since the early 20th century, there has been a sharp rise in antisemitic incidents across the Arab world, largely due to the advent of Arab antisemitic conspiracy theories, which were influenced by European antisemitic conspiracy theories.\nBeginning in 1879, the compound word was first used in print in Germany as a \"scientific-sounding term\" for (lit.\u2009'Jew-hatred'), and it has since been used to refer to anti-Jewish sentiment alone. In the 21st century, the idea that there is a variation of antisemitism known as \"new antisemitism\" has emerged on several occasions. According to this view, since Israel is a Jewish state, expressions of anti-Zionist positions could harbour antisemitic sentiments, and criticism of Israel can serve as a vehicle for attacks against Jews in general.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOrigin and usage.\nEtymology.\nFirst used in the 1770s by members of the G\u00f6ttingen school of history, the coining of \"Semites\" as a biblical terminology for race was derived from Shem (), one of the three sons of Noah in the Book of Genesis, together with the parallel terms Hamites and Japhetites.\nThe origin of \"antisemitic\" terminologies is found in the responses of orientalist Moritz Steinschneider to the views of orientalist Ernest Renan. Historian Alex Bein writes: \"The compound anti-Semitism appears to have been used first by Steinschneider, who challenged Renan on account of his 'anti-Semitic prejudices' [i.e., his derogation of the Semites as a race].\" Psychologist Avner Falk similarly writes: \"The German word \" was first used in 1860 by the Austrian Jewish scholar Moritz Steinschneider (1816\u20131907) in the phrase \" (antisemitic prejudices). Steinschneider used this phrase to characterise the French philosopher Ernest Renan's false ideas about how 'Semitic races' were inferior to 'Aryan races'\".\nPseudoscientific theories concerning race, civilization, and \"progress\" had become quite widespread in Europe in the second half of the 19th century, especially as Prussian nationalistic historian Heinrich von Treitschke did much to promote this form of racism. He coined the phrase \"the Jews are our misfortune\" which would later be widely used by Nazis. According to Falk, Treitschke uses the term \"Semitic\" almost synonymously with \"Jewish\", in contrast to Renan's use of it to refer to a whole range of peoples, based generally on linguistic criteria.\nAccording to philologist Jonathan M. Hess, the term was originally used by its authors to \"stress the radical difference between their own 'antisemitism' and earlier forms of antagonism toward Jews and Judaism.\"\nIn 1879, German journalist Wilhelm Marr published a pamphlet, (\"The Victory of the Jewish Spirit over the Germanic Spirit. Observed from a non-religious perspective\") in which he used the word \" interchangeably with the word \" to denote both \"Jewry\" (the Jews as a collective) and \"Jewishness\" (the quality of being Jewish, or the Jewish spirit). He accused the Jews of a worldwide conspiracy against non-Jews, called for resistance against \"this foreign power\", and claimed that \"there will not be a single office in the land, including the highest, which will not have been usurped by the Jews\".\nThis followed his 1862 book \"\" (\"A Mirror to the Jews\") in which he argued that \"Judaism must cease to exist if humanity is to commence\", demanding both that Judaism be dissolved as a \"religious-denominational sect\" but also subject to criticism \"as a race, a civil and social entity\". In the introductions to the first through fourth editions of \"\", Marr denied that he intended to preach Jew-hatred, but instead to help \"the Jews reach their full human potential\" which could happen only \"through the downfall of Judaism, a phenomenon that negates everything purely human and noble.\"\nThis use of was followed by a coining of \" which was used to indicate opposition to the Jews as a people and opposition to the Jewish spirit, which Marr interpreted as infiltrating German culture.\nThe pamphlet became very popular, and in the same year Marr founded the \" (League of Antisemites), apparently named to follow the \"\" (Anti-Chancellor League). The league was the first German organisation committed specifically to combating the alleged threat to Germany and German culture posed by the Jews and their influence and advocating their forced removal from the country.\nSo far as can be ascertained, the word was first widely printed in 1881, when Marr published , and Wilhelm Scherer used the term in the January issue of .\nThe \"Jewish Encyclopedia\" reports, \"In February 1881, a correspondent of the \"\" speaks of 'Anti-Semitism' as a designation which recently came into use (\"Allg. Zeit. d. Jud.\" 1881, p.\u00a0138). On 19 July 1882, the editor says, 'This quite recent Anti-Semitism is hardly three years old.'\"\nThe word \"antisemitism\" was borrowed into English from German in 1881. \"Oxford English Dictionary\" editor James Murray wrote that it was not included in the first edition because \"Anti-Semite and its family were then probably very new in English use, and not thought likely to be more than passing nonce-words... Would that anti-Semitism had had no more than a fleeting interest!\" The related term \"philosemitism\" was used by 1881.\nUsage.\nFrom the outset the term \"anti-Semitism\" bore special racial connotations and meant specifically prejudice against Jews. The word \"Semitic\" was coined for use in linguistics by German orientalist August Ludwig von Schl\u00f6zer in 1781 to designate the Semitic group of languages\u2014Aramaic, Arabic, Hebrew and others\u2014allegedly spoken by the descendants of Biblical figure Shem, son of Noah. \nDefinition.\nThough the general definition of antisemitism is hostility or prejudice against Jews, and, according to Olaf Blaschke, has become an \"umbrella term for negative stereotypes about Jews\", a number of authorities have developed more formal definitions.\nWriting in 1987, Holocaust scholar and City University of New York professor Helen Fein defined it as \"a persisting latent structure of hostile beliefs towards Jews as a collective manifested in individuals as attitudes, and in culture as myth, ideology, folklore and imagery, and in actions\u2014social or legal discrimination, political mobilization against the Jews, and collective or state violence\u2014which results in and/or is designed to distance, displace, or destroy Jews as Jews.\"\nElaborating on Fein's definition, Dietz Bering of the University of Cologne writes that, to antisemites, \"Jews are not only partially but totally bad by nature, that is, their bad traits are incorrigible. Because of this bad nature: (1) Jews have to be seen not as individuals but as a collective. (2) Jews remain essentially alien in the surrounding societies. (3) Jews bring disaster on their 'host societies' or on the whole world, they are doing it secretly, therefore the anti-Semites feel obliged to unmask the conspiratorial, bad Jewish character.\"\nFor Swiss historian Sonja Weinberg, as distinct from economic and religious anti-Judaism, antisemitism in its specifically modern form shows conceptual innovation, a resort to \"science\" to defend itself, new functional forms, and organisational differences. It was anti-liberal, racialist and nationalist. It promoted the myth that Jews conspired to 'judaise' the world; it served to consolidate social identity; it channeled dissatisfactions among victims of the capitalist system; and it was used as a conservative cultural code to fight emancipation and liberalism.\nIn 2003, Israeli politician Natan Sharansky developed what he called the \"three D\" test to distinguish antisemitism from criticism of Israel, giving delegitimization, demonization, and double standards as a litmus test for the former.\nBritish-American historian and accused Zionist apologist Bernard Lewis, writing in 2006, defined antisemitism as a special case of prejudice, hatred, or persecution directed against people who are in some way different from the rest. According to Lewis, antisemitism is marked by two distinct features: Jews are judged according to a standard different from that applied to others, and they are accused of \"cosmic evil\". Thus, \"it is perfectly possible to hate and even to persecute Jews without necessarily being anti-Semitic\" unless this hatred or persecution displays one of the two features specific to antisemitism.\nThere have been a number of efforts by international and governmental bodies to define antisemitism formally. In 2005, the United States Department of State stated that \"while there is no universally accepted definition, there is a generally clear understanding of what the term encompasses.\" For the purposes of its 2005 Report on Global Anti-Semitism, the term was considered to mean \"hatred toward Jews\u2014individually and as a group\u2014that can be attributed to the Jewish religion and/or ethnicity.\"\nIn 2005, the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia (EUMC, now the Fundamental Rights Agency), an agency of the European Union, developed a more detailed working definition, which stated: \"Antisemitism is a certain perception of Jews, which may be expressed as hatred toward Jews. Rhetorical and physical manifestations of antisemitism are directed toward Jewish or non-Jewish individuals and/or their property, toward Jewish community institutions and religious facilities.\" It also adds that \"such manifestations could also target the state of Israel, conceived as a Jewish collectivity,\" but that \"criticism of Israel similar to that leveled against any other country cannot be regarded as antisemitic.\" It provided contemporary examples of ways in which antisemitism may manifest itself, including promoting the harming of Jews in the name of an ideology or religion; promoting negative stereotypes of Jews; holding Jews collectively responsible for the actions of an individual Jewish person or group; denying the Holocaust or accusing Jews or Israel of exaggerating it; and accusing Jews of dual loyalty or a greater allegiance to Israel than their own country. It also lists ways in which attacking Israel could be antisemitic, and states that denying the Jewish people their right to self-determination, e.g., by claiming that the existence of a state of Israel is a racist endeavor, can be a manifestation of antisemitism\u2014as can applying double standards by requiring of Israel a behavior not expected or demanded of any other democratic nation, or holding Jews collectively responsible for the actions of the State of Israel.\nThe EUMC working definition was adopted by the European Parliament Working Group on Antisemitism in 2010, by the United States Department of State in 2017, in the Operational Hate Crime Guidance of the UK College of Policing in 2014 and by the UK's Campaign Against Antisemitism. In 2016, the working definition was adopted by the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance. IHRA's Working definition of antisemitism is among the most controversial documents related to opposition to antisemitism, and critics argue that it has been used to censor criticism of Israel. In response to the perceived lack of clarity in the IHRA definition, two new definitions of antisemitism were published in 2021, the Nexus Document in February 2021 and the Jerusalem Declaration on Antisemitism in March 2021.\nEvolution of usage.\nIn 1879, Wilhelm Marr founded the (Anti-Semitic League). Identification with antisemitism and as an antisemite was politically advantageous in Europe during the late 19th century. For example, Karl Lueger, the popular mayor of fin de si\u00e8cle Vienna, skillfully exploited antisemitism as a way of channeling public discontent to his political advantage. In its 1910 obituary of Lueger, \"The New York Times\" notes that Lueger was \"Chairman of the Christian Social Union of the Parliament and of the Anti-Semitic Union of the Diet of Lower Austria. In 1895, A. C. Cuza organized the and the in Bucharest. In the period before World War II, when animosity towards Jews was far more commonplace, it was not uncommon for a person, an organization, or a political party to self-identify as an antisemite or antisemitic.\nThe early Zionist pioneer Leon Pinsker, a professional physician, preferred the clinical-sounding term Judeophobia (also Judaeophobia) to antisemitism, which he regarded as a misnomer. The word \"Judeophobia\" first appeared in his pamphlet \"Auto-Emancipation\", published anonymously in German in September 1882, where it was described as an irrational fear or hatred of Jews. According to Pinsker, this irrational fear was an inherited predisposition. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Judeophobia is a form of demonopathy, with the distinction that the Jewish ghost has become known to the whole race of mankind, not merely to certain races... Judeophobia is a psychic disorder. As a psychic disorder, it is hereditary, and as a disease transmitted for two thousand years it is incurable... Thus have Judaism and Jew-hatred passed through history for centuries as inseparable companions... Having analyzed Judeophobia as a hereditary form of demonopathy, peculiar to the human race, and represented Jew-hatred as based upon an inherited aberration of the human mind, we must draw the important conclusion, that we must give up contending against these hostile impulses, just as we give up contending against every other inherited predisposition.\nIn the aftermath of the Kristallnacht pogrom in 1938, German propaganda minister Goebbels announced: \"The German people is anti-Semitic. It has no desire to have its rights restricted or to be provoked in the future by parasites of the Jewish race.\"\nAfter 1945 victory of the Allies over Nazi Germany, and particularly after the full extent of the Nazi genocide against the Jews became known, the term \"antisemitism\" acquired pejorative connotations. This marked a full circle shift in usage, from an era just decades earlier when \"Jew\" was used as a pejorative term. Yehuda Bauer wrote in 1984: \"There are no anti-Semites in the world\u00a0... Nobody says, 'I am anti-Semitic.' You cannot, after Hitler. The word has gone out of fashion.\"\nThe term has been described as confusing, for in modern usage \"Semitic\" designates a language group, not a race. In this sense, the term is a misnomer, since there are many speakers of Semitic languages (e.g., Arabs, Ethiopians, and Assyrians) who are not the objects of antisemitic prejudices, while there are many Jews who do not speak Hebrew, a Semitic language. Though \"antisemitism\" could be construed as prejudice against people who speak other Semitic languages, this is not how the term is commonly used.\nThe term may be spelled with or without a hyphen (\"antisemitism\" or \"anti-Semitism\"). Many scholars and institutions favor the unhyphenated form.\nCharacterizations of \"Semite\" as having little to no value on the socially constructed racial spectrum combined with its overuse due to popularization stemming from pro-Caucasian racism, as identification with antisemitism and as an antisemite was politically advantageous in Europe at least during the late 19th century as previously discussed, thereby diluting anti-Judaism, have been made since at least the 1930s.\nIn 1973, Bernard Lewis wrote that \"the Semite ... [was] strictly linguistic in origin and use\" and the idea that anything could be intuited beyond hatred of Jews through the use of the root word \"\", such as by \"The Economist\" and acclaimed biographer Isaac Deutscher, was an effective etymological fallacy, arguing \"on the contrary [to the idea that t]he Nazis['], who may be accepted as the most authoritative exponents of anti-Semitism, hostility was limited to Jews only, and did not include the other so-called Semitic peoples[, they] found and still find no difficulty in simultaneously hating Jews and courting Arabs ...\"\nWithout addressing the scientific value of the term \"Semite\", Shmuel Almog argued, \"If you use the hyphenated form, you consider the words 'Semitism', 'Semite', 'Semitic' as meaningful\u00a0... [I]n antisemitic parlance, 'Semites' really stands for Jews, just that.\" Emil Fackenheim supported the unhyphenated spelling, in order to \"[dispel] the notion that there is an entity 'Semitism' which 'anti-Semitism' opposes.\" \nOthers endorsing an unhyphenated term for the same reason include the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance; historian Deborah Lipstadt; Padraic O'Hare, professor of Religious and Theological Studies and Director of the Center for the Study of Jewish-Christian-Muslim Relations at Merrimack College; and historians Yehuda Bauer and James Carroll. According to Carroll, who first cites O'Hare and Bauer on \"the existence of something called 'Semitism'\", \"the hyphenated word thus reflects the bipolarity that is at the heart of the problem of antisemitism\".\nThe Associated Press and its accompanying \"AP Stylebook\" adopted the unhyphenated spelling in 2021. Style guides for other news organizations such as the \"New York Times\" and \"Wall Street Journal\" later adopted this spelling as well. It has also been adopted by many Holocaust museums, such as the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum and Yad Vashem.\nEternalism\u2013contextualism debate.\nThe study of antisemitism has become politically controversial because of differing interpretations of the Holocaust and the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict. There are two competing views of antisemitism, eternalism, and contextualism. The eternalist view sees antisemitism as separate from other forms of racism and prejudice and an exceptionalist, transhistorical force teleologically culminating in the Holocaust. Hannah Arendt criticized this approach, writing that it provoked \"the uncomfortable question: 'Why the Jews of all people?' ... with the question begging reply: Eternal hostility.\" Zionist thinkers and antisemites draw different conclusions from what they perceive as the eternal hatred of Jews; according to antisemites, it proves the inferiority of Jews, while for Zionists it means that Jews need their own state as a refuge. Most Zionists do not believe that antisemitism can be combatted with education or other means.\nThe contextual approach treats antisemitism as a type of racism and focuses on the historical context in which hatred of Jews emerges. Some contextualists restrict the use of \"antisemitism\" to refer exclusively to the era of modern racism, treating anti-Judaism as a separate phenomenon. Historian David Engel has challenged the project to define antisemitism, arguing that it essentializes Jewish history as one of persecution and discrimination. Engel argues that the term \"antisemitism\" is not useful in historical analysis because it implies that there are links between anti-Jewish prejudices expressed in different contexts, without evidence of such a connection.\nManifestations.\nAntisemitism manifests itself in a variety of ways. Ren\u00e9 K\u00f6nig mentions social antisemitism, economic antisemitism, religious antisemitism, and political antisemitism as examples. K\u00f6nig points out that these different forms demonstrate that the \"origins of anti-Semitic prejudices are rooted in different historical periods.\" K\u00f6nig asserts that differences in the chronology of different antisemitic prejudices and the irregular distribution of such prejudices over different segments of the population create \"serious difficulties in the definition of the different kinds of anti-Semitism.\"\nThese difficulties may contribute to the existence of different taxonomies that have been developed to categorize the forms of antisemitism. The forms identified are substantially the same; it is primarily the number of forms and their definitions that differ. Bernard Lazare, writing in the 1890s, identified three forms of antisemitism: Christian antisemitism, economic antisemitism, and ethnologic antisemitism. William Brustein names four categories: religious, racial, economic, and political. The Roman Catholic historian Edward Flannery distinguished four varieties of antisemitism:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEurope has blamed the Jews for an encyclopedia of sins.The Church blamed the Jews for killing Jesus; Voltaire blamed the Jews for inventing Christianity. In the febrile minds of anti-Semites, Jews were usurers and well-poisoners and spreaders of disease. Jews were the creators of both communism and capitalism; they were clannish but also cosmopolitan; cowardly and warmongering; self-righteous moralists and defilers of culture.Ideologues and demagogues of many permutations have understood the Jews to be a singularly malevolent force standing between the world and its perfection.\nJeffrey Goldberg, 2015.\nLouis Harap, writing in the 1980s, separated \"economic antisemitism\" and merges \"political\" and \"nationalistic\" antisemitism into \"ideological antisemitism\". Harap also adds a category of \"social antisemitism\".\nReligious antisemitism.\nReligious antisemitism, also known as anti-Judaism, is antipathy towards Jews because of their perceived religious beliefs. In theory, antisemitism and attacks against individual Jews would stop if Jews stopped practicing Judaism or changed their public faith, especially by conversion to the official or right religion. However, in some cases, discrimination continues after conversion, as in the case of \"marranos\" (Christianized Jews in Spain and Portugal) in the late 15th century and 16th century, who were suspected of secretly practising Judaism or Jewish customs.\nAlthough the origins of antisemitism are rooted in the Judeo-Christian conflict, other forms of antisemitism have developed in modern times. Frederick Schweitzer asserts that \"most scholars ignore the Christian foundation on which the modern antisemitic edifice rests and invoke political antisemitism, cultural antisemitism, racism or racial antisemitism, economic antisemitism, and the like.\" William Nicholls draws a distinction between religious antisemitism and modern antisemitism based on racial or ethnic grounds: \"The dividing line was the possibility of effective conversion [...] a Jew ceased to be a Jew upon baptism.\" From the perspective of racial antisemitism, however, \"the assimilated Jew was still a Jew, even after baptism.[...] From the Enlightenment onward, it is no longer possible to draw clear lines of distinction between religious and racial forms of hostility towards Jews[...] Once Jews have been emancipated and secular thinking makes its appearance, without leaving behind the old Christian hostility towards Jews, the new term antisemitism becomes almost unavoidable, even before explicitly racist doctrines appear.\"\nSome Christians such as the Catholic priest Ernest Jouin, who published the first French translation of the \"Protocols\", combined religious and racial antisemitism, as in his statement that \"From the triple viewpoint of race, of nationality, and of religion, the Jew has become the enemy of humanity.\" The virulent antisemitism of \u00c9douard Drumont, one of the most widely read Catholic writers in France during the Dreyfus Affair, likewise combined religious and racial antisemitism. Drumont founded the Antisemitic League of France.\nEconomic antisemitism.\nThe underlying premise of economic antisemitism is that Jews perform harmful economic activities or that economic activities become harmful when they are performed by Jews.\nLinking Jews and money underpins the most damaging and lasting antisemitic canards. Antisemites claim that Jews control the world finances, a theory promoted in the fraudulent \"The Protocols of the Elders of Zion\" and later repeated by Henry Ford and his \"The Dearborn Independent\". In the modern era, such myths continue to be spread in books such as \"The Secret Relationship Between Blacks and Jews\" published by the Nation of Islam and on the internet.\nDerek Penslar writes that there are two components to the financial canards:\na) Jews are savages that \"are temperamentally incapable of performing honest labor\"\nb) Jews are \"leaders of a financial cabal seeking world domination\"\nAbraham Foxman describes six facets of the financial canards:\nGerald Krefetz summarizes the myth as \"[Jews] control the banks, the money supply, the economy, and businesses\u2014of the community, of the country, of the world\". Krefetz gives, as illustrations, many slurs and proverbs (in several different languages) which suggest that Jews are stingy, or greedy, or miserly, or aggressive bargainers. During the nineteenth century, Jews were described as \"scurrilous, stupid, and tight-fisted\", but after the Jewish Emancipation and the rise of Jews to the middle- or upper-class in Europe were portrayed as \"clever, devious, and manipulative financiers out to dominate [world finances]\".\nL\u00e9on Poliakov asserts that economic antisemitism is not a distinct form of antisemitism, but merely a manifestation of theologic antisemitism (because, without the theological causes of economic antisemitism, there would be no economic antisemitism). In opposition to this view, Derek Penslar contends that in the modern era, economic antisemitism is \"distinct and nearly constant\" but theological antisemitism is \"often subdued\".\nAn academic study by Francesco D'Acunto, Marcel Prokopczuk, and Michael Weber showed that people who live in areas of Germany that contain the most brutal history of antisemitic persecution are more likely to be distrustful of finance in general. Therefore, they tended to invest less money in the stock market and make poor financial decisions. The study concluded, \"that the persecution of minorities reduces not only the long-term wealth of the persecuted but of the persecutors as well.\"\nRacial antisemitism.\nRacial antisemitism is prejudice against Jews as a racial/ethnic group, rather than Judaism as a religion.\nRacial antisemitism is the idea that the Jews are a distinct and inferior race compared to their host nations. In the late 19th century and early 20th century, it gained mainstream acceptance as part of the eugenics movement, which categorized non-Europeans as inferior. It more specifically claimed that Northern Europeans, or \"Aryans\", were superior. Racial antisemites saw the Jews as part of a Semitic race and emphasized their non-European origins and culture. They saw Jews as beyond redemption even if they converted to the majority religion.\nRacial antisemitism replaced the hatred of Judaism with the hatred of Jews as a group. In the context of the Industrial Revolution, following the Jewish Emancipation, Jews rapidly urbanized and experienced a period of greater social mobility. With the decreasing role of religion in public life tempering religious antisemitism, a combination of growing nationalism, the rise of eugenics, and resentment at the socio-economic success of the Jews led to the newer, and more virulent, racist antisemitism.\nIn the early 19th century, a number of laws enabling the emancipation of the Jews were enacted in Western European countries. The old laws restricting them to ghettos, as well as the many laws that limited their property rights, rights of worship and occupation, were rescinded. Despite this, traditional discrimination and hostility to Jews on religious grounds persisted and was supplemented by racial antisemitism, encouraged by the work of racial theorists such as Joseph Arthur de Gobineau and particularly his \"Essay on the Inequality of the Human Race\" of 1853\u20131855. Nationalist agendas based on ethnicity, known as ethnonationalism, usually excluded the Jews from the national community as an alien race. Allied to this were theories of Social Darwinism, which stressed a putative conflict between higher and lower races of human beings. Such theories, usually posited by northern Europeans, advocated the superiority of white Aryans to Semitic Jews.\nPolitical antisemitism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe whole problem of the Jews exists only in nation states, for here their energy and higher intelligence, their accumulated capital of spirit and will, gathered from generation to generation through a long schooling in suffering, must become so preponderant as to arouse mass envy and hatred. In almost all contemporary nations, therefore \u2013 in direct proportion to the degree to which they act up nationalistically \u2013 the literary obscenity of leading the Jews to slaughter as scapegoats of every conceivable public and internal misfortune is spreading.\nFriedrich Nietzsche\n, 1886, [MA 1 475]\nWilliam Brustein defines political antisemitism as hostility toward Jews based on the belief that Jews seek national or world power. Yisrael Gutman characterizes political antisemitism as tending to \"lay responsibility on the Jews for defeats and political economic crises\" while seeking to \"exploit opposition and resistance to Jewish influence as elements in political party platforms.\" Derek J. Penslar wrote, \"Political antisemitism identified the Jews as responsible for all the anxiety-provoking social forces that characterized modernity.\"\nAccording to Viktor Kar\u00e1dy, political antisemitism became widespread after the legal emancipation of the Jews and sought to reverse some of the consequences of that emancipation.\nCultural antisemitism.\nLouis Harap defines cultural antisemitism as \"that species of anti-Semitism that charges the Jews with corrupting a given culture and attempting to supplant or succeeding in supplanting the preferred culture with a uniform, crude, \"Jewish\" culture.\" Similarly, Eric Kandel characterizes cultural antisemitism as being based on the idea of \"Jewishness\" as a \"religious or cultural tradition that is acquired through learning, through distinctive traditions and education.\" According to Kandel, this form of antisemitism views Jews as possessing \"unattractive psychological and social characteristics that are acquired through acculturation.\" Niewyk and Nicosia characterize cultural antisemitism as focusing on and condemning \"the Jews' aloofness from the societies in which they live.\"\nAn important feature of cultural antisemitism is that it considers the negative attributes of Judaism to be redeemable by education or by religious conversion.\nConspiracy theories.\nHolocaust denial and Jewish conspiracy theories are also considered forms of antisemitism. Zoological conspiracy theories have been propagated by Arab media and Arabic language websites, alleging a \"Zionist plot\" behind the use of animals to attack civilians or to conduct espionage.\nNew antisemitism.\nStarting in the 1990s, some scholars have advanced the concept of new antisemitism, coming simultaneously from the left, the right, and radical Islam, which tends to focus on opposition to the creation of a Jewish homeland in the State of Israel, and they argue that the language of anti-Zionism and criticism of Israel are used to attack Jews more broadly. In this view, the proponents of the new concept believe that criticisms of Israel and Zionism are often disproportionate in degree and unique in kind, and they attribute this to antisemitism.\nJewish scholar Gustavo Perednik posited in 2004 that anti-Zionism in itself represents a form of discrimination against Jews, in that it singles out Jewish national aspirations as an illegitimate and racist endeavor, and \"proposes actions that would result in the death of millions of Jews\". Proponents of this theory assert that the new antisemitism deploys traditional antisemitic motifs, including older motifs such as the blood libel.\nCritics of the concept view it as trivializing the meaning of antisemitism, and as exploiting antisemitism in order to silence debate and to deflect attention from legitimate criticism of the State of Israel, and, by associating anti-Zionism with antisemitism, misusing it to taint anyone opposed to Israeli actions and policies.\nHistory.\nMany authors see the roots of modern antisemitism in both pagan antiquity and early Christianity. Jerome Chanes identifies six stages in the historical development of antisemitism:\nChanes suggests that these six stages could be merged into three categories: \"ancient antisemitism, which was primarily ethnic in nature; Christian antisemitism, which was religious; and the racial antisemitism of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.\"\nAncient world.\nThe first clear examples of anti-Jewish sentiment can be traced to the 3rd century BCE to Alexandria, the home to the largest Jewish diaspora community in the world at the time and where the Septuagint, a Greek translation of the Hebrew Bible, was produced. Manetho, an Egyptian priest and historian of that era, wrote scathingly of the Jews. His themes are repeated in the works of Chaeremon, Lysimachus, Poseidonius, Apollonius Molon, and in Apion and Tacitus. Agatharchides of Cnidus ridiculed the practices of the Jews and the \"absurdity of their Law\", making a mocking reference to how Ptolemy Lagus was able to invade Jerusalem in 320 BCE because its inhabitants were observing the \"Shabbat\". One of the earliest anti-Jewish edicts, promulgated by Antiochus IV Epiphanes in about 170\u2013167 BCE, sparked a revolt of the Maccabees in Judea.\nIn view of Manetho's anti-Jewish writings, antisemitism may have originated in Egypt and been spread by \"the Greek retelling of Ancient Egyptian prejudices\". The ancient Jewish philosopher Philo of Alexandria describes an attack on Jews in Alexandria in 38 CE in which thousands of Jews died. The violence in Alexandria may have been caused by the Jews being portrayed as misanthropes. Tcherikover argues that the reason for hatred of Jews in the Hellenistic period was their separateness in the Greek cities, the \"poleis\". Bohak has argued, however, that early animosity against the Jews cannot be regarded as being anti-Judaic or antisemitic unless it arose from attitudes that were held against the Jews alone, and that many Greeks showed animosity toward any group they regarded as barbarians.\nStatements exhibiting prejudice against Jews and their religion can be found in the works of many pagan Greek and Roman writers. Edward Flannery writes that it was the Jews' refusal to accept Greek religious and social standards that marked them out. Hecataetus of Abdera, a Greek historian of the early third century BCE, wrote that Moses \"in remembrance of the exile of his people, instituted for them a misanthropic and inhospitable way of life.\" Manetho wrote that the Jews were expelled Egyptian lepers who had been taught by Moses \"not to adore the gods.\" Edward Flannery describes antisemitism in ancient times as essentially \"cultural, taking the shape of a national xenophobia played out in political settings.\"\nThere are examples of Hellenistic rulers desecrating the Temple and banning Jewish religious practices, such as circumcision, Shabbat observance, the study of Jewish religious books, etc. Examples may also be found in anti-Jewish riots in Alexandria in the 3rd century BCE.\nThe Jewish diaspora on the Nile island Elephantine, which was founded by mercenaries, experienced the destruction of its temple in 410 BCE.\nRelationships between the Jewish people and the occupying Roman Empire were at times antagonistic and resulted in several rebellions. According to Suetonius, the emperor Tiberius expelled from Rome Jews who had gone to live there. The 18th-century English historian Edward Gibbon identified a more tolerant period in Roman\u2013Jewish relations beginning in about 160 CE. However, when Christianity became the state religion of the Roman Empire, the state's attitude towards the Jews gradually worsened.\nJames Carroll asserted: \"Jews accounted for 10% of the total population of the Roman Empire. By that ratio, if other factors such as pogroms and conversions had not intervened, there would be 200 million Jews in the world today, instead of something like 13 million.\"\nPersecutions during the Middle Ages.\nIn the late 6th century CE, the newly Catholicised Visigothic kingdom in Hispania issued a series of anti-Jewish edicts which forbade Jews from marrying Christians, practicing circumcision, and observing Jewish holy days. Continuing throughout the 7th century, both Visigothic kings and the Church were active in creating social aggression and towards Jews with \"civic and ecclesiastic punishments\", ranging between forced conversion, slavery, exile and death.\nFrom the 9th century, the medieval Islamic world classified Jews and Christians as \"dhimmis\" and allowed Jews to practice their religion more freely than they could do in medieval Christian Europe. Under Islamic rule, there was a Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain that lasted until at least the 11th century. It ended when several Muslim pogroms against Jews took place on the Iberian Peninsula, including those that occurred in C\u00f3rdoba in 1011 and in Granada in 1066. Several decrees ordering the destruction of synagogues were also enacted in Egypt, Syria, Iraq and Yemen from the 11th century. In addition, Jews were forced to convert to Islam or face death in some parts of Yemen, Morocco and Baghdad several times between the 12th and 18th centuries.\nThe Almohads, who had taken control of the Almoravids' Maghribi and Andalusian territories by 1147, were far more fundamentalist in outlook compared to their predecessors, and they treated the \"dhimmis\" harshly. Faced with the choice of either death or conversion, many Jews and Christians emigrated. Some, such as the family of Maimonides, fled east to more tolerant Muslim lands, while some others went northward to settle in the growing Christian kingdoms.\nIn medieval Europe, Jews were persecuted with blood libels, expulsions, forced conversions and massacres. These persecutions were often justified on religious grounds and reached a first peak during the Crusades. In 1096, hundreds or thousands of Jews were killed during the First Crusade. This was the first major outbreak of anti-Jewish violence in Christian Europe outside Spain and was cited by Zionists in the 19th century as indicating the need for a state of Israel.\nIn 1147, there were several massacres of Jews during the Second Crusade. The Shepherds' Crusades of 1251 and 1320 both involved attacks, as did the Rintfleisch massacres in 1298. Expulsions followed, such as the 1290 banishment of Jews from England, the expulsion of 100,000 Jews from France in 1394, and the 1421 expulsion of thousands of Jews from Austria. Many of the expelled Jews fled to Poland.\nIn medieval and Renaissance Europe, a major contributor to the deepening of antisemitic sentiment and legal action among the Christian populations was the popular preaching of the zealous reform religious orders, the Franciscans (especially Bernardino of Feltre) and Dominicans (especially Vincent Ferrer), who combed Europe and promoted antisemitism through their often fiery, emotional appeals.\nAs the Black Death epidemics devastated Europe in the mid-14th century, causing the death of a large part of the population, Jews were used as scapegoats. Rumors spread that they caused the disease by deliberately poisoning wells. Hundreds of Jewish communities were destroyed in numerous persecutions. Although Pope Clement VI tried to protect them by issuing two papal bulls in 1348, the first on 6 July and an additional one several months later, 900 Jews were burned alive in Strasbourg, where the plague had not yet affected the city.\nReformation.\nMartin Luther, an ecclesiastical reformer whose teachings inspired the Reformation, wrote antagonistically about Jews in his pamphlet \"On the Jews and their Lies\", written in 1543. He portrays the Jews in extremely harsh terms, excoriates them and provides detailed recommendations for a pogrom against them, calling for their permanent oppression and expulsion. At one point he writes: \"...we are at fault in not slaying them...\", a passage that, according to historian Paul Johnson, \"may be termed the first work of modern antisemitism, and a giant step forward on the road to the Holocaust.\"\n17th century.\nDuring the mid-to-late 17th century the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth was devastated by several conflicts, in which the Commonwealth lost over a third of its population (over 3\u00a0million people), and Jewish losses were counted in the hundreds of thousands. The first of these conflicts was the Khmelnytsky Uprising, when Bohdan Khmelnytsky's supporters massacred tens of thousands of Jews in the eastern and southern areas he controlled (today's Ukraine). The precise number of dead may never be known, but the decrease of the Jewish population during that period is estimated at 100,000 to 200,000, which also includes emigration, deaths from diseases, and captivity in the Ottoman Empire, called \"jasyr\".\nEuropean immigrants to the United States brought antisemitism to the country as early as the 17th century. Peter Stuyvesant, the Dutch governor of New Amsterdam, implemented plans to prevent Jews from settling in the city. During the Colonial Era, the American government limited the political and economic rights of Jews. It was not until the American Revolutionary War that Jews gained legal rights, including the right to vote. However, even at their peak, the restrictions on Jews in the United States were never as stringent as they had been in Europe.\nIn the Zaydi imamate of Yemen, Jews were also singled out for discrimination in the 17th century, which culminated in the general expulsion of all Jews from places in Yemen to the arid coastal plain of Tihamah and which became known as the Mawza Exile.\nEnlightenment.\nIn 1744, Archduchess of Austria Maria Theresa ordered Jews out of Bohemia but soon reversed her position, on the condition that Jews pay for their readmission every ten years. This extortion was known among the Jews as (\"queen's money\" in Yiddish). In 1752, she introduced the law limiting each Jewish family to one son.\nIn 1782, Joseph II abolished most of these persecution practices in his , on the condition that Yiddish and Hebrew were eliminated from public records and that judicial autonomy was annulled. Moses Mendelssohn wrote that \"Such a tolerance... is even more dangerous play in tolerance than open persecution.\"\nVoltaire.\nAccording to Arnold Ages, Voltaire's \"Lettres philosophiques, Dictionnaire philosophique, and Candide, to name but a few of his better known works, are saturated with comments on Jews and Judaism and the vast majority are negative\". Paul H. Meyer adds: \"There is no question but that Voltaire, particularly in his latter years, nursed a violent hatred of the Jews and it is equally certain that his animosity...did have a considerable impact on public opinion in France.\" Thirty of the 118 articles in Voltaire's \"Dictionnaire Philosophique\" concerned Jews and described them in consistently negative ways.\nLouis de Bonald and the Catholic Counter-Revolution.\nThe counter-revolutionary Catholic royalist Louis de Bonald stands out among the earliest figures to explicitly call for the reversal of Jewish emancipation in the wake of the French Revolution. Bonald's attacks on the Jews are likely to have influenced Napoleon's decision to limit the civil rights of Alsatian Jews. Bonald's article (1806) was one of the most venomous screeds of its era and furnished a paradigm which combined anti-liberalism, a defense of a rural society, traditional Christian antisemitism, and the identification of Jews with bankers and finance capital, which would in turn influence many subsequent right-wing reactionaries such as Roger Gougenot des Mousseaux, Charles Maurras, and \u00c9douard Drumont, nationalists such as Maurice Barr\u00e8s and Paolo Orano, and antisemitic socialists such as Alphonse Toussenel. Bonald furthermore declared that the Jews were an \"alien\" people, a \"state within a state\", and should be forced to wear a distinctive mark to more easily identify and discriminate against them.\nUnder the French Second Empire, the popular counter-revolutionary Catholic journalist Louis Veuillot propagated Bonald's arguments against the Jewish \"financial aristocracy\" along with vicious attacks against the Talmud and the Jews as a \"deicidal people\" driven by hatred to \"enslave\" Christians. Between 1882 and 1886 alone, French priests published twenty antisemitic books blaming France's ills on the Jews and urging the government to consign them back to the ghettos, expel them, or hang them from the gallows. Gougenot des Mousseaux's (1869) has been called a \"Bible of modern antisemitism\" and was translated into German by Nazi ideologue Alfred Rosenberg.\nImperial Russia.\nThousands of Jews were slaughtered by Cossack Haidamaks in the 1768 massacre of Uman in the Kingdom of Poland. In 1772, the empress of Russia Catherine II forced the Jews into the Pale of Settlement \u2013 which was located primarily in present-day Poland, Ukraine, and Belarus \u2013 and to stay in their shtetls and forbade them from returning to the towns that they occupied before the partition of Poland. From 1804, Jews were banned from their villages and began to stream into the towns. A decree by emperor Nicholas I of Russia in 1827 conscripted Jews under 18 years of age into the cantonist schools for a 25-year military service in order to promote baptism.\nPolicy towards Jews was liberalised somewhat under Czar Alexander II (r.\u20091855\u00a0\u2013\u00a01881). However, his assassination in 1881 served as a pretext for further repression such as the May Laws of 1882. Konstantin Pobedonostsev, nicknamed the \"black czar\" and tutor to the czarevitch, later crowned Czar Nicholas II, declared that \"One-third of the Jews must die, one-third must emigrate, and one third be converted to Christianity\".\nIslamic antisemitism in the 19th century.\nHistorian Martin Gilbert writes that it was in the 19th century that the position of Jews worsened in Muslim countries. Benny Morris writes that one symbol of Jewish degradation was the phenomenon of stone-throwing at Jews by Muslim children. Morris quotes a 19th-century traveler: \"I have seen a little fellow of six years old, with a troop of fat toddlers of only three and four, teaching [them] to throw stones at a Jew, and one little urchin would, with the greatest coolness, waddle up to the man and literally spit upon his Jewish gaberdine. To all this the Jew is obliged to submit; it would be more than his life was worth to offer to strike a Mahommedan.\"\nIn the middle of the 19th century, J. J. Benjamin wrote about the life of Persian Jews, describing conditions and beliefs that went back to the 16th century: \"\u2026they are obliged to live in a separate part of town\u2026 Under the pretext of their being unclean, they are treated with the greatest severity and should they enter a street, inhabited by Mussulmans, they are pelted by the boys and mobs with stones and dirt\u2026.\"\nIn Jerusalem at least, conditions for some Jews improved. Moses Montefiore, on his seventh visit in 1875, noted that fine new buildings had sprung up and, \"surely we're approaching the time to witness God's hallowed promise unto Zion.\" Muslim and Christian Arabs participated in Purim and Passover; Arabs called the Sephardis 'Jews, sons of Arabs'; the Ulema and the Rabbis offered joint prayers for rain in time of drought.\nAt the time of the Dreyfus trial in France, \"Muslim comments usually favoured the persecuted Jew against his Christian persecutors\".\nSecular or racial antisemitism.\nIn 1850, the German composer Richard Wagner \u2013 who has been called \"the inventor of modern antisemitism\" \u2013 published (roughly \"Jewishness in Music\") under a pseudonym in the \"Neue Zeitschrift f\u00fcr Musik\". The essay began as an attack on Jewish composers, particularly Wagner's contemporaries, and rivals, Felix Mendelssohn and Giacomo Meyerbeer, but expanded to accuse Jews of being a harmful and alien element in German culture, who corrupted morals and were, in fact, parasites incapable of creating truly \"German\" art. The crux was the manipulation and control by the Jews of the money economy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAlthough originally published anonymously, when the essay was republished 19 years later, in 1869, the concept of the corrupting Jew had become so widely held that Wagner's name was affixed to it.\nAntisemitism can also be found in many of the Grimms' Fairy Tales by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, published from 1812 to 1857. It is mainly characterized by Jews being the villain of a story, such as in \"The Good Bargain\" (\"\") and \"The Jew Among Thorns\" (\"\").\nThe middle 19th century saw continued official harassment of the Jews, especially in Eastern Europe under Czarist influence. For example, in 1846, 80 Jews approached the governor in Warsaw to retain the right to wear their traditional dress but were immediately rebuffed by having their hair and beards forcefully cut, at their own expense.\nEven such influential figures as Walt Whitman tolerated bigotry toward the Jews in America. During his time as editor of the Brooklyn Eagle (1846\u20131848), the newspaper published historical sketches casting Jews in a bad light.\nThe Dreyfus Affair was an infamous antisemitic event of the late 19th century and early 20th century. Alfred Dreyfus, a Jewish artillery captain in the French Army, was accused in 1894 of passing secrets to the Germans. As a result of these charges, Dreyfus was convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment on Devil's Island. The actual spy, Marie Charles Esterhazy, was acquitted. The event caused great uproar among the French, with the public choosing sides on the issue of whether Dreyfus was actually guilty or not. \u00c9mile Zola accused the army of corrupting the French justice system. However, general consensus held that Dreyfus was guilty: 80% of the press in France condemned him. This attitude among the majority of the French population reveals the underlying antisemitism of the time period.\nAdolf Stoecker (1835\u20131909), the Lutheran court chaplain to Kaiser Wilhelm I, founded in 1878 an antisemitic, anti-liberal political party called the Christian Social Party. This party always remained small, and its support dwindled after Stoecker's death, with most of its members eventually joining larger conservative groups such as the German National People's Party.\nSome scholars view Karl Marx's essay \"On The Jewish Question\" as antisemitic, and argue that he often used antisemitic epithets in his published and private writings. These scholars argue that Marx equated Judaism with capitalism in his essay, helping to spread that idea. Some further argue that the essay influenced National Socialist, as well as Soviet and Arab antisemites. Marx himself had Jewish ancestry, and Albert Lindemann and Hyam Maccoby have suggested that he was embarrassed by it.\nOthers argue that Marx consistently supported Prussian Jewish communities' struggles to achieve equal political rights. These scholars argue that \"On the Jewish Question\" is a critique of Bruno Bauer's arguments that Jews must convert to Christianity before being emancipated, and is more generally a critique of liberal rights discourses and capitalism. Iain Hampsher-Monk wrote that \"This work [On The Jewish Question] has been cited as evidence for Marx's supposed anti-Semitism, but only the most superficial reading of it could sustain such an interpretation.\"\nDavid McLellan and Francis Wheen argue that readers should interpret \"On the Jewish Question\" in the deeper context of Marx's debates with Bruno Bauer, author of \"The Jewish Question\", about Jewish emancipation in Germany. Wheen says that \"Those critics, who see this as a foretaste of 'Mein Kampf', overlook one, essential point: in spite of the clumsy phraseology and crude stereotyping, the essay was actually written as a defense of the Jews. It was a retort to Bruno Bauer, who had argued that Jews should not be granted full civic rights and freedoms unless they were baptised as Christians\". According to McLellan, Marx used the word colloquially, as meaning \"commerce\", arguing that Germans must be emancipated from the capitalist mode of production not Judaism or Jews in particular. McLellan concludes that readers should interpret the essay's second half as \"an extended pun at Bauer's expense\".\n20th century.\nBetween 1900 and 1924, approximately 1.75\u00a0million Jews migrated to America, the bulk from Eastern Europe escaping the pogroms. This increase, combined with the upward social mobility of some Jews, contributed to a resurgence of antisemitism. In the first half of the 20th century, in the US, Jews were discriminated against in employment, access to residential and resort areas, membership in clubs and organizations, and in tightened quotas on Jewish enrolment and teaching positions in colleges and universities. The lynching of Leo Frank by a mob of prominent citizens in Marietta, Georgia, in 1915 turned the spotlight on antisemitism in the United States. The case was also used to build support for the renewal of the Ku Klux Klan which had been inactive since 1870.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, the Beilis Trial in Russia represented modern incidents of blood-libels in Europe. During the Russian Civil War, close to 50,000 Jews were killed in pogroms.\nAntisemitism in America reached its peak during the interwar period. The pioneer automobile manufacturer Henry Ford propagated antisemitic ideas in his newspaper \"The Dearborn Independent\" (published by Ford from 1919 to 1927). The radio speeches of Father Coughlin in the late 1930s attacked Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal and promoted the notion of a Jewish financial conspiracy. Some prominent politicians shared such views: Louis T. McFadden, Chairman of the United States House Committee on Banking and Currency, blamed Jews for Roosevelt's decision to abandon the gold standard, and claimed that \"in the United States today, the Gentiles have the slips of paper while the Jews have the lawful money\".\nIn Germany, shortly after Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party came to power in 1933, the government instituted repressive legislation which denied Jews basic civil rights.\nIn September 1935, the Nuremberg Laws prohibited sexual relations and marriages between \"Aryans\" and Jews as (\"race disgrace\") and stripped all German Jews, even quarter- and half-Jews, of their citizenship (their official title became \"subjects of the state\"). It instituted a pogrom on the night of 9\u201310 November 1938, dubbed \"Kristallnacht\", in which Jews were killed, their property destroyed and their synagogues torched. Antisemitic laws, agitation and propaganda were extended to German-occupied Europe in the wake of conquest, often building on local antisemitic traditions.\nIn 1940, the famous aviator Charles Lindbergh and many prominent Americans led the America First Committee in opposing any involvement in a European war. Lindbergh alleged that Jews were pushing America to go to war against Germany. Lindbergh adamantly denied being antisemitic, and yet he refers numerous times in his private writings \u2013 his letters and diary \u2013 to Jewish control of the media being used to pressure the U.S. to get involved in the European war. In one diary entry in November 1938, he responded to by writing \"I do not understand these riots on the part of the Germans. ... They have undoubtedly had a difficult Jewish problem, but why is it necessary to handle it so unreasonably?\", acknowledgement on Lindbergh's part that he agreed with the Nazis that Germany had a \"Jewish problem\". An article by Jonathan Marwil in \"Antisemitism, A Historical Encyclopedia of Prejudice and Persecution\" claims that \"no one who ever knew Lindbergh thought him antisemitic\" and that claims of his antisemitism were solely tied to the remarks he made in that one speech.\nIn the east the Third Reich forced Jews into ghettos in Warsaw, in Krak\u00f3w, in Lvov, in Lublin and in Radom.\nAfter the beginning of the war between Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union in 1941, a campaign of mass murder, conducted by the Einsatzgruppen, culminated from 1942 to 1945 in systematic genocide: the Holocaust. Eleven million Jews were targeted for extermination by the Nazis, and some six million were eventually killed.\nContemporary antisemitism.\nHolocaust denial.\nHolocaust denial, the claim that the Nazi genocide of European Jews during the Second World War either never happened or is substantially exaggerated by historical accounts, is a form of antisemitism and conspiracy theory. Political movements seeking to revive the ideologies of the Nazis and other states that participated in the Holocaust, like neo-Nazism and neofascism, practice Holocaust denial.\nThere is significant debate about whether analogies between Israel's treatment of Palestinians and the Nazis' treatment of Jews or comparisons to Anti-Palestinianism are antisemitic. Those who say they are antisemitic have termed such analogies \"Holocaust inversion\"\u2014a form of Holocaust trivialisation, in which the Holocaust is compared with other events in a way that downplays its severity. Deborah Lipstadt describes Holocaust inversion as a type of Holocaust denial.\nSoviet antisemitism.\nThere have continued to be antisemitic incidents since WWII, some of which had been state-sponsored. In the Soviet Union, antisemitism was even used as an instrument for settling personal conflicts, starting with the conflict between Joseph Stalin and Leon Trotsky and continuing through numerous conspiracy theories spread by official propaganda. Antisemitism in the USSR reached new heights after 1948 during the campaign against the \"rootless cosmopolitan\" (euphemism for \"Jew\") in which numerous Yiddish-language poets, writers, painters, and sculptors were killed or arrested. This culminated in the antisemitic conspiracy theory of the 'Doctors' Plot' in 1952.\nIn the 20th century, Soviet and Russian antisemitism underwent significant transformations, shaped by political, social, and ideological shifts. During the early Soviet period, the Bolsheviks initially condemned antisemitism, seeing it as incompatible with Marxist ideology. However, under Joseph Stalin's regime, antisemitism reemerged, often cloaked in 'anti-Zionist' rhetoric. As early as 1943, Stalin and his propagandists intensified attacks against Jews as \"rootless cosmopolitans\". The Party issued confidential directives to fire Jews from positions of power, but state-controlled media did not openly attack Jews until the late 1940s. The Doctors' plot of 1952, a fabricated conspiracy accusing predominantly Jewish doctors of attempting to assassinate Soviet leaders, exemplified this resurgence. This campaign fostered widespread antisemitic sentiments and resulted in the arrest and execution of numerous Jewish professionals.\nIn that same year, the antisemitic Sl\u00e1nsk\u00fd show trial alleged the existence of an 'international Zionist conspiracy' to destroy Socialism. Izabella Tabarovsky, a scholar of the history of antisemitism, argues that, \"Manufactured by the Soviet secret services, the trial tied together Zionism, Israel, Jewish leaders, and American imperialism, turning 'Zionism' and 'Zionist' into dangerous labels that could be used against one's political enemies.\" In the post-Stalin era, state-sanctioned antisemitism persisted and intensified. In February 1953, the Soviet Union severed diplomatic relations with the State of Israel and \"soon the state media was saturated with anti-Zionist propaganda, depicting bloated, hook-nosed Jewish bankers and all-consuming serpents embossed with the Star of David.\" The 1963 publication of the antisemitic book \"Judaism Without Embellishment,\" written under orders from the central Soviet government, echoed Nazi propaganda, alleging a global Jewish conspiracy to subvert the Soviet Union. It was the beginning of a new wave of government-sponsored anti-Semitism.\nThe Six-Day War in 1967 led to an intensification in Soviet anti-Zionist propaganda as the Soviets had backed the defeated Arab states. This propaganda often blurred the lines with antisemitism, leading to discriminatory policies against Jews and restricting their emigration. By the end of the war, \"the \"corporate Jew\", whether \"cosmopolitan\" or \"Zionist\", became identified as the enemy. Popular anti-Semitic stereotyping had been absorbed into official channels, generated by chauvinist needs and totalitarian requirements.\" The Anti-Zionist Committee of the Soviet Public shut down and expropriated synagogues, yeshivas, and Jewish civil organisations and prohibited the learning of Hebrew. It also engaged in a wide-scale propaganda campaign between 1967 and 1988 overseen by the KGB and published pamphlets featuring antisemitic conspiracy theories, for example falsely claiming that Zionist Jews collaborated with the Nazi regime in the Holocaust and of inflating the significance and scale of anti-Jewish persecution.\nTheir propaganda frequently borrowed directly from the forged Protocols of the Elders of Zion and sometimes relied upon Adolf Hitler's \"Mein Kampf\" as a source of information about Zionism. Antizionism helped Moscow \"bond both with its Arab allies and the Western hard left of all shades. Having appointed Zionism as a scapegoat for humanity's greatest evils, Soviet propaganda could score points by equating it with racism in African radio broadcasts and with Ukrainian nationalism on Kyiv TV.\" The still-extant Novosti Press Agency, a key element in the Soviet propaganda machine, also participated in the spreading of antisemitic anti-Zionism. Its chairman, Ivan Udaltsov, published a memorandum on 27 January 1971, to the CPSU in which he claimed that \"Zionists, by provoking antisemitism, recruit volunteers for the Israeli army\", blaming Jews for antisemitism, and falsely alleged that Zionists were responsible for \"subversive activities\" during the 1968 Prague Spring. According to historian William Korey, \"Judaism was singled out for condemnation as prescribing 'racial exclusivism' and as justifying 'crimes against 'Gentiles.'\"\nSimilar antisemitic propaganda in Poland resulted in the flight of Polish Jewish survivors from the country. After the war, the Kielce pogrom and the \"March 1968 events\" in communist Poland represented further incidents of antisemitism in Europe. The anti-Jewish violence in postwar Poland had a common theme of blood libel rumours.\n21st-century European antisemitism.\nPhysical assaults against Jews in Europe have included beatings, stabbings, and other violence, which increased markedly, sometimes resulting in serious injury and death. A 2015 report by the US State Department on religious freedom declared that \"European anti-Israel sentiment crossed the line into anti-Semitism.\"\nThis rise in antisemitic attacks is associated with both Muslim antisemitism and the rise of far-right political parties as a result of the economic crisis of 2008. This rise in the support for far-right ideas in western and eastern Europe has resulted in the increase of antisemitic acts, mostly attacks on Jewish memorials, synagogues and cemeteries but also a number of physical attacks against Jews.\nIn Eastern Europe the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the instability of the new states brought the rise of nationalist movements and the accusation against Jews for the economic crisis, taking over the local economy and bribing the government, along with traditional and religious motives for antisemitism such as blood libels. Writing on the rhetoric surrounding the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Jason Stanley relates these perceptions to broader historical narratives: \"the dominant version of antisemitism alive in parts of eastern Europe today is that Jews employ the Holocaust to seize the victimhood narrative from the 'real' victims of the Nazis, who are Russian Christians (or other non-Jewish eastern Europeans)\". He calls out the \"myths of contemporary eastern European antisemitism \u2013 that a global cabal of Jews were (and are) the real agents of violence against Russian Christians and the real victims of the Nazis were not the Jews, but rather this group.\"\nMost of the antisemitic incidents in Eastern Europe are against Jewish cemeteries and buildings (community centers and synagogues). Nevertheless, there were several violent attacks against Jews in Moscow in 2006 when a neo-Nazi stabbed 9 people at the Bolshaya Bronnaya Synagogue, the failed bomb attack on the same synagogue in 1999, the threats against Jewish pilgrims in Uman, Ukraine and the attack against a menorah by extremist Christian organization in Moldova in 2009.\nAccording to Paul Johnson, antisemitic policies are a sign of a state which is poorly governed. While no European state currently has such policies, the Economist Intelligence Unit notes the rise in political uncertainty, notably populism and nationalism, as something that is particularly alarming for Jews.\n21st-century Arab antisemitism.\nRobert Bernstein, founder of Human Rights Watch, says that antisemitism is \"deeply ingrained and institutionalized\" in \"Arab nations in modern times\".\nIn a 2011 survey by the Pew Research Center, all of the Muslim-majority Middle Eastern countries polled held significantly negative opinions of Jews. In the questionnaire, only 2% of Egyptians, 3% of Lebanese Muslims, and 2% of Jordanians reported having a positive view of Jews. Muslim-majority countries outside the Middle East similarly held markedly negative views of Jews, with 4% of Turks and 9% of Indonesians viewing Jews favorably.\nAccording to a 2011 exhibition at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, United States, some of the dialogue from Middle East media and commentators about Jews bear a striking resemblance to Nazi propaganda. According to Josef Joffe of \"Newsweek\", \"anti-Semitism\u2014the real stuff, not just bad-mouthing particular Israeli policies\u2014is as much part of Arab life today as the hijab or the hookah. Whereas this darkest of creeds is no longer tolerated in polite society in the West, in the Arab world, Jew hatred remains culturally endemic.\"\nMuslim clerics in the Middle East have frequently referred to Jews as descendants of apes and pigs, which are conventional epithets for Jews and Christians.\nAccording to professor Robert Wistrich, director of the Vidal Sassoon International Center for the Study of Antisemitism (SICSA), the calls for the destruction of Israel by Iran or by Hamas, Hezbollah, Islamic Jihad, or the Muslim Brotherhood, represent a contemporary mode of genocidal antisemitism.\n21st-century antisemitism at universities.\nAfter the 2023 Hamas-led attack on Israel on 7 October, antisemitism and anti-Jewish hate crimes around the world increased significantly. Multiple universities and university officials have been accused of systemic antisemitism. On 1 May 2024, the United States House of Representatives voted 320\u201391 in favour of adopting a bill enshrining the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance definition of antisemitism into law. The bill was opposed by some who claimed it conflated criticism of Israel with antisemitism, while Jewish advocacy groups like the American Jewish Committee and World Jewish Congress generally supported it in response to the increase in antisemitic incidents on university campuses. An open letter by 1,200 Jewish professors opposed the proposal.\nBlack Hebrew Israelite antisemitism.\nExtremist groups of Black Hebrew Israelites believe that Jewish people are \"imposters\", who have \"stolen\" Black Americans' true racial and religious identity. Some of these groups also promote the unsupported Khazar hypothesis of Ashkenazi ancestry. In 2022, the American Jewish Committee stated that the Black Hebrew Israelite claim that \"we are the real Jews\" is a \"troubling anti-Semitic trope with dangerous potential\".\nThe perpetrators of several antisemitic attacks in the United States have expressed interest in the Black Hebrew Israelites. Between 2019 and 2022, individuals motivated by Black Hebrew Israelitism committed five religiously motivated murders. In September 2022, the Program on Extremism at George Washington University published a report which said the largest threat came from \"individuals loosely affiliated with or inspired by the movement\", rather than from formal members of Black Hebrew Israelite organizations.\nAntisemitism on the internet.\nAntisemitism on the internet involves a complex interplay between social media dynamics, conspiracy theories, and the broader socio-political context. Social media platforms have proved fertile for breeding antisemitic rhetoric, particularly during crises such as the COVID-19 pandemic, during which a notable rise in antisemitic conspiracy theories emerged. The role of social media in amplifying these sentiments is underscored by analyses of comment sections on major media outlets, which reveal a significant presence of antisemitic discourse, often framed within the context of political events and international relations. Furthermore, the emergence of TikTok as a new platform has raised concerns about the proliferation of antisemitic content, with studies highlighting the challenges of moderating such material effectively. The intersection of antisemitism with broader themes of populism and right-wing extremism is also evident, as these ideologies often utilize antisemitic narratives to galvanize support and create a sense of otherness. Additionally, the phenomenon of subtle hate speech has been identified, where antisemitic sentiments are recontextualized in ways that may evade direct detection yet still perpetuate harmful stereotypes. Antisemitic bias appears even in ostensibly neutral sources; one paper has asserted that there was an incident of it on the Wikipedia platform, though this is disputed. Overall, the digital landscape presents both challenges and opportunities for combating antisemitism, necessitating a multifaceted approach that includes community engagement and technological solutions to monitor and counteract hate speech effectively.\nCauses.\nAntisemitism has been explained in terms of racism, xenophobia, projected guilt, displaced aggression, conspiracy theory, and the search for a scapegoat.\nAntisemitism scholar Lars Fischer writes that \"scholars distinguish between theories that assume an actual causal (rather than merely coincidental) correlation between what (some) Jews do and antisemitic perceptions (correspondence theories), on the one hand, and those predicated on the notion that no such causal correlation exists and that 'the Jews' serve as a foil for the projection of antisemitic assumptions, on the other.\" The latter position is exemplified by Theodor W. Adorno, who wrote that \"Anti-Semitism is the rumour about the Jews\"; in other words, \"a conspiratorial mentality that sees Jewish people as invisible and yet ubiquitous, as capable of pulling the strings of power from behind the scenes.\"\nAs an example of the correspondence theory, an 1894 book by Bernard Lazare questions whether Jews themselves were to blame for some antisemitic stereotypes, for instance arguing that Jews traditionally keeping strictly to their own communities, with their own practices and laws, led to a perception of Jews as anti-social; he later abandoned this belief and the book is considered antisemitic today. As another example, Walter Laqueur suggested that the antisemitic perception of Jewish people as greedy (as often used in stereotypes of Jews) probably evolved in Europe during medieval times where a large portion of money lending was operated by Jews. Among factors thought to contribute to this situation include that Jews were restricted from other professions, while the Christian Church declared for their followers that money lending constituted immoral \"usury\", although recent scholarship, such as that of historian Julie Mell shows that Jews were not overrepresented in the sector and that the stereotype was founded in Christian projection of taboo behaviour on to the minority.\nIn \"Anti-Judaism: The Western Tradition\" (2013), historian David Nirenberg traces the history of antisemitism, arguing that antisemitism should be understood not as a product of isolated historical events or cultural biases but is instead embedded within the very fabric of Western thought and society. Its foundation lies in the early claim of Jewish deicide and depictions of Jews as 'Christ-killers'. Throughout Western history, Jews have since been used as a symbolic 'other' to define and articulate the values and boundaries of various cultures and intellectual traditions. In philosophy, literature, and politics, Jewishness has often been constructed as a counterpoint to what is considered normative or ideal. One of the key insights from Nirenberg's work is that antisemitism has proven to be remarkably adaptable. It changes form and adapts to different contexts and times, whether in medieval religious disputes, Enlightenment critiques, or modern racial theories. Philosophers and intellectuals have often used 'Jewishness' as a foil to explore and define their ideas. For instance, in the Enlightenment, figures like Voltaire critiqued Judaism as backward and superstitious to promote their visions of reason and progress. Similarly, the Soviet Union frequently portrayed Judaism as linked with capitalism and mercantilism, standing in opposition to the ideals of proletarian solidarity and communism. In each case, Judaism or the Jews are portrayed as standing in tension with prevailing moral norms.\nAuthor and scholar Dara Horn published an article in \"The Atlantic\" reflecting on her previous published doubts about the effectiveness of Holocaust education pedagogy and the rising antisemitism in the wake of the October 7th Massacre in Israel by Palestinians. In it, Horn argues that antisemitism functions by appropriating what has happened to Jews and recasting their experience as part of a broader, universal struggle, which always ends in ultimately redefining Jewish identity as incompatible with these ideals. She concludes that the attacks on Jews, often under the guise of anti-Zionism, follow the same ancient pattern of marginalization and vilification.This is the permission structure for anti-Semitism: claim whatever has happened to the Jews as one's own experience, announce a \"universal\" ideal that all good people must accept, and then redefine Jewish collective identity as lying beyond it. Hating Jews thus becomes a demonstration of righteousness. The key is to define, and redefine, and redefine again, the shiny new moral reasoning for why the Jews have failed the universal test of humanity.\nPrevention through education.\nEducation plays an important role in addressing and overcoming prejudice and countering social discrimination. However, education is not only about challenging the conditions of intolerance and ignorance in which antisemitism manifests itself; it is also about building a sense of global citizenship and solidarity, respect for, and enjoyment of diversity and the ability to live peacefully together as active, democratic citizens. Education equips learners with the knowledge to identify antisemitism and biased or prejudiced messages and raises awareness about the forms, manifestations, and impact of antisemitism faced by Jews and Jewish communities.\nSome Jewish writers have argued that public education about antisemitism through the prism of the Holocaust is unhelpful at best or actively deepening antisemitism at worst. Dara Horn wrote in \"The Atlantic\" that \"Auschwitz is not a metaphor\", arguing \"That the Holocaust drives home the importance of love is an idea, like the idea that Holocaust education prevents anti-Semitism, that seems entirely unobjectionable. It is entirely objectionable. The Holocaust didn't happen because of a lack of love. It happened because entire societies abdicated responsibility for their own problems, and instead blamed them on the people who represented\u2014have always represented, since they first introduced the idea of commandedness to the world\u2014the thing they were most afraid of: responsibility.\"\nInstead, she argues that perhaps \"a more effective way to address anti-Semitism might lie in cultivating a completely different quality, one that happens to be the key to education itself: curiosity. Why use Jews as a means to teach people that we're all the same, when the demand that Jews be just like their neighbors is exactly what embedded the mental virus of anti-Semitism in the Western mind in the first place? Why not instead encourage inquiry about the diversity, to borrow a de rigueur word, of the human experience?\"\nGeographical variation.\nA March 2008 report by the U.S. State Department found that there was an increase in antisemitism across the world, and that both old and new expressions of antisemitism persist. A 2012 report by the U.S. Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor also noted a continued global increase in antisemitism, and found that Holocaust denial and opposition to Israeli policy at times was used to promote or justify blatant antisemitism. In 2014, the Anti-Defamation League conducted a study titled \"ADL Global 100: An Index of Anti-Semitism\", which also reported high antisemitism figures around the world and, among other findings, that as many as \"27% of people who have never met a Jew nevertheless harbor strong prejudices against him\".\nIn August 2024, the Israeli Ministry of Diaspora Affairs announced a new antisemitism monitoring project. The goal of the project is to measure levels of antisemitism in various countries, as well as identify instigators and trends. In the event that antisemitism in a given country becomes severe, the Diaspora Minister may contact that country's government in an official capacity.\n\"Antisemitica\" collections.\nThere have been attempts to collect material deemed antisemitic, such as the \"Felix Posen Bibliographic Project on Antisemitism\", an electronic version of the \"Antisemitism \u2013 An Annotated Bibliography\" published by De Gruyter Saur from 1984 to 2013 and which lists some 50,000 items including books, dissertations, and articles from periodicals and collections from a diverse range of disciplines as well items from visuals arts such as films and caricatures. Apart from antisemitic material, including those pertaining to \"Jewish self-hate\", the project also contains Jewish responses to such polemical works and also philosemitic works.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliographies, calendars, etc.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1081", "revid": "50870544", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1081", "title": "Economy of Azerbaijan", "text": "The economy of Azerbaijan is highly dependent on oil and gas exports, in particular since the completion of the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan Pipeline. The transition to oil production in the late 1990s led to rapid economic growth over the period 1995\u20132014. Since 2014, GDP growth has slowed down substantially.\nLarge oil reserves are a major contributor to Azerbaijan's economy. Gas and oil make up two-thirds of Azerbaijan's GDP, making it one of the top ten most fossil fuel-dependent economies in the world. Gas and oil make up 90% of Azerbaijan's export revenues and 60% of its finances.\nAzerbaijan's economy is characterized by corruption and inequality. The country's oil wealth has significantly strengthened the stability of Ilham Aliyev's regime and enriched ruling elites in Azerbaijan. The country's oil wealth has enabled the state to host lavish international events, as well as engage in extensive lobbying efforts abroad.\nThe national currency is the Azerbaijani manat. The private sector is weak in Azerbaijan, as the economy is dominated by state-owned enterprises. More than half of the formal labor force works for the government in Azerbaijan.\nEconomic history of Azerbaijan.\nRepublic era.\nOil and gas are the most prominent products of Azerbaijan's economy. More than $60 billion was invested into Azerbaijan's oil sector by major international oil companies in AIOC consortium operated by BP. Oil production under the first of these production sharing agreements (PSAs), with the Azerbaijan International Operating Company, began in November 1997 and was about 500,000 barrels per day in 2006. People visit petroleum spas (or \"oil spas\") to bathe in the local crude in Naftalan. A leading caviar producer and exporter in the past, Azerbaijan's fishing industry today is concentrated on the dwindling stocks of sturgeon and beluga in the Caspian Sea.\nAzerbaijan shares all the problems of the former Soviet republics in making the transition from a command to a market economy, but its energy resources brighten its long-term prospects. Azerbaijan has begun making progress on economic reform, and old economic ties and structures are slowly being replaced. An obstacle to economic progress, including foreign investment, is the continuing conflict with Armenia over the Nagorno-Karabakh region.\nIn 1992 Azerbaijan became a member of the Economic Cooperation Organization. In 2002, the Azerbaijani merchant marine had 54 ships. \nIn 2010 Azerbaijan entered into the top eight biggest oil suppliers to EU countries with \u20ac9.46 billion. In 2011, the amount of foreign investments in Azerbaijan was $20 billion, a 61% increase from 2010. According to Minister of Economic Development of Azerbaijan, Shahin Mustafayev, in 2011, \"$15.7 billion was invested in the non-oil sector, while the rest\u00a0\u2013 in the oil sector\".\nIn 2012, because of its economic performance after the Soviet breakup, Azerbaijan was predicted to become \"Tiger of Caucasus\". In 2012, Globalization and World Cities Research Network study ranked Baku as a Gamma-level global city.\nIn 2015, Turkey and Azerbaijan agreed to boost mutual trade to US$15 billion by 2023.\nMacroeconomic trend.\nThe following is a chart of trend of gross domestic product of Azerbaijan at market prices with figures in USD.\nFor purchasing power parity comparisons, the US dollar was exchanged at 1,565.88 Manats only. Currently, the new Manat is in use, with an exchange rate of about 1 manat = $0.59. Mean graduate pay was $5.76 per man-hour in 2010.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132017.\nSource: IMF\nFor more than a century the backbone of the Azerbaijani economy has been petroleum, which represented 50 percent of Azerbaijan's GDP in 2005, and is projected to double to almost 125 percent of GDP in 2007. Now that Western oil companies are able to tap deep-water oilfields untouched by the Soviets because of poor technology, Azerbaijan is considered one of the most important areas in the world for oil exploration and development. Proven oil reserves in the Caspian Basin, which Azerbaijan shares with Russia, Kazakhstan, Iran, and Turkmenistan, are comparable in size to the North Sea, although exploration is still in the early stages.\nSectors of the economy.\nAgriculture.\nAzerbaijan has the largest agricultural basin in the region. About 54.9 percent of Azerbaijan is agricultural lands. At the beginning of 2007 there were of utilized agricultural area. In the same year, the total wood resources counted . Azerbaijan's agricultural scientific research institutes are focused on meadows and pastures, horticulture and subtropical crops, leaf vegetables, viticulture and wine-making, cotton growing and medicinal plants. In some lands, it is profitable to grow grain, potatoes, sugar beets, cotton and tobacco. Livestock, dairy products, and wine and spirits are also important farm products. The Caspian fishing industry is concentrated on the dwindling stocks of sturgeon and beluga.\nSome portions of most products that were previously imported from abroad have begun to be produced locally (among them are Coca-Cola by Coca-Cola Bottlers LTD, beer by Baki-Kastel, parquet by Nehir and oil pipes by EUPEC Pipe Coating Azerbaijan).\nA new program which is prepared by the European Union is aimed to supporting the economic diversification of Azerbaijan.\nManufacturing.\nIn 2007, mining and hydrocarbon industries accounted for well over 95 percent of the Azerbaijani economy. Diversification of the economy into manufacturing industries remains a long-term issue.\nAs of the late 2000s, the defense industry of Azerbaijan has emerged as an autonomous entity with a growing defense production capability. The ministry is cooperating with the defense sectors of Ukraine, Belarus and Pakistan. Along with other contracts, Azerbaijani defense industries and Turkish companies, Azerbaijan will produce 40\u00a0mm revolver grenade launchers, 107\u00a0mm and 122\u00a0mm MLRS systems, Cobra 4\u00d74 vehicles and joint modernization of BTR vehicles in Baku.\nFinancial and business services.\nThe banking sector remains small in relation to the size of the Azerbaijani economy.\nTelecommunications.\nThe Azerbaijan telecommunications sector is embroiled in corruption. Azerbaijan President Ilham Aliyev and his family own two of Azerbaijan's largest mobile providers (Azerfon and Azercell) through offshore companies and potentially control three-quarters of the mobile market in Azerbaijan. The third large mobile provider is Bakcell, which is registered as a company in an offshore tax haven and whose owners are unknown. Ownership of the mobile providers in Azerbaijan enables the ruling Aliyev family to monitor phone calls and internet activity.\nInvestigative reporting revealed that Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev and his family made more than $1 billion when state shares of mobile operators were transferred to a purportedly \"local partner\" which was in reality owned by the Aliyev family's offshore companies.\nAzerbaijan has relatively expensive call rates relative to comparable countries. The high prices are possibly due to consolidated control of the mobile market and a lack of competition.\nThe Azerbaijan government has stated that it wants to create a high-tech sector in Azerbaijan.\nTourism.\nTourism is an important part of the economy of Azerbaijan. The country was a well-known tourist spot in the 1980s. However, the fall of the Soviet Union, and the First Nagorno-Karabakh War during the 1988\u20131994 period, damaged the tourist industry and the image of Azerbaijan as a tourist destination.\nIt was not until the 2000s that the tourism industry began to recover, and the country has since experienced a high rate of growth in the number of tourist visits and overnight stays. In recent years, Azerbaijan has also become a popular destination for religious, spa, and health care tourism. During winter, the Shahdag Winter Complex offers skiing.\nThe government of Azerbaijan has set the development of Azerbaijan as an elite tourist destination a top priority. It is a national strategy to make tourism a major, if not the single largest, contributor to the Azerbaijani economy. These activities are regulated by the State Tourism Agency and the Ministry of Culture.\nThe Formula One Grand Prix is held in Baku, the capital city, and has been held here for years.\nCurrency system.\nThe Azerbaijani manat is the currency of Azerbaijani, denominated as the manat, subdivided into 100 qapik. The manat is issued by the Central Bank of Azerbaijan, the monetary authority of Azerbaijan. The ISO 4217 abbreviation is AZN. The Latinised symbol is ().\nThe manat is held in a floating exchange-rate system, managed primarily against the US dollar. The rate of exchange (Azerbaijani manat per US$1) for 28 January 2016, was AZN 1.60.\nThere is a complex relationship between Azerbaijan's balance of trade, inflation, measured by the consumer price index and the value of its currency. Despite allowing the value of the manat to \"float\", Azerbaijan's central bank has decisive ability to control its value in relationship to other currencies.\nInfrastructure.\nEnergy.\nTwo-thirds of Azerbaijan is rich in oil and natural gas. The region of the Lesser Caucasus accounts for most of the country's gold, silver, iron, copper, titanium, chromium, manganese, cobalt, molybdenum, complex ore and antimony. In September 1994, a 30-year contract was signed between the State Oil Company of Azerbaijan Republic (SOCAR) and 13\u00a0oil companies, among them Amoco, BP, ExxonMobil, Lukoil and Statoil. As Western oil companies are able to tap deep-water oilfields untouched by the Soviet exploitation, Azerbaijan is considered one of the most important spots in the world for oil exploration and development. Azeriqaz, a sub-company of SOCAR, intends to ensure full gasification of the country by 2021.\nTransportation.\nThe convenient location of Azerbaijan on the crossroad of major international traffic arteries, such as the Silk Road and the south\u2013north corridor, highlights the strategic importance of the transportation sector for the country's economy. The transport sector in the country includes roads, railways, aviation, and maritime transport.\nAzerbaijan is also an important economic hub in the transportation of raw materials. The Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline (BTC) became operational in May 2006 and extends more than 1,774\u00a0kilometers through the territories of Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey. The BTC is designed to transport up to 50\u00a0million tons of crude oil annually and carries oil from the Caspian Sea oilfields to global markets. The South Caucasus Pipeline, also stretching through the territory of Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey, became operational at the end of 2006 and offers additional gas supplies to the European market from the Shah Deniz gas field. Shah Deniz is expected to produce up to 296\u00a0billion cubic meters of natural gas per year. Azerbaijan also plays a major role in the EU-sponsored Silk Road Project.\nIn 2012, the construction of Kars\u2013Tbilisi\u2013Baku railway expected to provide transportation between Asia and Europe through connecting the railways of China and Kazakhstan in the east with Turkey's Marmaray to the European railway system in the west. Broad gauge railways in 2010 stretched for and electrified railways numbered . By 2010, there were 35 airports and one heliport.\nRegulation.\nSingle window system shares needed information through a single gateway with all organizations serving in trade field, as well as abolishes useless processes and raises the effectiveness of cooperation among different parties. 73 economies implement single window system in the world. Azerbaijan started to implement this system in 2009. It implemented an E-Government portal as well.\nA single-window system was established by a decree of the Azerbaijani President issued in 2007, 30 April, in order to simplify export-import procedures, innovate customs services, and improve the trade environment. The president appointed the State Customs Committee as the leading body of controlling goods and transportation passing through the borders of the country in 2008.\nThe State Migration Service issues appropriate permits for foreigners and stateless persons coming to Azerbaijan to live and work. The \"single window\" principle has been applied on migration management processes starting from 1 July 2009 according to the Decree.\n\"Data from CIA World Factbook unless noted otherwise\"\nOther economic indicators.\n17% of GDP (2011 est.)\n1.1% (2012 est.)\n-3% (2011 est.)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1082", "revid": "48607067", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1082", "title": "Geography of Azerbaijan", "text": "Azerbaijan is a country in the Caucasus region, situated at the juncture of Eastern Europe and West Asia. Three physical features dominate Azerbaijan: the Caspian Sea, whose shoreline forms a natural boundary to the east; the Greater Caucasus mountain range to the north; and the extensive flatlands at the country's center. About the size of Portugal or the US state of Maine, Azerbaijan has a total land area of approximately . In the three Transcaucasian states, Azerbaijan has the greatest land area. Special administrative subdivisions are the Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic, which is separated from the rest of Azerbaijan by a strip of Armenian territory, and the Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Region, entirely within Azerbaijan. The status of Nagorno-Karabakh is internationally recognized as territory of Azerbaijan.\nLocated in the region of the southern Caucasus Mountains, Azerbaijan borders the Caspian Sea to the east, Georgia and Russia to the north, Iran to the south, and Armenia to the southwest and west. A small part of Nakhchivan also borders Turkey to the northwest. The capital of Azerbaijan is the ancient city of Baku, which has the largest and best harbor on the Caspian Sea and has long been the center of the republic's oil industry.\nTopography and drainage.\nThe elevation changes over a relatively short distance from lowlands to highlands; nearly half the country is considered mountainous. Notable physical features are the gently undulating hills of the subtropical southeastern coast, which are covered with tea plantations, orange groves, and lemon groves; numerous mud volcanoes and mineral springs in the ravines of Kobustan Mountain near Baku; and coastal terrain that lies as much as twenty-eight meters below sea level.\nExcept for its eastern Caspian shoreline and some areas bordering Georgia and Iran, Azerbaijan is ringed by mountains. To the northeast, bordering Russia's Dagestan Autonomous Republic, is the Greater Caucasus range; to the west, bordering Armenia, is the Lesser Caucasus range. To the extreme southeast, the Talysh Mountains form part of the border with Iran. The highest elevations occur in the Greater Caucasus, where Mount Bazard\u00fcz\u00fc rises 4,466 meters above sea level. Eight large rivers flow down from the Caucasus ranges into the central Kura-Aras Lowlands, alluvial flatlands and low delta areas along the seacoast designated by the Azerbaijani name for the Mtkvari River (Kura) and its main tributary, the Aras. The Mtkvari, the longest river in the Caucasus region, forms the delta and drains into the Caspian a short distance downstream from the confluence with the Aras. The Mingachevir Reservoir, with an area of 605 square kilometers that makes it the largest body of water in Azerbaijan, was formed by damming the Kura in western Azerbaijan. The waters of the reservoir provide hydroelectric power and irrigation of the Kura\u2013Aras plain. Most of the country's rivers are not navigable. About 15% of the land in Azerbaijan is arable.\nMountains.\nThe country's highest peak, Bazard\u00fcz\u00fc, rises to at the Azerbaijan-Russia border.\nClimate.\nTemperature.\nThe climate varies from subtropical and humid in the southeast to subtropical and dry in central and eastern Azerbaijan, continental and humid in the mountains, and continental and dry in Nakhchivan. Baku, on the Caspian, enjoys mild weather that averages in January and in July.\nPrecipitation.\nPhysiographic conditions and different atmosphere circulations admit 8 types of air currents including continental, sea, arctic, tropical currents of air that formulates the climate of the Republic. The maximum annual precipitation falls in Lenkeran () and the minimum in Absheron (). The maximum daily precipitation of was observed at the Bilieser Station in 1955.\nEnvironmental problems.\nAir and water pollution are widespread and pose great challenges to economic development. Major sources of pollution include oil refineries and chemical and metallurgical industries, which in the early 1990s continued to operate as inefficiently as they had in the Soviet era. Air quality is extremely poor in Baku, the center of oil refining. Some reports have described Baku's air as the most polluted in the former Soviet Union, and other industrial centers suffer similar problems.\nThe Caspian Sea, including Baku Bay, has been polluted by oil leakages and the dumping of raw or inadequately treated sewage, reducing the yield of caviar and fish. In the Soviet period, Azerbaijan was pressed to use extremely heavy applications of pesticides to improve its output of scarce subtropical crops for the rest of the Soviet Union. The continued regular use of the pesticide DDT in the 1970s and 1980s was an egregious lapse, although that chemical was officially banned in the Soviet Union because of its toxicity to humans. Excessive application of pesticides and chemical fertilizers has caused extensive groundwater pollution and has been linked by Azerbaijani scientists to birth defects and illnesses. Rising water levels in the Caspian Sea, mainly caused by natural factors exacerbated by man-made structures, have reversed the decades-long drying trend and now threaten coastal areas; the average level rose between 1978 and 1993. Because of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, large numbers of trees were felled, roads were built through pristine areas, and large expanses of agricultural land were occupied by military forces.\nLike other former Soviet republics, Azerbaijan faces a gigantic environmental cleanup complicated by the economic uncertainties left in the wake of the Moscow-centered planning system. The Committee for the Protection of the Natural Environment is part of the Azerbaijani government, but in the early 1990s it was ineffective at targeting critical applications of limited funds, establishing pollution standards, or monitoring compliance with environmental regulations. Early in 1994, plans called for Azerbaijan to participate in the international Caspian Sea Forum, sponsored by the European Union (EU).\n Droughts and floods; some lowland areas threatened by rising levels of the Caspian Sea\n Local scientists consider the Abseron Yasaqligi (Apsheron Peninsula) (including Baky and Sumqayit) and the Caspian Sea to be the ecologically most devastated area in the world because of severe air, water, and soil pollution; soil pollution results from the use of DDT as a pesticide and also from toxic defoliants used in the production of cotton.\n* Party to: Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands\n* Total: \n**\"country rank in the world:\" 113rd\n* Land: \n* Water: \n* Note: Includes the exclave of Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic and the Nagorno-Karabakh region; the region's autonomy was abolished by Azerbaijani Supreme Soviet on November 26, 1991.\n* Australia comparative: approximately larger than Tasmania\n* Canada comparative: approximately larger than New Brunswick\n* United Kingdom comparative: slightly larger than Scotland\n* United States comparative: slightly smaller than Maine\n* EU comparative: slightly smaller than Portugal\n**Armenia (with Azerbaijan-proper) \n** Armenia (with Azerbaijan-Nakhchivan exclave) \n** Georgia \n**Iran (with Azerbaijan-proper) \n**Iran (with Azerbaijan-Nakhchivan exclave) \n**Russia \n**Turkey \n*0\u00a0km\n**Note: Azerbaijan borders the Caspian Sea. Its coastline with the Caspian Sea is .\n* Border disputes with Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan, Iran, and Russia\n* large, flat lowland (much of it below sea-level) with Great Caucasus Mountains to the north, uplands in the west\n Petroleum, natural gas, iron ore, nonferrous metals, bauxite\n* Arable land: 22.95%\n* Permanent crops: 2.79%\n* Other: 74.26% (2012 est.)\n* 14,250 km\u00b2 (2010)\n* 34.68 km3 (2011)\n* Total: 12.21 km3/yr (4%/18%/78%)\n* Per capita: 1,384 cu m/yr (2010)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1083", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1083", "title": "Azerbaijan/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "1085", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1085", "title": "Azerbaijan/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "1087", "revid": "46505507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1087", "title": "Foreign relations of Azerbaijan", "text": " \nThe Republic of Azerbaijan is a member of the United Nations, the Non-Aligned Movement, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, NATO's Partnership for Peace, the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council, the World Health Organization, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development; the Council of Europe, CFE Treaty, the Community of Democracies; the International Monetary Fund; and the World Bank.\nList.\nList of countries which Azerbaijan maintains diplomatic relations with:\nDisputes.\nNagorno-Karabakh.\nThe frozen conflict over currently largely Armenian-populated region of Nagorno-Karabakh within the Republic of Azerbaijan began when in 1988 the Armenian majority of Nagorno-Karabakh demanded autonomy with demonstrations and persecutions against ethnic Azeris following in Armenia. This led to anti-Armenian rioting in Azerbaijan, with Azerbaijani militias beginning their effort to expel Armenians from the enclave. In 1992, a war broke out and pogroms of Armenians and Azeris forced both groups to flee their homes. In 1994, a Russian-brokered ceasefire ended the war but more than 1 million ethnic Armenians and Azeris are still not able to return. In 2023, an Azerbaijani offensive into Nagorno-Karabakh ended the conflict, with the self-proclaimed Republic of Artsakh conceding sovereignty to the government of Azerbaijan on January 1, 2024.\nCaviar diplomacy.\nThe European Stability Initiative (ESI) has revealed in a report from 2012 with the title \"Caviar diplomacy: How Azerbaijan silenced the Council of Europe\", that since Azerbaijan's entry into the Council of Europe, each year 30 to 40 deputies are invited to Azerbaijan and generously paid with expensive gifts, including caviar (worth up to 1,400 euro), silk carpets, gold, silver and large amounts of money. In return they become lobbyists for Azerbaijan. This practice has been widely referred to as \"Caviar diplomacy\".\nESI also published a report on 2013 Presidential elections in Azerbaijan titled \"Disgraced: Azerbaijan and the end of election monitoring as we know it\". The report revealed the ties between Azerbaijani government and the members of certain observation missions who praised the elections. Azerbaijan's \"Caviar diplomacy\" at 2013 presidential elections sparked a major international scandal, as the reports of two authoritative organizations Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe/European Parliament and OSCE/ODIHR completely contradicted one another in their assessments of elections.\nNon-governmental anti-corruption organization Transparency International has regularly judged Azerbaijan to be one of the most corrupt countries in the world and has also criticized Azerbaijan for the \"Caviar diplomacy\".\nAt June 2016 the public prosecutor of Milan has accused the former leader of the (Christian) Union of the center and of the European People's Party of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe Luca Volonte of accepting large bribes from representatives of the Azerbaijani government. Two people with high-level experience of the Council of Europe's parliamentary assembly (Pace) have told the Guardian they believe its members have been offered bribes for votes by Azerbaijan. Former Azerbaijani diplomat, Arif Mammadov, alleged that a member of Azerbaijan's delegation at the Council of Europe had \u20ac30m (\u00a325m) to spend on lobbying its institutions, including the Council of Europe assembly. PACE ratified the terms of reference of an independent external investigation body to carry out a detailed independent inquiry into the allegations of corruption at the council involving Azerbaijan.\nESISC report.\nOn 6 March 2017, ESISC (European Strategic Intelligence and Security Center) published a scandalous report called \"The Armenian Connection\" where it veraciously attacked human rights NGOs and research organisations criticising human rights violations and corruption in Azerbaijan, Turkey, and Russia.\nESISC in that report asserted that \"Caviar diplomacy\" report elaborated by ESI aimed to create climate of suspicion based on slander to form a network of MPs that would engage in a political war against Azerbaijan. In the Second Chapter of the report called \"The Armenian Connection: \u00abMr X\u00bb, Nils Mui\u017enieks, Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights\" that was published on 18 April 2017 ESISC asserted that the network composed of European PMs, Armenian officials and some NGOs: Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International, \"Human Rights House Foundation\", \"Open Dialog\", European Stability Initiative, and Helsinki Committee for Human Rights, was financed by the Soros Foundation. According to ESISC the key figure of the network since 2012 has been Nils Mui\u017enieks, Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe and the network has served to the interests of George Soros and the Republic of Armenia.\n\"The report is written in the worst traditions of authoritarian propaganda, makes absurd claims, and is clearly aimed at deflecting the wave of criticism against cover-up of unethical lobbying and corruption in PACE and demands for change in the Assembly\", said Freedom Files Analytical Centre.\nAccording Robert Coalson (Radio Free Europe), ESISC is a part of Baku's lobbying efforts to extend to the use of front think tanks to shift public opinion.\nEuropean Stability Initiative said that \"ESISC report is full of lies (such as claiming that German PACE member Strasser holds pro-Armenian views and citing as evidence that he went to Yerevan in 2015 to commemorate the Armenian genocide, when Strasser has never in his life been to independent Armenia)\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1088", "revid": "50464830", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1088", "title": "Azerbaijani Armed Forces", "text": "Military forces of Azerbaijan\nThe Azerbaijani Armed Forces () is the military of the Republic of Azerbaijan. It was re-established according to the country's Law of the Armed Forces on 9 October 1991. The original Azerbaijan Democratic Republic's armed forces were dissolved after Azerbaijan was absorbed into the Soviet Union as the Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic from 28 April 1920. After the Soviet Union dissolved in 1991\u201392, Azerbaijan's armed forces were reformed based on the Soviet bases and equipment left on Azerbaijani soil.\nThe armed forces have three main branches: the Azerbaijani Land Forces, the Azerbaijani Air Forces and the Azerbaijani Navy. Associated forces include the Azerbaijani National Guard, the Internal Troops of Azerbaijan, and the State Border Service, which can be involved in state defense under certain circumstances.\nIn Nagorno-Karabakh and the surrounding region, the Azerbaijani armed forces are repeatedly involved in fighting, especially with neighboring Armenia (e.g., the Nagorno-Karabakh war in 2020 and the blockade of the Republic of Artsakh in 2022-23).\nAccording to the Azerbaijani media sources, the military expenditure of Azerbaijan for 2009 was set at US$2.46\u00a0billion. However, according to Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, only $1.473\u00a0billion was spent that year. IISS also suggests that the defence budget in 2009 was $1.5\u00a0billion. The Ministry of Defence Industry of Azerbaijan supervises the design, manufacturing, regulation and maintenance of military equipment. In the future, Azerbaijan hopes to start building tanks, armored vehicles, military planes and military helicopters.\nOverview.\nSince the fall of the Soviet Union, Azerbaijan has been trying to further develop its armed forces into a professional, well trained, and mobile military. Azerbaijan has been undergoing extensive modernization and capacity expansion programs, with the military budget increasing from around $300\u00a0million in 2005 to $2.46\u00a0billion in 2009. The total armed forces number 56,840 personnel in the land forces, 7,900 personnel in the air force and air defence force, and 2,200 personnel in the navy. There are also 19,500 personnel in the National Guard, State Border Service, and Internal Troops. In addition, there are 300,000 former service personnel who have had military service in the last 15 years. The military hardware of Azerbaijan consists of 220 main battle tanks, an additional 162 T-80 battle tanks were acquired between 2005 and 2010, 595 armored combat vehicles and 270 artillery systems. The air force has about 106 aircraft and 35 helicopters.\nSince the Dissolution of the Soviet Union Azerbaijan didn't join the Russian dominated CSTO nor the western NATO. But Azerbaijan participates in NATO's Partnership for Peace. \nThe country is a member of regional alliances: since 2013, Azerbaijan has been a member of the Eurasia Special Forces with Military Status, or TAKM, alongside Turkey, Kyrgyzstan, and Mongolia. Azerbaijan is also a member of the GUAM alliance, which plans to establish a plans to establish peacekeeping forces. Azerbaijan has military exchange and support by Ukraine, Pakistan and the US and a very strong exchange and training with the Turkish armed forces.\nAzerbaijan has acceded to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty as a non-nuclear weapons state.\nIn 2003 Azerbaijan joined the multi-national force - Iraq and sent 150 troops to Iraq, and later troops to Kosovo. Azerbaijani troops have also served in Afghanistan with ISAF in a small platon. For this foreign deployments the Baku \"N\" Military Unit\" of the Land Forces was sent.\nDespite the rise in Azerbaijan's defence budget, the armed forces were assessed in 2008 as not having a high state of battle readiness and being ill-prepared for wide scale combat operations. Azeri victory in the Second Karabakh War in late 2020 demonstrated how significantly Azerbaijan's military capabilities had grown.\nHistory of the Azerbaijani armed forces.\nAzerbaijan Democratic Republic.\nThe history of the modern Azerbaijan army dates back to Azerbaijan Democratic Republic (ADR) in 1918, when the Armed Forces of the Republic of Azerbaijan were created on 26 June 1918. First \"de facto\" Minister of Defense of ADR was Dr. Khosrov bey Sultanov. When the Ministry was formally established, Gen. Samedbey Mehmandarov became the minister, and Lt-Gen. Ali-Agha Shikhlinski his deputy. Chiefs of Staff of ADR Army were Lt-Gen. Maciej Sulkiewicz (March 1919 \u2013 10 December 1919) and Maj-Gen. Abdulhamid bey Gaitabashi (10 December 1919 \u2013 April 1920).\nThe Red Army invaded Azerbaijan on 28 April 1920. Although the bulk of the newly formed Azerbaijani army was engaged in putting down an Armenian revolt that had just broken out in Karabakh, the Azerbaijanis did not surrender their brief independence of 1918\u201320 quickly or easily. As many as 20,000 of the total 30,000 soldiers died resisting what was effectively a Russian reconquest. The national Army of Azerbaijan was abolished by the Bolshevik government, 15 of the 21 army generals were executed by the Bolsheviks.\nRussian Civil War.\nAfter the Sovietisation of Azerbaijan, the newly formed Azerbaijani Red Army replaced the previous army, taking part in the Russian Civil War, and the invasion of Georgia.\nWorld War II.\nDuring World War II, Azerbaijan played a crucial role in the strategic energy policy of Soviet Union. Much of the Soviet Union's oil on the Eastern Front was supplied by Baku. By a decree of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR in February 1942, the commitment of more than 500 workers and employees of the oil industry of Azerbaijan was recognised with orders and medals.\nOperation Edelweiss carried out by the German Wehrmacht targeted Baku because of the importance of its oil fields to the USSR. Some 800,000 Azerbaijanis fought within the ranks of the Soviet Army of which 400,000 died. Azerbaijani national formations of the Red Army included the 223rd, 227th, 396th, 402nd, and 416th Rifle Divisions. Azerbaijani Major-General Hazi Aslanov was awarded a second Hero of the Soviet Union after a long post-war fight for recognition of his accomplishments.\nDissolution of the Soviet armed forces.\nDuring the Cold War, Azerbaijan had been the deployment area of units of the Soviet 4th Army whose principal formations in 1988 included four motor rifle divisions (23rd Guards, 60th, 75th, and 295th). The 75th Motor Rifle Division was isolated in Nakhchivan. The 4th Army also included missile and air defense brigades and artillery and rocket regiments. The 75th Division's stores and equipment were apparently transferred to the Nakhchivan authorities. Azerbaijan also hosted the 49th Arsenal of the Soviet Main Agency of Missiles and Artillery, which contained over 7,000 train-car loads of ammunition to the excess of one billion units.\nThe first president of Azerbaijan, Ayaz Mutallibov, did not wish to build an independent army, wanting to rely instead largely on Soviet troops. Even when the Parliament decided that an army should be formed in September 1991, disagreements between the government and the opposition Azerbaijani Popular Front Party impeded creation of a unified force. Around this time, the first unit of the new army was formed on the basis of the 18\u2013110 military unit of mechanized infantry of the Soviet Ground Forces (probably part of the 4th Army) located in Shikhov, south of Baku. At the time of the parliamentary decision, Lieutenant-General Valeh Barshadli became the first Minister of Defense of Azerbaijan, from 5 September to 11 December 1991. Later from May to 4 September 1992 he served as Chief of General Staff of Azerbaijani Armed Forces.\nNewly formed military.\nIn summer 1992, the nascent Defense Ministry received a resolution by the Azerbaijani president on the takeover of units and formations in Azerbaijani territory. It then forwarded an ultimatum to Moscow demanding control over vehicles and armaments of the 135th and 139th Motor Rifle Regiments of the 295th Motor Rifle Division. In July 1992, Azerbaijan ratified the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE), which establishes comprehensive limits on key categories of conventional military equipment.\nThe transfer of the property of the 4th Army (except for part of the property of the 366th Motor Rifle Regiment of the 23rd Guards Motor Rifle Division captured by Armenian armed formations in 1992 during the regiment's withdrawal from Stepanakert) and the 49th arsenal was completed in 1992. Thus, by the end of 1992, Azerbaijan received arms and military hardware sufficient for approximately four motor rifle divisions with prescribed army units. It also inherited naval ships. There are also reports that 50 combat aircraft from the disbanded 19th Army of the Soviet Air Defence Forces came under Azerbaijani control.\n\u201cFull-fledged work on the creation of a national army in Azerbaijan began only in November 1993, when the ..situation.. began to stabilize.\u201d Articles for draft evasion and desertion were introduced.\nThe Azerbaijani armed forces took a series of devastating defeats by Armenian forces during the 1992\u20131994 Nagorno-Karabakh War, which resulted in the loss of control of Nagorno-Karabakh proper and seven surrounding rayons, comprising roughly 20% of the territory of Azerbaijan. Azerbaijani sources insist that Armenian victory was largely due to military help from Russia and the wealthy Armenian diaspora. Armenians partially deny the allegation, claiming that Russian side was equally supplying Armenian and Azerbaijani sides with weapons and mercenaries. During the war, the Azerbaijani armed forces were also aided by Turkish military advisers, and Russian, Ukrainian, Chechen and Afghan mercenaries.\nAzerbaijan approved the CFE flank agreement in May 1997.\n21st century.\nA number of Azerbaijani human rights groups have been tracking non-combat deaths and have noted an upward trend in the early 2010s. Based on Defense Ministry statistics that had not been released to the public, the Group of Monitoring Compliance with Human Rights in the Army (GMCHRA) has recorded the deaths of 76 soldiers to date in non-combat incidents for 2011, and the injury of 91 others. In comparison, there were 62 non-combat deaths and 71 cases of injury in 2010. The string of non-combat deaths raises questions about the reform progress of the military. Factors behind the deaths include bullying, hazing, and the systemic corruption within the Azerbaijani Armed Forces (see Corruption in Azerbaijan).\nIn 2017, Azerbaijani authorities used large scale torture (the Tartar Case) on Azerbaijani military personnel accused of treason. Generals Nacmeddin Sadikhov and Hikmet Hasanov were accused of torturing Azerbaijani officers and soldiers and according to the authorities and human rights defenders, more than 400 people were subjected to torture in the course of the case. The Azerbaijani authorities claimed one person was killed as a result, while human rights defenders say the number is about 13, and many were wrongfully convicted and given hefty prison sentences.\nSecond Karabakh War.\nThe Second Karabakh War (also known in Azerbaijan as \"The Patriotic War\" or \"Operation Iron Fist\") began on the morning of 27 September 2020 when Azerbaijan launched an offensive along the Line of Contact. On the seventh day of the war, a major offensive was launched by the ground forces, advancing in the north, making some territorial gains while the fighting gradually shifted to the south. Following the capture of Shusha, the second-largest settlement in Nagorno-Karabakh, by Azerbaijani forces, a ceasefire agreement was signed between Azerbaijan, and Armenia, ending all hostilities in the area. Under the agreement, Armenia returned the surrounding territories it occupied in 1994 to Azerbaijan while Azerbaijan gained land access to its Nakhchivan exclave. Total casualties were in the low thousands.\nDuring the war, the Azerbaijani army was widely accused of committing war crimes against Armenian soldiers and civilians. Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International both condemned Azerbaijan's \u201cindiscriminate\u201d shelling of Armenian civilians, including the use of cluster munitions. In addition, videos of Azerbaijani soldiers mistreating or executing captive Armenians were circulated online and received widespread condemnation.\nOn 10 December, a victory parade was held in honor of the Azerbaijani Army on Azadliq Square, with 3,000 soldiers marching alongside military equipment, unmanned aerial vehicles and aircraft.\nIn August 2022, the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination expressed deep concern regarding \"severe and grave human rights violations committed during 2020 hostilities and beyond by the Azerbaijani military forces against prisoners of war and other protected persons of Armenian ethnic or national origin, including extrajudicial killings, torture and other ill-treatment and arbitrary detention as well as the destruction of houses, schools, and other civilian facilities.\"\nStructure.\nCommand.\nSince the fall of the Soviet Union, there have been attempts in the defence ministry to reform the military to be more in line with the Turkish/NATO model, resulting in Soviet-legacy officers such as Rovshan Akbarov and Najmeddin Sadikov being removed from power.\nAzerbaijan periodically holds drills to improve interaction and combat coordination between the servicemen during operations, its military personnel's combat readiness, as well as to develop commanders' military decision-making and unit management skills.\nLand Forces.\nThe Azerbaijani Land Forces number 85,000 strong, according to UK Advanced Research and Assessment Group estimates. The 2,500 men of the National Guard are also part of the ground forces. In addition, there are 300,000 former service personnel who have had military service in the last 15 years. Other paramilitary agencies consist of Interior Ministry Internal Troops of Azerbaijan, 12,000 strong, and the land component of the State Border Service, 5,000 strong.\nAzerbaijan has signed numerous contracts to strengthen its armed forces and to train its military with Turkey's assistance. Over the last 15 years, Azerbaijan has been preparing its military for possible action against Armenian forces in Nagorno-Karabakh.\nThe Land Forces consist of five army corps:\nThe Land Forces include 23 motor rifle brigades, an artillery brigade, a multiple rocket launcher brigade, and an anti-tank regiment. The IISS Military Balance reported in 2007 that the Land Forces had an estimated 40 SA-13 Gopher, SA-4 Ganef, and SA-8 Gecko air defence missile systems, with '80\u2013240 eff.' to support the army in the battlefield. (IISS 2007, p.\u00a0157)\nThe peacekeeping forces of Azerbaijan are mostly supplied from the Land Forces, though the Internal Troops of Azerbaijan do also supply some. As of March 2011, 94 peacekeepers were deployed with the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan. In the past, it also actively supported the peacekeeping operation in Kosovo and Iraq.\nThe Azerbaijani peacekeeping unit deployed in Iraq consisted of 14 officers, 16 sergeants and 120 privates, a total of 150 troops. The unit secured the hydroelectric power station and reservoir in Al Haditha from August 2003. In December 2008, Azerbaijan withdrew the unit from Iraq.\nReportedly in December 2014 Azerbaijan created the Separate Combined Arms Army in Nakhchivan. Karam Mustafayev became commander of the corps. The army was created based on the Nakhchivan 5th Army Corps to strengthen defense capability of Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic, increase of combat capability of military units and formations of the Armed Forces, improve central control, reports quoting the Defence Ministry said.\nAir forces.\nThe Azerbaijani Air and Air Defence Force is a single unified service branch. Some 8,000 men serve in the air force and air defence force. The Air and Air Defence Force has around 106 aircraft and 35 helicopters. The country has four major airbases. Nasosnaya (air base) has fighters, Kyurdamir Air Base a bomber regiment, Ganja Air Base transports, and Baku Kala Air Base the helicopter unit. There are also four other airbases which do not appear to have aircraft based there. These are Dollyar Air Base, Nakhchivan Airport, Sanqacal Air Base, and Sitalcay Air Base.\nThe Azerbaijani Air Force using MiG-21, Su-24 and Su-25 aircraft, as well as the MiG-29 purchased from Ukraine in 2006 and Il-76 transport aircraft. The MiG-29 have been designated as the standard aircraft for the AzAF. Azerbaijan is holding talks with either the People's Republic of China or Pakistan to purchase JF-17 Thunder aircraft. MiG-25s previously in service have been retired seemingly in the 2007\u201309 period.\nAzerbaijan's helicopter force is concentrated at Baku Kala Air Base and according to the IISS consists of a single regiment with around 14\u201315 Mi-24, 12\u201313 Mi-8 and 7 Mi-2. Jane's Information Group and the IISS give figures which agree with only a single aircraft's difference. Recently, end of 2010 Russian Rosvertol announced that Azerbaijan armed forces signed a deal for 24 pieces of Mi-35M (Hind-E) gunships what would further enhance the Azerbaijani ground attack formations.\nThe Air Force has L-39 advanced training aircraft in store. The Azerbaijan Border Guard and Voluntary Society of Defense, Patriotism and Sport have Yakovlev light training aircraft.\nAzerbaijan has missile and radar systems intended to defend Azerbaijani airspace. There are at least 2 divisions of S-300PMU2. Thereby the country has one of the most capable SAM surface-to-air missile system in the region. Azerbaijan also operates two S-200 (SA-5 GAMMON) batteries near Baku and Mingachevir; the S-300PMU-2 represents a logical replacement for these systems offering coverage of the majority of the nation. The country also has about 100 NATO designated SA-2 Guideline (original name S-75), SA-3 Goa (S-125 Pechora-2M), and the SA-5 Gammon (S-200) are in static installations. These may be around Baku and the central part to cover the whole Azerbaijani aerospace.\nHowever, August 2011 investigations shows that after purchase of S-300 surface-to-air missiles, the largest apparent gap in Azerbaijan's air defense system may have been filled.\nAlso in Azerbaijan there was a former Soviet early warning radar. The Gabala Radar Station was a bistatic phased-array installation, operated by the Russian Space Forces. The contract was signed in 2002 and was due to expire in 2012 where it was to be given back to the Azerbaijani government. The contract costed Russia $7\u00a0million per year. The radar station had a range of up to , and was designed to detect intercontinental ballistic missile launches as far as from the Indian Ocean. In December 2012 Russia announced that negotiations had been unsuccessful and that they had stopped using the radar station. The site was given back to Azerbaijan and all the equipment dismantled and transported to Russia. Nowadays, Russia covers the area from the Armavir Radar Station.\nNavy.\nThe main naval base of the Soviet Union in the Caspian Sea was based in Baku. When the Soviet Union collapsed, Azerbaijan inherited the naval base and parts of the Caspian Sea Flotilla. The Azerbaijan Navy has about 2,200 personnel. In 2010, the navy had a Petya class light frigate, \"Qusar\" (G 121), and a number of patrol craft, including one Turk class, \"Araz,\" P 223, one Brya (Project 722) class, P 218, one Shelon (Project 1388M) class, P 212, one Poluchat class (Project 368), P 219, one Luga class (Project 888), T 710, and four Petrushka (Polish UK-3 class), P 213, P 214, P 215, and P 216. There are four minesweepers consisting of 2 Sonya class minesweeper and 2 Yevgenya class minesweepers. (Jane's Fighting Ships 2010)\nThe Navy is also attributed with 5 landing craft, 3 Polnochny and 2 Vydra (IISS 2007), plus three research ships, 1 Project 10470, A 671, ex Svyaga, 1 Balerian Uryvayev class survey vessel (AG) and one Vadim Popov class survey vessel (AG).\nThe U.S. Navy has helped train the Azerbaijani Navy. There is also an agreement to provide US support to refurbish Azerbaijani warships in the Caspian Sea. In 2006, the US Government donated 3 motorboats to the Azerbaijani Navy. In 2007, an agreement between the Azerbaijani Navy and a US military company was concluded, which stated that a part of the Azerbaijani Navy would be equipped with advanced laser marksmanship systems. The US company specialists were also to give training on the use of the new equipment. A number of separate U.S. programmes are underway under the Caspian Guard Initiative, focused mostly on enhancing Azerbaijani and Kazakh maritime border security.\nIn May 2011, the president of the State Oil Company of Azerbaijan Republic Rovnag Abdullayev stated that Azerbaijan would start production of national warships after 2013.\nThe Naval Intelligence of Azerbaijan maintains the 641st Special Warfare Naval Unit. The special forces were trained by the U.S. Navy SEALs Unit 641 has several midget submarines such as Triton-1M and Triton 2 at their disposal as well as underwater tool motion for individual divers. The special unit is composed of 3 reconnaissance groups, 2 groups for mountainous warfare, and one diving group. Obligatory training includes parachute jumping day and night, on land and on water.\nSpecial forces.\nThe Special Forces of Azerbaijan are part of the Ministry of Defence. It was established in April 1999 with officers and warrant officers who had participated in the First Nagorno-Karabakh War of 1991\u20131994. The Turkish Special Forces Command played a role in the formation of the unit. During the 2020 Nagorno-Karabakh War, personnel of the Special Forces reclaimed the city of Jebrayil and nine surrounding villages from the Armenian Army. On November 8, Aliyev congratulated the commander of the Special Forces on their \"liberation of Shusha\". The war was considered to be first time Azerbaijan has actively used all of its special forces units.\nDefense industry.\nThe Ministry of Defence Industry of Azerbaijan directs domestic military supplies for Azerbaijan. It was established in 2005. The Defence Industries Ministry subsumed the State Department for Military Industry and for Armaments and the Military Science Center, each of which was formerly a separate agency within the Azerbaijani Defense Ministry.\nThe defense industry has emerged as an autonomous entity with a growing production capability. The ministry is cooperating with the defense sectors of Ukraine, Belarus and Pakistan. Along with other contracts, Azerbaijani defence industries and Turkish companies, Azerbaijan will produce 40mm revolver grenade launchers, 107mm and 122mm MLRS systems, Cobra 4\u00d74 vehicles and joint modernization of BTR vehicles in Baku.\nThe major military companies of Azerbaijan are:\nIn early 2008, reports indicated that an agreement with Turkey had been signed which would lead to Azerbaijan producing armoured personnel carriers, infantry fighting vehicles, and small calibre artillery pieces.\nInternational cooperation.\nAzerbaijan cooperates with about 60 countries in the military-technical sphere and has an agreement on military-technical cooperation with more than 30 countries.\nIsrael.\nAzerbaijan and Israel cooperate on numerous areas of the defense industry. Israel was Azerbaijan's largest weapon supplier with $4.85 billion in sales during 2016 alone. As of 2023, Turkey was Azerbaijan's largest weapon supplier. Azerbaijan has shown great interest in Israeli technology over the years. In particular, an agreement was reached over the construction of the factory of intelligence and combat drones in Azerbaijan.\nThe Israeli defense company Elta Systems Ltd has had cooperation from Azerbaijan in building the TecSAR reconnaissance satellite system, which can take high-definition photos of ground surfaces in all weather conditions. According to Azerbaijani military experts, the TecSAR system will be indispensable for military operations in the mountainous terrains of Azerbaijan.\nAs of June 2009, Israel and Azerbaijan had been negotiating on the production of Namer armoured infantry fighting vehicles in Azerbaijan. There is no further information as to whether any agreement has been made.\nTurkey.\nIn December 2009, an agreement on military assistance was signed by Turkey and Azerbaijan. The agreement envisions Ankara supplying Azerbaijan with weapons, military equipment, and, if necessary, soldiers in case war with Armenia over Karabakh resumes.\nTurkey has provided Azerbaijan with infantry weapons, tactical vehicles (jeeps, trucks, etc.) professional training, military organization, technology transfer, licensed military hardware production, and other services. Due to help from Turkish specialists and instructors, thousands of Azerbaijani officers have been trained to western standards.\nThe military position as an area of international importance of Azerbaijan increased with an agreement between Azerbaijan and Turkey on the participation of an Azerbaijani peacekeeping platoon in the staff of the Turkish battalion in Kosovo.\nSince 1992, Azerbaijan and Turkey have signed more than 100 military protocols, some of the major protocols include:\nIn May 2011, Azerbaijan had discussed the purchase of long-range rockets from two Chinese companies, the minister of the defence industry has said. Other arms deals were signed with Turkey. Turkish Defence Minister Vecdi Gonul and Yaver Jamalov signed a protocol of intent on future joint production of two types of output \u2013 107-mm rockets and the national rifle, possibly the Mehmet\u00e7ik-1. A protocol of intent was signed the same day with the Mechanical and Chemical Industry Corporation MKEK on the joint production of 120-mm mortar launchers. This project will come into force in a few months time. Agreement has also been reached with Turkish company Aselsan on the production of some types of defence output in Azerbaijan, specifically the latest types of weapons' sights. These projects will probably happen in the near future too. Recently, Turkish defense industries secretariat told that an export version of the T-155 Firtina self-propelled howitser is almost done and could start production. T-155 has been powered by a German MTU power pack, which restricts the sale to some countries like Azerbaijan. The Turkish manufacturer MKEK, has announced that they have found an alternate supplier for the power pack where Azerbaijan showed interest to buy the high tech, more capable 155mm 52 caliber from Turkish authorities.\nUnited States.\nSection 907 of the United States Freedom Support Act bans any kind of direct United States aid to the Azerbaijani government. Since a waiver was made in 2001 there has been extensive U.S. military cooperation with Azerbaijan. This has included Special Forces and naval aid, consultations with United States European Command, and linkages through the U.S. National Guard State Partnership Program.\nOn 19 May 2006, Azerbaijani Defense Minister Safar Abiyev and the then commander of United States Air Forces in Europe General Tom Hobbins met in Baku to discuss military cooperation. He said the objective of his visit was to become familiar with the state of Azerbaijani armed forces. Hobbins pointed to the progress made in the NATO-Azerbaijan relations, saying that the successful implementation of the NATO Partnership for Peace program in Azerbaijan has brought the country even closer to the alliance. He said that the two countries' air forces will expand cooperation.\nThe U.S. state of Oklahoma is linked with Azerbaijan through the U.S. National Guard State Partnership Program (SPP). Oklahoma National Guard troops have been sent on training and humanitarian missions to Baku.\nRussia.\nRussia is one of Azerbaijan's main suppliers of arms. \"As of today, military and technical cooperation with Russia is measured at $4 billion and it tends to grow further,\" President Ilham Aliyev said after meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin in Baku in 2013.\nIsrael.\nAzerbaijan and Israel cooperate on numerous areas of the defense industry. Israel was Azerbaijan's largest weapon supplier with $4.85 billion in sales during 2016 alone. As of 2023, Turkey was Azerbaijan's largest weapon supplier. Azerbaijan has shown great interest in Israeli technology over the years. In particular, an agreement was reached over the construction of the factory of intelligence and combat drones in Azerbaijan.\nThe Israeli defense company Elta Systems Ltd has had cooperation from Azerbaijan in building the TecSAR reconnaissance satellite system, which can take high-definition photos of ground surfaces in all weather conditions. According to Azerbaijani military experts, the TecSAR system will be indispensable for military operations in the mountainous terrains of Azerbaijan.\nAs of June 2009, Israel and Azerbaijan had been negotiating on the production of Namer armoured infantry fighting vehicles in Azerbaijan. There is no further information as to whether any agreement has been made.\nNATO.\nThe North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and Azerbaijan cooperate. Azerbaijan's Individual Partnership Action Plan (IPAP) and its Partnership for Peace (PfP) linkages lay out the programme of cooperation between Azerbaijan and NATO.\nThe Azerbaijani government has however delayed implementing IPAP-recommended reforms, however, in part at least because no decision had been taken to seek NATO membership. This is because Azerbaijan's foreign policy 'seeks to balance interests with the U.S., EU, Russia and Iran.'\nAccording to a NATO diplomatic source some key officials at NATO headquarters in Brussels were pushing hard for engaging Azerbaijan on the membership question. \"Turkey, Romania, Italy, Poland, the United Kingdom and the Baltic states,\" are among the member-states also backing a fast track for Azerbaijan's NATO membership.\nHowever, Azerbaijan made its policy of not being aligned with a geopolitical/military structure official when it became a full member of the Non-Aligned Movement in 2011.\nThere is also a limited amount of military cooperation with the other countries of GUAM: Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan, and Moldova.\nPersonnel.\nEducational system.\nThe purpose of Azerbaijani military education and training is to train soldiers, officers, and non-commissioned officers to have independent and creative thinking and commitment to the Azerbaijani people and the government. Military education in the Azerbaijani Armed Forces have been described as either being secondary education, further education, or higher education.\nAzerbaijani pilots were formerly trained in the Azerbaijan Air Force School, where they would then develop their skills in operational units. Azerbaijan has an experience exchange with Turkey, Ukraine, the United States and a number of NATO countries. The Turkish Air Force School has a great role in the training of Azerbaijani military pilots. Azerbaijani pilots are also trained in Ukraine's Pilot Training School.\nThe following is a list of educational institutions in the armed forces, under the auspices of the National Defense University:\nMilitary Justice.\nMilitary Courts act as courts of first instance deals. The Military Court is composed of a President and judges. The following military courts exist in Azerbaijan:\nWomen and ethnic minorities in the armed forces.\nDuring the first war, Russians, who were a large minority in Azerbaijan at the time, served in the units of the Azerbaijani Army, many of whom formerly served in the Soviet Army. According to the Russian Ministry of Defence more than 300 officers of the 7th Army, based in the capital of Baku, refused to leave Azerbaijan at the outset of the war. During the Second Karabakh War, the death of an ethnic Russian Azerbaijani soldier, Dmitry Solntsev, was reported. There was also Denis Aliyev (born as Denis Pronin) from the X\u0259tai raion, who was killed in Jabrayil. He was later posthumously awarded the Medal \"For the Liberation of Jabrayil\" in December. Cossacks, associated with the Association of Cossacks of Azerbaijan, often join the Azerbaijani Armed Forces.\nFemale military personnel in the military are generally involved in education, office work, medical care, and the development of international cooperation. They also serve in the rear, signal troops, and intelligence forces. Women are exempt from conscription, which means that female service is purely on a voluntary basis. There are currently 1,000 female personnel in the Azerbaijani military, accounting for 3% of the armed forces. During the Karabakh Conflict, 2,000 of the 74,000 Azerbaijani soldiers were women, and 600 of them directly took part in military operations, with a women's battalion being established in 1992. The enrollment of females in Azerbaijani higher military schools began in 1999. According to soldier Tehrana Bahruzi in her book, \u201cZakir Hasanov: the Ideal Minister\", Defence Minister Zakir Hasanov was responsible for launching the first female unit in the Special Forces of Azerbaijan. In October 2020, the first female military casualty was reported, a combat medic who died while taking wounded soldiers from the battlefield.\nPersonnel medals and awards.\nToday 'National Hero of Azerbaijan' is the highest national title in the country, awarded for outstanding services of national importance to Azerbaijan in defense, as well as other deeds in other spheres.\nTraditions and military institutions.\nMilitary oath.\nThe military oath () is taken by conscripts as a legal basis of the beginning of their military service. The oath is administered by the commanding officer of the unit. The following is the text for the current version of the oath:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan, and I swear that I will be loyal to my homeland, Azerbaijan and its people, when I join the Azerbaijani Armed Forces.\nI solemnly swear:\nI will honorably protect the interests of the Republic of Azerbaijan, its sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence, for which I will spare no blood and soul. I will be sincere, brave, disciplined, will not give military secrets, will fulfill the requirements of military regulations, and will unconditionally obey the orders of commanders and chiefs.\nI will study the military work in good faith, continue and develop the military traditions of my ancestors with honor, and I will be ready to stand up for the Motherland at any moment with a weapon in hand.\nIf I break my oath, I am ready to take responsibility with the full seriousness of the laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan.\nBattle flags and pennants.\nA battle flag for a military unit is a symbol of honor which remains forever in the unit unless it is dissolved. By military law, if the battle flag is lost in battle, the commander of the military unit and the servicemen under its command are brought to court, and the unit is abolished. Battle flags have the color of the State Flag, with the slogan \"For Azerbaijan\" being embroidered with golden silk on a blue stripe along the upper edge of the fabric. Outside the battle flag, the Azerbaijani military also utilizes the Turkish military tradition of pennants as symbols.\nMilitary holidays.\nThese are the military holidays observed by all service personnel of the Armed Forces:\nAzerbaijan Military History Museum.\nAzerbaijan Military History Museum is a structure under the Ministry of Defense. It was established on 10 December 1992 by the order of the Minister of Defense and in accordance with a decree signed on 29 October 1992 \"On the transfer of the Museum of Combat Glory of the VI Army Garrison of the Commonwealth of Independent States\". Today, the museum displays 5 tanks, 9 armored personnel carriers, 16 artillery pieces, 6 aircraft, 4 helicopters, 6 different military equipment of the Air Force. Currently, the number of exhibits totals 11,000.\nRepublican Veterans Organization.\nAfter the Second World War, veterans movements were launched in Azerbaijan, with the Baku Veterans Committee being established on 10 June 1960. The activity of the committee was limited to Baku until the early 1970s. During the leadership of First Secretary Heydar Aliyev, there was a revival in the veteran movement, during which the committee gradually expanded to the republic. The establishment of the Republican Veterans Organization took place on 21 March 1987. Despite the official registration of the RVO with the Ministry of Justice, the activity of the organization was largely formal due to the tensions in the country with the Karabakh War, as well as the attitude of the government towards Red Army veterans in general. One of the first laws signed by the President Aliyev was the Law \"On Veterans\" (28 June 1994), which restored the mandate for the RVO.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1089", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1089", "title": "Azerbaijan/Foreign relations", "text": ""}
{"id": "1091", "revid": "1305063761", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1091", "title": "Geography of Armenia", "text": "Armenia is a landlocked country in the South Caucasus region of the Caucasus. The country is geographically located in West Asia https://\nthe Armenian plateau. Armenia is bordered on the north and east by Georgia and Azerbaijan and on the south and west by Iran, Azerbaijan's exclave Nakhchivan, and Turkey.\nThe terrain is mostly mountainous, with fast flowing rivers and few forests. The climate is highland continental: hot summers and cold winters. The land rises to above sea-level at Mount Aragats.\nPhysical environment.\nArmenia is located in the southern Caucasus, the region southwest of Russia between the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea. Modern Armenia occupies part of historical Armenia, whose ancient centers were in the valley of the Araks River and the region around Lake Van in Turkey. Armenia is bordered on the north by Georgia, on the east by Azerbaijan, on the south by Iran, and on the west by Turkey.\nIn Armenia forest cover is around 12% of the total land area, equivalent to 328,470 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, down from 334,730 hectares (ha) in 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 310,000 hectares (ha) and planted forest covered 18,470 hectares (ha). Of the naturally regenerating forest 5% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity) and around 0% of the forest area was found within protected areas. For the year 2015, 100% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership.\nTopography and drainage.\nTwenty-five million years ago, a geological upheaval pushed up the Earth's crust to form the Armenian Plateau, creating the complex topography of modern Armenia. The Lesser Caucasus range extends through northern Armenia, runs southeast between Lake Sevan and Azerbaijan, then passes roughly along the Armenian-Azerbaijani border to Iran. Thus situated, the mountains make travel from north to south difficult. Geological turmoil continues in the form of devastating earthquakes, which have plagued Armenia. In December 1988, the second largest city in the republic, Leninakan (now Gyumri), was heavily damaged by a massive quake that killed more than 25,000 people.\nAbout half of Armenia's area of approximately has an elevation of at least , and only 3% of the country lies below . The lowest points are in the valleys of the Araks River and the Debed River in the far north, which have elevations of , respectively. Elevations in the Lesser Caucasus vary between . To the southwest of the range is the Armenian Plateau, which slopes southwestward toward the Araks River on the Turkish border. The plateau is masked by intermediate mountain ranges and extinct volcanoes. The largest of these, Mount Aragats, high, is also the highest point in Armenia. Most of the population lives in the western and northwestern parts of the country, where the two major cities, Yerevan and Gyumri, are located.\nThe valleys of the Debed and Akstafa rivers form the chief routes into Armenia from the north as they pass through the mountains. Lake Sevan, across at its widest point and long, is by far the largest lake. It lies above sea level on the plateau and is large. Other main lakes are: Arpi, , Sev, , Akna .\nTerrain is most rugged in the extreme southeast, which is drained by the Bargushat River, and most moderate in the Araks River valley to the extreme southwest. Most of Armenia is drained by the Araks or its tributary, the Hrazdan, which flows from Lake Sevan. The Araks forms most of Armenia's border with Turkey and Iran, while the Zangezur Mountains form the border between Armenia's southern province of Syunik and Azerbaijan's adjacent Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic.\nClimate.\nTemperatures in Armenia generally depend upon elevation. Mountain formations block the moderating climatic influences of the Mediterranean Sea and the Black Sea, creating wide seasonal variations with cold snowy winters, and warm to hot summers. On the Armenian Plateau, the mean midwinter temperature is to , and the mean midsummer temperature is to . Average precipitation ranges from per year in the lower Araks River valley to at the highest altitudes. Despite the harshness of winter in most parts (with frosts reaching and lower in Shirak region), the fertility of the plateau's volcanic soil made Armenia one of the world's earliest sites of agricultural activity.\nArea and boundaries.\nArea:&lt;br&gt;\"total:\" 29,743\u00a0km2\n\"country comparison to the world:\" 143\n\"land:\" 28,203\u00a0km2&lt;br&gt;\"water:\" 1,540\u00a0km2\nArea comparative\nLand boundaries:&lt;br&gt;\"total:\" 1,570\u00a0km&lt;br&gt;\"border countries:\"\nAzerbaijan 566\u00a0km, Azerbaijan-Nakhchivan exclave 221\u00a0km, Georgia 219\u00a0km, Iran 44\u00a0km, Turkey 311\u00a0km\nCoastline:\n0\u00a0km (landlocked)\nElevation extremes:&lt;br&gt;\"lowest point:\" 375m&lt;br&gt;\"highest point:\" Mount Aragats 4,090 m\nExtreme points of Armenia:&lt;br&gt;\"North:\"\nTavush ()&lt;br&gt;\"South:\"\nSyunik ()&lt;br&gt;\"West:\"\nShirak ()&lt;br&gt;\"East:\"\nSyunik ()\nResources and land use.\nNatural resources:\ndeposits of gold, copper, molybdenum, zinc, bauxite\nArmenia has significant deposits of copper, molybdenum and gold, as well as smaller deposits of zinc, lead and silver. Some copper-molybdenum and polymetallic ore deposits are rich in elements such as bismuth, tellurium, selenium, gallium, indium, thallium, rhenium and germanium.\nLand use:\n&lt;br&gt;\"arable land:4.456 km\u00b2,\" 15.8%&lt;br&gt;\"permanent crops:\" 1.9%&lt;br&gt;\"permanent pastures: 4.2%\"&lt;br&gt;\"forest (2018): 11.2%\"&lt;br&gt;\"other:\" 31.2% (2011)\nIrrigated land: 2.084\u00a0km2 (2018)\nTotal renewable water resources:\n7.77 m3 (2011) Armenia is considered to be a big water \u201csupplier\u201d in the Caspian basin; as a result, the country lacks water, especially in summer when the rate of evaporation exceeds the amount of precipitation. That is the main reason why since ancient times inhabitants have built water reservoirs and irrigation canals in the area. Lake Sevan contains the largest amount of water in the country.\nFreshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural):&lt;br&gt;\"total:\" 2.86\u00a0km3/yr (40%/6%/54%)&lt;br&gt;\"per capita:\" 929.7 m3/yr (2010)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1092", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1092", "title": "Demographics of Armenia", "text": "The population of Eastern Armenia \u2013 corresponding to the First Republic of Armenia as well as Soviet and post-Soviet Armenia \u2013 has undergone significant changes in the 20th century.\nFollowing Turkey's genocide of Armenians in 1915, between 300,000-600,000 Armenians fled from Western Armenia to Eastern Armenia, a number which increased further following Turkey's invasion of Eastern Armenia in 1920. After registering steady increases during the Soviet period due to repatriation campaigns and low emigration rates, the population declined from its peak value of 3.633 million in 1992 to 3.075 million in 2025. Primary factors contributing to this emigration include the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict and the economic hardship caused by the ongoing blockade imposed by Turkey and Azerbaijan (1989-present). Recently there has been a moderate influx of Armenians returning to Armenia.\nHistorical statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCiting Armenia's conquest and occupation by the Seljuks (11th century) and Mongols (13th\u201315th centuries), historians Edmund Herzig and Marina Kurkchiyan write \"the combination of progressive Turkish (and Kurdish) immigration and Armenian decline, through massacre, famine and emigration, changed the demographic balance in a way that Arab immigration had never done\".\nAs a result of \"deliberate relocation policies employed by both the Ottomans and Safavids\" during the Ottoman\u2013Safavid War, there was a large-scale displacement of Armenians; Armenians also emigrated \"to escape the insecurity and hardship of life in war-torn Armenia\". Whilst Shah Abbas I relocated Armenians to Isfahan and \"Armenian colonies in other parts of Iran\" in 1604\u20131605, \"the Ottomans also removed Armenian artisans to their capital\".\nFollowing the Russian annexation, 45,000 Armenians from Persia and 100,000 from the Ottoman Empire migrated to Eastern Armenia, with another 25,000 migrating following the 1878 Russo-Turkish war. As a result of the repatriation, Armenians had regained a majority in their homeland \"for the first time in several hundred years\". As a result of persecution and massacres in the Ottoman Empire, some 100,000 Armenians immigrated to Eastern Armenia between 1870 and 1910. The areas with Armenian-majorities would later \"form the nucleus in the twentieth century of an independent Armenian state\".\nHistorian Sen Hovhannisian writes that during the 80 years of peace during which Eastern Armenia was part of Russia, there was \"unprecedented\" population growth: it tripled from 161,700 to 496,100 between 1831 and 1873, and doubled in the following forty years until it reached 1,000,100 in 1913. The population between 1831 and 1913 increased 6.18 times, yielding an average annual growth rate of 10,200 people. Following the outbreak of World War I, the population, which was 1,014,300 in 1914, fell by 20,500 in 1916 due to the Christian population being drafted. As a result of \"wars and civil clashes, hunger and diseases\" of 1918\u20131920, 432,000 people (35.8 percent of the population) were \"exterminated\".\nUpon its sovietisation, the territory of modern-day Armenia had a population of some 720,000, a decline of nearly 30 percent\u2014\"almost half\" consisted of refugees. American historian Richard Pipes states that \"according to Soviet estimates, the Armenian population of Transcaucasia declined between 1914 and 1920 by one half million: 200,000 in consequence of Turkish, and, presumably, Communist, massacres, and 300,000 from other causes, mostly famine and disease\".\nThe drastic decline of the population was addressed by the Soviet Armenian government by repatriating displaced Azerbaijanis to districts where they had formed a significant population in Armenia. The Azerbaijani population of Armenia which numbered some 10,000 in 1920 (attributed to the ARF government's expulsion of at least 200,000 Turks and Kurds) rose to 72,596 in 1922 as a result of the return of 60,000 refugees. In addition to this, the Soviet government welcomed 44,000 Armenian refugees from Greece, Iraq, Turkey, and elsewhere throughout the 1920s and 1930s. In 1946\u20131948, 86,000 Armenians were repatriated to Soviet Armenia to offset the country's wartime losses. At the same time, by agreement of Armenian and Azerbaijani Soviet leaderships, tens of thousands of Azerbaijanis in Armenia were resettled to Azerbaijan to make room for the repatriates.\nPopulation size and structure.\nAccording to the 2018 HDI statistical update (with data for 2017), compared to all its neighbouring countries Armenia has:\nSince 1990, Armenia recorded steady growth of average annual HDI scores in every reported period (1990\u20132000, 2000\u20132010, 2010\u20132017).\nAccording to the 2016 Sustainable Society Index, Armenia has a higher rank of Human Wellbeing than all its neighbours. At the same time its Economic Wellbeing rank is below neighbouring countries.\nThe 2011 census counted 539,394 persons (19.4 percent of the population above 6 years of age) with higher professional education.\nStructure of the population.\nThe median age in 2020 was 36.6 years (male: 35.1, female: 38.3).\n36.3 percent of women who gave birth in 2016 had higher education.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 12.10.2011):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2019):\nIn 2016, households with up to four members prevailed in urban areas throughout Armenia, with the share of such households coming to 70.2 percent in urban communities compared to 60.1 percent in rural communities.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nVital statistics.\nVital statistics summary data.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n1 The numbers of life births and deaths until 1959 were calculated from the birth rate and death rate, respectively\n2 The high number of deaths in 1988 is related to the Spitak earthquake, while in the rest of the 20th century the death rate was equal to the rate of other European countries (excluding England).\n3 The population estimate for 2012 has been recalculated on the basis of the 2011 Census.\n2024: https://armstat.am/file/article/population_01_07_24.pdf\nLife expectancy.\nAccording to the 2018 HDI statistical update, compared to all its neighbouring countries Armenia has the highest health expenditures as percentage of its GDP and the highest healthy life expectancy at birth.\nIn 2016, the average life expectancy at birth for males was 71.6 years and for females was 78.3 years, with the average at 75.0 years.\nAfter a setback during 1986\u20131996, mostly due to the Spitak earthquake, and the First Nagorno-Karabakh War, Armenia regained its position and was consistently among the top three former Soviet republics during 1997\u20132016, topping the list in 2007.\nDuring the Soviet period, life expectancy was traditionally high in Armenia and topped all other republics of the USSR, and most other countries in Eastern Europe between 1978 and 1980.\nSource: UN\nReproduction indicators.\nIn 2016, natural increase of population comprised 12,366 persons and the crude rate of natural increase reached 4.1%, per 1000 population, decreasing by 0.4 percent compared to the previous year.\nAfter double-digit crude natural increase rates between 1982 and 1992, rates did not exceed 5.5 after 1998. At a regional level, slightly better rates were recorded in the capital Yerevan, where the value of 5.5 is consistently being surpassed since 2009. Particularly weak is natural increase in Tavush and Syunik provinces, not much better off are Lori and Vayots Dzor provinces.\nFertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and CBR (Crude Birth Rate):\nArmenia's Total Fertility Rate at 1.6 was lowest in the Caucasus region in 2017. TFR is expected to stay at 1.6 between 2015 and 2020, less from 1.7 in years 2010\u20132015.\nThe mean age of mothers at birth was 26.8 years and at first birth it was 24.7 years in 2016. Adolescent birth rate, as well as, share of women married aged 18 was lowest in Armenia compared to its neighbouring countries.\nIn 2016, infant mortality rate (in the first year of their life) was 8.6 per 1,000 live births.\nA study revealed that population growth rate \"changes\" were more favourable in Armenia than in its surrounding countries between 2005 and 2015.\nSince the 1960s, Armenia has the highest share of urban population among South Caucasus countries.\nEthnic groups.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 2022, ethnic minorities included Russians, Assyrians, Ukrainians, Yazidis, Kurds, Iranians, Greeks, Georgians, and Belarusians. There were also smaller communities of Vlachs, Mordvins, Ossetians, Udis, and Tats. Minorities of Poles and Caucasus Germans also exist, though they are heavily Russified.\nLanguages.\nArmenian is the sole official language.\nAs per 2022 census data, Armenian is the most widely spoken language at 99%, Kurdish at 1%, Russian at 65% and English at 5%.\nArmenia is a member of La Francophonie, and hosted its annual summit in 2018.\nThe largest communities of the Armenian diaspora, are fluent in Russian and English.\nReligions.\nMost Armenians are Christians, primarily of the Apostolic Church rite. Armenia is considered the first nation to officially adopt Christianity, which was first preached in Armenia by two Apostles of Jesus, St. Bartholomew and St. Thaddeus in the 1st century. The Armenian Apostolic Church can trace its roots back to the 3rd and 4th centuries. The country formally adopted the Christian faith in 301 A.D. Over 90 percent of Armenians belong to the Armenian Apostolic Church. Armenia also has a population of Catholics and Evangelical Protestants.\nAccording to the 2022 Armenian census, number of adherents of primary religions in Armenia are the following: 2,793,042 (95.2%) Armenian Apostolic, 15,836 (0.5%) Evangelical, 14,349 (0.5%) Yazidism, 17,884 (0.6%) Armenian and Roman (Latin) Catholic, 6,316 (0.2%) Eastern Orthodox, 5,282 (0.2%) Jehovah's Witness, 2,000 (0.1%) Molokan (non-Orthodox Russians), 524 Assyrian Church of the East (Nestorian), 2,132 Paganism, 515 Islam, 118 Judaism. 17,501 (0.6%) people chose No Religion and 49,353 people chose (1.7%) No Response.\nEmigration.\nCompared to its neighbouring countries, Armenia has the highest share of immigrants (6.5 percent of total population, 2017 data).\nThe estimated number of population net migration is \u221224.8 thousand persons, according to the Integrated living conditions survey of households of 2016; for urban population \u221213.8 thousand and for rural population \u221211.0 thousand persons.\n24.9% of households were involved in external and internal migration processes over the period of 2013\u2013 2016. Migration directions were distributed as follows: 12% \u2013 internal, 10.5% \u2013 Republic of Artsakh, rest (76.4%) \u2013 international (of which 89.8% \u2013 Russia). Among household members of age 15 and above, who left their permanent residence in 2013\u20132016 for 3 months and longer and had not returned as of 2016, 11.9% were in Armenia, 13.0% in Artsakh, and 75.1% in other countries, predominantly in Russia. More than 54% of migrant household members of the age 15 years and above sent money and/ or goods to their families/relatives/friends within 12 months preceding the survey.\nAccording to 2019 UN data, the emigration rate averaged annually around 1.7 per 1000 inhabitants in years 2015\u20132020 and is expected to remain the same until year 2045. These are below average emigration rate of 11.5 per 1000 in years 2000\u20132010 and even below the emigration rate of 3.2 per 1000 in years 1980\u20131985.\nMigration during post-Soviet period.\nIt is estimated that 740,000-1,300,000 people left Armenia between 1988 and 2005.\nEconomically recessed situation in Armenia during the 1990s enhanced the emigration of 125,000 refugees and displaced persons. Human and natural disasters also caused approximately 192,000 individuals to become internally displaced persons in Armenia. Among the disasters, the major impact was the 1988 Spitak earthquake.\nAfter the collapse of the Soviet Union, borders that were once formal, now assumed real significance. Nonetheless, increased political, inter-ethnic, and social tensions prompted more and more people to migrate between Armenia and its neighbouring countries. As a result, approximately 100,000 persons or 3 percent of the country's population emigrated during the beginning of 1990s.\nRefugees and forcibly displaced persons started arriving to Armenia in spring 1988 and continued coming until late 1991. During this time, Armenia gave shelter to approximately 419,000 refugees and displaced persons, 360,000 of whom migrated from Azerbaijan. The rest immigrated from other regions of the former Soviet Union.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMigration flows during the post-soviet period can be divided into 3 stages:\nAccording to government records, over 55 per cent of all emigrants are unmarried and 60 per cent are males between the ages of 20 and 44 (very few are children and even fewer are elderly people). Most have an educational level far higher than the national average and have no intention of returning to Armenia. Although no hard data exists, emigrant families appear to be even less likely to return.\nThe emigration of the major part of the Armenian population has brought about important changes. For example, a decrease in the number of people of reproductive age in Armenia has led to a progressive drop in marriages and birth rates. There has also been a considerable change in the ethnic composition of the population in Armenia due to a higher rate of emigration among ethnic minorities.\nWealth and poverty.\nInequality.\nOut of 41 emerging economies, Armenia was among only four, which recorded rising inequality (measured by Gini coefficient) in years 2007\u20132015.\nWealth.\nAccording to Global Wealth Report, prepared by Credit Suisse, mean wealth per adult in Armenia in 2019 is estimated at $19,517 (rising 9 times from estimated $2,177 in year 2000). Mean wealth per adult in Armenia surpasses corresponding values for neighboring countries Georgia and Azerbaijan by over 50%, all CIS countries except Russia and Kazakhstan, and neighboring Iran. Growth rate of mean wealth per adult between 2000 and 2019 with the value of 9 times beats all neighboring countries, most of CIS countries as well as Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.\nMedian wealth per adult is reported at $8,309 in 2019, above the world average, rising 9.6 times from $862 in year 2000.\nBetween 2000 and 2019, average debts per adult grew 28.7 times to $1,261, or 6.5% of wealth per adult (below the 11.9% world average).\n55% of adults own less than $10,000, 42.7% \u2014 $10,000\u2013$100,000, 2.2% \u2014 $100,000\u2013$1\u00a0million and 0.1% \u2014 over $1\u00a0million. The share of adults owning less than $10,000 with the value of 55% is less than corresponding value in each of CIS countries, neighboring Iran and Turkey, as well as the world average. Gini coefficient for wealth is reported at 66.3%, less than 82.4% the European average and 88.5% the world average.\nPoverty.\nAs much as 53.5% of the country's population was officially considered poor in 2004. Poverty fell significantly in the following years amid double-digit economic growth that came to an end due to the 2008 financial crisis. It soared to almost 36% in 2010, one year after Armenia's Gross Domestic Product shrunk by over 14%. Afterwards, there was a decreasing trend throughout the last years reaching 23.5% in 2018, down from 25.7% in 2017.\nThe poverty indicators in Shirak, Lori, Kotayk, Tavush and Armavir provinces are higher than the country average. The highest poverty rate in the country has been recorded in Shirak province, where 46% of the population is below the poverty line. To overcome poverty, Armenia would need AMD 63.2\u00a0billion, or an amount equal to 1.2% of GDP, in addition to the resources already allocated for social assistance, assuming that such assistance would be efficiently targeted to the poor.\nIn terms of the international poverty line corresponding to US$1.25 in 2005 PPP, poverty in Armenia went down from 19.3% in the year 2001 to 1.5% in the year 2008 and remained nearly unchanged until the year 2015 moving in the range of 1.5% \u2013 2.7%.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1093", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1093", "title": "Politics of Armenia", "text": "The politics of Armenia take place in the framework of the parliamentary representative democratic republic of Armenia, whereby the president of Armenia is the head of state and the prime minister of Armenia the head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the president and the Government. Legislative power is vested in both the Government and Parliament.\nHistory.\nArmenia became independent from the Russian Empire on 28 May 1918 as the \"Republic of Armenia\", later referred as First Republic of Armenia. About a month before its independence Armenia was part of short lived Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic. Suffering heavy losses during the Turkish invasion of Armenia and after the Soviet invasion of Armenia, the government of the First Republic resigned on 2 December 1920. Soviet Russia reinstalled its control over the country, which later became part of the Transcaucasian SFSR. The TSFSR was dissolved in 1936 and Armenia became a constituent republic of the Soviet Union known as the Armenian SSR, later also referred as the \"Second Republic of Armenia\".\nDuring the dissolution of the Soviet Union the population of Armenia voted overwhelmingly for independence following the 1991 Armenian independence referendum. It was followed by a presidential election in October 1991 that gave 83% of the votes to Levon Ter-Petrosyan. Earlier in 1990, when the National Democratic Union party defeated the Armenian Communist Party, he was elected Chairman of the Supreme Council of Armenia. Ter-Petrosyan was re-elected in 1996. Following public discontent and demonstrations against his policies on Nagorno-Karabakh, the President resigned in January 1998 and was replaced by Prime Minister Robert Kocharyan, who was elected as second President in March 1998. Following the assassination of Prime Minister Vazgen Sargsyan, parliament Speaker Karen Demirchyan and six other officials during parliament seating on 27 October 1999, a period of political instability ensued during which an opposition headed by elements of the former Armenian National Movement government attempted unsuccessfully to force Kocharyan to resign. In May 2000, Andranik Margaryan replaced Aram Sargsyan (a brother of assassinated Vazgen Sargsyan) as prime minister.\nKocharyan's re-election as president in 2003 was followed by widespread allegations of ballot-rigging. He went on to propose controversial constitutional amendments on the role of parliament. These were rejected in a referendum the following May. Concurrent parliamentary elections left Kocharyan's party in a very powerful position in the parliament. There were mounting calls for the President's resignation in early 2004 with thousands of demonstrators taking to the streets in support of demands for a referendum of confidence in him.\nThe Government of Armenia's stated aim is to build a Western-style parliamentary democracy. However, international observers have questioned the fairness of Armenia's parliamentary and presidential elections and constitutional referendum between 1995 and 2018, citing polling deficiencies, lack of cooperation by the Electoral Commission, and poor maintenance of electoral lists and polling places. Armenia is considered one of the most democratic nations of the Commonwealth of Independent States and the most democratic in the Caucasus region.\nThe observance of human rights in Armenia is uneven and is marked by shortcomings. Police brutality allegedly still goes largely unreported, while observers note that defendants are often beaten to extract confessions and are denied visits from relatives and lawyers. Public demonstrations usually take place without government interference, though one rally in November 2000 by an opposition party was followed by the arrest and imprisonment for a month of its organizer. Freedom of religion is not always protected under existing law. Nontraditional churches, especially the Jehovah's Witnesses, have been subjected to harassment, sometimes violently. All churches apart from the Armenian Apostolic Church must register with the government, and proselytizing was forbidden by law, though since 1997 the government has pursued more moderate policies. The government's policy toward conscientious objection is in transition, as part of Armenia's accession to the Council of Europe.\nArmenia boasts a good record on the protection of national minorities, for whose representatives (Assyrians, Kurds, Russians and Yazidis) four seats are reserved in the National Assembly. The government does not restrict internal or international travel.\nTransition to a parliamentary republic.\nIn December 2015, the country held a referendum which approved transformation of Armenia from a semi-presidential to a parliamentary republic.\nAs a result, the president was stripped of his veto faculty and the presidency was downgraded to a figurehead position elected by parliament every seven years. The president is not allowed to be a member of any political party and re-election is forbidden.\nSkeptics saw the constitutional reform as an attempt of third president Serzh Sargsyan to remain in control by becoming Prime Minister after fulfilling his second presidential term in 2018.\nIn March 2018, the Armenian parliament elected Armen Sarkissian as the new President of Armenia. The controversial constitutional reform to reduce presidential power was implemented, while the authority of the prime minister was strengthened. In May 2018, parliament elected opposition leader Nikol Pashinyan as the new prime minister. His predecessor Serzh Sargsyan resigned two weeks earlier following widespread anti-government demonstrations.\nIn June 2021, early parliamentary elections were held. Nikol Pashinyan's Civil Contract party won 71 seats, while 29 went to the Armenia Alliance headed by former President Robert Kocharyan. The I Have Honor Alliance, which formed around another former president, Serzh Sargsyan, won seven seats. After the election, Armenia's acting prime minister Nikol Pashinyan was officially appointed to the post of prime minister by the country's president Armen Sarkissian. In January 2022, Armenian President Armen Sarkissian resigned from office, stating that the constitution does no longer give the president sufficient powers or influence. On 3 March 2022, Vahagn Khachaturyan was elected as the fifth president of Armenia in the second round of parliamentary vote.\nLegislative branch.\nThe unicameral National Assembly of Armenia (\"Azgayin Zhoghov\") is the legislative branch of the government of Armenia.\nBefore the 2015 Armenian constitutional referendum, it was initially made of 131 members, elected for five-year terms: 41 members in single-seat constituencies and 90 by proportional representation. The proportional-representation seats in the National Assembly are assigned on a party-list basis among those parties that receive at least 5% of the total of the number of the votes.\nFollowing the 2015 referendum, the number of MPs was reduced from the original 131 members to 101 and single-seat constituencies were removed.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nAs of January 2025, there are 123 political parties registered in Armenia. The electoral threshold is currently set at 5% for single parties and 7% for blocs. \nIndependent agencies.\nIndependent of three traditional branches are the following independent agencies, each with separate powers and responsibilities:\nCorruption.\nTransparency International's 2024 Corruption Perceptions Index ranked Armenia 60th out of 180 in the world with 47 points. This has pushed the country up from being ranked at 60th in 2020 and 58th in 2021. According to Transparency International, Armenia has improved significantly on the Corruption Perception Index since 2012, especially since the 2018 revolution, the country has taken steps to counter corruption. Further mentioning that \"Armenia has taken a gradual approach to reform, resulting in steady and positive improvements in anti-corruption. However, safeguarding judicial independence and ensuring checks and balances remain critical first steps in its anti-corruption efforts. The effectiveness of those efforts is additionally challenged by the current political and economic crisis as a result of the recent Nagorno Karabakh conflict and the subsequent protests against Prime Minister Nikol Pashinyan over a ceasefire deal\".\nIn 2008, Transparency International reduced its Corruption Perceptions Index for Armenia from 3.0 in 2007 to 2.9 out of 10 (a lower score means more perceived corruption); Armenia slipped from 99th place in 2007 to 109th out of 180 countries surveyed (on a par with Argentina, Belize, Moldova, Solomon Islands, and Vanuatu).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1094", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1094", "title": "Economy of Armenia", "text": "The economy of Armenia is an emerging free-market economy. It is the 113th-largest economy in the world (out of 192 countries measured by IMF), with a gross domestic product (GDP) of $27.86 billion in 2025. The services sector is the largest in Armenia's economy, contributing 61.5% of the country's total GDP; followed by the industrial sector at 23.2%; and the agricultural sector at 7.9%. A smaller, but increasingly important piece of the economy is the IT sector, which makes up 6.25% of national GDP and was growing at an average yearly rate of 20% as of 2022.\nAs a former member of the Soviet Union, Armenia's economy was subjected to rigorous central planning, with the USSR driving large-scale industrialization efforts throughout the entire union. This greatly sped up the transition of Armenia's economy from primarily agrarian to a more modern, industrial economy. Some of the most prominent manufacturing industries during this time were chemicals, electronics, machinery, processed food, synthetic rubber and textiles. The Soviet period also saw a large expansion of Armenia's mining industry, exploiting domestic deposits of copper, zinc, gold, lead, and bauxite for export to other parts of the Soviet Union.\nAfter gaining independence in 1991, the economy shifted heavily away from the state-run model and saw rapid privatization throughout the economy. The economic shock caused by the breakup of the Soviet Union, along with the conflict with Azerbaijan over the ethnic Armenian-dominated region of Nagorno-Karabakh, contributed to a severe economic decline in the early 1990s. Armenia recovered from this collapse in the decades that followed with a period of rapid economic growth; the size of the economy tripled by the end of the decade from the post-war low of 1994, and it grew an additional 500% in the 2000s. In 2015, Armenia joined the Eurasian Economic Union, which has expanded its trade opportunities and made the economy more competitive. However, despite these tailwinds, geopolitical concerns\u2014namely hostile relations with Azerbaijan and heavy reliance on Russia\u2014continue to pose significant risks to Armenia's future economic prosperity.\nOwing to a relative lack of domestic natural resources, Armenia needs to import large amounts of raw materials and energy resources to sustain its economy. This contributes to a large trade deficit, although this is somewhat offset by international aid, remittances from Armenians abroad, and foreign direct investment. The vast majority of energy is produced with imported fuel from Russia, including natural gas and nuclear fuel for Armenia's Metsamor nuclear power plant.\nHistory.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, the territory of present-day Armenia was an agricultural region with some copper mining and cognac production. From 1915 through 1921, Armenians in the region suffered from a genocide carried out by the Ottoman Empire, during which about 1.5 million Armenians were killed. This caused total property and financial collapse when all of their assets and belongings were forcibly taken away by the Turks, the consequences of which, including revolution, the influx of refugees from Western Armenia, disease, hunger and further economic misery, have still left their mark over a century later. At that point, only American relief efforts saved Armenia from total collapse. Thus, Armenians went from being one of the wealthiest ethnic groups in the region to suffering from poverty and famine. Armenians were the second richest ethnic group in Anatolia after the Greeks, and they were heavily involved in highly productive sectors such as banking, architecture, and trade. However, after the mass killings of Armenian intellectuals in April 1915 and the genocide targeted towards the whole Armenian population left the people and the country in ruins. The genocide was responsible for the loss of many high-quality skills that the Armenians possessed.\nArmenian Soviet Socialist Republic.\nThe first Soviet Armenian government regulated economic activity stringently, nationalizing all economic enterprises, requisitioning grain from peasants, and suppressing most private market activity. This first experiment of state control ended with the advent of Soviet leader Vladimir Lenin's New Economic Policy (NEP) of 1921\u20131927. This policy continued state control of the large enterprises and banks, but peasants could market much of their grain, and small businesses could function. In Armenia, the NEP years brought partial recovery from the economic disaster of the post-World War I period. By 1926 agricultural production in Armenia had reached nearly three-quarters of its prewar level.\nBy the end of the 1920s, Stalin's regime had revoked the NEP and re-established the centralised state monopoly on all economic activity. Once this occurred, the main goal of the Soviet economic policy in Armenia was to turn a predominantly agrarian and rural republic into an industrial and urban one. Among other restrictions, peasants now were forced to sell nearly all of their output to state procurement agencies rather than at the open market. From the 1930s through the 1960s, an industrial infrastructure has been constructed. Besides hydroelectric plants and canals, roads were built and gas pipelines were laid to bring fuel and food from Azerbaijan and Russia.\nThe state socialist command economy, in which market forces were suppressed and all orders for production and distribution came from the state authorities, survived in all its essential features until the fall of the Soviet regime in 1991. In the early stages of the communist economic revolution, Armenia underwent a fundamental transformation into a \"proletarian\" society. Between 1929 and 1939, the percentage of Armenia's work force categorised as industrial workers grew from 13% to 31%. By 1935 industry supplied 62% of Armenia's economic production. Highly integrated and sheltered within artificial barter economy of the Soviet system from the 1930s until the end of the communist era, the Armenian economy showed few signs of self-sufficiency at any time during that period. In 1988, Armenia produced only 0.9% of the net material product of the Soviet Union (1.2% of industry, 0.7% of agriculture). The republic retained 1.4% of total state budget revenue, delivered 63.7% of its NMP to other republics, and exported only 1.4% of what it produced to markets outside the Soviet Union.\nAgriculture accounted for only 20% of net material product and 10% of employment before the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991.\nArmenia's industry was especially dependent on the Soviet military-industrial complex. About 40% of all enterprises in the republic were devoted to defense, and some factories lost 60% to 80% of their business in the last years of the Soviet Union, when massive cuts were made in the national defense expenditures. As the republic's economy faced the prospects of competing in world markets in the mid-1990s, the great liabilities of Armenia's industry were its outdated equipment and infrastructure and the pollution emitted by many of the country's heavy industrial plants.\nThe economic downturn that began in 1989 worsened dramatically in 1992. According to statistics, the GDP declined by 37.5 percent in 1991 compared to 1990, and all sectors contributing to the GDP decreased in production. The collapse of industry in favor of agriculture, whose products were mostly imported throughout the Soviet period, changed the structure of sectoral contributions to GDP.\nIn 1991, Armenia's last year as a Soviet republic, national income fell 12% from the previous year, while per capita gross national product was 4,920 rubles, only 68% of the Soviet average. In large part due to the earthquake of 1988, the Azerbaijani blockade that began in 1989 and the collapse of the international trading system of the Soviet Union, the Armenian economy of the early 1990s remained far below its 1980 production levels. In the first years of independence (1992\u201393), inflation was extremely high, productivity and national income dropped dramatically, and the national budget ran large deficits.\nA period of chronic shortages, was the first stage of price deregulation, which allowed goods to stay in Armenia as opposed to being exported for better prices; the inflation rates were 10 percent in 1990, 100 percent in 1991, and 642.5 percent during the first four months of 1992, compared with the first four months of 1991. Thus, there were two opposing dynamics: price increases in response to shortages and falling incomes due to the recession and unemployment.\nPost-communist economic reforms.\nArmenia introduced elements of the free market and privatisation into their economic system in the late 1980s, when Mikhail Gorbachev began advocating economic reform. To supply the country's basic needs, the first decision was land reform and the privatization of land. This allowed for the emergence of small-parcel agriculture supplying markets and supporting self-sustenance during the period of shortages. Cooperatives were set up in the service sector, particularly in restaurants, although substantial resistance came from the Communist Party of Armenia (CPA) and other groups that had enjoyed privileged position in the old economy. In the late 1980s, much of Armenia's economy already was opening either semi-officially or illegally, with widespread corruption and bribery. The so-called mafia, made up of interconnected groups of powerful officials and their relatives and friends, sabotaged the efforts of reformers to create a lawful market system. When the December 1988 earthquake brought millions of dollars of foreign aid to the devastated regions of Armenia, much of the money went to corrupt and criminal elements.\nBeginning in 1991, the democratically elected government pushed vigorously for privatisation and market relations, although its efforts were frustrated by the old ways of doing business in Armenia, the Azerbaijani blockade, and the costs of the First Nagorno-Karabakh War. In 1992, the Law on the Programme of Privatisation and Decentralisation of Incompletely Constructed Facilities established a state privatisation committee, with members from all political parties. In the middle of 1993, the committee announced a two-year privatisation programme, whose first stage would be privatisation of 30% of state enterprises, mostly services and light industries. The remaining 70%, including many bankrupt, nonfunctional enterprises, were to be privatised in a later stage with a minimum of government restriction, to encourage private initiative. For all enterprises, the workers would receive 20% of their firm's property free of charge; 30% would be distributed to all citizens by means of vouchers; and the remaining 50% was to be distributed by the government, with preference given to members of the labour organisations. A major problem of this system, however, was the lack of supporting legislation covering foreign investment protection, bankruptcy, monopoly policy, and consumer protection.\nIn the first post-communist years, efforts to interest foreign investors in joint enterprises were only moderately successful because of the blockade and the energy shortage. Only in late 1993 was a department of foreign investment established in the Ministry of Economy, to spread information about Armenia's investment opportunities and improve the legal infrastructure for investment activity. A specific goal of this agency was creating a market for scientific and technical intellectual property.\nA few Armenians living abroad made large-scale investments. Besides a toy factory and construction projects, diaspora Armenians built a cold storage plant (which in its first years had little produce to store) and established the American University of Armenia in Yerevan to teach the techniques necessary to run a market economy.\nArmenia was admitted to the International Monetary Fund in May 1992 and to the World Bank in September. A year later, the government complained that those organisations were holding back financial assistance and announced its intention to move toward fuller price liberalisation, and the removal of all tariffs, quotas, and restrictions of foreign trade. Although privatisation had slowed because of catastrophic collapse of the economy, Prime Minister Hrant Bagratyan informed the United States officials in the fall of 1993 that plans had been made to embark on a renewed privatisation programme by the end of the year.\nLike other former states, Armenia's economy suffers from the legacy of a centrally planned economy and the breakdown of former Soviet trading patterns. Soviet investment in and support of Armenian industry has virtually disappeared, so that few major enterprises are still able to function. In addition, the effects of the 1988 earthquake, which killed more than 25,000 people and made 500,000 homeless, are still being felt. Although a cease-fire has held since 1994, the conflict with Azerbaijan over Nagorno-Karabakh has not been resolved. The consequent blockade along both the Azerbaijani and Turkish borders has devastated the economy, because of Armenia's dependence on outside supplies of energy and most raw materials. Land routes through Azerbaijan and Turkey are closed; routes through Georgia and Iran are adequate and reliable. In 1992\u201393, the GDP had fallen nearly 60% from its 1989 level. The national currency, the dram, suffered hyperinflation for the first few years after its introduction in 1993.\nArmenia has registered strong economic growth since 1995 and inflation has been negligible for the past several years. New sectors, such as precious stone processing and jewelry making and communication technology (primarily Armentel, which is left from the USSR era and is owned by external investors). This steady economic progress has earned Armenia increasing support from international institutions. The International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, EBRD, as well as other international financial institutions (IFIs) and foreign countries are extending considerable grants and loans. Total loans extended to Armenia since 1993 exceed $800 million. These loans are targeted at reducing the budget deficit, stabilizing the local currency; developing private businesses; energy; the agriculture, food processing, transportation, and health and education sectors; and ongoing rehabilitation work in the earthquake zone.\nBy 1994, however, the Armenian government had launched an ambitious IMF-sponsored economic liberalization program that resulted in positive growth rates in 1995\u20132005. The economic growth of Armenia expressed in GDP per capita was one of strongest in the CIS. GDP went from $350 to more than $800 on average between 1995 and 2003. Three principal factors explain this result: the credibility of the macroeconomic policies of stabilization, the correction effect following the depression, and the importance of external transfers, in particular since 2000. Armenia became a member of the World Trade Organization (WTO) in January 2003. Armenia also has managed to slash inflation, stabilize its currency, and privatize most small- and medium-sized enterprises. Armenia's unemployment rate, however, remains high, despite strong economic growth.\nThe chronic energy shortages Armenia suffered in the early and mid-1990s have been offset by the energy supplied by one of its nuclear power plants at Metsamor. Armenia is now a net energy exporter, although it does not have sufficient generating capacity to replace the Metsamor nuclear plant, which is under international pressure to close due to its old design. The European Union had classified the VVER 440 Model V230 light-water-cooled reactors as the \"oldest and least reliable\" category of all the 66 Soviet reactors built in the former Eastern Bloc. However the IAEA has found that the Metsamor NPP has adequate safety and can function beyond its design lifespan.\nThe country's electricity distribution system was privatized in 2002.\n2020 recession.\nThe Armenian economy performed poorly in 2020, and contracted by 7.2% after years of consecutive growth. The two biggest contributing factors were the COVID-19 recession and the Second Nagorno-Karabakh War. In the first half of 2020, the Armenian economy was negatively impacted by the economic restrictions that were implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. These restrictions included a stay-at-home order, an indoor social distancing requirement, and a mask mandate. These restrictions had a negative impact on businesses; according to the World Bank, individual consumption dropped by 9% in the first six months of 2020 due to the stay-at-home order.\nThe economy was further impacted by the war against Azerbaijan later in the year.\nData.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1992\u20132021 (with IMF staff estimates in 2022\u20132026). Inflation below 5% is in green.\nRegional Economies.\nThis is a list of provinces of Armenia by nominal GDP shown in Armenian dram and US$. Statistics shown are for 2017.\nSectors.\nAgriculture.\nAlthough agriculture used to make up a larger share of Armenia's economy, this share has been declining and sits at 7.9% of Armenia's GDP. Despite this relative decline, around 30% of the Armenian workforce is still employed in the agriculture industry. Roughly 16% of Armenia's land is arable, with most of the richest farmland concentrated near the Aras River valley and in the valleys north of Yerevan. The agriculture sector currently has a near equal distribution of crops and livestock, with the former accounting for 47.5% of the industry, and the latter accounting for 52.5%.\nIn recent years, the sector's growth has been constrained by small, fragmented landholdings, soil degradation, limited arable land, and challenges in the livestock industry, including disease management and low productivity. The breakup of large, state-owned farming enterprises after the dissolution of the Soviet Union created many smaller, diversified farms, which drives up costs and makes it difficult for farms to take advantage of economies of scale. However, the industry has remained competitive in key agricultural products, such as figs, pomegranates, olives, peaches, walnuts, quince, and apricots (Armenia is the world's 9th largest producer). Processed foods and alcoholic beverages\u2014particularly brandy and an increasingly dynamic wine sector\u2014dominate agricultural exports. Armenia has a reputation for high-quality brandy, and its wine industry has expanded rapidly due to investment, improved vineyard management, and growing international interest in indigenous grape varieties.\nMining.\nIn 2017, mining industry output with grew by 14.2% to 172 billion AMD at current prices and run at 3.1% of Armenia's GDP.\nIn 2017, mineral product (without precious metals and stones) exports grew by 46.9% and run at US$692 million, which comprised 30.1% of all exports.\nConstruction.\nReal estate transactions count grew by 36% in September 2019 compared to September 2018. Also, the average market value of one square meter of housing in apartment buildings in Yerevan in September 2019 grew by 10.8% from September 2018.\nIn 2017, construction output increased by 2.2% reaching 416 billion AMD.\nArmenia experienced a construction boom during the latter part of the 2000s. According to the National Statistical Service, Armenia's booming construction sector generated about 20 percent of Armenia's GDP during the first eight months of 2007. According to a World Bank official, 30 percent of Armenia's economy in 2009 came from the construction sector.\nHowever, during the January to September 2010 period, the sector experienced a 5.2 percent year-on-year decrease, which according to the Civilitas Foundation is an indication of the unsustainability of a sector based on an elite market, with few products for the median or low budgets. This decrease comes despite the fact that an important component of the government stimulus package was to support the completion of ongoing construction projects.\nEnergy.\nIn 2017, electricity generation increased by 6.1% reaching 7.8 billion KWh.\nDigital economy.\nThe digital economy is a branch of the economy based on digital computing technologies. The digital economy is sometimes referred to as the Internet economy or the web economy. The digital economy is often intertwined with the traditional economy, making it difficult to distinguish between them. Aimed at the sector's development on 15 November 2021, the Silicon Mountains Summit dedicated to introducing intelligent solutions in the economy was held in Yerevan. The main topic of the summit was the prospect of digitalization of the economy in Armenia. The main driving force of this sphere in Armenia is the banks. Digital transformation is a necessity for banks and financial institutions. At the moment, ACBA Bank is the leader\u2024\nIndustry and Manufacturing.\nIn 2017, industrial output increased by 12.6% annually reaching 1661 billion AMD.\nIndustrial output was relatively positive throughout 2010, with year-on-year average growth of 10.9 percent in the period January to September 2010, due largely to the mining sector where higher global demand for commodities led to higher prices. According to the National Statistical Service, during the January\u2013August 2007 period, Armenia's industrial sector was the single largest contributor to the country's GDP, but remained largely stagnant with industrial output increasing only by 1.7 percent per year. In 2005, Armenia's industrial output (including electricity) made up about 30 percent of GDP.\nServices.\nIn the 2000s, along with the construction sector, the services sector was the driving force behind Armenia's recent high economic growth rate.\nBetween 2017 and 2019, Armenia's economy increased fast, with annual rate of\u00a0GDP growth averaging 6.8 percent. Following the political realignment of 2018, prudent macroeconomic policy helped develop a track record of macroeconomic stability and an enhanced business environment. In Armenia, the service sector in 2020 reduced volumes by 14.7%, against 15% growth a year earlier, amounting to 1.7 trillion drams ($3.5 billion). According to the Statistical Committee, a negative trend was recorded in all service segments except finance, as well as information and communication.\nRetail trade.\nIn 2010, retail trade turnover was largely unaltered compared to 2009. The existing monopolies throughout the retail sector have made the sector non-responsive to the crisis and resulted in near zero growth. The aftermath of the crisis has started to shift the structure in the retail sector in favor of food products.\nNowadays(2019), Armenia has improved standards of living and growing income, which brought to the improvement of retail sector in Armenia. retail sector has the highest employment level. While the sector improves, currently the major sector is still in Yerevan, and not in the other cities of Armenia. The development that happened in this sector was the opening of Dalma Garden Mall, and later Yerevan mall, Rio mall and Rossia mall, which dramatically increased the quality of retail in Yerevan. Currently there is a new development, as in Gyumri there is a new mall opened called Shirak Mall. Another reason for the development of the retail is the development that happened in the banking industry. Today people can easily get financial assistance from the banks right to their credit cards, without visiting the bank.\nInformation and Communication Technologies.\nAs of February 2019 nearly 23 thousand employees were counted in ICT sector. With 404 thousand AMD they enjoyed highest pay rate among surveyed sectors of economy. Average salaries in pure IT sector (excluding communications sub-sector) stood at 582 thousand AMD.\nFinancial Services.\nIn January 2019 there were 20.5 thousand employees registered in the financial sector.\nAccording to Moody's, robust economic growth will benefit banks with GDP growth remaining robust at around 4.5% in 2019\u201320.\nIndustry report on banking sector prepared by AmRating presents slightly varying figures for some of above data.\nTourism.\nTourism in Armenia has been a key sector to the Armenian economy since the 1990s when tourist numbers exceeded half a million people visiting the country every year (mostly ethnic Armenians from the Diaspora). The Armenian Ministry of Economy reports that most international tourists come from Russia, EU states, the United States and Iran. Though relatively small in size, Armenia has three UNESCO world heritage sites.\nDespite internal and external problems, the number of incoming tourists has been continually increasing. 2018 saw a record high of over 1.6 million inbound tourists.\nIn 2018 receipts from international tourism amounted to $1.2 billion, nearly twice the value for 2010. In per capita terms these stood at $413, ahead of Turkey and Azerbaijan, but behind Georgia.\nIn 2019 the largest growth at 27.2% was shown by accommodation and catering sector, which came as a result of the growth of tourist flows.\nFinancial system.\nForeign debt.\nThe amount of interest paid on the public debt rose significantly (from AMD 11 billion in 2008 to AMD 46.5 billion in 2013), as did the amount of principle repayments (from annual repayments of US$15\u201316 million in 2005-2008 exceeding US$150 million in 2013). This is a significant financial load on the state budget. Because of additional borrowings and lower concessionality of new loans, the burden might rise in the future years.\nIn 2019, the Armenian government planned to obtain about $490 million in fresh loans rising public debt to about $7.5 billion. Just over $6.9 billion of that would be the government's debt.\nAfter reaching nearly 60.0 per cent of GDP, the public debt to GDP ratio decreased by approximately three percentage points in 2018 compared with a year before and stood at 55.7 per cent at the end of 2018.\nThe government's public debt at the end of 2019 stood at $6.94 billion, making 50.3% of its GDP.\nIn March 2019 sovereign debt was $5488 million, $86.5 million (about 2%) less than a year ago.\nOther sources quote Armenia's debt at $10.8 billion in September 2018, possibly including non-public debt too.\nIn 2018 debt-to-GDP ratio stood at 55.7% down from 58.7% in 2017.\nArmenia revised the country's fiscal rules in 2018, setting a permissible threshold for public debt in the amount of 40, 50 and 60% of GDP. At the same time, it established that in case of force majeure situations such as natural disasters, wars, the government will be allowed to exceed this threshold.\nThe debt rose by $863.5 million in 2016 and by another $832.5 million in 2017. It totalled just $1.9 billion (13.5% of GDP) before the 2008 financial crisis and the Great Recession.\nExchange rate of national currency.\nNational Statistics Office publishes official reference exchange rates for each year.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nInflation.\nFor 2023 the IMF forecasts inflation at 3.5%, which is below most neighbouring countries.\nThe Armenian government projects inflation at 2.7% in 2019.\nThe inflation rate in Armenia in 2020 was 1.21 percent, a 0.23 percent decrease over 2019, in 2019 was 1.44 percent, a 1.08 percent decrease over 2018, in 2018 was 2.52 percent, up 1.55 percent from 2017 and in 2017 was 0.97 percent, a 2.37 percent rise from 2016.\nCash remittances.\nCash remittances from Armenians working abroad \u2014 mostly in Russia and the United States \u2014 contribute significantly to Armenia's Gross Domestic Product making up 14% of GDP in 2018. They help Armenia sustain double-digit economic growth and finance its massive trade deficit.\nIn 2008 transfers reached record high of $2.3 billion. In 2015 they reached 10-year low at $1.6 billion. In 2018, they run at round $1.8 billion. $0.8 billion were transferred in first half of 2019. According to CBA their impact on economy is decreasing, as GDP grows at outperforming rate.\nNet private transfers decreased in 2009, but saw a continuous increase during the first six months of 2010. Since private transfers from the Diaspora tend to be mostly injected into consumption of imports and not in high value-added sectors, the transfers have not resulted in sizeable increases in productivity.\nAccording to the Central Bank of Armenia, during the first half of 2008, cash remittances sent back to Armenia by Armenians working abroad rose by 57.5 percent and totaled US$668.6 million, equivalent to 15 percent of the country's first-half Gross Domestic Product. However, the latter figures only represent cash remittances processed through Armenian commercial banks. According to RFE/RL, comparable sums are believed to be transferred through non-bank systems, implying that cash remittances make up approximately 30 percent of Armenia's GDP in the first half of 2008.\nIn 2007 cash remittances through bank transfers rose by 37 percent to a record-high level of US$1.32 billion. According to the Central Bank of Armenia, in 2005, cash remittances from Armenians working abroad reached a record-high level of $1 billion, which is worth more than one fifth of the country's 2005 GDP.\nBanking.\nThe central bank has set additional capital buffers in the banking sector. In force since April 2019, the regulator set three buffers exceeding the current capital adequacy requirement compliant with the Basel III regulation: a capital conservation buffer, a counter-cyclical capital buffer and a systemic risk buffer. Full implementation of the buffers over the course of the next few years will strengthen the financial sector's resistance to economic shocks and help increase the efficiency of macroprudential policies.\nArmenian banks' lending grew by 10 percent in 2019.\nMicrofinance.\nThe establishment of Microfinance institutions in Armenia was dependent on them making a complementary effort to fill the gap in the financial services sector. Its primary goal was to deal with the rising unemployment and poverty brought on by transitory shock. In this context, self-employment in the country emerged as one of the best options to unemployment. Commercial banking institutions in Armenia overlooked micro-business enterprises that lacked credit histories and sufficient funding. Microfinance has been proposed as an adaptable instrument to assist people in transition economies take advantage of new opportunities.\nGovernment.\nGovernment revenues.\nIn August 2019 Moody's Investors Service upgraded Armenia to Ba3 rating with stable outlook.\nAccording to the National Statistical Service, Armenia's government debt stood at AMD 3.1 trillion (about $6,4 billion, including $5,1 billion of external debt) as of 30 November 2017. Armenia's debt-to-GDP ratio will drop by 1% in 2018 according to finance minister.\nIn Armenia's external debt ($5.5 billion as of 1 January 2018), the arrears for multi-country credit programs dominate \u2013 66.2% or $3.6 billion, followed by debt on bilateral loan programs - 17.5% or $958.9 million and investments of non-residents in Armenian Eurobonds \u2013 15,4% or $844.9 million.\nFor the whole Armenian economy and international commerce, 2020 was a year of decline. In a variety of areas Armenian commodities are being exported and imported at a lower rate. According to the Armenian Statistical Committee, Armenia exported goods worth $2.544 billion in 2020, a fall of 3.9 percent from 2019. Armenia imported items worth 4.559 billion dollars in 2020, down 17.7% from the previous year. The volume of Armenia's international trade has varied throughout the previous 10 years.\nTaxation.\nEmployee income tax.\nFrom 1 January 2020, Armenia will switch to a flat income taxation system, which, regardless of the amount will tax wages at 23%. Moreover, until 2023 the taxation rate will gradually decrease from 23% to 20%.\nCorporate income tax.\nThe reform adopted in June 2019 aims to boost medium-term economic activity and to increase tax compliance. Among other measures, the corporate income tax was reduced by two percentage points to 18.0 per cent and the tax on dividends for non-resident organisations halved to 5.0 per cent.\nSpecial taxation for small business.\nFrom 1 January 2020, the republic will abandon two alternative tax systems - self-employed and family entrepreneurship. They will be replaced by micro-entrepreneurship with a non-taxable threshold of up to 24 million drams. Business entities that carry out specialized activities, in particular, accounting, advocacy, and consulting will not be considered as micro-business entities. Micro business will be exempted from all types of taxes other than income tax, which will be 5 thousand drams per employee.\nValue-added tax.\nOver half of the tax revenues in January\u2013August 2008 were generated from value-added taxes (VAT) of 20%. By comparison, corporate profit tax generated less than 16 percent of the revenues. This suggests that tax collection in Armenia is improving at the expense of ordinary citizens, rather than wealthy citizens (who have been the main beneficiaries of Armenia's double-digit economic growth in recent years).\nVAT (Value Added Tax): In Armenia, VAT-paying individuals subtract the VAT paid on their inputs from the VAT levied on their sales and account to the tax authorities for the difference. The standard rate of VAT on domestic sales of goods and services, as well as imports importation, is 20%. Exports of products and services are not taxed.\nExternal trade and investment.\nForeign trade.\nExports.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nAccording to the National Statistical Committee, in 2018, exports amounted to $2.411.9 billion, having grown by 7.8% from the previous year. After a boom of almost 93% in 2022, the IMF expects exports of goods and services to grow by 22% in 2023 and 8% in 2024.\nThe goods export structure changed considerably in 2018 as the export of the traditional mining sector decreased while the share of textiles, agriculture and precious metals increased.\nGeographical location of the country and relatively low electricity costs are comparative advantages supporting to boost the production of the textile and leather products in Armenia. Proximity to Europe in comparison with manufacturers in East Asia creates opportunity to strengthen Armenia's position as contract manufacturing destination for European brands. Foreign companies that put orders to Armenian companies are mainly famous European brands, particularly, from Italy (La Perla, SARTIS, VERSACE etc.) and Germany (LEBEK International Fashion, KUBLER Bekleidungswerk). With the Armenia's entry into Eurasian Economic Commission, the opportunity to increase its presence with textile and leather production raised also in the countries of Eurasian Economic Commission as no customs duty applies to Armenian products in the export markets within the customs union.\nAccording to the study \"Regional and International Trade of Armenia\", authors investigated the trade potential of Armenia for different product groups by employing a gravity model of trade approach. The study explored Armenia's trade flows to 139 countries for the period of 2003 to 2007. According to the results of the paper, the authors concluded that \"Armenia has exceeded its export potential almost with all the CIS countries\". In addition, the authors concluded that the most perspective product groups of Armenian export tend to be \"Industrial products\", \"Food and beverages\" and \"Consumer goods\". On the other hand, the paper \"The effects of exchange rate volatility on exports: evidence from Armenia\" analyzes the effect of Armenian floating exchange rate regime and exchange rate volatility on Armenian exports to Russia. According to the paper exchange rate volatility has long-run and short-run negative effects on exports. Moreover, authors stated that high exchange rate risk resulted in decreasing exports to Russia.\nAccording to most recent (2019 Jan-Feb compared to 2018 Jan-Feb) ArmStat calculations, biggest growth in export quantities was measured towards Turkmenistan by 23.6 times (from $37K to $912K), Estonia by 15 times (from $8.4K to $136.5K) and Canada by 11.5 times (from $623K to $7.8 mln). Meanwhile, exports to Russia, Germany, USA and UAE dropped.\nImports.\nIn 2017 Armenia imported $3.96B, making it the 133rd largest importer in the world. During the last five years the imports of Armenia have decreased at an annualized rate of -1.2%, from $3.82B in 2012 to $3.96B in 2017. The most recent imports are led by Petroleum Gas which represent 8.21% of the total imports of Armenia, followed by Refined Petroleum, which account for 5.46%. Armenia's main imports are oil, natural gas, cereals, rubber manufactures, cork and wood, and electrical machinery. Armenia's main imports partners are Russia, China, Ukraine, Iran, Germany, Italy, Turkey, France and Japan.\nThe European Union (28.7% of total exports), Russia (26.9%), Switzerland (14.1%), and Iraq (14.1%) are Armenia's largest export partners (6.3 percent ). The Russian Federation is the most important import partner (26.2%), followed by the EU (22.6%), China (13.8%), and Iran (13.8%). (5.6 percent ). After the 2008 Russian-Georgian conflict, which briefly halted the nation's hydrocarbon supply and exposed the country's energy vulnerabilities, the country has been looking for other energy sources. Tensions with its neighbors, notably Azerbaijan and Turkey, continue to exist, affecting commerce. Armenia's ties to Russia, as well as its membership in the Eurasian Economic Union, constrain the country's potential to integrate further with the EU.\nImports in 2017 amounted to $4.183 billion, up 27.8% from 2016.\nIn 2018 the country's structural trade imbalance was predicted to be 15.7 percent of GDP (World Bank). According to World Trade Organization data, Armenia exported commodities worth US$2.4 billion in 2018, up 7% from the previous year, and imported goods worth US$4.9 billion, up 18%. In terms of services, the country exported US$2 billion in 2018 and imported US$2.1 billion.\nThe global economic crisis has had less impact on imports because the sector is more diversified than exports. In the first nine months of 2010, imports grew about 19 percent, just about equal to the decline of the same sector in 2009.\nDeficit.\nAccording to the National Statistical Service foreign trade deficit amounted to US$1.94 billion in 2017.\nThe current account deficit represented 2.4 percent of GDP in 2017 and increased up to 8.1 percent of GDP during the first three quarters of 2018. This was a result of about 8 percent increase in goods export and 21 percent increase on goods import in nominal terms year on year in 2018.\nArmenia's foreign trade turnover increased by 11.6 percent in January\u2013May 2021, compared to an 11.2 percent decline a year earlier, owing to a reversal of the y-o-y dynamics of exports and imports from 8.1 to 12.8 percent decline to 20.8-6.7 percent growth, according to preliminary data from the RA Statistical Committee. As a consequence, Armenia's foreign trade turnover reached 1.5 trillion drams ($2.9 billion), with exports totaling 567.4 billion drams ($1.1 billion) and imports being 931.8 billion drams ($1.8 billion), resulting in a 364.4 billion drams ($695 million) international trade deficit. Foreign trade turnover climbed by 3.9 percent in May 2021, resulting to a 7.9% increase in exports and a minimal 1.5 percent increase in imports. As a consequence, Armenia's international trade deficit in May 2021 was 83.4 billion drams ($160 million), decreasing 7.4% from the same month in 2020. (by 21.1 percent ). Foreign trade turnover increased by 13% year over year in May 2020, due to a 30.7 percent increase in exports and a moderate 4.3 percent increase in imports.\nPartners.\nEuropean Union.\nIn 2022 Armenia's bilateral trade with the EU topped $2.3 billion, making the EU one of Armenia's biggest and most important economic partners.\nEU-Armenia trade increased by 15% in 2018 reaching a total value of \u20ac1.1 billion.\nIn 2017 EU countries accounted for 24.3 percent of Armenia's foreign trade. Whereby exports to EU countries grew by 32,2% to $633 million.\nIn 2010 EU countries accounted for 32.1 percent of Armenia's foreign trade. Germany is Armenia's largest trading partner among EU member states, accounting for 7.2 percent of trade; this is due largely to mining exports. Armenian exports to EU countries have skyrocketed by 65.9 percent, making up more than half of all 2010 January to September exports. Imports from EU countries increased by 17.1 percent, constituting 22.5 percent of all imports.\nDuring January\u2013February 2007, Armenia's trade with the European Union totaled $200 million. During the first 11 months of 2006, the European Union remained Armenia's largest trading partner, accounting for 34.4 percent of its $2.85 billion commercial exchange during the 11-month period.\nRussia and former Soviet republics.\nOn 14 October 2024, Armenia notified its ratification of the Commonwealth of Independent States Agreement on Free Trade in Services, Establishment, Operations and Investment, which entered into force on 13 November 2024 for Armenia.\nIn the first quarter of 2019, share of Russia in foreign trade turnover fell to 11% from 29% from the previous year.\nIn 2017, CIS countries accounted for 30 percent of Armenia's foreign trade. Exports to CIS countries rose by 40,3% to $579,5 million.\nBilateral trade with Russia stood at more than $700 million for the first nine months of 2010 \u2013 on track to rebound to $1 billion mark first reached in 2008 prior to the global economic crisis.\nDuring January\u2013February 2007, Armenia's trade with Russia and other former Soviet republics was $205.6 million (double the amount from the same period the previous year), making them the country's number one trading partner. During the first 11 months of 2006, the volume of Armenia's trade with Russia was $376.8 million or 13.2 percent of the total commercial exchange.\nChina.\nIn 2017 trade with China grew by 33.3 percent.\nAs of early 2011 trade with China is dominated by imports of Chinese goods and accounts for about 10 percent of Armenia's foreign trade. The volume of Chinese-Armenian trade soared by 55 percent to $390 million in January\u2013November 2010. Armenian exports to China, though still modest in absolute terms, nearly doubled in that period.\nIran.\nArmenia's trade with Iran grew significantly from 2015 and 2020. Because Armenia's land borders to the east and west have been closed by the governments of Turkey and Azerbaijan, domestic firms have looked to Iran as a key economic partner. In 2020, trade between the countries exceeded $300 million. The number of Iranian tourists has risen in recent years, with an estimated 80,000 Iranian tourists in 2010. In January 2021, Iran's finance minister Farhad Dejpasand said that trade between the two countries could reach $1 billion annually as Iran looks to become a regional economic force.\nUnited States.\nFrom January to September 2010, bilateral trade with the United States was about $150 million, on track for about a 30 percent increase over 2009. An increase in Armenia's exports to the US in 2009 and 2010 has been due to shipments of aluminum foil.\nDuring the first 11 months of 2006 US\u2013Armenian trade totaled $152.6 million.\nGeorgia.\nThe volume of Georgian\u2013Armenian trade remains modest in both relative and absolute terms. According to official Armenian statistics it rose by 11 percent to $91.6 million in January\u2013November 2010. The figure was equivalent to just over 2 percent of Armenia's overall foreign trade.\nTurkey.\nIn 2019 the volume of bilateral trade with Turkey was about $255 million, with trade taking place across Georgian territory. This figure is not expected to increase significantly so long as the land border between the Armenia and Turkey remains closed.\nForeign direct investments.\nArmenia has concluded a number of Bilateral Investment Treaties (BITs), Treaties with Investment Provisions (TIPs) and Investment Related Instruments (IRIs) according to the database of UNCTAD.\nBetween 40%-53% of all foreign direct investments in Armenia between 1988 and 2022 originate from Russia. Foreign direct investment (FDI) into Armenia decreased by US$2.7 million in December 2020, compared to a reduction of US$10.3 million the previous quarter.\nArmenia foreign direct investment: USD mn Net Flows data is available from March 1993 through December 2020, and is updated quarterly.\nThe statistics ranged from a high of US$425.9 million in December 2008 to a low of \u201367.6 USD mn in December 2014.\nArmenia's current account surplus is US$51.7 million in December 2020, according to the most recent statistics.\n-In June 2021, Armenian Direct Investment Abroad increased by 12.8 million dollars.\n-In June 2021, it boosted its Foreign Portfolio Investment by $14.6 million.\n-In December 2020 the country's nominal GDP was reported to be 3.8 billion dollars.\nYearly FDI figures.\nDespite robust economic growth foreign direct investment (FDI) in Armenia remain low as of 2018.\nin January\u2013September 2019 the net flow of direct foreign investment in the real sector of the Armenian economy stood at about $267 million.\nJersey was the main source of FDI in 2017. Moreover, combined net FDI from all other sources was negative, indicating capital outflow. The tax haven Jersey is home to an Anglo-American company, Lydian International, which is currently building a controversial massive gold mine in the southeastern Vayots Dzor Province. Lydian has pledged to invest a total of $370 million in the Amulsar gold mine.\nNegative values indicate investments of Armenian corporations to foreign country exceeding investments from that country in Armenia.\nStock FDI.\nFDI stock to GDP ratio grew continuously during 2014\u20132016 and reached 44.1% in 2016, surpassing average figures for Commonwealth of Independent States countries, transition economies and the world.\nBy the end of 2017 stock net FDI (for the period 1988\u20132017) reached 1824 billion AMD, while gross flow of FDI for the same period reached 3869 billion AMD.\nAs of February 2019, the European Investment Bank (EIB) has invested about 380 million euros in the various projects implemented in Armenia.\nFDI in founding capital of financial institutions.\nDuring the sector consolidation process in 2014\u20132017 the share of foreign capital in the authorized capital of the Armenian commercial banks decreased from 74,6% to 61,8%.\nNet FDI in founding capital of financial institutions accumulated by end of September 2017 is presented in pie chart below.\nForeign aid.\nUnited States.\nThe Armenian government receives foreign aid from the government of the United States through the United States Agency for International Development and the Millennium Challenge Corporation.\nOn 27 March 2006, the Millennium Challenge Corporation signed a five-year, $235.65 million compact with the Government of Armenia. The single stated goal of the \"Armenian Compact\" is \"the reduction of rural poverty through a sustainable increase in the economic performance of the agricultural sector.\" The compact includes a $67 million to rehabilitate up to 943 kilometers of rural roads, more than a third of Armenia's proposed \"Lifeline road network\". The Compact also includes a $146 million project to increase the productivity of approximately 250,000 farm households through improved water supply, higher yields, higher-value crops, and a more competitive agricultural sector.\nIn 2010 the volume of US assistance to Armenia remained near 2009 levels; however, longer-term decline continued. The original Millennium Challenge Account commitment for $235 million had been reduced to about $175 million due to Armenia's poor governance record. Thus, the MCC would not complete road construction. Instead, the irrigated agriculture project was headed for completion with apparently no prospects for extension beyond 2011.\nOn 8 May 2019, conditioned with the political events in Armenia since April 2018, United States Agency for International Development signed an extension of US\u2013Armenia bilateral agreement in the area of governance and public administration, which would add additional US$8.5 million to the agreement. By signing another document on the same day, USAID increased the aid by additional US$7.5 million in support for more competitive and diversified private sector in Armenia. The financial allocations will be directed to the financing of the USAID-funded project in infrastructures, agriculture, tourism\u2024 After the signing of the new bilateral agreements, the total amount of the U.S. grants to Armenia amounted to around US$81 million.\nEuropean Union.\nAccording to the agreement signed in 2020 EU will provide Armenia with 65 million euros for implementation of three programs in such areas as energy efficiency, environment and community development and formation of tools for implementation of the Comprehensive and Enhanced Partnership Agreement.\nWith curtailment of the MCC funding, the European Union may replace the US as Armenia's chief source of foreign aid for the first time since independence. From 2011 to 2013 the EU is expected to advance at least \u20ac157.3 million ($208 million) in aid to Armenia.\nDomestic business environment.\nSince transition of power to new leadership in 2018 Armenian government works on improving domestic business environment. Numerous formerly privileged business are now required to pay taxes and officially register all workers. Mainly due to this there were 9.7% more payroll employees registered in January 2019 as compared to January 2018.\nIn April 2019 Armenian parliament approved reforms of management of joint stock companies effectively enacting a blocking minority shareholders stake of 25% to cope with shareholder oppression.\nFollowing the advice of economic advisers who cautioned Armenia's leadership against the consolidation of economic power in the hands of a few, in January 2001 the government of Armenia established the State Commission for the Protection of Economic Competition. Its members cannot be dismissed by the government.\nForeign trade facilitation.\nIn June 2011 Armenia adopted a Law on Free Economic Zones (FEZ), and developed several key regulations at the end of 2011 to attract foreign investments into FEZs: exemptions from VAT (value added tax), profit tax, customs duties, and property tax.\nThe \"Alliance\" FEZ was opened in August 2013, and currently has nine businesses taking advantage of its facilities. The focus of \"Alliance\" FEZ is on high-tech industries which include information and communication technologies, electronics, pharmaceuticals and biotechnology, architecture and engineering, industrial design and alternative energy. In 2014, the government expanded operations in the Alliance FEZ to include industrial production as long as there is no similar production already occurring in Armenia.\nIn 2015 another \"Meridian\" FEZ, focused on jewelry production, watch-making, and diamond-cutting opened in Yerevan, with six businesses operating in it. The investment programs for these companies must still be approved by government.\nThe Armenian government approved the program to construct the Meghri free economic zone at the border with Iran, which is expected to open in 2017.\nControversial issues.\nMonopolies.\nMajor monopolies in Armenia include:\nFormer notable monopolies in Armenia :\nAssumed (unofficial) monopolies until 2018 velvet revolution:\nAccording to one analyst, Armenia's economic system in 2008 was anticompetitive due to the structure of the economy being a type of \"monopoly or oligopoly\". \"The result is the prices with us do not drop even if they do on international market, or they do quite belated and not to the size of the international market.\"\nAccording to the 2008 estimate of a former prime minister, Hrant Bagratyan, 55 percent of Armenia's GDP is controlled by 44 families.\nIn early 2008 the State Commission for the Protection of Economic Competition named 60 companies having \"dominant positions\" in Armenia.\nIn October 2009, when visiting Yerevan, the World Bank's managing director, Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, warned that Armenia will not reach a higher level of development unless its leadership changes the \"oligopolistic\" structure of the national economy, bolsters the rule of law and shows \"zero tolerance\" towards corruption. \"I think you can only go so far with this economic model,\" Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala told a news conference in Yerevan. \"Armenia is a lower middle-income country. If it wants to become a high-income or upper middle-income country, it can not do so with this kind of economic structure. That is clear.\" She also called for a sweeping reform of tax and customs administration, the creation of a \"strong and independent judicial system\" as well as a tough fight against government corruption. The warning was echoed by the International Monetary Fund.\nTakeover of Armenian industrial property by the Russian state and Russian companies.\nSince 2000 the Russian state has acquired several key assets in the energy sector and Soviet-era industrial plants. Property-for-debt or equity-for-debt swaps (acquiring ownership by simply writing off the Armenian government's debts to Russia) are usually the method of acquiring assets. The failure of market reforms, clan-based economics, and official corruption in Armenia have allowed the success of this process.\nIn August 2002 the Armenian government sold an 80 percent stake in the Armenian Electricity Network (AEN) to Midland Resources, a British offshore-registered firm which is said to have close Russian connections.\nIn September 2002 the Armenian government handed over Armenia's largest cement factory to the Russian ITERA gas exporter in payment for its $10 million debt for past gas deliveries.\nOn 5 November 2002, Armenia transferred control of 5 state enterprises to Russia in an assets-for-debts transaction which settled $100 million of Armenian state debts to Russia. The document was signed for Russia by Prime Minister Mikhail Kasyanov and Industry Minister Ilya Klebanov, while Prime Minister Andranik Markarian and National Security Council Secretary Serge Sarkisian signed for Armenia. The five enterprises which passed to 100 percent Russian state ownership are:\nIn January 2003 the Armenian government and United Company RUSAL signed an investment cooperation agreement, under which United Company RUSAL (which already owned a 76% stake) acquired the Armenian government's remaining 26% share of RUSAL ARMENAL aluminum foil mill, giving RUSAL 100% ownership of RUSAL ARMENAL.\nOn 1 November 2006, the Armenian government handed de facto control of the Iran-Armenia gas pipeline to Russian company Gazprom and increased Gazprom's stake in the Russian-Armenian company ArmRosGazprom from 45% to 58% by approving an additional issue of shares worth $119 million. This left the Armenian government with a 32% stake in ArmRosGazprom. The transaction will also help finance ArmRosGazprom's acquisition of the Hrazdan electricity generating plant's fifth power bloc (Hrazdan-5), the leading unit in the country.\nIn October 2008 the Russian bank Gazprombank, the banking arm of Gazprom, acquired 100 percent of Armenian bank Areximbank after previously buying 80 percent of said bank in November 2007 and 94.15 percent in July of the same year.\nIn December 2017 government transferred natural gas distribution networks in cities Meghri and Agarak to Gazprom Armenia for cost-free use. Construction of these was funded by foreign aid and costed about 1.3 billion AMD.\nNon-transparent deals.\nCritics of the Robert Kocharyan government (in office until 2008) say that the Armenian administration never considered alternative ways of settling the Russian debts. According to economist Eduard Aghajanov, Armenia could have repaid them with low-interest loans from other, presumably Western sources, or with some of its hard currency reserves which then totaled about $450 million. Furthermore, Aghajanov points to the Armenian government's failure to eliminate widespread corruption and mismanagement in the energy sector \u2013 abuses that cost Armenia at least $50 million in losses each year, according to one estimate.\nPolitical observers say that Armenia's economic cooperation with Russia has been one of the least transparent areas of the Armenian government's work. The debt arrangements have been personally negotiated by (then) Defense Minister (and later President) Serge Sarkisian, initially Kocharyan's closest political associate. Other top government officials, including former Prime Minister Andranik Markarian, had little say on the issue. Furthermore, all of the controversial agreements have been announced after Sarkisian's frequent trips to Moscow, without prior public discussion.\nWhile Armenia is not the only ex-Soviet state that has incurred multi-million-dollar debts to Russia over the past decades, it is the only state to have so far given up such a large share of its economic infrastructure to Russia. For example, pro-Western Ukraine and Georgia (both of which owe Russia more than Armenia) have managed to reschedule repayment of their debts.\nInfrastructure.\nDomestic.\nSince early 2008, Armenia's entire rail network is managed by the Russian state railway under brand South Caucasus Railways.\nMetros.\nYerevan Metro was launched in 1981. It serves 11 active stations.\nBuses.\nYerevan Central Bus Station, also known as Kilikia Bus Station, is Yerevan's primary bus terminal, linking buses to both domestic and foreign destinations.\nRoadways.\nTotal length:\n8,140\u00a0km, World ranking: 112 (7,700\u00a0km paved including 1561\u00a0km of expressways).\nInternational.\nThrough Georgia.\nRussian natural gas reaches Armenia via a pipeline through Georgia.\nThe only operational rail link into Armenia is from Georgia. During Soviet times, Armenia's rail network connected to Russia's via Georgia through Abkhazia along the Black Sea. However, the rail link between Abkhazia and other Georgian regions has been closed for a number of years, forcing Armenia to receive rail cars laden with cargo only through the relatively expensive rail-ferry services operating between Georgian and other Black Sea ports.\nThe Georgian Black Sea ports of Batumi and Poti process more than 90 percent of freight shipped to and from landlocked Armenia. The Georgian railway, which runs through the town of Gori in central Georgia, is the main transport link between Armenia and the aforementioned Georgian seaports. Fuel, wheat and other basic commodities are transported to Armenia by rail.\nArmenia's main rail and road border-crossing with Georgia (at ) is at the Debed river near the Armenian town of Bagratashen and the Georgian town of Sadakhlo.\nThe Upper Lars border crossing (at Darial Gorge) between Georgia and Russia across the Caucasus Mountains serves as Armenia's sole overland route to the former Soviet Union and Europe. It was controversially shut down by the Russian authorities in June 2006, at the height of a Russian-Georgian spy scandal. Upper Lars is the only land border crossing that does not go through Georgia's Russian-backed breakaway regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia. The other two roads linking Georgia and Russia run through South Ossetia and Abkhazia, effectively barring them to international traffic.\nThrough Iran.\nA new gas pipeline to Iran has been completed, and a road to Iran through the southern city of Meghri allows trade with that country. An oil pipeline to pump Iranian oil products is also in the planning stages.\nAs of October 2008 the Armenian government was considering implementing an ambitious project to build a railway to Iran. The 400 kilometer railway would pass through Armenia's mountainous southern province of Syunik, which borders Iran. Economic analysts say that the project would cost at least $1 billion (equivalent to about 40 percent of Armenia's 2008 state budget). As of 2010, the project has been continuously delayed, with the rail link estimated to cost as much as $4 billion and stretch . In June 2010, Transport Minister Manuk Vartanian revealed that Yerevan is seeking as much as $1 billion in loans from China to finance the railway's construction.\nThrough Turkey and Azerbaijan.\nThe border closures by Turkey and Azerbaijan have severed Armenia's rail link between Gyumri and Kars; the rail link with Iran through the Azeri exclave of Nakhichevan; and a natural gas and oil pipeline with Azerbaijan. Also closed are road links with Turkey and Azerbaijan. Despite the economic blockade of Turkey on Armenia, every day dozens of Turkish trucks laden with goods enter Armenia through Georgia.\nIn 2010 it was confirmed that Turkey will keep the border closed for the foreseeable future after the Turkey-Armenia normalization process collapsed.\nLabor market.\nLabor occupation.\nAccording to the 2018 HDI statistical update, Armenia had the highest percentage of employment in services (49.7%) and lowest share in agriculture (34.4%) among the South Caucasus countries. As of September 2024, the number of formally employed individuals in Armenia's labor market reached 776.8 thousand, with the following industries accounting for the highest share in employment:\nUnionization.\nIn 2018, about 30% of wage workers were organized in unions. At the same time, rate of unionization was dropping at average rate of 1% since 1993.\nMonthly wages.\nAccording to preliminary figures from Statistical Committee of Armenia monthly wages averaged 172 thousand AMD in February 2019.\nIt is estimated that wages rise at 0.8% for each additional year of experience and \"the ability to solve problems and learn new skills yields a wage premium of nearly 20 percent\".\nUnemployment.\nIt was reported that in 2020 there was a drop in the unemployment rate in Armenia from 16.99% in 2019 to 16.63% in 2020. The Statistical Committee of Armenia reported that in 2020, the unemployment rate has been volatile reaching to 19.8% during the first quarter of the year and then decreasing to 16% during the fourth quarter. According to the latest reports on population of Armenia, in December 2020 the population consisted of 2.96million people and the average monthly earning during February 2021 was US$366.05.\nAccording to prime minister Nikol Pashinyan in January 2019, 562,043 payroll jobs were recorded, against of 511,902 in January 2018, an increase of 9.7%.Statistical Committee of Armenia publication based on data retrieved from employers and national income service cites 560,586 payroll positions in January 2019, an increase of 9.9% against previous year. This however does not match survey data published by the Statistical Committee of Armenia, according to which in 4th quarter of 2018 there were 870.1 thousand persons employed against 896.7 thousand employed persons in 4th quarter of 2017. The mismatch was highlighted by former PM Hrant Bagratyan. For the whole year of 2018 Statistical Committee of Armenia survey counted 915.5 thousand employed persons, an increase of 1.4% against previous year. In the same period unemployment rate of economically active population dropped from 20.8% to 20.4%.\nThe unemployment rate, which stood at 38.4% in 2001, has fallen significantly over the past two and a half decades. It fluctuated between 16% and 19% from 2008 to 2020, before dropping to 15.5% in 2021, 13.5% in 2022 and 12.6% in 2023 due to the strong economic growth of recent years. At the same time, an estimated 60% of workers were employed in the informal economy in 2019. World Bank research also reveals that employment rate fell in years 2000\u20132015 in middle- and low-skill occupations, while it grew high-skill occupations.\nSee also Statistical Committee of Armenia publication (in English) \"Labour market in the Republic of Armenia, 2018\".\nFemale unemployment in Armenia.\nWorldwide, women's unemployment rate is 6%, higher than men's by about 0.8 points. According to International Labor Organization, Armenia has the highest women's unemployment rate in post-Soviet countries, equaling 17.3% for women above 25. If we compare this rate with those of the neighboring countries (Latvia: 8.6%, Georgia: 7.7%, Azerbaijan: 4.8%), we can see that it is very high. In 2017, the National Statistical Service of Armenia stated that more than 60% of officially registered unemployed people in Armenia are women. One of the lecturers of Yerevan State University, Ani Kojoyan, mentioned that even though there is no issue in the legislation that becomes a reason for women's unemployment; however, there are some issues that are not mentioned in the legislation. Some of those issues are the fact that potential employers consider women's marital status, how many children they have, or if they are planning to get pregnant any time soon. Moreover, some women are not allowed to work by their husbands after graduating from higher educational institutions. She mentions that the most crucial problem affecting this phenomenon is the fact women do not stand up for their rights. It is also mentioned that according to various sources, there is an inequality in men's and women's monthly wages. In all the sectors, the average monthly salary of men is much higher than women even with the same years of education. It is stated that eliminating the discrimination between two genders would positively impact the country's economy. Ani Kojoyan mentions that this is a crucial problem for the economy except for being a women's rights violation. Thus, the Armenian government should take care that unemployed women can find jobs and become taxpayers.\nMigrant workers.\nSince gaining independence in 1991, hundreds of thousands of Armenia's residents have gone abroad, mainly to Russia, in search of work. Unemployment has been the major cause of this massive labor emigration. OSCE experts estimate that between 116,000 and 147,000 people left Armenia for economic reasons between 2002 and 2004, with two-thirds of them returning home by February 2005. According to estimates by the National Statistical Survey, the rate of labor emigration was twice as higher in 2001 and 2002.\nAccording to an OSCE survey, a typical Armenian migrant worker is a married man aged between 41 and 50 years who \"began looking for work abroad at the age of 32\u201333.\"\nFor Armenians another feature of migration was an increase in a variety of threats. The journey itself was extremely dangerous. To pay their way, may departing migrants took out loans failed, the whole family's future was put at a risk. As a consequence, the practice of delaying or refusing to pay part or all of a migrant workers wages has become common. The risks were also heightened by many emigrants failure. This type of migration inherited almost all of the negative characteristics that described pre-transition labor migration.\nDuring the workshop, participants addressed the increasing importance of migration as a growth factor, as well as the significance of SDG Target 10.7 on anticipated and well-managed migration policies for Armenia.\nNatural environment protection.\nEnvironmental Project Implementation Unit implements projects related to Natural environment protection.\nArmenia's greenhouse gas emissions decreased 62% from 1990 to 2013, averaging \u22121.3% annually.\nArmenia is working on addressing its environmental problems. Ministry of Environment has introduced a pollution fee system by which taxes are levied on air and water emissions and solid waste disposal.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1096", "revid": "28021428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1096", "title": "Transport in Armenia", "text": "This article considers transport in Armenia.\nRailways.\nTotal.\n in common carrier service; does not include industrial lines\nBroad gauge.\n850\u00a0km of gauge (850\u00a0km electrified) (1995)\nThere is no service south of Yerevan.\nCity with metro system: Yerevan\nInternational links.\nMost of the cross-border lines are currently closed due to political problems. However, there are daily inbound and outbound trains connecting Tbilisi and Yerevan. Departing from Yerevan railway station trains connect to both Tbilisi and Batumi. From neighboring Georgia, trains depart to Yerevan from Tbilisi railway station. Within Armenia, new electric trains connect passengers from Yerevan to Armenia's second-largest city of Gyumri. The new trains run four times a day and the journey takes approximately two hours.\nThere is also discussion to establish a rail link between Yerevan and Tehran. Armenia is pursuing funding from the Asian Development Bank to launch the construction of this infrastructure project. The completion of the project could establish a major commodities transit corridor and would serve as the shortest transportation route between Europe and the Persian Gulf. In June 2019, Iranian president Hassan Rouhani backed this project and stated that \u201cwe want the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman to be connected to the Black Sea, and one of the ways to make this happen is through Iran, Armenia and Georgia.\u201d\nMetros.\nThe capital city of Armenia, Yerevan, is serviced by the Yerevan Metro. The system was launched in 1981, and like most former Soviet Metros, its stations are very deep (20\u201370 meters underground) and intricately decorated with national motifs. The metro runs on a 13.4 kilometers (8.3\u00a0mi) line and currently serves 10 active stations. Trains run every five minutes from 6:30\u00a0a.m. until 11 p.m. local AMT time. As of 2017, the annual ridership of the metro is 16.2 million passengers. Free Wi-Fi is available at all stations and some trains. \nTrams.\nYerevan tram (Armenian: ) was a tram system previously operating in Yerevan, the capital of Armenia. It was opened on 29 September 1906 in the form of a city wagonway. In the second half of the 20th century, the tram system had up to 12 routes, which were served by 3 depots. Trams were operated until 21 January 2004.\nHistory.\nThe only city in Armenia where a tram ever existed was Yerevan. On 29 September 1906, the Yerevan horse wagonway was opened. This type of narrow-gauge wagonway existed until August 1918, when the tram was destroyed during World War I.\nOn 12 January 1933, a wide-gauge electric tram was launched. The number of tram cars increased by 25% on average every five years, in 1933 it was 16, then in 1945 there were 77 cars, and in 1965 - 222 cars. Two types of trams were used, the 71-605 and the RVZ-6M2, both were Soviet made. Since the cost of the tram was 2.4% higher than that of buses, as well as due to expensive electricity and problems arising when the tram crossed the Great Bridge of Hrazdan in Yerevan, route #7 (Erebuni - Zeytun) was closed on 20 June 2003.\nMost of the tracks have been removed and the trams have been turned into scrap. The tram depot is used by various private enterprises, and the substation currently serves the Yerevan trolleybus.\nBuses.\nInternational connections.\nLand borders are open with both Georgia and Iran. Yerevan Central Bus Station, also known as Kilikia Bus Station is the main bus terminal in Yerevan with buses connecting to both internal and international destinations. There are daily bus connections between Yerevan and Tbilisi and Yerevan and Tehran. Approximately three times daily, buses depart from Yerevan Central Bus Station to Stepanakert, the capital of the partially recognized state of Artsakh. There are also scheduled bus routes which connect Yerevan with Kyiv, Moscow, Saint Petersburg as well as several other cities across Russia. It is also possible to connect to Chi\u0219in\u0103u Moldova, Minsk Belarus and other cities in Eastern Europe from Yerevan through connecting bus routes via Georgia and Ukraine. In addition, there is a once a week bus service to Istanbul via Georgia. In June 2019, a new bus route from Baghdad to Yerevan via Iran began.\nLocal connections.\nThe Armenian bus network connects all major cities, towns, and villages throughout the country. In larger cities and towns such as Yerevan, Gyumri, Vanadzor and Armavir, bus stations are equipped with a waiting room and a ticket office, in other towns bus stations may not have shelters. Most of the routes are operated by GAZelle minivans with a capacity of 15 passengers, some routes are operated by soviet bus producer LiAZ (Russia). Yerevan itself has a large integrated bus network, with a newly acquired bus fleet, passengers are able to connect from one end of the city to the other. Wi-Fi is available on most city buses. Despite this, buses often have difficulty meeting the demand for capacity, mainly in Yerevan, where vehicles are typically overcrowded. There are no night services between 11 p.m. and 6 a.m. There is no ticket system in the country, passengers pay in cash to drivers. Passengers on the national bus network pay before boarding, passengers on the Yerevan bus network pay after the ride, while leaving the vehicle. Timetables and fares are published on https://.\nFrom Yeritasardakan metro station in downtown Yerevan, travelers can take the 201 airport shuttle, which goes directly to Zvartnots International Airport, which takes approximately 20 minutes from the city center.\nRoadways.\nSince independence, Armenia has been developing its internal highway network. The \"North-South Road Corridor Investment Program\" is a major infrastructure project which aims at connecting the southern border of Armenia with its northern by means of a 556\u00a0km-long Meghri-Yerevan-Bavra highway. It is a major US$1.5 billion infrastructure project funded by the Asian Development Bank, European Investment Bank and the Eurasian Development Bank. When completed, the highway will provide access to European countries via the Black Sea. It could also eventually interconnect the Black Sea ports of Georgia with the major ports of Iran, thus positioning Armenia in a strategic transport corridor between Europe and Asia. Armenia is pursuing further loans from China as part of the Belt and Road Initiative to complete the north\u2013south highway.\nArmenia connects to European road networks via the International E-road network through various routes such as; European route E117, European route E691, European route E001 and European route E60. Armenia also connects to the Asian Highway Network through routes AH81, AH82 and AH83.\nThe number of insured registered cars in Armenia has grown from 390,457 in 2011 to 457,878 in 2015.\nTotal.\n8,800 \u00a0km\nWorld Ranking: 112\nPaved.\n8,800 \u00a0km (including 1,561\u00a0km of expressways)\nUnpaved.\n0\u00a0km (2006 est.)\nPipelines.\nNatural gas 3,838\u00a0km (2017)\nPorts and harbors.\nCargo shipments to landlocked Armenia are routed through ports in Georgia and Turkey.\nAirports.\nAir transportation in Armenia is the most convenient and comfortable means of getting into the country. There are large international airports that accept both external and domestic flights throughout the Republic. As of 2020, 11 airports operate in Armenia. However, only Yerevan's Zvartnots International Airport and Gyumri's Shirak Airport are in use for commercial aviation. There are three additional civil airports currently under reconstruction in Armenia, including Syunik Airport, Stepanavan Airport, and Goris Airport. The leading Armenian airlines in operation are Armenia Aircompany and Armenia Airways.\nThere are plenty of air connections between Yerevan and other regional cities, including Athens, Barcelona, Beirut, Berlin, Bucharest, Brussels, Damascus, Doha, Dubai, Istanbul, Kyiv, Kuwait City, London, Milan, Minsk, Moscow, Paris, Prague, Riga, Rome, Tehran, Tel-Aviv, Tbilisi, Vienna, Venice, and Warsaw, as well as daily connections to most major cities within the CIS region. Statistics show that the number of tourists arriving in the country by air transportation increases yearly. In 2018, passenger flow at the two main airports of Armenia reached a record high of 2,856,673 million people. In December 2019, yearly passenger flow exceeded 3,000,000 million people for the first time in Armenia's history.\nIn November 2019, the creation of a Free Route Airspace (FRA) between Armenia and Georgia was announced. The process has been carried out through the joint efforts of the General Department of Civil Aviation of Armenia, the Georgian Civil Aviation Administration and Eurocontrol. The Free Route Airspace between the two South Caucasus countries will increase flights to around 40,000 annually.\nCountry comparison to the world: 153\nAirports - with paved runways.\nTotal: 10\nOver 3,047 m (9,900 feet): 2\n1,524 to 2,437 m (7,920 feet): 2\n914 to 1,523 m (4,950 feet): 4\nUnder 914 m: 2 (as of 2008)\nAirports - with unpaved runways.\nTotal: 1\n1,524 to 2,437 m: 0\n914 to 1,523 m: 1\nunder 914 m: 0 (as of 2008)\nHeliports.\nArmenia maintains a number of both military and civilian heliports. The main military heliport is located on the premises of Erebuni Airport in Yerevan. Meanwhile, the company Armenian Helicopters, based at Zvartnots Airport in Yerevan, offers charter flights within Armenia and to certain neighboring countries, including Georgia, Russia, and Turkey. Helicopter services are delivered with the US-made Robinson R66 and the European AIRBUS EC130T2 choppers. Flights can be carried out as scheduled or on individual routes.\nAerial tramways.\nThe Wings of Tatev is currently the world's longest reversible aerial tramway which holds the record for longest non-stop double-track cable car and is located in the town of Halidzor.\nIn October 2019, it was announced that investors were interested in creating an aerial tramway in the capital, Yerevan.\nInternational transport agreements.\nArmenia cooperates in various international transport-related organizations and agreements, including the following:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1097", "revid": "1130897", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1097", "title": "Armed Forces of Armenia", "text": "Combined military forces of Armenia\nThe Armed Forces of the Republic of Armenia (, abbreviated \u0540\u0540 \u0536\u0548\u0552, \"HH ZU\"), sometimes referred to as the Armenian Army (), is the national military of Armenia. It consists of personnel branches under the General Staff of the Armenian Armed Forces, which can be divided into two general branches: the Ground Forces, and the Air Force. Although it was partially formed out of the former Soviet Army forces stationed in the Armenian SSR (mostly units of the 7th Guards Army of the Transcaucasian Military District), the military of Armenia can be traced back to the founding of the First Republic of Armenia in 1918. Being landlocked, Armenia does not have a navy.\nThe Commander-in-Chief of the military is the President of Armenia, Vahagn Khachaturyan. The Ministry of Defence is in charge of political leadership, headed by Suren Papikyan, while military command remains in the hands of the general staff, headed by the Chief of Staff, who is Major-General Edward Asryan. Border guards subject to the Ministry of Defence until 2001, patrol Armenia's borders with Georgia and Azerbaijan, while Russian troops continue to monitor its borders with Iran and Turkey. Since 2002, Armenia has been a member of the Collective Security Treaty Organization. Armenia signed a military cooperation plan with Lebanon on 27 November 2015.\nHistory.\nEarly Armenian Army.\nAn Armenian military corps was established to fight against the Ottomans during the Turkish\u2013Armenian War in early 1918. In accordance with the Treaty of Batum of 4 June 1918 the Ottoman Empire demobilized most of the Armenian army. Ethnic Armenian conscripts and volunteers in the Imperial Russian Army would later become the core of the military of the First Armenian Republic.\nSoviet era.\nThe 7th Guards Army was based in Yerevan from 1946 to 1992. In the late 1980s the Army consisted of:\nOn 1 June 1992, ITAR-TASS reported that General Fyodor Reut said that some units of the 7th Guards Army would begin leaving Armenia in 10\u201315 days. The army was disbanded later that summer. The former Soviet Air Defense Forces in Armenia were drawn from the 14th Air Defense Corps of the 19th Separate Air Defense Army.\n1988\u20131992.\nThe modern Armenian military entered its first stage at the beginning of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, when Armenian militias were formed to combat Azerbaijani units in Artsakh. On 20 September 1990, the first military unit was created, the Yerevan Special Regiment, with the first oath being held in the Republican Assembly Point and was attended by the first President of Armenia Levon Ter-Petrosyan, Prime Minister Vazgen Manukyan, and defence minister Vazgen Sargsyan. Five battalions were also formed in Ararat, Goris, Vardenis, Ijan and Meghri. In 1991, by the decision of the government, the State Committee of Defense under the Council of Ministers, which facilitated the task of coordinating the defense operations of Armenia, becoming the basis on which the Ministry of Defense was to be established later on.\n1992\u2013present.\nArmenia established a Ministry of Defence on 28 January 1992. The first military unit of the defence ministry to be formed was the 1st Airborne Regiment, where the first Armenian soldier took the oath to the nation that March. Since a significant part of the officers of the Armed Forces were fighters of the self-defense volunteer detachments, a center for raising the qualification of officers was established for their qualification and training, which during its activity it provided about 1,500 officer-graduates. The School of Non-Commissioned Officers produced about 1,000 graduates.\nThe Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe was ratified by the Armenian parliament in July 1992. The treaty establishes comprehensive limits on key categories of military equipment, such as tanks, artillery, armored combat vehicles, combat aircraft, and combat helicopters, and provides for the destruction of weaponry in excess of those limits. Armenian officials have consistently expressed determination to comply with its provisions and thus Armenia has provided data on armaments as required under the CFE Treaty. Despite this, Azerbaijan accuses Armenia of diverting a large part of its military forces to Nagorno-Karabakh and thus circumventing these international regulations. In March 1993, Armenia signed the multilateral Chemical Weapons Convention, which calls for the eventual elimination of chemical weapons. Armenia acceded to the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty as a non-nuclear weapons state in July 1993.\nIn addition to the branches of services listed above, Armenia established its own Internal Troops from the former Soviet Interior Troops after the dissolution of the Soviet Union. Up until December 2002, Armenia maintained a Ministry of Internal Affairs, but along with the Ministry of National Security, it was reorganized as a non-ministerial institution. The two organizations became the Police of Armenia and the National Security Service.\nOrganization and service branches.\nThe Armenian Armed Forces are Headquartered in Yerevan, where most of the general staff is based. The general staff is responsible for operational command of the Armenian Military and its two major branches. The armed forces also has the following personnel branches:\nGround Forces.\nAccording to IISS 2010, Armenia has 30 T-80 tanks, 390 T-72 tanks, 14 T-54/55 tanks and 80 BMP-1's, 7 BMP-1K, 55 BMP-2 and 12 BRM-1K. Wheeled APCs reported included 11 BTR-60s, 21 BTR-70s, 4 BTR-80s, 145 MT-LBs, 5 BMD-1S, and 120 BRDM-2 scout vehicles.\nAlthough the Russians have supplied newer equipment to Armenia over the years, the numbers have never been sufficient to upgrade all ground force formations and many of the lower readiness units still have older, Soviet-legacy systems that have not been upgraded or in many cases effectively maintained. These older systems are placing great demands on the logistics system for service, maintenance, replacement parts and necessary upgrades, costing the army both financially and in overall readiness. The ground force is engaged in an effort of reassessment, reorganisation and restructuring, as the future of Armenia's defence needs a revised force structure and unit mix. The army sees the need to maintain much of its traditional mechanised formations, but is looking to lighten and make more mobile and self-sustainable a small number of other formations. It must develop these newer formations to support its international requirements and effectively operate in mountainous and other rugged terrain, but it must do this without affecting the mechanised capability that is needed to confront Azerbaijan's conventional forces.\nSince the fall of the Soviet Union, Armenia has followed a policy of developing its armed forces into a professional, well trained, and mobile military. In 2000, the Centre for International Studies and Research reported that at that time the Armenian Army had the strongest combat capability of the three South Caucasus countries' armies (the other two being Georgia and Azerbaijan). CSTO Secretary, Nikolay Bordyuzha, came to a similar conclusion after collective military drills in 2007 when he stated that, \"the Armenian Army is the most efficient one in the post-Soviet space\". This was echoed more recently by Igor Korotchenko, a member of the Public Council, Russian Ministry of Defense, in a March 2011 interview with Voice of Russia radio.\nThe Army is functionally divided into \"Active\" and \"Reserve Forces\". Their main functions include deterrence, defense, peace support and crisis management, humanitarian and rescue missions, as well as social functions within Armenian society.\nThe Active Forces mainly have peacekeeping and defensive duties, and are further divided into Deployment Forces, Immediate Reaction, and Main Defense Forces. The Reserve Forces consists of Enhancement Forces, Territorial Defense Forces, and Training Grounds. They deal with planning and reservist preparation, armaments and equipment storage, training of formations for active forces rotation or increase in personnel.\nDuring peacetime the Army maintains permanent combat and mobilization readiness. They become part of multinational military formations in compliance with international treaties Armenia is a signatory to, participate in the preparation of the population, the national economy and the maintenance of wartime reserves and the infrastructure of the country for defense.\nIn times of crisis the Army's main tasks relate to participation in operations countering terrorist activities and defense of strategic facilities (such as nuclear power plants and major industrial facilities), assisting the security forces in proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, illegal armaments traffic and international terrorism.\nIn case of low- and medium-intensity military conflict the Active Forces that are part of the Army participate in carrying out the initial tasks for the defense of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the country. In case of a high intensity conflict the Land Forces, together with the Air Force, Air Defense and Border Guards, form the defense group of the Armenian Armed Forces aiming at countering aggression and protect the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the country.\nExperiments in developing small arms have been undertaken in Armenia, producing the K-3 assault rifle, but Jane's Infantry Weapons estimates that the program has ceased, and the rifle is not in widespread service with the army. The AK-74 is the standard-issue rifle of the Armenian Army with older AKMs in reserve use. Beside AK rifles Armenian forces use mostly Russian small arms like the Makarov pistol, SVD sniper rifle, and the PKM general purpose machine gun.\nAir Force and Air Defense.\nThe Armenian Air Force consists of 15 Su-25 ground attack planes, 4 Su-30 jet fighters, 1 Mig 25, 16 Mil Mi-24 helicopter gunships, 6 L-39 trainer and attack aircraft, 16 Yak-52 trainer aircraft, 3 Il-76 cargo planes, 18 Mil Mi-8 transport helicopters, and 10 Mil Mi-2 light utility helicopters. There are an additional 18 MiG-29 fighter jets of the Russian 102nd Military Base stationed in Gyumri.\nThe Armenian anti-aircraft branch was equipped and organized as part of the military reform program of Lieutenant-General Norat Ter-Grigoryants. It consists of an anti-aircraft missile brigade and two regiments armed with 100 anti-aircraft complexes of various models and modifications, including the SA-8, Krug, S-75, S-125, SA-7, SA-10, SA-13, SA-16 and SA-18. Russia has SA-6 and S-300 long range surface-to-air missiles at the Russian 102nd Military Base. There are also 24 Scud ballistic missiles with eight launchers.\nNumerical strength is estimated at 3,000 servicemen, with plans for further expansion.\nIn late December 2010, the Armenian Defense Minister, Seyran Ohanyan, officially acknowledged that the army are equipped with the Russian-made S-300 surface-to-air missiles. The statement was made while the Minister was inspecting a new air-defense command point that maintains \"state-of-the-art equipment\" built specifically for the operation of the S-300's. Russian specialist started to train Armenian teams on sophisticated Missiles and Defensive Systems. The S-300 was paraded for the first time in the 2011 Parade and the only S-300 missile system (SA10 Grumble) which likes mobility. The S-300 is the main Air Defensive system that protects Armenia's air security. In the 2016 Armenian Parade celebrating the Armenian Independence BUK-M2 Air Defense Systems were shown. These systems were not part of the 200\u00a0million dollar contract agreement between Yerevan and Moscow but an agreement between CSTO partners. Other devices such as stem of electronic warfare (EW) \"Infauna\" and P-325U consist in the Armenian Armed Forces.\nMilitary of Artsakh.\nIn addition to forces mentioned above, there were around 20,000 active soldiers defending Nagorno-Karabakh, a disputed territory which seceded from Azerbaijan from 1991 to 2023. They were well trained and well equipped with the latest in military software and hardware. The Karabakh army's heavy military hardware included: 316 tanks, 324 armored vehicles, 322 artillery pieces of calibers over 122\u00a0mm, 44 multiple rocket launchers, and a new anti-aircraft defense system. In addition, the Artsakh Defence Army maintained a small air-force of 2 Su-25s, 5 Mi-24s and 5 other helicopters. The Artsakh Defence Army was disbanded on 21 September 2023 under the terms of Nagorno-Karabakh ceasefire agreement following the 2023 Azerbaijani military offensive on the territory.\nPersonnel.\nThe Armed Forces of Armenia is constitutionally a conscript force, but there is also a growing number of professional officers. There were roughly 19,000 conscripts and 23,000 professionals serving in 2017. Enlistment, which is performed twice a year, is handled by military commissariats. Male draftees between the ages of 18 and 27 are obliged to present themselves in the commissariats for registration. People who have changed their citizenship or have dual citizenship are also subject to conscription, unless they have already served in the armed forces of another country. Since 2003, conscientious objectors can apply for alternative service. Draft evaders can not be appointed to public service positions. Citizens who have completed military service are registered in the reserve and are divided into rank and file, non-commissioned and commissioned staff of the reserve. Reservists can be called up to training musters and exercises in peacetime. Reserve obligation lasts up to the age of 50.\nEducational institutions.\nHigher military education is provided by the National Defense Research University in Yerevan. It was established in 2016, on the basis of the Institute for National Strategic Studies.\nThe \"I Have the Honour State Program\" is an educational program of the ministry of defence that serves conscripts in the army. Participants of the program are given the right to defer conscription in favor of education in post-secondary institutions with full reimbursement of tuition fees, after which the conscript is awarded the rank of lieutenant and is appointed to the service for a period of 2 years and 3 months.\nContract service.\nA contractual military service is a service last for 3\u201312 months, or for a term of three or five years. Males under 36 who have not previously served as contract servicemen and are registered in the reserve, can be enrolled in contractual military service as privates. Felons and those not fit for service are ineligible for contract service. Since 2008, sergeant training courses for contract servicemen have operated in the Armed Forces and since 2013, the duration of the courses has three months. The courses are open to reservist privates under the age of 25.\nConscription.\nMilitary service in Armenia is mandatory. Citizens aged 27 to 50 are registered in the reserve and may be drafted if a national mobilization was declared. The enlistment process is handled by the military commissariats in January and May. Dual citizens are not be exempt from the draft. If one fails to follow through with their obligations, a criminal case is then instituted, which could lead to 3 years in jail.\nThe following military commissariats operate in Armenia:\nThe armed forces also sport the following volunteer units:\nWomen in the armed forces.\nDuring the First Nagorno-Karabakh War in the early 90s, at least 115 Armenian women were known to have taken part in combat operations. Many women from the diaspora arrived to serve in non-combat missions. The first woman to have been given a significant position in the military was Zhanna Galstyan, who was appointed deputy commander of the Central District Defensive Unit after the formation of the Artsakh Defense Army.\nMore than 2,000 women currently serve in the army, with most working in administrative positions or in liaison and medical units. In October 2016, a program, approved by the National Assembly, committed the military to \"creating additional opportunities\" for women serving in the army or seeking military service. Defense Minister Vigen Sargsyan at the time told the MPs that \"It would be wrong not to let them (women) reach their full potential.\" The Erato Detachment was the first all-women military unit in the Armenian Armed Forces, being created after of clashes between the Azerbaijani Army and Armenia occurred in July 2020. Anna Hakobyan, the wife of the current Prime Minister of Armenia, Nikol Pashinyan, underwent a week long combat readiness program with women from the Republic of Artsakh who joined the unit.\nMinorities.\nDuring the 2020 war, a group of Yazidi reservists formed a reserve military unit that joined the frontline in Karabakh. The unit was led by Rzgan Sarhangyan and is composed of 50 soldiers aged between 18 and 55.\nEquipment.\nThe Armenian Army operates a wide variety of older equipment, mostly of Soviet origin. There is also some newer equipment from Russia. In 2015, a US$200m loan was ratified by Russia for the purchase of modern weapons between 2015 and 2017. Armenia produces its own combat helmets and body armors through the works of a joint Armenian-Polish company. Some personal equipment used by special units (Future Assault Shell Technology helmets, plate carriers and special pouches) is imported. Armenia also produces most of its small arms, with only specialised units being imported.\nFollowing the 2016 Nagorno-Karabakh clashes, the Helsinki Citizens' Assembly released a report, which detailed the circumstances of death of Armenian servicemen. Among the contributing factors were stated to be malfunctioning equipment and lack of necessary materiel, especially ammunition. This was followed by plans to increase Armenian defense spending to purchase more weapons and ammunition.\nArmenia is not a significant exporter of conventional weapons, but it has provided support, including material, to the Armenians of Nagorno-Karabakh during the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.\nInternational military cooperation.\nRussia.\nRussia is one of the closest allies of Armenia. The Russian 102nd Military Base, the former 127th Motor Rifle Division, is stationed in Gyumri. The military alliance of the two nations and, in particular, the presence of Russian troops on Armenian soil has been a key element of Armenia's national security doctrine since Armenia gained independence in 1991. Russia stations an estimated 5,000 soldiers of all types in Armenia, including 3,000 officially reported to be based at the 102nd Military Base. In 1997, the two countries signed a far-reaching friendship treaty, which calls for mutual assistance in the event of a military threat to either party and allows Russian border guards to patrol Armenia's frontiers with Turkey and Iran. In early 2005, the 102nd Military Base had 74 tanks, 17 battle infantry vehicles, 148 armored personnel carriers, 84 artillery pieces, 18 MiG-29 fighters, one battery of SA-6 and two batteries of S-300 anti-aircraft missiles. However, in 2005\u20132007, following an agreement on the withdrawal of two Russian military bases from Georgia, a great deal of military hardware was moved to the 102nd Base from the Russian 12th Military Base in Batumi and the 62nd Military Base at Akhalkalaki, Georgia. Russia also supplies weapons at the relatively lower prices of the Russian domestic market as part of a collective security agreement since January 2004.\nAccording to unconfirmed reports by the Azeri media, Russia has supplied $1\u00a0billion worth of arms and ammunitions to Armenia in 1996; and handed over an additional $800\u00a0million worth of arms to Armenia in 2008\u20132009. According to AzerNews, the weapons in this latest transfer include 21 tanks, 12 armored vehicles, five other battle machines, a great number of rocket launchers, over 1,050 cases of grenades, nearly 7,900 types of ammunition, 120 grenade launchers, over 4,000 sub-machine guns, TNT fuses, mines of various types, 14 mine-launchers, 9 Grad launchers, five cannons, and other weapons.\nOfficer training is another sphere of Russian-Armenian military cooperation. In the first years of sovereignty when Armenia lacked a military educational establishment of its own, officers of its army were trained in Russia. Even now when Armenia has a military college on its own territory, the Armenian officer corps honors the tradition and is trained at Russian military educational establishments. In 1997, 600 Armenian servicemen were being trained at Russian Military Academies: the training was conducted by the Marshal Bagramyan Training Brigade.\nAt the first meeting of the joint Russian-Armenian government panel for military-technical cooperation that took place during autumn 2005, Prime Minister Mikhail Fradkov reported that, Russian factories will participate in the Armenian program of military modernization, and that Russia is prepared to supply the necessary spare parts and equipment. In accordance with this agreement, Armenia and Russia agreed to work together in exporting weapons and other military equipment to third countries in December 2009. The export agreement was signed by Defense Minister Seyran Ohanyan and a visiting senior Russian official, Konstantin Biryulin, during a meeting of a Russian-Armenian inter-governmental commission on bilateral military-technical cooperation. The agreement envisages the two countries' interaction in exporting military production to third countries, which will help to strengthen the armed forces of the two states, and further cement the already close Russian\u2013Armenian military cooperation.\nA Russian-Armenian defense agreement signed in August 2010 extends Russia's military presence in Armenia till 2044 and commits Russia to supplying Armenia with modern and compatible weaponry and special military hardware at reduced prices.\nAt the beginning of 2009, Azerbaijani media published allegations that Russia had made extensive weapons transfers to Armenia throughout 2008 costing about $800\u00a0million. On 12 January 2009, the Russian ambassador was invited to the Azerbaijani Ministry of Foreign Affairs and asked about this information. On 21 January 2009, Russian ministry of foreign relations officially denied the transfers. According to US diplomatic cables leaked in December 2010, Azerbaijani defence minister Safar Abiyev claimed that in January 2009 during his visit to Moscow, his Russian counterpart Anatoly Serdyukov unofficially had admitted to weapons transfers \"after the second bottle of vodka\" that evening, although officially it was denied.\nIn June 2013 it was revealed that Russia has deployed in Armenia several Iskander-M ballistic missiles systems, which are stationed at undisclosed locations in the country.\nCollective Security Treaty Organisation.\nOn 7 October 2002, the Presidents of Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia and Tajikistan, signed a charter in Tashkent, founding the Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO) (Russian: \u041e\u0440\u0433\u0430\u043d\u0438\u0437\u0430\u0446\u0438\u044f \u0414\u043e\u0433\u043e\u0432\u043e\u0440\u0430 \u043e \u041a\u043e\u043b\u043b\u0435\u043a\u0442\u0438\u0432\u043d\u043e\u0439 \u0411\u0435\u0437\u043e\u043f\u0430\u0441\u043d\u043e\u0441\u0442\u0438 (\u041e\u0414\u041a\u0411/ODKB)) or simply \u0422\u0430\u0448\u043a\u0435\u043d\u0442\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439 \u0434\u043e\u0433\u043e\u0432\u043e\u0440 (The Tashkent Treaty). Nikolai Bordyuzha was appointed secretary general of the new organisation. On 23 June 2006, Uzbekistan became a full participant in the CSTO and its membership was formally ratified by its parliament on 28 March 2008. Furthermore, the CSTO is an observer organisation at the United Nations General Assembly.\nThe charter reaffirmed the desire of all participating states to abstain from the use or threat of force. Signatories would not be able to join other military alliances or other groups of states, while aggression against one signatory would be perceived as an aggression against all. To this end, the CSTO holds yearly military command exercises for the CSTO nations to have an opportunity to improve inter-organisation cooperation. The largest-scale CSTO military exercise held, to date, were the \"Rubezh 2008\" exercises hosted in Armenia where a combined total of 4,000 troops from all 7 constituent CSTO member countries conducted operative, strategic, and tactical training with an emphasis towards furthering the efficiency of the collective security element of the CSTO partnership.\nThe Ministry of Defense of Armenia has repeatedly stated that it would expect direct military assistance from the CSTO in case war with Azerbaijan resumes, as recently as December 2009, Defense Minister Ohanyan made the same statement. In August 2009, Nikolay Bordyuzha, the CSTO's secretary-general, confirmed that official Yerevan can count on such support.\nOn 4 February 2009, an agreement to create the Collective Rapid Reaction Force (KSOR) was reached by five of the seven CSTO members, with plans finalized on 14 June 2009. Armenia is one of the five member states. The force is intended to be used to repulse military aggression, conduct anti-terrorist operations, fight transnational crime and drug trafficking, and neutralize the effects of natural disasters.\nNATO.\nArmenia participates in NATO's Partnership for Peace (PiP) program and it is in a NATO organization called Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC). Armenia is in the process of implementation of Individual Partnership Action Plans (IPAPs), which is a program for those countries that have the political will and ability to deepen their relationship with NATO. Cooperative Best Effort exercise (the first where Russia was represented) was run on Armenian territory in 2003.\nFrance.\nOn 5 October 2023, following the 2023 Azerbaijani offensive in Nagorno-Karabakh, France announced that it would send defense aid to the Armenian military.\nGreece.\nGreece is Armenia's closest ally in NATO and the two cooperate on multiple issues. A number of Armenian officers are trained in Greece every year, and military aid/material assistance has been provided to Armenia. In 2003, the two countries signed a military cooperation accord, under which Greece will increase the number of Armenian servicemen trained at the military and military-medical academies in Athens.\nIn February 2003, Armenia sent 34 peacekeepers to Kosovo where they became part of the Greek contingent. Officials in Yerevan have said the Armenian military plans to substantially increase the size of its peacekeeping detachment and counts on Greek assistance to the effort. In June 2008, Armenia sent 72 peacekeepers to Kosovo for a total of 106 peacekeepers.\nIn November 2024, several sources claimed that Greece was planning to transfer all Russian-made air defences it possessed to Armenia. The equipment includes S-300 long-range SAMs, acquired by Greece after the Cypriot Missile Crisis, Tor-M1 short-medium range SAM, and Osa-AKM short-range systems. The claim has not been confirmed by the Greek MoD yet.\nBaltic States.\nLithuania has been sharing experience and providing consultations to the Armenian Defense Ministry in the field of democratic control of armed forces, military and defense concepts and public relations since 2002. Since 2004, Armenian officers have been invited to study at the Lithuanian War Academy and the Baltic Defence College in Tartu, Estonia. Lithuania covers all study expenditures. In early 2007, two Armenian officers for the first time took part in a Baltic lead international exercise, Amber Hope, which was held in Lithuania.\nUnited States.\nThe United States has been steadily upping its military clout in the region. In early 2003, the United States Department of Defense announced several major military programs in the Caucasus. Washington's military aid to Armenia in 2005 amounted to $5\u00a0million, and in April 2004, the two sides signed a military-technical cooperation accord. In late 2004, Armenia deployed a unit of 46 soldiers, which included bomb-disposal experts, doctors, and transport specialists, to Iraq as part of the American-led Multi-National Force Iraq. In 2005, the United States allocated $7\u00a0million to modernize the military communications of the Armenian Armed Forces.\nSince 2003, Armenia and the Kansas National Guard have exchanged military delegations as part of a National Guard Bureau program to promote better relations between the United States and developing nations. The program has largely consisted of mutual visits to each other's countries in an effort to share \"ideas and [the] best practices for military and emergency management.\"\nEagle Partner 2023 was a military exercise which took place in Armenia from 11 September to 20 September 2023. The main goal of the exercise was the fortifying of the alliance between the United States with Armenia and also the training of the 12th Peacekeeping Brigade of the Armed Forces of Armenia for future peacekeeping missions. Eagle Partner 2024 began on 15 July 2024. The exercises were scheduled to last through July 24.\nOn 6 December 2024, Armenian Defense Minister Suren Papikyan held a high-level meeting with United States Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin at The Pentagon. The two leaders met to discuss the strategic relationship between the United States and Armenia. Austin stated, \"Your visit is historic. Armenia extended its hand to the United States and I'm proud to host you here today\" and \"the U.S. supports a sovereign, independent, and prosperous Armenia and that relationship between the two nations continues to grow closer.\" Papikyan highlighted the priority of transforming the Armenian Armed Forces and enhancing interoperability with the U.S. Armed Forces.\nEuropean Union.\nOn 22 July 2024, the European Union approved the allocation of 10 million euros to the Armed Forces of Armenia from the European Peace Facility. This marked the first ever funding assistance to the Armed Forces of Armenia from the EU. The funding will be used to increase the material and technical capabilities of Armenia's army. The EU's Foreign Affairs chief, Josep Borrell stated \"Security is an important element of bilateral relations with Armenia. The EU has a mutual interest in further expanding dialogue on foreign and security policy, also looking into Armenia's future participation in EU-led missions and operations.\" Armenia's Foreign Minister Ararat Mirzoyan stated \"We salute the historic decisions of EU Foreign Affairs Council on providing assistance to Armenia under the European Peace Facility. This is a very important milestone in the Armenia-EU partnership based on shared values and principles as well as the vision for stability, peace and prosperity.\" While the Armenian Minister of Defence, Suren Papikyan stated \"This initiative will give a new charge to closer cooperation with our partner EU member countries in both bilateral and multilateral formats.\"\nPeacekeeping operations.\nAs of 2022, Armenia is involved in peacekeeping operations in Kosovo, Afghanistan, Lebanon, Mali and Kazakhstan\nKosovo.\nThere are 70 Armenian soldiers serving in Kosovo as peacekeepers.\nArmenia joined the Kosovo Force in Kosovo in 2004. Armenian \"blue helmets\" serve within the Greek Army battalion. The relevant memorandum was signed on 3 September 2003, in Yerevan and ratified by the Armenian Parliament on 13 December 2003. The sixth deployment of Armenian peacekeepers departed for Kosovo on 14 November 2006. In 2008, the Armenian National Assembly voted unanimously to double the peacekeeping force in Kosovo by sending an extra 34 peacekeepers to the region, increasing the total number of peacekeepers in the region to 68.\nArmenia temporarily withdrew its peacekeepers from Kosovo in February 2012 as a result of the reduction of the Greek subdivisions. Armenia redeployed them in July to serve alongside American soldiers in Kosovo.\nIraq.\nAfter the end of the invasion of Iraq, Armenia deployed a unit of 46 peacekeepers under Polish command. Armenian peacekeepers were based in Al-Kut, from the capital of Baghdad. On 23 July 2006, the fourth shift of Armenian peacekeepers departed for Iraq. The shift included 3 staff commanders, 2 medical officers, 10 combat engineers and 31 drivers. Throughout the length of the deployment, there was one Armenian wounded and no deaths. The Armenian government extended the small troop presence in Iraq by one year at the end of 2005 and 2006. On 7 October 2008, Armenia withdrew its contingent of 46 peacekeepers. This coincided with the withdrawal of the Polish contingent in Iraq.\nAfghanistan.\nArmenia deployed 130 soldiers in Afghanistan as part of the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). They were serving under German command protecting an airport in Kunduz.\nLebanon.\nIn 2014, Armenia deployed 33 peacekeepers to Lebanon as part of UNIFIL. Since then, they have served under the Italian contingent and fulfill headquarter security functions.\nMali.\nIn 2015, one peacekeeper was dispatched to Mali on a monitoring-peacekeeping mission.\nKazakhstan.\nIn 2022, Armenia sent around 100 servicemen to Kazakhstan as part of the Collective Security Treaty Organization peacekeeping forces. Nikol Pashinyan, who serves as the CSTO chairman, confirmed that the alliance will send 'peacekeepers' to Kazakhstan for a limited period given the threat to national security and the sovereignty of Kazakhstan, due to the 2022 Kazakh protests.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1098", "revid": "46505507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1098", "title": "Foreign relations of Armenia", "text": "Since its independence, Armenia has maintained a policy of trying to have positive and friendly relations with Iran, Greece, and the West, including the United States and the European Union. It has full membership status in a number of international organizations, such as the Council of Europe and the Eurasian Economic Union, and observer status, etc. in some others. However, the dispute over the Armenian genocide of 1915 and the ongoing Nagorno-Karabakh conflict have created tense relations with two of its immediate neighbors, Azerbaijan and Turkey.\nThe Ministry of Foreign Affairs implements the foreign policy agenda of the Government of Armenia and organizes and manages diplomatic services abroad. Since August 2021, Ararat Mirzoyan has served as the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Armenia.\nForeign relations.\nArmenia is a member of more than 70 different international organizations, including the following:\nArmenia is also an observer member of the ASEAN Inter-Parliamentary Assembly, the Community of Democratic Choice, the Non-Aligned Movement, the Organization of American States, the Pacific Alliance, the Arab League, the Community of Democracies, a dialogue partner in the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation, and a regional member of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.\nArmenian genocide recognition.\nAs of 2025, 34 states have officially recognized the historical events as genocide. Parliaments of countries that recognize the Armenian genocide include Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Cyprus, Czech Republic, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Russia, Slovakia, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, United States, Uruguay, Vatican City and Venezuela. Additionally, some regional governments of countries recognize the Armenian genocide too, such as New South Wales and South Australia in Australia as well as Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales in the United Kingdom. US House Resolution 106 was introduced on 30 January 2007, and later referred to the House Committee on Foreign Affairs. The bill has 225 co-sponsors. The bill called for former President George W. Bush to recognize and use the word genocide in his annual 24 April speech which he never used. His successor President Barack Obama expressed his desire to recognize the Armenian genocide during the electoral campaigns, but after being elected, did not use the word \"genocide\" to describe the events that occurred in 1915. The US House of Representatives formally recognized the Armenian genocide with House Resolution 296 on 29 October 2019. The United States Senate unanimously recognized the genocide with Senate Resolution 150 on 12 December 2019. In 2021, President Joe Biden became the first U.S. president to formally recognize the Armenian genocide. As of 2022, all 50 U.S. states have also recognized the events as genocide.\nDisputes.\nNagorno-Karabakh conflict.\nArmenia provides political, material and military support to the Republic of Artsakh in the longstanding Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.\nThe current conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh began in 1988 when Armenian demonstrations against Azerbaijani rule broke out in Nagorno\u2013Karabakh and later in Armenia. The Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast voted to secede from Azerbaijan and join Armenia. Soon, violence broke out against Armenians in Azerbaijan and Azeris in Armenia. In 1990, after violent episodes in Nagorno\u2013Karabakh and Azerbaijani cities like Baku, Sumgait and Kirovabad, Moscow declared a state of emergency in Karabakh, sending troops to the region, and forcibly occupied Baku, killing over a hundred civilians. In April 1991, Azerbaijani militia and Soviet forces targeted Armenian populations in Karabakh, known as Operation Ring. Moscow also deployed troops to Yerevan. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, conflict escalated into a full-scale war between the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic (supported by Armenia), and Azerbaijan. Military action was influenced by the Russian military, which manipulated the rivalry between the two neighbouring sides in order to keep both under control.\nMore than 30,000 people were killed in the fighting during the period of 1988 to 1994. In May 1992, Armenian forces seized Shusha and Lachin (thereby linking Nagorno-Karabakh to Armenia). By October 1993, Armenian forces succeeded in taking almost all of former NKAO, Lachin and large areas in southwestern Azerbaijan. In 1993, the UN Security Council adopted four resolutions calling for the cessation of hostilities, unimpeded access for international humanitarian relief efforts, and the eventual deployment of a peacekeeping force in the region. Fighting continued, however, until May 1994 at which time Russia brokered a cease-fire between the three sides.\nNegotiations to resolve the conflict peacefully have been ongoing since 1992 under the Minsk Group of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. The Minsk Group is co-chaired by Russia, France, and the United States and has representation from Turkey, the U.S., several European nations, Armenia and Azerbaijan. Despite the 1994 cease-fire, sporadic violations, sniper-fire and land mine incidents continue to claim over 100 lives each year.\nSince 1997, the Minsk Group co-chairs have presented three proposals to serve as a framework for resolving the conflict. Each proposal was rejected. Beginning in 1999, the presidents of Azerbaijan and Armenia initiated a direct dialogue through a series of face-to-face meetings, often facilitated by the Minsk Group Co-Chairs. The OSCE sponsored a round of negotiations between the presidents in Key West, Florida. U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell launched the talks on 3 April 2001, and the negotiations continued with mediation by the U.S., Russia and France until 6 April 2001. The Co-Chairs are still continuing to work with the two presidents in the hope of finding lasting peace.\nThe two countries were technically still at war until 2025. Citizens of Armenia, as well as citizens of any other country who are of Armenian descent, are forbidden entry to Azerbaijan. If a person's passport shows evidence of travel to Nagorno\u2013Karabakh, they are forbidden entry to Azerbaijan.\nIn 2008, in what became known as the 2008 Mardakert Skirmishes, Armenian forces and Azerbaijan clashed over Nagorno-Karabakh. The fighting between the sides was brief, with few casualties on either side.\nThe 2020 Nagorno-Karabakh war and the 2023 Azerbaijani offensive in Nagorno-Karabakh were the latest escalations of the unresolved conflict.\nOn 8 August 2025, in a press conference at the White House, the leaders of Armenia and Azerbaijan agreed to a peace deal, ending the conflict after over three decades.\nCountries without diplomatic relations.\nArmenia does not have diplomatic relations with the following countries (organized by continent):\nOceania.\nArmenia also has no diplomatic relations with states with limited recognition except for the now defunct Republic of Artsakh and the State of Palestine.\nCountries with diplomatic relations.\nList.\nList of countries which Armenia maintains diplomatic relations with:\nMultilateral relations.\nNotes on some of Armenia's multilateral relations follow:\nBilateral relations.\nNotes on some of Armenia's bilateral relations follow (organized by continent):\nOther international organizations.\nArmenia is additionally a full member, unless otherwise noted, in the following international organizations, programs and treaties:\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1105", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1105", "title": "Argentina/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "1108", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1108", "title": "Argentina/Foreign relations", "text": ""}
{"id": "1109", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1109", "title": "Geography of American Samoa", "text": ""}
{"id": "1110", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1110", "title": "Demographics of American Samoa", "text": "Demographics of American Samoa include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects. American Samoa is an unincorporated territory of the United States located in the South Pacific Ocean.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe statistics from 1900 to 1950 and every decennial census are from the U.S. Census Bureau. There was no census taken in 1910, but a special census taken in 1912. Beginning with the 1930 Census, Swain Island is included in the population count for American Samoa. The remaining statistics are from the World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 01.IV.2010): \nLanguages.\nNative languages include:\nEnglish proficiency is very high.\nReligion.\nMajor Christian denominations on the island include the Congregational Christian Church in American Samoa, the Catholic Church, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and the Methodist Church of Samoa. Collectively, these churches account for the vast majority of the population.\nJ. Gordon Melton in his book claims that the Methodists, Congregationalists with the London Missionary Society, and Catholics led the first Christian missions to the islands. Other denominations arrived later, beginning in 1895 with the Seventh-day Adventists, various Pentecostals (including the Assemblies of God), Church of the Nazarene, Jehovah's Witnesses, and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nThe World Factbook 2010 estimate shows the religious affiliations of American Samoa as 98.3% Christian, other 1%, unaffiliated 0.7%. World Christian Database 2010 estimate shows the religious affiliations of American Samoa as 98.3% Christian, 0.7% agnostic, 0.4% Chinese Universalist, 0.3% Buddhist, and 0.3% Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed.\nAccording to Pew Research Center, 98.3% of the total population is Christian. Among Christians, 59.5% are Protestant, 19.7% are Catholic and 19.2% are other Christians. A major Protestant church on the island, gathering a substantial part of the local Protestant population, is the Congregational Christian Church in American Samoa, a Reformed denomination in the Congregationalist tradition. As of \u00a02017[ [update]], The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints website claims membership of 16,180 or one-quarter of the whole population, with 41 congregations, and 4 family history centers in American Samoa. The Jehovah's Witnesses claim 210 \"ministers of the word\" and 3 congregations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1111", "revid": "10291250", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1111", "title": "Politics of American Samoa", "text": " \nPolitics of American Samoa takes place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic dependency, whereby the governor is the head of government, and of a multi-party system. American Samoa is an unincorporated and unorganized territory of the United States, administered by the Office of Insular Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior. Its constitution was ratified in 1966 and came into effect in 1967. Executive power is discharged by the governor and the lieutenant governor. Legislative power is vested in the two chambers of the legislature. The party system is based on the United States party system. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.\nThere is also the traditional village politics of the Samoan Islands, the and the , which continues in American Samoa and in independent Samoa, and which interacts across these current boundaries. The is the language and customs, and the the protocols of the (council) and the chiefly system. The and the take place at all levels of the Samoan body politic, from the family, to the village, to the region, to national matters. The (chiefs) are elected by consensus within the of the extended family and village(s) concerned. The and the (which is itself made of ) decide on distribution of family exchanges and tenancy of communal lands. The majority of lands in American Samoa and independent Samoa are communal. A can represent a small family group or a great extended family that reaches across islands, and to both American Samoa and independent Samoa.\nGovernment.\nThe government of American Samoa is defined under the Constitution of American Samoa. As an unincorporated territory, the Ratification Act of 1929 vested all civil, judicial, and military powers in the president, who in turn delegated authority to the secretary of the interior in Executive Order . The secretary promulgated the Constitution of American Samoa which was approved by a constitutional convention of the people of American Samoa and a majority of the voters of American Samoa voting at the 1966 election, and came into effect in 1967.\nThe governor of American Samoa is the head of government and along with the lieutenant governor of American Samoa is elected on the same ticket by popular vote for four-year terms.\nThe legislative power is vested in the American Samoa Fono, which has two chambers. The House of Representatives has 21 members serving two-year terms, being 20 representatives popularly elected from various districts and one delegate from Swains Island elected in a public meeting. The Senate has 18 members, elected for four-year terms by and from the chiefs of the islands.\nThe judiciary of American Samoa is composed of the High Court of American Samoa, a District Court, and village courts. The High Court is led by a chief justice and an associate justice, appointed by the secretary of the interior. Other judges are appointed by the governor upon the recommendation of the chief justice and confirmed by the Senate.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1112", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1112", "title": "Economy of American Samoa", "text": "The economy of American Samoa is a traditional Polynesian economy in which more than 90% of the land is communally owned. American Samoa is an unincorporated territory of the United States; economic activity is strongly linked to the main customs zone of the U.S., with which American Samoa conducts the great bulk of its trade. Tuna fishing and processing plants are the backbone of the private sector, with canned tuna being the primary export. Transfers from the U.S. federal government add substantially to American Samoa's economic well-being. Attempts by the government to develop a larger and broader economy are restrained by Samoa's remote location, its limited transportation, and its devastating hurricanes.\nStatistics.\nGDP: purchasing power parity \u2013 $537\u00a0million (2007 est.)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 210\nGDP (official exchange rate): $462.2 million (2005)\nGDP \u2013 real growth rate: 3% (2003)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 139\nGDP \u2013 per capita: purchasing power parity \u2013 $7,874 (2008)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 120\nGDP \u2013 composition by sector:\n&lt;br&gt;\"agriculture:\"\nNA%\n&lt;br&gt;\"industry:\"\nNA%\n&lt;br&gt;\"services:\"\nNA% (2002)\nLabor Force: 17,630 (2005)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 203\nLabor force \u2013 by occupation: government 33%, tuna canneries 34%, other 33% (1990)\nUnemployment rate: 23.8% (2010)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 175\nPopulation below poverty line:\nNA% (2002 est.)\nHousehold income or consumption by percentage share:\n&lt;br&gt;\"lowest 10%:\"\nNA%\n&lt;br&gt;\"highest 10%:\"\nNA%\nInflation rate (consumer prices):\nNA% (2003 est.)\nBudget:\n&lt;br&gt;\"revenues:\" $155.4 million (37% in local revenue and 63% in US grants)\n&lt;br&gt;\"expenditures:\" $183.6 million (FY07)\nAgriculture \u2013 products: bananas, coconuts, vegetables, taro, breadfruit, yams, copra, pineapples, papayas; dairy products, livestock\nIndustries: tuna canneries (largely dependent on foreign fishing vessels), handicrafts\nIndustrial production growth rate: NA%\nElectricity \u2013 production: 180 GWh (2006)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 179\nElectricity \u2013 production by source:\n&lt;br&gt;\"fossil fuel:\"\n100%\n&lt;br&gt;\"hydro:\"\n0%\n&lt;br&gt;\"nuclear:\"\n0%\n&lt;br&gt;\"other:\"\n0% (2001)\nElectricity \u2013 consumption: 167.4 GWh (2006)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 179\nElectricity \u2013 exports: 0 kWh (2007)\nElectricity \u2013 imports: 0 kWh (2007)\nOil \u2013 production: (2007 est.)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 209\nOil \u2013 consumption: (604 m3/d), 2006\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 170\nOil \u2013 exports: (2005)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 142\nOil \u2013 imports: (2005)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 166\nNatural gas \u2013 production: 0 cu m (2007)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 208\nNatural gas \u2013 consumption: 0 cu m (2007)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 207\nNatural gas \u2013 exports: 0 cu m (2007)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 202\nNatural gas \u2013 imports: 0 cu m (2007)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 201\nNatural gas \u2013 proved reserves: 0 cu m (2006)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 205\nExports: $445.6 million (2004)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 167\nExports \u2013 commodities:\ncanned tuna 93% (2004)\nExports \u2013 partners:\nIndonesia 70%, Australia 6.7%, Japan 6.7%, Samoa 6.7% (2002)\nImports: $308.8 million (2004)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 195\nImports \u2013 commodities:\nmaterials for canneries 56%, food 8%, petroleum products 7%, machinery and parts 6% (2004)\nImports \u2013 partners:\nAustralia 36.6%, New Zealand 20.3%, South Korea 16.3%, Mauritius 4.9% (2002)\nDebt \u2013 external:\n$NA (2002 est.)\nEconomic aid \u2013 recipient:\n$NA; note \u2013 important financial support from the US, more than $40 million in 1994\nCurrency:\nUS dollar (USD)\nCurrency code:\nUSD\nExchange rates:\nUS dollar is used\nFiscal year:\n1 October \u2013 30 September\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1114", "revid": "42195518", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1114", "title": "Transportation in American Samoa", "text": ""}
{"id": "1116", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1116", "title": "American Samoa/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "1123", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1123", "title": "Australia/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "1129", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1129", "title": "August 13", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearAugust 13 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1130", "revid": "1071745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1130", "title": "Avicenna", "text": "Persian polymath, physician and philosopher (c. 980\u20131037)\nIbn Sina (c.\u2009980 \u2013 22 June 1037), commonly known in the West as Avicenna ( ), was a preeminent philosopher and physician of the Muslim world. He was a seminal figure of the Islamic Golden Age, serving in the courts of various Iranian rulers, and was influential to medieval European medical and Scholastic thought. \nOften described as the father of early modern medicine, Avicenna's most famous works are \"The Book of Healing\", a philosophical and scientific encyclopedia, and \"The Canon of Medicine\", a medical encyclopedia that became a standard medical text at many medieval European universities and remained in use as late as 1650. \nBesides philosophy and medicine, Avicenna's corpus includes writings on astronomy, alchemy, geography and geology, psychology, Islamic theology, logic, mathematics, physics, and works of poetry. His philosophy was of the Peripatetic school derived from Aristotelianism, of which he is considered among the greatest proponents within the Muslim world.\nAvicenna wrote most of his philosophical and scientific works in Arabic but also wrote several key works in Persian; his poetry was written in both languages. Of the 450 works he is believed to have written, around 240 have survived, including 150 on philosophy and 40 on medicine.\nName.\n' is a Latin corruption of the Arabic patronym Ibn S\u012bn\u0101 (), meaning \"Son of Sina\". However, Avicenna was not the son but the great-great-grandson of a man named Sina. His formal Arabic name was Ab\u016b \u02bfAl\u012b al-\u1e24usayn bin \u02bfAbdall\u0101h bin al-\u1e24asan bin \u02bfAl\u012b bin S\u012bn\u0101 al-Balkh\u012b al-Bukh\u0101r\u012b ().\nCircumstances.\nAvicenna created an extensive corpus of works during what is commonly known as the Islamic Golden Age, in which the translations of Byzantine, Greco-Roman, Persian, and Indian texts were studied extensively. Greco-Roman (Middle Platonic, Neoplatonic, and Aristotelian) texts translated by the Kindi school were commented, redacted and developed substantially by Islamic intellectuals, who also built upon Persian and Indian mathematical systems, astronomy, algebra, trigonometry and medicine.\nThe Samanid Empire in the eastern part of Persia, Greater Khorasan, and Central Asia, as well as the Buyid dynasty in the western part of Persia and Iraq, provided a thriving atmosphere for scholarly and cultural development. Under the Samanids, Bukhara rivaled Baghdad for cultural capital of the Muslim world. There, Avicenna had access to the great libraries of Balkh, Khwarazm, Gorgan, Rey, Isfahan and Hamadan.\nVarious texts (such as the 'Ahd with Bahmanyar) show that Avicenna debated philosophical points with the greatest scholars of the time. Nizami Aruzi described how before ibn Sina left Khwarazm, he had met al-Biruni (a scientist and astronomer), Abu Nasr Mansur (a renowned mathematician), Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi (a respected philosopher) and ibn al-Khammar (a great physician). The study of the Quran and the Hadith also thrived, and Islamic philosophy, fiqh \"jurisprudence\", and kalam \"speculative theology\" were all further developed by ibn Sina and his opponents at this time.\nBiography.\nEarly life and education.\nAvicenna was born in c.\u2009980 in the village of Afshana in Transoxiana to a Persian family. The village was near the Samanid capital of Bukhara, which was his mother's hometown. His father Abd Allah was a native of the city of Balkh in Bactria. An official of the Samanid bureaucracy, he had served as the governor of a village of the royal estate of Harmaytan near Bukhara during the reign of Nuh II (r.\u2009976\u00a0\u2013\u00a0997). Avicenna also had a younger brother. A few years later, the family settled in Bukhara, a center of learning, which attracted many scholars. It was there that Avicenna was educated, which early on was seemingly administered by his father. \nAlthough both Avicenna's father and brother had converted to Isma'ilism, he himself did not follow the faith. He was instead a Hanafi Sunni, the same school followed by the Samanids.\nAvicenna was first schooled in the Quran and literature, and by the age of 10, he had memorized the entire Quran. He was later sent by his father to an Indian greengrocer, who taught him arithmetic. Afterwards, he was schooled in fiqh by the Hanafi jurist Ismail al-Zahid. Sometime later, his father invited the physician and philosopher al-Natili to their house to educate ibn Sina. Together, they studied the \"Isagoge\" of Porphyry (died 305) and possibly the \"Categories\" of Aristotle (died 322 BCE) as well. After Avicenna had read the \"Almagest\" of Ptolemy (died 170) and Euclid's \"Elements\", al-Natili told him to continue his research independently. By the time Avicenna was eighteen, he was well-educated in Greek sciences. Although ibn Sina only mentions al-Natili as his teacher in his autobiography, he most likely had other teachers as well, such as the physicians Qumri and Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi.\nCareer.\nIn Bukhara and Gurganj.\nAt the age of seventeen, Avicenna was made a physician of Nuh II. By the time Avicenna was at least 21 years old, his father died. He was subsequently given an administrative post, possibly succeeding his father as the governor of Harmaytan. Avicenna later moved to Gurganj, the capital of Khwarazm, which he reports that he did due to \"necessity\". The date he went to the place is uncertain, as he reports that he served the Khwarazmshah, the ruler of Khwarazm, the Ma'munid ruler Abu al-Hasan Ali. The latter ruled from 997 to 1009, which indicates that Avicenna moved sometime during that period.\nHe may have moved in 999, the year in which the Samanid Empire fell after the Kara-Khanid Khanate captured Bukhara and imprisoned the Samanid emir Abd al-Malik II. Due to his high position and strong connection with the Samanids, ibn Sina may have found himself in an unfavorable position after the fall of his suzerain.\nIt was through the minister of Gurganj, Abu'l-Husayn as-Sahi, a patron of Greek sciences, that Avicenna entered into the service of Abu al-Hasan Ali. Under the Ma'munids, Gurganj became a centre of learning, attracting many prominent figures, such as ibn Sina and his former teacher Abu Sahl al-Masihi, the mathematician Abu Nasr Mansur, the physician ibn al-Khammar, and the philologist al-Tha'alibi.\nIn Gorgan.\nAvicenna later moved due to \"necessity\" once more (in 1012), this time to the west. There he travelled through the Khurasani cities of Nasa, Abivard, Tus, Samangan and Jajarm. He was planning to visit the ruler of the city of Gorgan, the Ziyarid Qabus (r.\u2009977\u00a0\u2013\u00a0981,\u00a0997\u00a0\u2013\u00a01012), a cultivated patron of writing, whose court attracted many distinguished poets and scholars. However, when Avicenna eventually arrived, he discovered that the ruler had been dead since the winter of 1013. Avicenna then left Gorgan for Dihistan, but returned after becoming ill. There he met Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani (died 1070) who became his pupil and companion. Avicenna stayed briefly in Gorgan, reportedly serving Qabus's son and successor Manuchihr (r.\u20091012\u00a0\u2013\u00a01031) and resided in the house of a patron.\nIn Ray and Hamadan.\nIn c.\u20091014, Avicenna went to the city of Ray, where he entered into the service of the Buyid amir Majd al-Dawla (r.\u2009997\u00a0\u2013\u00a01029) and his mother Sayyida Shirin, the \"de facto\" ruler of the realm. There he served as the physician at the court, treating Majd al-Dawla, who was suffering from melancholia. Avicenna reportedly later served as the \"business manager\" of Sayyida Shirin in Qazvin and Hamadan, though details regarding this tenure are unclear. During this period, Avicenna finished writing \"The Canon of Medicine\" and started writing his \"The Book of Healing\".\nIn 1015, during Avicenna's stay in Hamadan, he participated in a public debate, as was customary for newly arrived scholars in western Iran at that time. The purpose of the debate was to examine one's reputation against a prominent resident. The person whom Avicenna debated against was Abu'l-Qasim al-Kirmani, a member of the school of philosophers of Baghdad. The debate became heated, resulting in ibn Sina accusing Abu'l-Qasim of lack of basic knowledge in logic, while Abu'l-Qasim accused ibn Sina of impoliteness.\nAfter the debate, Avicenna sent a letter to the Baghdad Peripatetics, asking if Abu'l-Qasim's claim that he shared the same opinion as them was true. Abu'l-Qasim later retaliated by writing a letter to an unknown person in which he made accusations so serious that ibn Sina wrote to Abu Sa'd, the deputy of Majd al-Dawla, to investigate the matter. The accusation made towards Avicenna may have been the same as he had received earlier, in which he was accused by the people of Hamadan of copying the stylistic structures of the Quran in his \"Sermons on Divine Unity\". The seriousness of this charge, in the words of the historian Peter Adamson, \"cannot be underestimated in the larger Muslim culture\".\nNot long afterwards, Avicenna shifted his allegiance to the rising Buyid amir Shams al-Dawla, the younger brother of Majd al-Dawla, which Adamson suggests was due to Abu'l-Qasim also working under Sayyida Shirin. Avicenna had been called upon by Shams al-Dawla to treat him, but after the latter's campaign in the same year against his former ally, the Annazid ruler Abu Shawk (r.\u20091010\u00a0\u2013\u00a01046), he forced Avicenna to become his vizier.\nAlthough Avicenna would sometimes clash with Shams al-Dawla's troops, he remained vizier until the latter died of colic in 1021. Avicenna was asked to stay as vizier by Shams al-Dawla's son and successor Sama' al-Dawla (r.\u20091021\u00a0\u2013\u00a01023), but he instead went into hiding with his patron, Abu Ghalib al-Attar, to wait for better opportunities to emerge. It was during this period that Avicenna was secretly in contact with Ala al-Dawla Muhammad (r.\u20091008\u00a0\u2013\u00a01041), the Kakuyid ruler of Isfahan and uncle of Sayyida Shirin.\nIt was during his stay at Attar's home that Avicenna completed \"The Book of Healing\", writing 50 pages a day. The Buyid court in Hamadan, particularly the Kurdish vizier Taj al-Mulk, suspected Avicenna of correspondence with Ala al-Dawla, and as a result, had the house of Attar ransacked and ibn Sina imprisoned in the fortress of Fardajan, outside Hamadan. Juzjani blames one of ibn Sina's informers for his capture. He was imprisoned for four months until Ala al-Dawla captured Hamadan, ending Sama al-Dawla's reign.\nIn Isfahan.\nAvicenna was subsequently released, and went to Isfahan, where he was well received by Ala al-Dawla. In the words of Juzjani, the Kakuyid ruler gave Avicenna \"the respect and esteem which someone like him deserved\". Adamson also says that Avicenna's service under Ala al-Dawla \"proved to be the most stable period of his life\". Avicenna served as the advisor, if not vizier of Ala al-Dawla, accompanying him in many of his military expeditions and travels. Avicenna dedicated two Persian works to him, a philosophical treatise named \"Danish-nama-yi Ala'i\" (\"Book of Science for Ala\"), and a medical treatise about the pulse.\nDuring the brief occupation of Isfahan by the Ghaznavids in January 1030, Avicenna and Ala al-Dawla relocated to the southwestern Iranian region of Khuzistan, where they stayed until the death of the Ghaznavid ruler Mahmud (r.\u2009998\u00a0\u2013\u00a01030), which occurred two months later. It was seemingly when Avicenna returned to Isfahan that he started writing his \"Pointers and Reminders\". In 1037, while Avicenna was accompanying Ala al-Dawla to a battle near Isfahan, he contracted a severe colic, having suffered from colic throughout his life. He died shortly afterwards in Hamadan, where he was buried.\nPhilosophy.\nAvicenna wrote extensively on early Islamic philosophy, especially the subjects logic, ethics and metaphysics, including treatises named \"Logic\" and \"Metaphysics\". Most of his works were written in Arabic, then the language of science in the Muslim world, and some in Early New Persian. Of linguistic significance even to this day are a few books that he wrote in Persian, particularly the \"Danishnama\". Avicenna's commentaries on Aristotle often criticized the philosopher, encouraging a lively debate in the spirit of ijtihad.\nAvicenna's Neoplatonic scheme of emanations became fundamental in kalam in the 12th century.\n\"The Book of Healing\" became available in Europe in a partial Latin translation some fifty years after its composition under the title \"Sufficientia\", and some authors have identified a \"Latin Avicennism\" as flourishing for some time paralleling the more influential Latin Averroism, but it was suppressed by the Parisian decrees of 1210 and 1215.\nAvicenna's psychology and theory of knowledge influenced the theologian William of Auvergne and Albertus Magnus, while his metaphysics influenced the thought of Thomas Aquinas.\nMetaphysical doctrine.\nEarly Islamic philosophy and Islamic metaphysics, imbued as it is with kalam, distinguishes between essence and existence more clearly than Aristotelianism. Whereas existence is the domain of the contingent and the accidental, essence endures within a being beyond the accidental. The philosophy of Avicenna, particularly that part relating to metaphysics, owes much to al-Farabi. The search for a definitive Islamic philosophy separate from Occasionalism can be seen in what is left of his work.\nFollowing al-Farabi's lead, Avicenna initiated a full-fledged inquiry into the question of being, in which he distinguished between essence () and existence (). He argued that the fact of existence cannot be inferred from or accounted for by the essence of existing things, and that form and matter by themselves cannot interact and originate the movement of the universe or the progressive actualization of existing things. Existence must, therefore, be due to an agent-cause that necessitates, imparts, gives, or adds existence to an essence. To do so, the cause must be an existing thing and coexist with its effect.\nImpossibility, contingency, necessity.\nAvicenna's consideration of the essence-attributes question may be elucidated in terms of his ontological analysis of the modalities of being; namely impossibility, contingency and necessity. Avicenna argued that the impossible being is that which cannot exist, while the contingent in itself (\"mumkin bi-dhatihi\") has the potentiality to be or not to be without entailing a contradiction. When actualized, the contingent becomes a 'necessary existent due to what is other than itself' (\"wajib al-wujud bi-ghayrihi\"). Thus, contingency-in-itself is potential beingness that could eventually be actualized by an external cause other than itself. The metaphysical structures of necessity and contingency are different. Necessary being due to itself (\"wajib al-wujud bi-dhatihi\") is true in itself, while the contingent being is 'false in itself' and 'true due to something else other than itself'. The necessary is the source of its own being without borrowed existence. It is what always exists.\nDifferentia.\nThe Necessary exists 'due-to-Its-Self', and has no quiddity/essence other than existence. Furthermore, It is 'One' (\"wahid ahad\") since there cannot be more than one 'Necessary-Existent-due-to-Itself' without differentia (fasl) to distinguish them from each other. Yet, to require differentia entails that they exist 'due-to-themselves' as well as 'due to what is other than themselves'; and this is contradictory. If no differentia distinguishes them from each other, then, in no sense are these 'Existents' not the same. Avicenna adds that the 'Necessary-Existent-due-to-Itself' has no genus (\"jins\"), nor a definition (\"hadd\"), nor a counterpart (\"nadd\"), nor an opposite (\"did\"), and is detached (\"bari\") from matter (\"madda\"), quality (\"kayf\"), quantity (\"kam\"), place (\"ayn\"), situation (\"wad\") and time (\"waqt\").\nReception.\nAvicenna's theology on metaphysical issues (\"il\u0101hiyy\u0101t\") has been criticized by some Islamic scholars, among them al-Ghazali, ibn Taymiyya, and ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya. While discussing the views of the theists among the Greek philosophers, namely Socrates, Plato and Aristotle in \"Al-Munqidh min ad-Dalal\" \"Deliverance from Error\", al-Ghazali noted: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[the Greek philosophers] must be taxed with unbelief, as must their partisans among the Muslim philosophers, such as Avicenna and al-Farabi and their likes. None, however, of the Muslim philosophers engaged so much in transmitting Aristotle's lore as did the two men just mentioned. [...] The sum of what we regard as the authentic philosophy of Aristotle, as transmitted by al-Farabi and Avicenna, can be reduced to three parts: a part which must be branded as unbelief; a part which must be stigmatized as innovation; and a part which need not be repudiated at all.\nArgument for God's existence.\nAvicenna made an argument for the existence of God which would be known as the \"Proof of the Truthful\" (\"burh\u0101n al-\u1e63idd\u012bq\u012bn\"). Avicenna argued that there must be a Proof of the Truthful, an entity that cannot \"not\" exist and through a series of arguments, he identified it with God in Islam. Present-day historian of philosophy Peter Adamson called this argument one of the most influential medieval arguments for God's existence, and Avicenna's biggest contribution to the history of philosophy.\nAl-Biruni correspondence.\nCorrespondence between ibn Sina with his student Ahmad ibn \u02bfAli al-Ma\u02bfsumi and al-Biruni has survived in which they debated Aristotelian natural philosophy and the Peripatetic school. al-Biruni began by asking eighteen questions, ten of which were criticisms of Aristotle's \"On the Heavens\".\nTheology.\nIbn Sina was a devout Muslim and sought to reconcile rational philosophy with Islamic theology. He aimed to prove the existence of God and His creation of the world scientifically and through reason and logic. His views on Islamic theology and philosophy were enormously influential, forming part of the core of the curriculum at Islamic religious schools until the 19th century.\nAvicenna wrote several short treatises dealing with Islamic theology. These included treatises on the prophets and messengers in Islam, whom he viewed as \"inspired philosophers\", and also on various scientific and philosophical interpretations of the Quran, such as how Quranic cosmology corresponds to his philosophical system. In general, these treatises linked his philosophical writings to Islamic religious ideas; for example, the body's afterlife.\nThere are occasional brief hints and allusions in his longer works, however, that Avicenna considered philosophy as the only sensible way to distinguish real prophecy from illusion. He did not state this more clearly because of the political implications of such a theory if prophecy could be questioned, and also because most of the time he was writing shorter works which concentrated on explaining his theories on philosophy and theology clearly, without digressing to consider epistemological matters which could only be properly considered by other philosophers.\nLater interpretations of Avicenna's philosophy split into three different schools; those (such as al-Tusi) who continued to apply his philosophy as a system to interpret later political events and scientific advances; those (such as al-Razi) who considered Avicenna's theological works in isolation from his wider philosophical concerns; and those (such as al-Ghazali) who selectively used parts of his philosophy to support their own attempts to gain greater spiritual insights through a variety of mystical means. It was the theological interpretation championed by those such as al-Razi which eventually came to predominate in the madrasahs.\nAvicenna memorized the Quran by the age of ten, and as an adult, wrote five treatises commenting on surahs of the Quran. One of these texts included the \"Proof of Prophecies\", in which he comments on several Quranic verses and holds the Quran in high esteem. Avicenna argued that the Islamic prophets should be considered higher than philosophers.\nAvicenna is generally understood to have been aligned with the Hanafi school of Sunni thought. Avicenna studied Hanafi law, many of his notable teachers were Hanafi jurists, and he served under the Hanafi court of Ali ibn Mamun. Avicenna said at an early age that he remained \"unconvinced\" by Ismaili missionary attempts to convert him.\nMedieval historian \u1e92ah\u012br al-d\u012bn al-Bayhaq\u012b (d. 1169) believed Avicenna to be a follower of the Brethren of Purity.\nThought experiments.\nWhile he was imprisoned in the castle of Fardajan near Hamadhan, Avicenna wrote his famous \"floating man\"\u2014literally falling man\u2014a thought experiment to demonstrate human self-awareness and the substantiality and immateriality of the soul. Avicenna believed his \"Floating Man\" thought experiment demonstrated that the soul is a substance, and claimed humans cannot doubt their own consciousness, even in a situation that prevents all sensory data input. The thought experiment told its readers to imagine themselves created all at once while suspended in the air, isolated from all , which includes no sensory contact with even their own bodies. He argued that, in this scenario, one would still have self-consciousness. Because it is conceivable that a person, suspended in air while cut off from sense experience, would still be capable of determining his own existence, the thought experiment points to the conclusions that the soul is a perfection, independent of the body, and an immaterial substance. The conceivability of this \"Floating Man\" indicates that the soul is perceived intellectually, which entails the soul's separateness from the body. Avicenna referred to the living human intelligence, particularly the active intellect, which he believed to be the hypostasis by which God communicates truth to the human mind and imparts order and intelligibility to nature. Following is an English translation of the argument:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One of us (i.e. a human being) should be imagined as having been created in a single stroke; created perfect and complete but with his vision obscured so that he cannot perceive external entities; created falling through air or a void, in such a manner that he is not struck by the firmness of the air in any way that compels him to feel it, and with his limbs separated so that they do not come in contact with or touch each other. Then contemplate the following: can he be assured of the existence of himself? He does not have any doubt in that his self exists, without thereby asserting that he has any exterior limbs, nor any internal organs, neither heart nor brain, nor any one of the exterior things at all; but rather he can affirm the existence of himself, without thereby asserting there that this self has any extension in space. Even if it were possible for him in that state to imagine a hand or any other limb, he would not imagine it as being a part of his self, nor as a condition for the existence of that self; for as you know that which is asserted is different from that which is not asserted and that which is inferred is different from that which is not inferred. Therefore the self, the existence of which has been asserted, is a unique characteristic, in as much that it is not as such the same as the body or the limbs, which have not been ascertained. Thus that which is ascertained (i.e. the self), does have a way of being sure of the existence of the soul as something other than the body, even something non-bodily; this he knows, this he should understand intuitively, if it is that he is ignorant of it and needs to be beaten with a stick [to realize it].\u2014\u200a\nHowever, Avicenna posited the brain as the place where reason interacts with sensation. Sensation prepares the soul to receive rational concepts from the universal Agent Intellect. The first knowledge of the flying person would be \"I am,\" affirming his or her essence. That essence could not be the body, obviously, as the flying person has no sensation. Thus, the knowledge that \"I am\" is the core of a human being: the soul exists and is self-aware. Avicenna thus concluded that the idea of the self is not logically dependent on any physical thing, and that the soul should not be seen in relative terms, but as a primary given, a substance. The body is unnecessary; in relation to it, the soul is its perfection. In itself, the soul is an immaterial substance.\nPrincipal works.\n\"The Canon of Medicine\".\nAvicenna authored a five-volume medical encyclopedia, \"The Canon of Medicine\" (). In it, he postulated that invisible tainted organisms were associated with disease, and recommended isolating ill individuals to reduce transmission to others. It was used as the standard medical textbook in the Islamic world and Europe up to the 18th century. The \"Canon\" still plays an important role in Unani medicine.\n\"Liber Primus Naturalium\".\nAvicenna considered whether events like rare diseases or disorders have natural causes. He used the example of polydactyly to explain his perception that causal reasons exist for all medical events. This view of medical phenomena anticipated developments in the Enlightenment by seven centuries.\n\"The Book of Healing\".\nEarth sciences.\nAvicenna wrote on Earth sciences such as geology in \"The Book of Healing\". While discussing the formation of mountains, he explained:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPhilosophy of science.\nIn the \"Al-Burhan\" (\"On Demonstration\") section of \"The Book of Healing\", Avicenna discussed the philosophy of science and described an early scientific method of inquiry. He discussed Aristotle's \"Posterior Analytics\" and significantly diverged from it on several points. Avicenna discussed the issue of a proper methodology for scientific inquiry and the question of \"How does one acquire the first principles of a science?\" He asked how a scientist would arrive at \"the initial axioms or hypotheses of a deductive science without inferring them from some more basic premises?\" He explained that the ideal situation is when one grasps that a \"relation holds between the terms, which would allow for absolute, universal certainty\". Avicenna then added two further methods for arriving at the first principles: the ancient Aristotelian method of induction (\"istiqra\"), and the method of examination and experimentation (\"tajriba\"). Avicenna criticized Aristotelian induction, arguing that \"it does not lead to the absolute, universal, and certain premises that it purports to provide.\" In its place, he developed a \"method of experimentation as a means for scientific inquiry.\"\nLogic.\nAn early formal system of temporal logic was studied by Avicenna. Although he did not develop a real theory of temporal propositions, he did study the relationship between \"temporalis\" and the implication. Avicenna's work was further developed by Najm al-D\u012bn al-Qazw\u012bn\u012b al-K\u0101tib\u012b and became the dominant system of Islamic logic until modern times. Avicennian logic also influenced several early European logicians such as Albertus Magnus and William of Ockham. Avicenna endorsed the law of non-contradiction proposed by Aristotle, that a fact could not be both true and false at the same time and in the same sense of the terminology used. He stated, \"Anyone who denies the law of non-contradiction should be beaten and burned until he admits that to be beaten is not the same as not to be beaten, and to be burned is not the same as not to be burned.\"\nPhysics.\nIn mechanics, Avicenna, in \"The Book of Healing\", developed a theory of motion, in which he made a distinction between the inclination (tendency to motion) and force of a projectile, and concluded that motion was a result of an inclination (\"mayl\") transferred to the projectile by the thrower, and that projectile motion in a vacuum would not cease. He viewed inclination as a permanent force whose effect is dissipated by external forces such as air resistance.\nThe theory of motion presented by Avicenna was probably influenced by the 6th-century Alexandrian scholar John Philoponus. Avicenna's is a less sophisticated variant of the theory of impetus developed by Buridan in the 14th century. It is unclear if Buridan was influenced by Avicenna, or by Philoponus directly.\nIn optics, Avicenna was among those who argued that light had a speed, observing that \"if the perception of light is due to the emission of some sort of particles by a luminous source, the speed of light must be finite.\" He also provided a wrong explanation of the rainbow phenomenon. Carl Benjamin Boyer described Avicenna's (\"Ibn S\u012bn\u0101\") theory on the rainbow as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Independent observation had demonstrated to him that the bow is not formed in the dark cloud but rather in the very thin mist lying between the cloud and the sun or observer. The cloud, he thought, serves as the background of this thin substance, much as a quicksilver lining is placed upon the rear surface of the glass in a mirror. Ibn S\u012bn\u0101 would change the place not only of the bow, but also of the color formation, holding the iridescence to be merely a subjective sensation in the eye.\nIn 1253, a Latin text entitled \"Speculum Tripartitum\" stated the following regarding Avicenna's theory on heat:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Avicenna says in his book of heaven and earth, that heat is generated from motion in external things.\nPsychology.\nAvicenna's legacy in classical psychology is primarily embodied in the \"Kitab al-nafs\" parts of his \"Kitab al-shifa\" (\"The Book of Healing\") and \"Kitab al-najat\" (\"The Book of Deliverance\"). These were known in Latin under the title De Anima (treatises \"on the soul\"). Notably, Avicenna develops what is called the Flying Man argument in the Psychology of \"The Cure\" I.1.7 as defence of the argument that the soul is without quantitative extension, which has an affinity with Descartes's \"cogito\" argument (or what phenomenology designates as a form of an \"epoche\").\nAvicenna's psychology requires that connection between the body and soul be strong enough to ensure the soul's individuation, but weak enough to allow for its immortality. Avicenna grounds his psychology on physiology, which means his account of the soul is one that deals almost entirely with the natural science of the body and its abilities of perception. Thus, the philosopher's connection between the soul and body is explained almost entirely by his understanding of perception; in this way, bodily perception interrelates with the immaterial human intellect. In sense perception, the perceiver senses the form of the object; first, by perceiving features of the object by our external senses. This sensory information is supplied to the internal senses, which merge all the pieces into a whole, unified conscious experience. This process of perception and abstraction is the nexus of the soul and body, for the material body may only perceive material objects, while the immaterial soul may only receive the immaterial, universal forms. The way the soul and body interact in the final abstraction of the universal from the concrete particular is the key to their relationship and interaction, which takes place in the physical body.\nThe soul completes the action of intellection by accepting forms that have been abstracted from matter. This process requires a concrete particular (material) to be abstracted into the universal intelligible (immaterial). The material and immaterial interact through the Active Intellect, which is a \"divine light\" containing the intelligible forms. The Active Intellect reveals the universals concealed in material objects much like the sun makes colour available to our eyes.\nOther contributions.\nAstronomy and astrology.\nAvicenna wrote an attack on astrology titled \"Missive on the Champions of the Rule of the Stars\" () in which he cited passages from the Quran to dispute the power of astrology to foretell the future. He believed that each classical planet had some influence on the Earth but argued against current astrological practices.\nAvicenna's astronomical writings had some influence on later writers, although in general his work could be considered less developed than that of ibn al-Haytham or al-Biruni. One important feature of his writing is that he considers mathematical astronomy a separate discipline from astrology. He criticized Aristotle's view of the stars receiving their light from the Sun, stating that the stars are self-luminous, and believed that the planets are also self-luminous. He claimed to have observed the transit of Venus. This is possible as there was a transit on 24 May 1032, but ibn Sina did not give the date of his observation and modern scholars have questioned whether he could have observed the transit from his location at that time; he may have mistaken a sunspot for Venus. He used his transit observation to help establish that Venus was, at least sometimes, below the Sun in the geocentric model, i.e. the sphere of Venus comes before the sphere of the Sun when moving out from the Earth.\nHe also wrote the \"Summary of the Almagest\" based on Ptolemy's \"Almagest\" with an appended treatise \"to bring that which is stated in the Almagest and what is understood from Natural Science into conformity\". For example, ibn Sina considers the motion of the solar apsis, which Ptolemy had taken to be fixed.\nChemistry.\nAvicenna was first to derive the attar of flowers from distillation and used steam distillation to produce essential oils such as rose essence, which he used as aromatherapeutic treatments for heart conditions.\nUnlike al-Razi, Avicenna explicitly disputed the theory of the transmutation of substances commonly believed by alchemists:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Those of the chemical craft know well that no change can be effected in the different species of substances, though they can produce the appearance of such change.\nFour works on alchemy attributed to Avicenna were translated into Latin as:\n was the most influential, having influenced later medieval chemists and alchemists such as Vincent of Beauvais. However, Anawati argues (following Ruska) that the de Anima is a fake by a Spanish author. Similarly the Declaratio is believed not to be actually by Avicenna. The third work (\"The Book of Minerals\") is agreed to be Avicenna's writing, adapted from the \"Kitab al-Shifa\" (\"Book of the Remedy\"). Avicenna classified minerals into stones, fusible substances, sulfurs and salts, building on the ideas of Aristotle and Jabir. The \"epistola de Re recta\" is somewhat less sceptical of alchemy; Anawati argues that it is by Avicenna, but written earlier in his career when he had not yet firmly decided that transmutation was impossible.\nPoetry.\nAlmost half of Avicenna's works are versified. His poems appear in both Arabic and Persian. As an example, Edward Granville Browne claims that the following Persian verses are incorrectly attributed to Omar Khayy\u00e1m, and were originally written by Ibn S\u012bn\u0101:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nLegacy.\nClassical Islamic civilization.\nRobert Wisnovsky, a scholar of Avicenna attached to McGill University, says that \"Avicenna was the central figure in the long history of the rational sciences in Islam, particularly in the fields of metaphysics, logic and medicine\" but that his works did not only have an influence in these \"secular\" fields of knowledge alone, as \"these works, or portions of them, were read, taught, copied, commented upon, quoted, paraphrased and cited by thousands of post-Avicennian scholars\u2014not only philosophers, logicians, physicians and specialists in the mathematical or exact sciences, but also by those who specialized in the disciplines of \u02bfilm al-kal\u0101m (rational theology, but understood to include natural philosophy, epistemology and philosophy of mind) and us\u016bl al-fiqh (jurisprudence, but understood to include philosophy of law, dialectic, and philosophy of language).\"\nMedieval and Renaissance Europe.\nAs early as the 14th century when Dante Alighieri depicted him in Limbo alongside the virtuous non-Christian thinkers in his \"Divine Comedy\" such as Virgil, Averroes, Homer, Horace, Ovid, Lucan, Socrates, Plato and Saladin. Avicenna has been recognized by both East and West as one of the great figures in intellectual history. Johannes Kepler cites Avicenna's opinion when discussing the causes of planetary motions in Chapter 2 of \"Astronomia Nova\".\nGeorge Sarton, the author of \"The History of Science\", described Avicenna as \"one of the greatest thinkers and medical scholars in history\" and called him \"the most famous scientist of Islam and one of the most famous of all races, places, and times\". He was one of the Islamic world's leading writers in the field of medicine.\nAlong with Rhazes, Abulcasis, Ibn al-Nafis and al-Ibadi, Avicenna is considered an important compiler of early Muslim medicine. He is remembered in the Western history of medicine as a major historical figure who made important contributions to medicine and the European Renaissance. His medical texts were unusual in that where controversy existed between Galen and Aristotle's views on medical matters (such as anatomy), he preferred to side with Aristotle, where necessary updating Aristotle's position to take into account post-Aristotelian advances in anatomical knowledge. Aristotle's dominant intellectual influence among medieval European scholars meant that Avicenna's linking of Galen's medical writings with Aristotle's philosophical writings in the \"Canon of Medicine\" (along with its comprehensive and logical organisation of knowledge) significantly increased Avicenna's importance in medieval Europe in comparison to other Islamic writers on medicine. His influence following translation of the \"Canon\" was such that from the early fourteenth to the mid-sixteenth centuries he was ranked with Hippocrates and Galen as one of the acknowledged authorities, (\"prince of physicians\").\nModern reception.\nInstitutions in a variety of counties have been named after Avicenna in honour of his scientific accomplishments, including the Avicenna Mausoleum and Museum, Bu-Ali Sina University, Avicenna Research Institute and Ibn Sina Academy of Medieval Medicine and Sciences. There is also a crater on the Moon named Avicenna.\nThe Avicenna Prize, established in 2003, is awarded every two years by UNESCO and rewards individuals and groups for their achievements in the field of ethics in science.\nThe Avicenna Directories (2008\u20132015; now the World Directory of Medical Schools) list universities and schools where doctors, public health practitioners, pharmacists and others, are educated. The original project team stated: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Why Avicenna? Avicenna\u00a0... was\u00a0... noted for his synthesis of knowledge from both east and west. He has had a lasting influence on the development of medicine and health sciences. The use of Avicenna's name symbolises the worldwide partnership that is needed for the promotion of health services of high quality.\nIn June 2009, Iran donated a \"Persian Scholars Pavilion\" to the United Nations Office in Vienna. It now sits in the Vienna International Center.\nIn popular culture.\nThe 1982 Soviet film \"Youth of Genius\" () by Elyor Ishmukhamedov recounts Avicenna's younger years. The film is set in Bukhara at the turn of the millennium.\nIn Louis L'Amour's 1985 historical novel \"The Walking Drum\", Kerbouchard studies and discusses Avicenna's \"The Canon of Medicine\".\nIn his book \"The Physician\" (1988) Noah Gordon tells the story of a young English medical apprentice who disguises himself as a Jew to travel from England to Persia and learn from Avicenna, the great master of his time. The novel was adapted into a feature film, \"The Physician\", in 2013. Avicenna was played by Ben Kingsley.\nHe appears in 2025's \"Civilization VII\" as a Great Person for the Abbasid civilization. When used, Avicenna creates a hospital with 2 extra food points.\nList of works.\nThe treatises of Avicenna influenced later Muslim thinkers in many areas including theology, philology, mathematics, astronomy, physics and music. His works numbered almost 450 volumes on a wide range of subjects, of which around 240 have survived. In particular, 150 volumes of his surviving works concentrate on philosophy and 40 of them concentrate on medicine. His most famous works are \"The Book of Healing\", and \"The Canon of Medicine\".\nAvicenna wrote at least one treatise on alchemy, but several others have been falsely attributed to him. His \"Logic\", \"Metaphysics\", \"Physics\", and \"De Caelo\", are treatises giving a synoptic view of Aristotelian doctrine, though \"Metaphysics\" demonstrates a significant departure from the brand of Neoplatonism known as Aristotelianism in Avicenna's world; Arabic philosophers have hinted at the idea that Avicenna was attempting to \"re-Aristotelianise\" Muslim philosophy in its entirety, unlike his predecessors, who accepted the conflation of Platonic, Aristotelian, Neo- and Middle-Platonic works transmitted into the Muslim world.\nThe \"Logic\" and \"Metaphysics\" have been extensively reprinted, the latter, e.g., at Venice in 1493, 1495 and 1546. Some of his shorter essays on medicine, logic, etc., take a poetical form (the poem on logic was published by Schmoelders in 1836). Two encyclopedic treatises, dealing with philosophy, are often mentioned. The larger, \"Al-Shifa\"' (\"Sanatio\"), exists nearly complete in manuscript in the Bodleian Library and elsewhere; part of it on the \"De Anima\" appeared at Pavia (1490) as the \"Liber Sextus Naturalium\", and the long account of Avicenna's philosophy given by Muhammad al-Shahrastani seems to be mainly an analysis, and in many places a reproduction, of the Al-Shifa'. A shorter form of the work is known as the An-najat (\"Liberatio\"). The Latin editions of part of these works have been modified by the corrections which the monastic editors confess that they applied. There is also a (\"hikmat-al-mashriqqiyya\", in Latin \"Philosophia Orientalis\"), mentioned by Roger Bacon, the majority of which was lost in antiquity, which according to Averroes was pantheistic in tone.\nAvicenna's works further include:\nPersian works.\nAvicenna's most important Persian work is the \"Danishnama\" (, \"Book of Knowledge\". Avicenna created a new scientific vocabulary that had not previously existed in Persian. The \"Danishnama\" covers such topics as logic, metaphysics, music theory and other sciences of his time. It has been translated into English by Parwiz Morewedge in 1977. The book is also important in respect to Persian scientific works.\n\"Andar D\u0101nish-i Rag\" (, \"On the Science of the Pulse\") contains nine chapters on the science of the pulse and is a condensed synopsis.\nPersian poetry from Avicenna is recorded in various manuscripts and later anthologies such as \"Nozhat al-Majales\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNamesakes of Ibn Sina.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This is, on the whole, an informed and good account of the life and accomplishments of one of the greatest influences on the development of thought both Eastern and Western.\u00a0... It is not as philosophically thorough as the works of D. Saliba, A.M. Goichon, or L. Gardet, but it is probably the best essay in English on this important thinker of the Middle Ages. (Julius R. Weinberg, \"The Philosophical Review\", Vol. 69, No. 2, Apr. 1960, pp.\u00a0255\u2013259)\n This is a distinguished work which stands out from, and above, many of the books and articles which have been written in this century on Avicenna (Ibn S\u012bn\u0101) (980\u20131037). It has two main features on which its distinction as a major contribution to Avicennan studies may be said to rest: the first is its clarity and readability; the second is the comparative approach adopted by the author.\u00a0... (Ian Richard Netton, \"Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society\", Third Series, Vol. 4, No. 2, July 1994, pp.\u00a0263\u2013264)\n This German publication is both one of the most comprehensive general introductions to the life and works of the philosopher and physician Avicenna (Ibn S\u012bn\u0101, d. 1037) and an extensive and careful survey of his contribution to the history of science. Its author is a renowned expert in Greek and Arabic medicine who has paid considerable attention to Avicenna in his recent studies.\u00a0... (Amos Bertolacci, \"Isis\", Vol. 96, No. 4, December 2005, p.\u00a0649)"}
{"id": "1132", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1132", "title": "The Ashes", "text": "International cricket series\nThe Ashes is a Test cricket series played biennially between England and Australia. The term originated in a satirical obituary published in a British newspaper, \"The Sporting Times\", immediately after Australia's 1882 victory at The Oval, its first Test win on English soil. The obituary stated that English cricket had died, and that \"the body will be cremated and the ashes taken to Australia\". The mythical ashes immediately became associated with the 1882\u201383 series played in Australia, before which the English captain the Hon. Ivo Bligh had vowed to \"regain those ashes\". The English media therefore dubbed the tour \"the Quest to regain the Ashes\".\nAfter England won two of the three Tests on the tour, a small urn was presented to Bligh at Melbourne. The contents of the urn are reputed to be the ashes of a wooden bail. It is not clear whether that \"tiny silver urn\" is the same as the small terracotta urn given to Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) by Bligh's widow after his death in 1927.\nThe Ashes urn has never been the official trophy of the series, having been a personal gift to Bligh, but replicas of the urn have often been held aloft by the winning team as a symbol of their victory. Since the 1998\u201399 Ashes series, \"the Ashes Trophy\", a Waterford Crystal trophy modelled on the Ashes urn, has been presented to the winners of the series. Irrespective of which side holds the trophy, the original urn remains in the MCC Museum at Lord's. It has been taken to Australia twice to be put on touring display, as part of the Australian Bicentenary celebrations in 1988 and to accompany the Ashes series in 2006\u201307.\nAshes series usually comprise five Tests, hosted in turn by England and Australia approximately every two years. The Ashes are regarded as being held by the team that most recently won the series. If the series is drawn, the team that currently holds the Ashes \"retains\" the trophy.\n1882 origins.\nThe first Test match between England and Australia was played at Melbourne, Australia, in 1877, though the Ashes legend started later, after the ninth Test, played in 1882. On their tour of England that year the Australians played just one Test, at The Oval in London. It was a low-scoring affair on a difficult wicket. Australia made a mere 63 runs in their first innings, and England, led by A. N. Hornby, took a 38-run lead with a total of 101. In their second innings, Australia, boosted by a spectacular 55 runs off 60 deliveries hit by Hugh Massie, managed 122, which left England only 85 runs to win. The Australians were greatly demoralised by the manner of their second-innings collapse, but fast bowler Fred Spofforth, spurred on by the gamesmanship of his opponents, in particular W. G. Grace, refused to give in. \"This thing can be done,\" he declared. Spofforth went on to devastate the English batting, taking his final four wickets for only two runs to leave England just eight runs short of victory.\nWhen Ted Peate, England's last batsman, came to the crease, his side needed just ten runs to win, but Peate managed only two before he was bowled by Harry Boyle. An astonished Oval crowd fell silent, struggling to believe that England could possibly have lost on home soil. When it finally sank in, the crowd swarmed onto the field, cheering loudly and chairing Boyle and Spofforth to the pavilion.\nWhen Peate returned to the pavilion he was reprimanded by his captain for not allowing his partner, Charles Studd (one of the best batsmen in England, having already hit two centuries that season against the colonial tourists), to get the runs. Peate humorously replied, \"I had no confidence in Mr Studd, sir, so thought I had better do my best.\"\nThe momentous defeat was widely recorded in the British press, which praised the Australians for their plentiful \"pluck\" and berated the Englishmen for their lack thereof. A celebrated poem appeared in \"Punch\" on Saturday, 9 September. The first verse, quoted most frequently, reads:\n&lt;poem&gt;\nWell done, Cornstalks! Whipt us\nFair and square,\nWas it luck that tript us?\nWas it scare?\nKangaroo Land's 'Demon', or our own\nWant of 'devil', coolness, nerve, backbone?\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nOn 31 August, in the magazine edited by Charles Alcock, \"Cricket: A Weekly Record of The Game\", there appeared a mock obituary:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOn 2 September a more celebrated mock obituary, written by Reginald Shirley Brooks, appeared in \"The Sporting Times\". It read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Hon. Ivo Bligh promised that on the 1882\u201383 tour of Australia, he would, as England's captain, \"recover those Ashes\". He spoke of them several times over the course of the tour, and the Australian media quickly caught on. The three-match series resulted in a two-one win to England, notwithstanding a fourth match, won by the Australians, whose status remains the subject of ardent dispute.\nIn the 20 years following Bligh's campaign the term \"the Ashes\" largely disappeared from public use. There is no indication that this was the accepted name for the series, at least not in England. The term became popular again in Australia first, when George Giffen, in his memoirs (\"With Bat and Ball\", 1899), used the title as if it were well known.\nThe true and global revitalisation of interest in the concept dates from 1903, when Sir Pelham Warner took a team to Australia with the promise that he would regain \"the Ashes\". As had been the case on Bligh's tour 20 years before, the Australian media latched fervently onto the term and, this time, it stuck. Having fulfilled his promise, Warner published a book entitled \"How We Recovered the Ashes\". Although the origins of the term are not referred to in the text, the title served (along with the general hype created in Australia) to revive public interest in the legend. The first mention of \"the Ashes\" in \"Wisden Cricketers' Almanack\" occurs in 1905, while \"Wisden\"'s first account of the legend is in its 1922 edition.\nUrn.\nIt took many years before the contests between England and Australia were consistently called \"the Ashes\", and so there was no concept of either a trophy or a physical representation of the ashes. As late as 1925, the following verse appeared in \"The Cricketers Annual\":\n&lt;poem&gt;\nSo here's to Chapman, Hendren and Hobbs,\nGilligan, Woolley and Hearne\nMay they bring back to the Motherland,\nThe ashes which have no urn!\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nNevertheless, several attempts had been made to embody the Ashes in a physical memorial. Examples include one presented to Warner in 1904, another to Australian captain M. A. Noble in 1909, and another to Australian captain W. M. Woodfull in 1934.\nThe oldest, and the one to enjoy enduring fame, was the one presented to Bligh, later Lord Darnley, during the 1882\u201383 tour. The precise nature of the origin of this urn remains a matter of dispute. Based on a statement by Bligh in 1894, it was believed that a group of Victorian ladies, including Bligh's fianc\u00e9e Florence Morphy, made the presentation after the victory in the Third Test in 1883. More recent researchers, in particular Ronald Willis and Joy Munns have studied the tour in detail and concluded that the presentation was made after a private cricket match played over Christmas 1882 when the English team were guests of Sir William Clarke, on his estate \"Rupertswood\", at Sunbury, Victoria. This was before the matches had started. The prime evidence for this theory was provided by a descendant of Clarke.\nIn August 1926 Ivo Bligh (now Lord Darnley) displayed the Ashes urn at the \"Morning Post\" Decorative Art Exhibition held in the Central Hall, Westminster. Darnley made the following statement about how he was given the urn:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When in the autumn the English Eleven went to Australia it was said that they had come to Australia to \"fetch\" the ashes. England won two out of the three matches played against Murdoch's Australian Eleven, and after the third match some Melbourne ladies put some ashes into a small urn and gave them to me as captain of the English Eleven.\nA more detailed account of how the Ashes were given to the Hon. Ivo Bligh was outlined by his widow, the Countess of Darnley, in 1930 when speaking at a cricket luncheon. Her speech was reported by \"The Times\" as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In 1882, it was first spoken of when \"The Sporting Times\", after the Australians had thoroughly beaten the English at The Oval, wrote an obituary in affectionate memory of English cricket \"whose demise was deeply lamented and the body would be cremated and taken to Australia\". Her husband, then Ivo Bligh, took a team to Australia in the following year. \"Punch\" had a poem containing the words \"When Ivo comes back with the Urn\" and when Ivo Bligh wiped out the defeat Lady Clarke, wife of Sir W. J. Clarke, who entertained the English so lavishly, found a little wooden urn, burnt a bail, put the ashes in the urn, and wrapping it in a red velvet bag, put it into her husband's hands. He had always regarded it as a great treasure.\nThere is another statement which is not totally clear made by Lord Darnley in 1921 about the timing of the presentation of the urn. He was interviewed in his Cobham Hall seat by Montague Grover and the report of this interview was as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This urn was presented to Lord Darnley by some ladies of Melbourne after the final defeat of his team, and before he returned with the members to England.\nHe made a similar statement in 1926. The report of this statement in the \"Brisbane Courier\" was as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The proudest possession of Lord Darnley is an earthenware urn containing the ashes which were presented to him by Melbourne residents when he captained the Englishmen in 1882. Though the team did not win, the urn containing the ashes was sent to him just before leaving Melbourne.\nThe contents of the urn are also problematic; they were variously reported to be the remains of a stump, bail or a ball leather casing, but in 1998 Lord Darnley's 82-year-old daughter-in-law (the Hon. Mrs Kathleen Bligh) suggested they were the remains of her mother-in-law's veil, creating added confusion to the matter. However, during the tour of Australia in 2006\u201307, the MCC official accompanying the urn said the veil myth had been discounted, and it was now \"95% certain\" that the urn contains the ashes of a cricket bail. Speaking on Channel Nine TV on 25 November 2006, he said x-rays of the urn showed the pedestal and handles were cracked, and repair work had to be carried out. The urn is made of terracotta and is about tall and may originally have been a perfume jar.\nA label containing a six-line verse is pasted on the urn. This is the fourth verse of a song-lyric published in the \"Melbourne Punch\" on 1 February 1883:\n&lt;poem&gt;\nWhen Ivo goes back with the urn, the urn;\nStudds, Steel, Read and Tylecote return, return;\nThe welkin will ring loud,\nThe great crowd will feel proud,\nSeeing Barlow and Bates with the urn, the urn;\nAnd the rest coming home with the urn.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nIn February 1883, just before the disputed Fourth Test, a velvet bag made by Mrs Mrs Ann Fletcher, the daughter of Captain Joseph Hines Clarke and Marion Wright, both of Dublin, was given to Bligh to contain the urn. During Darnley's lifetime there was little public knowledge of the urn, and no record of a published photograph exists before 1921. \"The Illustrated London News\" published this photo in January 1921 (as shown). When Darnley died in 1927 his widow presented the urn to the Marylebone Cricket Club and that was the key event in establishing the urn as the physical embodiment of the legendary ashes. MCC first displayed the urn in the Long Room and since 1953 in the MCC Cricket Museum at Lord's. MCC's wish for it to be seen by as wide a range of cricket enthusiasts as possible has led to its being mistaken for an official trophy. It is in fact a private memento, and for this reason it is never awarded to either England or Australia, but is kept permanently in the MCC Cricket Museum where it can be seen together with the specially made red and gold velvet bag with the scorecard of the 1882 match.\nBecause the urn itself is so delicate, it has been allowed to travel to Australia only twice. The first occasion was in 1988 for a museum tour as part of the Australian Bicentenary celebrations; the second was for the 2006\u201307 Ashes series. The urn arrived on 17 October 2006, going on display at the Museum of Sydney. It then toured other Australian states, with the final appearance at the Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery on 21 January 2007.\nIn the 1990s, given Australia's long dominance of the Ashes and the popular acceptance of the Darnley urn as \"the Ashes\", the idea was mooted that the victorious team should be awarded the urn as a trophy and allowed to retain it until the next series. As its condition is fragile and it is a prized exhibit at Lord's Cricket Museum, the MCC would not agree. Furthermore, in 2002, Bligh's great-great-grandson Lord Clifton, then-heir apparent to the earldom of Darnley, argued that the Ashes urn should not be returned to Australia because it belonged to his family and was given to the MCC only for safe keeping.\nAs a compromise, the MCC commissioned a larger replica of the urn in Waterford Crystal, known as \"the Ashes Trophy\", to award to the winning team of each series starting with the 1998\u201399 Ashes. This did little to diminish the status of the Darnley urn as the most celebrated icon in cricket, the symbol of this historic and keenly-fought contest.\nSeries and matches.\nQuest to \"recover those ashes\".\nLater in 1882, following the famous Australian victory at The Oval, Bligh led an England team to Australia, as he said, to \"recover those ashes\". Publicity surrounding the series was intense, and it was at some time during this series that the Ashes urn was crafted. Australia won the First Test by nine wickets, but in the next two England were victorious. At the end of the Third Test, England were generally considered to have \"won back the Ashes\" 2\u20131. A fourth match was played, against a \"United Australian XI\", which was arguably stronger than the Australian sides that had competed in the previous three matches; this game, however, is not generally considered part of the 1882\u201383 series. It \"is\" counted as a Test, but as a standalone. This match ended in a victory for Australia.\n1884 to 1896.\nAfter Bligh's victory, there was an extended period of English dominance. The tours generally had fewer Tests in the 1880s and 1890s than people have grown accustomed to in more recent years, the first five-Test series taking place only in 1894\u201395. England lost only four Ashes Tests in the 1880s out of 23 played, and they won all the seven series contested.\nThere was more chopping and changing in the teams, given that there was no official board of selectors for each country (in 1887\u201388, two separate English teams were on tour in Australia) and popularity with the fans varied. The 1890s games were more closely fought, Australia taking its first series win since 1882 with a 2\u20131 victory in 1891\u201392. But England dominated, winning the next three series to 1896 despite continuing player disputes.\nThe 1894\u201395 series began in sensational fashion when England won the First Test at Sydney by just 10 runs having followed on. Australia had scored a massive 586 (Syd Gregory 201, George Giffen 161) and then dismissed England for 325. But England responded with 437 and then dramatically dismissed Australia for 166 with Bobby Peel taking 6 for 67. At the close of the second last day's play, Australia were 113\u20132, needing only 64 more runs. But heavy rain fell overnight and next morning the two slow left-arm bowlers, Peel and Johnny Briggs, were all but unplayable. England went on to win the series 3\u20132 after it had been all square before the Final Test, which England won by 6 wickets. The English heroes were Peel, with 27 wickets in the series at an average of 26.70, and Tom Richardson, with 32 at 26.53.\nIn 1896, England under the captaincy of W. G. Grace won the series 2\u20131, and this marked the end of England's longest period of Ashes dominance.\n1897 to 1902.\nAustralia resoundingly won the 1897\u201398 series by 4\u20131 under the captaincy of Harry Trott. His successor Joe Darling won the next three series in 1899, 1901\u201302, and the classic 1902 series, which became one of the most famous in the history of Test cricket.\nFive matches were played in 1902 but the first two were drawn after being hit by bad weather. In the First Test (the first played at Edgbaston), after scoring 376 England bowled out Australia for 36 (Wilfred Rhodes 7/17) and reduced them to 46\u20132 when they followed on. Australia won the Third and Fourth Tests at Bramall Lane and Old Trafford respectively. At Old Trafford, Australia won by just 3 runs after Victor Trumper had scored 104 on a \"bad wicket\", reaching his hundred before lunch on the first day. England won the last Test at The Oval by one wicket. Chasing 263 to win, they slumped to 48\u20135 before Gilbert Jessop's 104 gave them a chance. He reached his hundred in just 75 minutes. The last-wicket pair of George Hirst and Rhodes were required to score 15 runs for victory. When Rhodes joined him, Hirst reportedly said: \"We'll get them in singles, Wilfred.\" In fact, they scored thirteen singles and a two.\nThe period of Darling's captaincy saw the emergence of outstanding Australian players such as Trumper, Warwick Armstrong, James Kelly, Monty Noble, Clem Hill, Hugh Trumble and Ernie Jones.\nReviving the legend.\nAfter what the MCC saw as the problems of the earlier professional and amateur series they decided to take control of organising tours themselves, and this led to the first MCC tour of Australia in 1903\u201304. England won it against the odds, and Plum Warner, the England captain, wrote up his version of the tour in his book \"How We Recovered The Ashes\". The title of this book revived the Ashes legend and it was after this that England v Australia series were customarily referred to as \"The Ashes\".\n1905 to 1912.\nEngland and Australia were evenly matched until the outbreak of the First World War in 1914. Five more series took place between 1905 and 1912. In 1905, England's captain Stanley Jackson not only won the series 2\u20130, but also won the toss in all five matches and headed both the batting and the bowling averages. Monty Noble led Australia to victory in both 1907\u201308 and 1909. Then England won in 1911\u201312 by four matches to one. Jack Hobbs establishing himself as England's first-choice opening batsman with three centuries, while Frank Foster (32 wickets at 21.62) and Sydney Barnes (34 wickets at 22.88) formed a formidable bowling partnership.\nEngland retained the Ashes when it won the 1912 Triangular Tournament, which also featured South Africa. The Australian touring party had been severely weakened by a dispute between the board and players that caused Clem Hill, Victor Trumper, Warwick Armstrong, Tibby Cotter, Sammy Carter and Vernon Ransford to be omitted.\n1920 to 1933.\nAfter the war, Australia took firm control of both the Ashes and world cricket. tactic of using two express bowlers in tandem paid off as Jack Gregory and Ted McDonald crippled the English batting on a regular basis. Australia recorded overwhelming victories both in England and on home soil. It won the first eight matches in succession including a 5\u20130 whitewash in 1920\u20131921 at the hands of Warwick Armstrong's team.\nThe ruthless and belligerent Armstrong led his team back to England in 1921 where his men lost only two games late in the tour to narrowly miss out of being the first team to complete a tour of England without defeat.\nEngland won only one Test out of 15 from the end of the war until 1925.\nIn a rain-hit series in 1926, England managed to eke out a 1\u20130 victory with a win in the final Test at The Oval. Because the series was at stake, the match was to be \"timeless\", i.e., played to a finish. Australia had a narrow first innings lead of 22. Jack Hobbs and Herbert Sutcliffe took the score to 49\u20130 at the end of the second day, a lead of 27. Heavy rain fell overnight, and next day the pitch soon developed into a traditional sticky wicket. England seemed doomed to be bowled out cheaply and to lose the match. In spite of the very difficult batting conditions, however, Hobbs and Sutcliffe took their partnership to 172 before Hobbs was out for exactly 100. Sutcliffe went on to make 161 and England won the game comfortably. Australian captain Herbie Collins was stripped of all captaincy positions down to club level, and some accused him of throwing the match.\nAustralia's ageing post-war team broke up after 1926, with Collins, Charlie Macartney and Warren Bardsley all departing, and Gregory breaking down at the start of the 1928\u201329 series.\nDespite the debut of Donald Bradman, the inexperienced Australians, led by Jack Ryder, were heavily defeated, losing 4\u20131. England had a very strong batting side, with Wally Hammond contributing 905 runs at an average of 113.12, and Hobbs, Sutcliffe and Patsy Hendren all scoring heavily; the bowling was more than adequate, without being outstanding.\nIn 1930, Bill Woodfull led an extremely inexperienced team to England.\nBradman fulfilled his promise in the 1930 series when he scored 974 runs at 139.14, which remains a world record Test series aggregate. A modest Bradman can be heard in a 1930 recording saying \"I have always endeavoured to do my best for the side, and the few centuries that have come my way have been achieved in the hope of winning matches. My one idea when going into bat was to make runs for Australia.\" In the Headingley Test, he made 334, reaching 309* at the end of the first day, including a century before lunch. Bradman himself thought that his 254 in the preceding match, at Lord's, was a better innings. England managed to stay in contention until the deciding final Test at The Oval, but yet another double hundred by Bradman, and 7/92 by Percy Hornibrook in England's second innings, enabled Australia to win by an innings and take the series 2\u20131. Clarrie Grimmett's 29 wickets at 31.89 for Australia in this high-scoring series were also important.\nAustralia had one of the strongest batting line-ups ever in the early 1930s, with Bradman, Archie Jackson, Stan McCabe, Bill Woodfull, Bill Ponsford and Jack Fingleton. It was the prospect of bowling at this line-up that caused England's 1932\u201333 captain Douglas Jardine to adopt the tactic of fast leg theory, better known as Bodyline.\nJardine instructed his fast bowlers, most notably Harold Larwood and Bill Voce, to bowl at the bodies of the Australian batsmen, with the goal of forcing them to defend their bodies with their bats, thus providing easy catches to a stacked leg-side field. Jardine insisted that the tactic was legitimate and called it \"leg theory\" but it was widely disparaged by its opponents, who dubbed it \"Bodyline\" (from \"on the line of the body\"). Although England decisively won the Ashes 4\u20131, Bodyline caused such a furore in Australia that diplomats had to intervene to prevent serious harm to Anglo-Australian relations, and the MCC eventually changed the Laws of cricket to curtail the number of leg side fielders.\nJardine's comment was: \"I've not travelled 6,000 miles to make friends. I'm here to win the Ashes\".\nSome of the Australians wanted to use Bodyline in retaliation, but Woodfull flatly refused. He famously told England manager Pelham Warner, \"There are two teams out there. One is playing cricket; the other is making no attempt to do so\" after the latter had come into the Australian rooms to express sympathy after a Larwood bouncer had struck the Australian skipper in the heart and felled him.\n1934 to 1953.\nOn the batting-friendly wickets that prevailed in the late 1930s, most Tests up to the Second World War still gave results. It should be borne in mind that Tests in Australia prior to the war were all played to a finish, with many batting records set during this period. Test matches had always been played over 3 days until 1933, but the Ashes were played over the modern standard five days from 1934, the series ended by a Timeless Test in both 1934 and 1938 \nThe 1934 Ashes series began with the notable absence of Larwood, Voce and Jardine. The MCC had made it clear, in light of the revelations of the bodyline series, that these players would not face Australia. The MCC, although it had earlier condoned and encouraged bodyline tactics in the 1932\u201333 series, laid the blame on Larwood when relations turned sour. Larwood was forced by the MCC to either apologise or be removed from the Test side. He went for the latter.\nAustralia recovered the Ashes in 1934 and held them until 1953, though no Test cricket was played during the Second World War.\nAs in 1930, the 1934 series was decided in the final Test at The Oval. Australia, batting first, posted a massive 701 in the first innings. Bradman (244) and Ponsford (266) were in record-breaking form with a partnership of 451 for the second wicket. England eventually faced a massive 707-run target for victory and failed, Australia winning the series 2\u20131. This made Woodfull the only captain to regain the Ashes and he retired upon his return to Australia.\nIn 1936\u201337 Bradman succeeded Woodfull as Australian captain. He started badly, losing the first two Tests heavily after Australia were caught on sticky wickets. However, the Australians fought back and Bradman won his first series in charge 3\u20132. England's bowling was led by two of the bowlers from the Bodyline series of four years before, Gubby Allen who had refused to bowl to the leg-theory field during that tour, and Bill Voce who joined Allen in bowling to a more conventional field on this occasion.\nThe 1938 series was a high-scoring affair with two high-scoring draws, resulting in a 1\u20131 result, Australia retaining the Ashes. After the first two matches ended in stalemate and the Third Test at Old Trafford never started due to rain, Australia then scraped home by five wickets inside three days in a low-scoring match at Headingley to retain the urn. In the timeless Fifth Test at The Oval, the highlight was Len Hutton's then world-record score of 364 as England made 903-7 declared. Bradman and Jack Fingleton injured themselves during Hutton's marathon effort, and with only nine men, Australia fell to defeat by an innings and 579 runs, the heaviest in Test history.\nThe Ashes resumed after the war when England toured in 1946\u201347 and, as in 1920\u201321, found that Australia had made the better post-war recovery. Still captained by Bradman and now featuring the potent new-ball partnership of Ray Lindwall and Keith Miller, Australia were convincing 3\u20130 winners.\nAged 38 and having been unwell during the war, Bradman had been reluctant to play. He batted unconvincingly and reached 28 when he hit a ball to Jack Ikin; England believed it was a catch, but Bradman stood his ground, believing it to be a bump ball. The umpire ruled in the Australian captain's favour and he appeared to regain his fluency of yesteryear, scoring 187. Australia promptly seized the initiative, won the First Test convincingly and inaugurated a dominant post-war era. The controversy over the Ikin catch was one of the biggest disputes of the era.\nIn 1948, Australia set new standards, completely outplaying its hosts to win 4\u20130 with one draw. This Australian team, led by Bradman, who turned 40 during his final tour of England, has gone down in history as \"The Invincibles\". Playing 34 matches on tour \u2013 three of which were not first-class \u2013 and including the five Tests, they remained unbeaten, winning 27 and drawing 7.\nBradman's men were greeted by packed crowds across the country, and records for Test attendances in England were set in the Second and Fourth Tests at Lord's and Headingley respectively. Before a record attendance of spectators at Headingley, Australia set a world record by chasing down 404 on the last day for a seven-wicket victory.\nThe 1948 series ended with one of the most poignant moments in cricket history, as Bradman played his final innings for Australia in the Fifth Test at The Oval, needing to score only four runs to end with a career batting average of exactly 100. However, Bradman made a second-ball duck, bowled by an Eric Hollies googly that sent him into retirement with a career average of 99.94.\nBradman was succeeded as Australian captain by Lindsay Hassett, who led the team to a 4\u20131 series victory in 1950\u201351. The series was not as one-sided as the number of wins suggest, with several tight matches.\nThe tide finally turned in 1953 when England won the final Test at The Oval to take the series 1\u20130, having narrowly avoided defeat in the preceding Test at Headingley. This was the beginning of one of the greatest periods in English cricket history with players such as captain Len Hutton, batsmen Denis Compton, Peter May, Tom Graveney, Colin Cowdrey, bowlers Fred Trueman, Brian Statham, Alec Bedser, Jim Laker, Tony Lock, wicket-keeper Godfrey Evans and all-rounder Trevor Bailey.\n1954 to 1971.\nIn 1954\u201355, Australia's batsmen had no answer to the pace of Frank Tyson and Statham. After winning the First Test by an innings after being controversially sent in by Hutton, Australia lost its way and England took a hat-trick of victories to win the series 3\u20131.\nA dramatic series in 1956 saw a record that will probably never be beaten: off-spinner Jim Laker's monumental effort at Old Trafford when he bowled 68 of 191 overs to take 19 out of 20 possible Australian wickets in the Fourth Test. It was Australia's second consecutive innings defeat in a wet summer, and the hosts were in strong positions in the two drawn Tests, in which half the playing time was washed out. Bradman rated the team that won the series 2\u20131 as England's best ever.\nEngland's dominance was not to last. Australia won 4\u20130 in 1958\u201359, having found a high-quality spinner of their own in new skipper Richie Benaud, who took 31 wickets in the five-Test series, and paceman Alan Davidson, who took 24 wickets at 19.00. The series was overshadowed by the furore over various Australian bowlers, most notably Ian Meckiff, whom the English management and media accused of illegally throwing Australia to victory.\nIn 1961, Australia won a hard-fought series 2\u20131, their first Ashes series win in England for 13 years. After narrowly winning the Second Test at Lord's, dubbed \"The Battle of the Ridge\" because of a protrusion on the pitch that caused erratic bounce, Australia mounted a comeback on the final day of the Fourth Test at Old Trafford and sealed the series with Richie Benaud taking 6-70 during the English runchase.\nThe tempo of the play changed over the next four series in the 1960s, held in 1962\u201363, 1964, 1965\u201366 and 1968. The powerful array of bowlers that both countries boasted in the preceding decade moved into retirement, and their replacements were of lesser quality, making it more difficult to force a result. England failed to win any series during the 1960s, a period dominated by draws as teams found it more prudent to save face than risk losing. Of the 20 Tests played during the four series, Australia won four and England three. As they held the Ashes, Australia's captains Bob Simpson and Bill Lawry were happy to adopt safety-first tactics and their strategy of sedate batting saw many draws. During this period, spectator attendances dropped and media condemnation increased, but Simpson and Lawry flatly disregarded the public dissatisfaction.\nIt was in the 1960s that the bipolar dominance of England and Australia in world cricket was seriously challenged for the first time. West Indies defeated England twice in the mid-1960s and South Africa, in two series before they were banned for apartheid, completely outplayed Australia 3\u20131 and 4\u20130. Australia had lost 2\u20131 during a tour of the West Indies in 1964\u201365, the first time it had lost a series to any team other than England.\nIn 1970\u201371, Ray Illingworth led England to a 2\u20130 win in Australia, mainly due to John Snow's fast bowling, and the prolific batting of Geoffrey Boycott and John Edrich. It was not until the last session of what was the 7th Test (one match having been abandoned without a ball bowled) that England's success was secured. Lawry was sacked after the Sixth Test after the selectors finally lost patience with Australia's lack of success and dour strategy. Lawry was not informed of the decision privately and heard his fate over the radio.\n1972 to 1987.\nThe 1972 series finished 2\u20132, with England under Illingworth retaining the Ashes.\nIn the 1974\u201375 series, with the England team breaking up and their best batsman Geoff Boycott refusing to play, Australian pace bowlers Jeff Thomson and Dennis Lillee wreaked havoc. A 4\u20131 result was a fair reflection as England were left shell shocked. England then lost the 1975 series 0\u20131, but at least restored some pride under new captain Tony Greig.\nAustralia won the 1977 Centenary Test which was not an Ashes contest, but then a storm broke as Kerry Packer announced his intention to form World Series Cricket. WSC affected all Test-playing nations but it weakened Australia especially as the bulk of its players had signed up with Packer; the Australian Cricket Board (ACB) would not select WSC-contracted players and an almost completely new Test team had to be formed. WSC came after an era during which the duopoly of Australian and English dominance dissipated; the Ashes had long been seen as a cricket world championship but the rise of the West Indies in the late 1970s challenged that view. The West Indies would go on to record resounding Test series wins over Australia and England and dominated world cricket until the 1990s.\nWith Greig having joined WSC, England appointed Mike Brearley as its captain and he enjoyed great success against Australia. Largely assisted by the return of Boycott, Brearley's men won the 1977 series 3\u20130 and then completed an overwhelming 5\u20131 series win against an Australian side missing its WSC players in 1978\u201379. Allan Border made his Test debut for Australia in 1978\u201379.\nBrearley retired from Test cricket in 1980 and was succeeded by Ian Botham, who started the 1981 series as England captain, by which time the WSC split had ended. After Australia took a 1\u20130 lead in the first two Tests, Botham was forced to resign or was sacked (depending on the source). Brearley surprisingly agreed to be reappointed before the Third Test at Headingley. This was a remarkable match in which Australia looked certain to take a 2\u20130 series lead after it had forced England to follow-on 227 runs behind. England, despite being 135 for 7, produced a second innings total of 356, Botham scoring 149*. Chasing just 130, Australia were sensationally dismissed for 111, Bob Willis taking 8\u201343. It was the first time since 1894\u201395 that a team following on had won a Test match. Under Brearley's leadership, England went on to win the next two matches before a drawn final match at The Oval. This series became known as 'Botham's Ashes' for his extraordinary feats with both bat and ball, after being dismissed as captain.\nIn 1982\u201383 Australia had Greg Chappell back from WSC as captain, while the England team was weakened by the enforced omission of their South African tour rebels, particularly Graham Gooch and John Emburey. Australia went 2\u20130 up after three Tests, but England won the Fourth Test by 3 runs (after a 70-run last wicket stand) to set up the final decider, which was drawn.\nIn 1985, David Gower's England team was strengthened by the return of Gooch and Emburey as well as the emergence at international level of Tim Robinson and Mike Gatting. Australia, now captained by Allan Border, had itself been weakened by a rebel South African tour, the loss of Terry Alderman being a particular factor. England won 3\u20131.\nDespite suffering heavy defeats against the West Indies during the 1980s, England continued to do well in the Ashes. Mike Gatting was the captain in 1986\u201387 but his team started badly and attracted some criticism. Then Chris Broad scored three hundreds in successive Tests and bowling successes from Graham Dilley and Gladstone Small meant England won the series 2\u20131. Ian Botham also scored his last international hundred and his last international five-wicket haul on this tour. A century from Dean Jones and five-fors from spinners Peter Taylor (on debut) and Peter Sleep gave Australia a consolation victory in the last match.\n1989 to 2005.\nThe Australian team of 1989 was comparable to the great Australian teams of the past, and resoundingly defeated England 4\u20130. Well led by Allan Border, the team included the young cricketers Mark Taylor, Merv Hughes, David Boon, Ian Healy and Steve Waugh, who were all to prove long-serving and successful Ashes competitors. England, now led once again by David Gower, suffered from injuries and poor form. During the Fourth Test news broke that prominent England players had agreed to take part in a \"rebel tour\" of South Africa the following winter; three of them (Tim Robinson, Neil Foster and John Emburey) were playing in the match, and were subsequently dropped from the England side.\nAustralia reached a cricketing peak in the 1990s and early 2000s, coupled with a general decline in England's fortunes. After re-establishing its credibility in 1989, Australia underlined its superiority with victories in the 1990\u201391, 1993, 1994\u201395, 1997, 1998\u201399, 2001 and 2002\u201303 series, all by convincing margins.\nGreat Australian players in the early years included batsmen Border, Boon, Taylor and Steve Waugh. The captaincy passed from Border to Taylor in the mid-1990s and then to Steve Waugh before the 2001 series. In the latter part of the 1990s Waugh himself, along with his twin brother Mark, scored heavily for Australia and fast bowlers Glenn McGrath and Jason Gillespie made a serious impact, especially the former. The wicketkeeper-batsman position was held by Ian Healy for most of the 1990s and by Adam Gilchrist from 2001 to 2006\u201307. In the 2000s, batsmen Justin Langer, Damien Martyn and Matthew Hayden became noted players for Australia. But the most dominant Australian player was leg-spinner Shane Warne, whose first delivery in Ashes cricket in 1993, to dismiss Mike Gatting, became known as the Ball of the Century.\nAustralia's record between 1989 and 2005 had a significant impact on the statistics between the two sides. Before the 1989 series began, the win\u2013loss ratio was almost even, with 87 test wins for Australia to England's 86, 74 tests having been drawn. By the 2005 series Australia's test wins had increased to 115 whereas England's had increased to only 93 (with 82 draws). In the period between 1989 and the beginning of the 2005 series, the two sides had played 43 times; Australia winning 28 times, England 7 times, with 8 draws. Only a single England victory had come in a match in which the Ashes were still at stake, namely the First Test of the 1997 series. All others were consolation victories when the Ashes had been secured by Australia.\n2005 to 2015.\nEngland were undefeated in Test matches through the 2004 calendar year. This elevated them to second in the ICC Test Championship. Hopes that the 2005 Ashes series would be closely fought proved well-founded, the series remaining undecided as the closing session of the final Test began. Experienced journalists including Richie Benaud rated the series as the most exciting in living memory. It has been compared with the great series of the distant past, such as 1894\u201395 and 1902.\nThe First Test at Lord's was convincingly won by Australia, but in the remaining four matches the teams were evenly matched and England fought back to win the Second Test by 2 runs, the smallest winning margin in Ashes history, and the second-smallest in all Tests. The rain-affected Third Test ended with the last two Australian batsmen holding out for a draw; and England won the Fourth Test by three wickets after forcing Australia to follow-on for the first time in 191 Tests. A draw in the final Test gave England victory in an Ashes series for the first time in 18 years and their first Ashes victory at home since 1985.\nAustralia regained the Ashes on its home turf in the 2006\u201307 series with a convincing 5\u20130 victory, only the second time an Ashes series had been won by that margin. Shane Warne, Glenn McGrath and Justin Langer retired from Test cricket after that series, while Damien Martyn retired during the series.\nThe 2009 series began with a tense draw in the First Test at SWALEC Stadium in Cardiff, with England's last-wicket batsmen James Anderson and Monty Panesar surviving 69 balls. England then achieved its first Ashes win at Lord's since 1934 to go 1\u20130 up. After a rain-affected draw at Edgbaston, the fourth match at Headingley was convincingly won by Australia by an innings and 80 runs to level the series. Finally, England won the Fifth Test at The Oval by a margin of 197 runs to regain the Ashes. Andrew Flintoff retired from Test cricket soon afterwards.\nThe 2010\u201311 series was played in Australia. The First Test at Brisbane ended in a draw, but England won the Second Test, at Adelaide, by an innings and 71 runs. Australia came back with a victory at Perth in the Third Test. In the Fourth Test at Melbourne Cricket Ground, England batting second scored 513 to defeat Australia (98 and 258) by an innings and 157 runs. This gave England an unbeatable 2\u20131 lead in the series and so it retained the Ashes. England went on to win the series 3\u20131, beating Australia by an innings and 83 runs at Sydney in the Fifth Test, including their highest innings total since 1938 (644). England's series victory was its first on Australian soil for 24 years. The 2010\u201311 Ashes series was the only one in which a team had won three Tests by innings margins and it was the first time England had scored 500 or more four times in a single series. England opener Cook scored 766 runs at average 127.66 in the series, the most dominant batsman in an Ashes series since Bradman in 1930.\nAustralia's build-up to the 2013 Ashes series was far from ideal. Darren Lehmann took over as coach from Mickey Arthur following a string of poor results. A batting line-up weakened by the previous year's retirements of former captain Ricky Ponting and Mike Hussey was also shorn of opener David Warner, who was suspended for the start of the series following an off-field incident. England won a closely fought First Test by 14 runs, despite 19-year-old debutant Ashton Agar making a world-record 98 for a number 11 in the first innings. England then won a very one-sided Second Test by 347 runs while the rain-affected Third Test, held at a newly refurbished Old Trafford, was drawn, ensuring that England retained the Ashes. England won the Fourth Test by 74 runs after Australia lost their last eight second-innings wickets for only 86 runs. The final Test was drawn, giving England a 3\u20130 series win.\nIn the second of two Ashes series held in 2013 (the series ended in 2014), this time hosted by Australia, the home team won the series five test matches to nil. This was the third time Australia has completed a clean sweep (or \"whitewash\") in Ashes history, a feat never matched by England. All six Australian specialist batsmen scored more runs than any Englishman with 10 centuries among them, with only debutant Ben Stokes scoring a century for England. Mitchell Johnson took 37 English wickets at 13.97 and Ryan Harris 22 wickets at 19.31 in the 5-Test series. Only Stuart Broad and all-rounder Stokes bowled effectively for England, with their spinner Graeme Swann retiring due to a chronic elbow injury after the decisive Third Test.\nAustralia came into the 2015 Ashes series in England as favourites to retain the Ashes. Although England won the first Test in Cardiff, Australia won comfortably in the second Test at Lords. In the next two Tests, the Australian batsmen struggled, being bowled out for 136 in the first innings at Edgbaston, with England proceeding to win by eight wickets. This was followed by Australia being bowled out for 60 as Stuart Broad took 8 for 15 in the first innings at Trent Bridge, the quickest \u2013 in terms of balls faced \u2013 a team has been bowled out in the first innings of a Test match. With victory by an innings and 78 runs on the morning of the third day of the Fourth Test, England regained the Ashes.\n2017 to present.\nDuring the buildup, the 2017\u201318 Ashes series was regarded as a turning point for both sides. Australia were criticised for being too reliant on captain Steve Smith and vice-captain David Warner, while England was said to have a shoddy middle to lower order. Off the field, England all-rounder Ben Stokes was ruled out of the side indefinitely due to a police investigation.\nAustralia won the first Test match in Brisbane by 10 wickets and the second Test at Adelaide by 120 runs in the first ever day-night Ashes test match. Australia regained The Ashes with an innings and 41 run win in the third Test at Perth; the final Ashes Test at the WACA Ground.\nPrior to the 2019 Ashes series, both teams were considered to have very strong bowling attacks but struggling batting orders. Australia had its top-order batsmen David Warner, Steve Smith and Cameron Bancroft available for international selection after being banned from international cricket for 9\u201312 months following the ball-tampering scandal in South Africa, during which time India had won its first ever Test series in Australia. However, Australia recovered to win the Test series against Sri Lanka 2\u20130.\nDespite winning the Cricket World Cup in July 2019 for the first time, England had also been criticised for its fragile top-order in Tests. The retirement of opener Alastair Cook in August 2018 ensured potential top-order batsmen Rory Burns, Joe Denly and Jason Roy were able to secure a place in the side. Despite losing a Test series 2\u20131 in their tour of the West Indies, England then improved to win the one-off Test against Ireland, by 143 runs. The 2019 series was eventually drawn 2\u20132, with Australia retaining the Ashes.\nThe 2021\u201322 Ashes series was played from December 2021 through January 2022, and featured the first Ashes Test match to be played in Tasmania, at Hobart's Bellerive Oval. Australia retained the Ashes in the 2021\u201322 Ashes series, after comfortably beating England 4\u20130.\nEngland were the hosts of the five Test matches of the 2023 Ashes series. The series got off to a good start for Australia as they won the first two Tests to go 0\u20132 up. The hosts won the third Test to put the series at 1-2 for the visitors. England needed to win the fourth Test in a hope to not only level the series but prevent Australia from retaining the Ashes. The match looked good for England to win, but rain intervened on the last two days and forced a draw, thus Australia retained the Ashes with the series at 1\u20132 after four Tests. The fifth and final Test was played at The Oval. During the contest Stuart Broad announced that he would retire from cricket at the end of the match. England went on to win the final Test match to draw the series at 2-2.\nEngland started the 2025\u201326 Ashes series poorly, losing the first test match in Perth in under two days. This was the first time an Ashes test had been decided in under two days since the first test of the 1921 Ashes, with England facing 405 balls, their shortest total in a Test match since 1904.\nSummary of results and statistics.\nIn the 140 years since 1883, Australia have held the Ashes for approximately 84.5 years, and England for 55.5 years:\nTest results, up to and including 31 July 2023:\nSeries results, up to and including 31 July 2023:\nA team must win a series to gain the right to hold the Ashes. A drawn series results in the previous holders retaining the Ashes. Ashes series have generally been played over five Test matches, although there have been four-match series (1938 and 1975) and six-match series (1970\u201371, 1974\u201375, 1978\u201379, 1981, 1985, 1989, 1993 and 1997). Australians have made 264 centuries in Ashes Tests, of which 23 have been scores over 200, while Englishmen have scored 212 centuries, of which 10 have been over 200. Australians have taken 10 wickets in a match on 41 occasions, Englishmen 38 times.\nMatch venues.\nThe series alternates between England (and Wales) and Australia, and each match of a series is held at a different ground.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, the grounds currently used are the Gabba in Brisbane (first staged an England\u2013Australia Test in the 1932\u201333 season), Adelaide Oval (1884\u201385), the Melbourne Cricket Ground (MCG) (1876\u201377), and the Sydney Cricket Ground (SCG) (1881\u201382). A single Test was held at the Brisbane Exhibition Ground in 1928\u201329. Traditionally, Melbourne hosts the Boxing Day Test and Sydney hosts the New Year's Day Test. Cricket Australia has announced that the 2025-26 Ashes match at the Gabba will be the last to be played there, due to setting up for the 2032 Olympics.\nAdditionally, the WACA in Perth (1970\u201371) hosted its final Ashes Test in 2017\u201318 and was due to be replaced by Perth Stadium for the 2021\u201322 series. However, Western Australian border restrictions and quarantine requirements during the COVID-19 pandemic led to a change in venue for the final Ashes Test to Bellerive Oval in Hobart. This was the first Ashes Test match to be held in Tasmania.\nCricket Australia proposed that the 2010\u201311 series should consist of six Tests, with the additional game to be played at Bellerive Oval in Hobart. The England and Wales Cricket Board declined and the series was played over five Tests.\nEngland.\nIn England and Wales, the grounds currently used are: Old Trafford in Manchester (1884), The Oval in Kennington, South London (1884); Lord's in St John's Wood, North London (1884); Headingley in Leeds (1899) and Edgbaston in Birmingham (1902). Additionally Sophia Gardens in Cardiff, Wales (2009); the Riverside Ground in Chester-le-Street, County Durham (2013) and Trent Bridge at West Bridgford (1899), have been used and one Test was also held at Bramall Lane in Sheffield in 1902. Traditionally the final Test of the series is played at the Oval.\nSophia Gardens and the Riverside were excluded as Test grounds between the years of 2020 and 2031 and therefore will not host an Ashes Test until at least 2035. The ECB announced the 2027 and 2031 Ashes series venues will be held at Lord's (2027 and 2031), The Oval (2027 and 2031), Edgbaston (2027), Trent Bridge (2027 and 2031), The Rose Bowl (2027), Old Trafford (2031) and Headingley (2031).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nCultural references.\nThe popularity and reputation of the cricket series has led to other sports and games using the name \"Ashes\" for contests between England/Great Britain and Australia. The best-known and longest-running of these events is the rugby league Ashes competition between Great Britain now England and Australia national rugby league teams. Use of the name \"Ashes\" was suggested by the Australian team when rugby league matches between the two countries commenced in 1908. Other examples included the television game shows \"Gladiators\" and \"Sale of the Century\", both of which broadcast special editions containing contestants from the Australian and English versions of the shows competing against each other.\nThe term was further genericised in Australia in the first half of the twentieth century, and was used to describe the most prominent rivalry or competition within a sport even if outside the context of Australia vs England. The Australian rules football interstate carnival, and the small silver casket which served as its trophy, were symbolically known as \"the Ashes\" of Australian football, and was spoken of as such until at least the 1940s. The soccer rivalry between Australia and New Zealand was described as \"the soccer ashes of Australasia\" until as late as the 1950s; ashes from cigars smoked by the two countries' captains were put into a casket in 1923 to make the trophy literal. The interstate rugby league rivalry between Queensland and New South Wales was known for a time as Australia's rugby league ashes, and bowls competitions between the two states also regularly used the term. Even some local rivalries, such as southern Western Australia's annual Great Southern Football Carnival, were locally described as \"the ashes\". This genericised usage is no longer common, and \"the Ashes\" would today be assumed only to apply to a contest between Australia and England.\nThe Ashes featured in the film \"The Final Test\", released in 1953, based on a television play by Terence Rattigan. It stars Jack Warner as an England cricketer playing the last Test of his career, which is the last of an Ashes series; the film includes cameo appearances of English captain Len Hutton and other players who were part of England's 1953 triumph.\nDouglas Adams's 1982 science fiction comedy novel \"Life, the Universe and Everything\" \u2013 the third part of \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" series \u2013 features the urn containing the Ashes as a significant element of its plot. The urn is stolen by alien robots, as the burnt stump inside is part of a key needed to unlock the \"Wikkit Gate\" and release an imprisoned world called Krikkit.\n\"Bodyline\", a fictionalised television miniseries based on the \"Bodyline\" Ashes series of 1932\u201333, was screened in Australia in 1984. The cast included Gary Sweet as Donald Bradman and Hugo Weaving as England captain Douglas Jardine.\nIn the 1938 film \"The Lady Vanishes\", Charters and Caldicott, played by Basil Radford and Naunton Wayne, are two cricket fans who are desperate to get home from Europe in order to see the last day's play in the Third Test at Manchester. It is not until they see a newsboy's poster near the end of the film that they discover that the match had been abandoned, due to floods.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1134", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1134", "title": "Analysis", "text": "Process of understanding a complex topic or substance\n \nAnalysis (pl.: analyses) is the process of breaking a complex topic or substance into smaller parts in order to gain a better understanding of it. The technique has been applied in the study of mathematics and logic since before Aristotle (384\u2013322 BC), though \"analysis\" as a formal concept is a relatively recent development.\nThe word comes from the Ancient Greek (\"analysis\", \"a breaking-up\" or \"an untying\" from \"ana-\" \"up, throughout\" and \"lysis\" \"a loosening\"). From it also comes the word's plural, \"analyses\".\nAs a formal concept, the method has variously been ascribed to Ren\u00e9 Descartes (\"Discourse on the Method\"), and Galileo Galilei. It has also been ascribed to Isaac Newton, in the form of a practical method of physical discovery (which he did not name).\nThe converse of analysis is synthesis: putting the pieces back together again in a new or different whole. \nScience and technology.\nChemistry.\nThe field of chemistry uses analysis in three ways: to identify the components of a particular chemical compound (qualitative analysis), to identify the proportions of components in a mixture (quantitative analysis), and to break down chemical processes and examine chemical reactions between elements of matter. For an example of its use, analysis of the concentration of elements is important in managing a nuclear reactor, so nuclear scientists will analyze neutron activation to develop discrete measurements within vast samples. A matrix can have a considerable effect on the way a chemical analysis is conducted and the quality of its results. Analysis can be done manually or with a device.\n Example: Precipitation reaction\n Example: To find concentration by uv-spectrophotometer.\nIsotopes.\nChemists can use isotope analysis to assist analysts with issues in anthropology, archeology, food chemistry, forensics, geology, and a host of other questions of physical science. Analysts can discern the origins of natural and man-made isotopes in the study of environmental radioactivity.\nEngineering.\nAnalysts in the field of engineering look at requirements, structures, mechanisms, systems and dimensions. Electrical engineers analyse systems in electronics. Life cycles and system failures are broken down and studied by engineers. It is also looking at different factors incorporated within the design.\nMathematics.\nModern mathematical analysis is the study of infinite processes. It is the branch of mathematics that includes calculus. It can be applied in the study of classical concepts of mathematics, such as real numbers, complex variables, trigonometric functions, and algorithms, or of non-classical concepts like constructivism, harmonics, infinity, and vectors.\nFlorian Cajori explains in (1893) the difference between modern and ancient mathematical analysis, as distinct from logical analysis, as follows:\nThe terms \"synthesis\" and \"analysis\" are used in mathematics in a more special sense than in logic. In ancient mathematics they had a different meaning from what they now have. The oldest definition of mathematical analysis as opposed to synthesis is that given in [appended to] Euclid, XIII. 5, which in all probability was framed by Eudoxus: \"Analysis is the obtaining of the thing sought by assuming it and so reasoning up to an admitted truth; synthesis is the obtaining of the thing sought by reasoning up to the inference and proof of it.\" \nThe analytic method is not conclusive, unless all operations involved in it are known to be reversible. To remove all doubt, the Greeks, as a rule, added to the analytic process a synthetic one, consisting of a reversion of all operations occurring in the analysis. Thus the aim of analysis was to aid in the discovery of synthetic proofs or solutions.\nJames Gow uses a similar argument as Cajori, with the following clarification, in his https:// (1884):\nThe synthetic proof proceeds by shewing that the proposed new truth involves certain admitted truths. An analytic proof begins by an assumption, upon which a synthetic reasoning is founded. The Greeks distinguished \"theoretic\" from \"problematic\" analysis. A theoretic analysis is of the following kind. To \"prove\" that A is B, \"assume\" first that A is B. If so, then, since B is C and C is D and D is E, therefore A is E. If this be known a falsity, A is not B. But if this be a known truth and all the intermediate propositions be convertible, then the reverse process, A is E, E is D, D is C, C is B, therefore A is B, constitutes a synthetic proof of the original theorem. Problematic analysis is applied in all cases where it is proposed to construct a figure which is assumed to satisfy a given condition. The problem is then converted into some theorem which is involved in the condition and which is proved synthetically, and the steps of this synthetic proof taken backwards are a synthetic solution of the problem.\nStatistics.\nIn statistics, the term \"analysis\" may refer to any method used\nfor data analysis. Among the many such methods, some are:\nGovernment.\nIntelligence.\nThe field of intelligence employs analysts to break down and understand a wide array of questions. Intelligence agencies may use heuristics, inductive and deductive reasoning, social network analysis, dynamic network analysis, link analysis, and brainstorming to sort through problems they face. Military intelligence may explore issues through the use of game theory, Red Teaming, and wargaming. Signals intelligence applies cryptanalysis and frequency analysis to break codes and ciphers. Business intelligence applies theories of competitive intelligence analysis and competitor analysis to resolve questions in the marketplace. Law enforcement intelligence applies a number of theories in crime analysis.\nHumanities and social sciences.\nLinguistics.\nLinguistics explores individual languages and language in general. It breaks language down and analyses its component parts: theory, sounds and their meaning, utterance usage, word origins, the history of words, the meaning of words and word combinations, sentence construction, basic construction beyond the sentence level, stylistics, and conversation. It examines the above using statistics and modeling, and semantics. It analyses language in context of anthropology, biology, evolution, geography, history, neurology, psychology, and sociology. It also takes the applied approach, looking at individual language development and clinical issues.\nLiterature.\nLiterary criticism is the analysis of literature. The focus can be as diverse as the analysis of Homer or Freud. While not all literary-critical methods are primarily analytical in nature, the main approach to the teaching of literature in the west since the mid-twentieth century, literary formal analysis or close reading, is. This method, rooted in the academic movement labelled The New Criticism, approaches texts \u2013 chiefly short poems such as sonnets, which by virtue of their small size and significant complexity lend themselves well to this type of analysis \u2013 as units of discourse that can be understood in themselves, without reference to biographical or historical frameworks. This method of analysis breaks up the text linguistically in a study of prosody (the formal analysis of meter) and phonic effects such as alliteration and rhyme, and cognitively in examination of the interplay of syntactic structures, figurative language, and other elements of the poem that work to produce its larger effects.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1135", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1135", "title": "Abner Doubleday", "text": "Union Army general (1819\u20131893)\nAbner Doubleday (June 26, 1819\u00a0\u2013 January 26, 1893) was a career United States Army officer and Union major general in the American Civil War. He fired the first shot in defense of Fort Sumter, the opening battle of the war, and had a pivotal role in the early fighting at the Battle of Gettysburg. Gettysburg was his finest hour, but his relief by Maj. Gen. George G. Meade caused lasting enmity between the two men. In San Francisco, after the war, he obtained a patent on the cable car railway that still runs there. In his final years in New Jersey, he was a prominent member and later president of the Theosophical Society.\nIn 1908, 15 years after his death, the Mills Commission declared that Doubleday had invented the game of baseball, although Doubleday never made such a claim. This claim has been thoroughly debunked by baseball historians.\nEarly years.\nDoubleday, the son of Ulysses F. Doubleday and Hester Donnelly, was born in Ballston Spa, New York, in a small house on the corner of Washington and Fenwick streets. As a child, Abner was very short. The family all slept in the attic loft of the one-room house. His paternal grandfather, also named Abner, had fought in the American Revolutionary War. His maternal grandfather Thomas Donnelly had joined the army at 14 and was a mounted messenger for George Washington. His great-grandfather Peter Donnelly was a Minuteman. His father, Ulysses F., fought in the War of 1812, published newspapers and books, and represented Auburn, New York, for four years in the United States Congress. Abner spent his childhood in Auburn and later was sent to Cooperstown to live with his uncle and attend a private preparatory high school. He practiced as a surveyor and civil engineer for two years before entering the United States Military Academy in 1838. He graduated in 1842, 24th in a class of 56 cadets, and was commissioned a brevet second lieutenant in the 3rd U.S. Artillery. In 1852, he married Mary Hewitt of Baltimore, the daughter of a local lawyer.\nEarly commands and Fort Sumter.\nDoubleday initially served in coastal garrisons and then in the Mexican\u2013American War from 1846 to 1848 and the Seminole Wars from 1856 to 1858. In 1858, he was transferred to Fort Moultrie in Charleston Harbor serving under Colonel John L. Gardner. By the start of the Civil War, he was a captain and second in command in the garrison at Fort Sumter, under Major Robert Anderson. He aimed the cannon that fired the first return shot in answer to the Confederate bombardment on April 12, 1861. He subsequently referred to himself as the \"hero of Sumter\" for this role. Of note, although Doubleday did not invent baseball, by sheer coincidence the Fort Sumter Garrison Flag (or Storm Flag) has the star pattern arranged in a diamond shape, which by that time in history, was the shape of the baseball infield.\nBrigade and division command in Virginia.\nDoubleday was promoted to major on May 14, 1861, and commanded the Artillery Department in the Shenandoah Valley from June to August, and then the artillery for Major General Nathaniel Banks's division of the Army of the Potomac. He was appointed brigadier general of volunteers on February 3, 1862, and was assigned to duty in northern Virginia while the Army of the Potomac conducted the Peninsula Campaign. His first combat assignment was to lead the 2nd Brigade, 1st Division, III Corps of the Army of Virginia during the Northern Virginia Campaign. In the actions at Brawner's farm, just before the Second Battle of Bull Run, he took the initiative to send two of his regiments to reinforce Brigadier General John Gibbon's brigade against a larger Confederate force, fighting it to a standstill. Personal initiative was required since his division commander, Brig. Gen. Rufus King, was incapacitated by an epileptic seizure at the time. He was replaced by Brigadier General John P. Hatch. His men were routed when they encountered Major General James Longstreet's corps, but by the following day, August 30, he took command of the division when Hatch was wounded, and he led his men to cover the retreat of the Union Army.\nDoubleday again led the division, now assigned to the I Corps of the Army of the Potomac, after South Mountain, where Hatch was wounded again. At Antietam, he led his men into the deadly fighting in the Cornfield and the West Woods, and one colonel described him as a \"gallant officer ... remarkably cool and at the very front of battle.\" He was wounded when an artillery shell exploded near his horse, throwing him to the ground in a violent fall. He received a brevet promotion to lieutenant colonel in the regular army for his actions at Antietam and was promoted in March 1863 to major general of volunteers, to rank from November 29, 1862. At Fredericksburg in December 1862, his division mostly sat idle. During the winter, the I Corps was reorganized and Doubleday assumed command of the 3rd Division. At Chancellorsville in May 1863, the division was kept in reserve.\nGettysburg.\nAt the start of the Battle of Gettysburg, July 1, 1863, Doubleday's division was the second infantry division on the field to reinforce the cavalry division of Brigadier General John Buford. When his corps commander, Major General John F. Reynolds, was killed very early in the fighting, Doubleday found himself in command of the corps at 10:50 am. His men fought well in the morning, putting up a stout resistance, but as overwhelming Confederate forces massed against them, their line eventually broke and they retreated back through the town of Gettysburg to the relative safety of Cemetery Hill south of town. It was Doubleday's finest performance during the war, five hours leading 9,500 men against ten Confederate brigades that numbered more than 16,000. Seven of those brigades sustained casualties that ranged from 35 to 50 percent, indicating the ferocity of the Union defense. On Cemetery Hill, however, the I Corps could muster only a third of its men as effective for duty, and the corps was essentially destroyed as a combat force for the rest of the battle; it would be decommissioned in March 1864, its surviving units consolidated into other corps.\nOn July 2, 1863, Army of the Potomac commander Maj. Gen. George G. Meade replaced Doubleday with Major General John Newton, a more junior officer from another corps. The ostensible reason was a false report by XI Corps commander Major General Oliver O. Howard that Doubleday's corps broke first, causing the entire Union line to collapse, but Meade also had a long history of disdain for Doubleday's combat effectiveness, dating back to South Mountain. Doubleday was humiliated by this snub and held a lasting grudge against Meade, but he returned to division command and fought well for the remainder of the battle. He was wounded in the neck on the second day of Gettysburg and received a brevet promotion to colonel in the regular army for his service. He formally requested reinstatement as I Corps commander, but Meade refused, and Doubleday left Gettysburg on July 7 for Washington.\nDoubleday's staff nicknamed him \"Forty-Eight Hours\" as a compliment to recognize his tendency to avoid reckless or impulsive actions and his thoughtfulness and deliberateness in considering circumstances and possible responses. In recent years, biographers have turned the nickname into an insult, incorrectly claiming \"Forty-Eight Hours\" was coined to highlight Doubleday's supposed incompetence and slowness to act.\nWashington.\nDoubleday assumed administrative duties in the defenses of Washington, D.C., where he was in charge of courts martial, which gave him legal experience that he used after the war. His only return to combat was directing a portion of the defenses against the attack by Confederate Lieutenant General Jubal A. Early in the Valley Campaigns of 1864. Also while in Washington, Doubleday testified against George Meade at the United States Congress Joint Committee on the Conduct of the War, criticizing him harshly over his conduct of the Battle of Gettysburg. While in Washington, Doubleday remained a loyal Republican and staunch supporter of President Abraham Lincoln. Doubleday rode with Lincoln on the train to Gettysburg for the Gettysburg Address and Col. and Mrs. Doubleday attended events with Mr. and Mrs. Lincoln in Washington.\nPostbellum career.\nAfter the Civil War, Doubleday mustered out of the volunteer service on August 24, 1865, reverted to the rank of lieutenant colonel, and became the colonel of the 35th U.S. Infantry in September 1867. He was stationed in San Francisco from 1869 through 1871 and he took out a patent for the cable car railway that still runs there, receiving a charter for its operation, but signing away his rights when he was reassigned. In 1871, he commanded the 24th U.S. Infantry, an all African-American regiment with headquarters at Fort McKavett, Texas. He retired in 1873.\nIn the 1870s, he was listed in the New York business directory as a lawyer.\nDoubleday spent much of his time writing. He published two important works on the Civil War: \"Reminiscences of Forts Sumter and Moultrie\" (1876), and \"Chancellorsville and Gettysburg\" (1882), the latter being a volume of the series \"Campaigns of the Civil War\".\nTheosophy.\nIn the summer of 1878, Doubleday lived in Mendham Township, New Jersey, and became a prominent member of the Theosophical Society. When two of the founders of that society, Helena Blavatsky and Henry Steel Olcott, moved to India at the end of that year, he was constituted as the president of the American body.\nDeath.\nDoubleday died of heart disease in Mendham Township on January 26, 1893. Doubleday's body was laid in state in New York's City Hall and then was taken to Washington by train from Mendham, and was buried in Arlington National Cemetery in Arlington County, Virginia. He was survived by his wife.\nBaseball.\nAlthough Doubleday achieved minor fame as a competent combat general with experience in many important Civil War battles, he is more widely known as the supposed inventor of the game of baseball, in Elihu Phinney's cow pasture in Cooperstown, New York, in 1839.\nThe Mills Commission, chaired by Abraham G. Mills, the fourth president of the National League, was appointed in 1905 to determine the origin of baseball. The committee's final report, on December 30, 1907, stated, in part, that \"the first scheme for playing baseball, according to the best evidence obtainable to date, was devised by Abner Doubleday at Cooperstown, New York, in 1839.\" It concluded by saying, \"in the years to come, in the view of the hundreds of thousands of people who are devoted to baseball, and the millions who will be, Abner Doubleday's fame will rest evenly, if not quite as much, upon the fact that he was its inventor ... as upon his brilliant and distinguished career as an officer in the Federal Army.\"\nHowever, there is considerable evidence to dispute this claim. Baseball historian George B. Kirsch has described the results of the Mills Commission as a \"myth\". He wrote, \"Robert Henderson, Harold Seymour, and other scholars have since debunked the Doubleday-Cooperstown myth, which nonetheless remains powerful in the American imagination because of the efforts of Major League Baseball and the Hall of Fame in Cooperstown.\" At his death, Doubleday left many letters and papers, none of which describe baseball or give any suggestion that he considered himself a prominent person in the evolution of the game, and his \"New York Times\" obituary did not mention the game at all. Chairman Mills himself, who had been a Civil War colleague of Doubleday and a member of the honor guard for Doubleday's body as it lay in state in New York City, never recalled hearing Doubleday describe his role as the inventor. Doubleday was a cadet at West Point in the year of the alleged invention and his family had moved away from Cooperstown the prior year. Furthermore, the primary testimony to the commission that connected baseball to Doubleday was that of Abner Graves, whose credibility is questionable; a few years later, he shot his wife to death and was committed to an institution for the criminally insane for the rest of his life. Part of the confusion could stem from there being another man by the same name in Cooperstown in 1839.\nDespite the lack of solid evidence linking Doubleday to the origins of baseball, Cooperstown, New York, became the new home of what is today the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum in 1937.\nThere may have been some relationship to baseball as a national sport and Abner Doubleday. While the modern rules of baseball were formulated in New York during the 1840s, it was the scattering of New Yorkers exposed to these rules throughout the country, that spread not only baseball, but also the \"New York Rules\", thereby harmonizing the rules, and being a catalyst for its growth. Doubleday was a high-ranking officer, whose duties included seeing to provisions for the US Army fighting throughout the south and border states. For the morale of the men, he is said to have provisioned balls and bats for the men.\nNamesakes and honors.\nDoubleday's men, admirers, and the state of New York erected a monument to him at Gettysburg. There is a obelisk monument at Arlington National Cemetery where he is buried.\nDoubleday Field is a 9,791-seat baseball stadium named for Abner Doubleday, located in Cooperstown, New York, near the Baseball Hall of Fame. It hosted the annual Hall of Fame Game, an exhibition game between two major league teams that was played from 1940 until 2008. It has hosted the Hall of Fame Classic since 2009.\nThe Auburn Doubledays are a collegiate summer baseball team based in Doubleday's hometown of Auburn, New York.\nDoubleday Field at the United States Military Academy at West Point, New York, where the Army Black Knights play at Johnson Stadium, is named in Doubleday's honor.\nThe Abner Doubleday Little League and Babe Ruth Fields in Ballston Spa, New York, the town of his birth. The house of his birth still stands in the middle of town and there is a monument to him on Front Street.\nA sign at the Doubleday Hill Monument, erected in Williamsport, Maryland, to commemorate Doubleday's occupation of a hill there during the Civil War, claims he invented the game in 1835.\nMendham Borough and Mendham Township, New Jersey has held a municipal holiday known as \"Abner Doubleday Day\" for numerous years in the General's honor and commissioned a plaque near the site of his home in the borough in 1998, even though the borough was known as Mendham Township back then.\nIn 2004, the Abner Doubleday Society erected a monument to Doubleday in Iron Spring Park, Ballston Spa, near his birthplace.\nIn World War II, the United States Liberty ship SS \"Abner Doubleday\" was named in his honor.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1136", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1136", "title": "America's National Game", "text": "1911 book by Albert Spalding\nAmerica's National Game is a book by Albert Spalding, published in 1911, that details the early history of the sport of baseball. It is one of the defining books in the early formative years of modern baseball.\nMuch of the story is told first-hand; since the 1850s, Spalding had been involved in the game, first as a pitcher and later a manager and club owner. Later he branched out to become a leading manufacturer of sporting goods.\nIn addition to his personal recollections, he had access to the records of Henry Chadwick, the game's first statistician and archivist. Much of his early history of the game is considered to be reliable. Spalding was, however, said to aggrandize his role in the major moments in baseball's history. Early editions of the book include quality full-page photo-plates of important players.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1140", "revid": "18731412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1140", "title": "Amplitude modulation", "text": "Electronic method of transmitting information with a carrier wave\nAmplitude modulation (AM) is a signal modulation technique used in electronic communication, most commonly for transmitting messages with a radio wave. In amplitude modulation, the instantaneous amplitude of the wave is varied in proportion to that of the message signal, such as an audio signal. This technique contrasts with angle modulation, in which either the frequency of the carrier wave is varied, as in frequency modulation, or its phase, as in phase modulation.\nAM was the earliest modulation method used for transmitting audio in radio broadcasting. It was developed during the first quarter of the 20th century beginning with Roberto Landell de Moura and Reginald Fessenden's radiotelephone experiments in 1900. This original form of AM is sometimes called double-sideband amplitude modulation (DSBAM), because the standard method produces sidebands on either side of the carrier frequency. Single-sideband modulation uses bandpass filters to eliminate one of the sidebands and possibly the carrier signal, which improves the ratio of message power to total transmission power, reduces power handling requirements of line repeaters, and permits better bandwidth utilization of the transmission medium.\nAM remains in use in many forms of communication in addition to AM broadcasting: shortwave radio, amateur radio, two-way radios, VHF aircraft radio, citizens band radio, and in computer modems in the form of quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM).\nFoundation.\nIn electronics and telecommunications, modulation is the variation of a property of a continuous wave carrier signal according to an information-bearing signal, such as an audio signal which represents sound, or a video signal which represents images. In this sense, the carrier wave, which has a much higher frequency than the message signal, \"carries\" the information. At the receiving station, the message signal is extracted from the modulated carrier by demodulation.\nIn general form, a modulation process of a sinusoidal carrier wave may be described by the following equation:\nformula_1.\n\"A(t)\" represents the time-varying amplitude of the sinusoidal carrier wave and the cosine-term is the carrier at its angular frequency formula_2, and the instantaneous phase deviation formula_3. This description directly provides the two major groups of modulation, amplitude modulation and angle modulation. In angle modulation, the term \"A\"(\"t\") is constant and the second term of the equation has a functional relationship to the modulating message signal. Angle modulation provides two methods of modulation, frequency modulation and phase modulation.\nIn amplitude modulation, the angle term is held constant and the first term, \"A\"(\"t\"), of the equation has a functional relationship to the modulating message signal.\nThe modulating message signal may be analog in nature, or it may be a digital signal, in which case the technique is generally called amplitude-shift keying.\nFor example, in AM radio communication, a continuous wave radio-frequency signal has its amplitude modulated by an audio waveform before transmission. The message signal determines the \"envelope\" of the transmitted waveform. In the frequency domain, amplitude modulation produces a signal with power concentrated at the carrier frequency and two adjacent sidebands. Each sideband is equal in bandwidth to that of the modulating signal, and is a mirror image of the other. Standard AM is thus sometimes called \"double-sideband amplitude modulation\" (DSBAM).\nA disadvantage of all amplitude modulation techniques, not only standard AM, is that the receiver amplifies and detects noise and electromagnetic interference in equal proportion to the signal. Increasing the received signal-to-noise ratio, say, by a factor of 10 (a 10 decibel improvement), thus would require increasing the transmitter power by a factor of 10. This is in contrast to frequency modulation (FM) and digital radio where the effect of such noise following demodulation is strongly reduced so long as the received signal is well above the threshold for reception. For this reason AM broadcast is not favored for music and high fidelity broadcasting, but rather for voice communications and broadcasts (sports, news, talk radio etc.).\nAM is inefficient in power usage, as at least two-thirds of the transmitting power is concentrated in the carrier signal. The carrier signal contains none of the transmitted information (voice, video, data, etc.). Its presence provides a simple means of demodulation using envelope detection, providing a frequency and phase reference for extracting the message signal from the sidebands. In some modulation systems based on AM, a lower transmitter power is required through partial or total elimination of the carrier component, however receivers for these signals are more complex because they must provide a precise carrier frequency reference signal (usually as shifted to the intermediate frequency) from a greatly reduced \"pilot\" carrier (in reduced-carrier transmission or DSB-RC) to use in the demodulation process. Even with the carrier eliminated in double-sideband suppressed-carrier transmission, carrier regeneration is possible using a Costas phase-locked loop.\nThis does not work for single-sideband suppressed-carrier transmission (SSB-SC), leading to the characteristic \"Donald Duck\" sound from such receivers when slightly detuned. Single-sideband AM is nevertheless used widely in amateur radio and other voice communications because it has power and bandwidth efficiency (cutting the RF bandwidth in half compared to standard AM). On the other hand, in medium wave and short wave broadcasting, standard AM with the full carrier allows for reception using inexpensive receivers. The broadcaster absorbs the extra power cost to greatly increase potential audience.\nShift keying.\nA simple form of digital amplitude modulation which can be used for transmitting binary data is on\u2013off keying, the simplest form of amplitude-shift keying, in which ones and zeros are represented by the presence or absence of a carrier. On\u2013off keying is likewise used by radio amateurs to transmit Morse code where it is known as continuous wave (CW) operation, even though the transmission is not strictly \"continuous\". A more complex form of AM, quadrature amplitude modulation is now more commonly used with digital data, while making more efficient use of the available bandwidth.\nAnalog telephony.\nA simple form of amplitude modulation is the transmission of speech signals from a traditional analog telephone set using a common battery local loop. The direct current provided by the central office battery is a carrier with a frequency of 0\u00a0Hz. It is modulated by a microphone (\"transmitter\") in the telephone set according to the acoustic signal from the speaker. The result is a varying amplitude direct current, whose AC-component is the speech signal extracted at the central office for transmission to another subscriber.\nAmplitude reference.\nAn additional function provided by the carrier in standard AM, but which is lost in either single or double-sideband suppressed-carrier transmission, is that it provides an amplitude reference. In the receiver, the automatic gain control (AGC) responds to the carrier so that the reproduced audio level stays in a fixed proportion to the original modulation. On the other hand, with suppressed-carrier transmissions there is \"no\" transmitted power during pauses in the modulation, so the AGC must respond to peaks of the transmitted power during peaks in the modulation. This typically involves a so-called \"fast attack, slow decay\" circuit which holds the AGC level for a second or more following such peaks, in between syllables or short pauses in the program. This is very acceptable for communications radios, where compression of the audio aids intelligibility. However, it is absolutely undesired for music or normal broadcast programming, where a faithful reproduction of the original program, including its varying modulation levels, is expected.\nITU type designations.\nIn 1982, the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) designated the types of amplitude modulation:\nHistory.\nAmplitude modulation was used in experiments of multiplex telegraph and telephone transmission in the late 1800s. However, the practical development of this technology is identified with the period between 1900 and 1920 of radiotelephone transmission, that is, the effort to send audio signals by radio waves. The first radio transmitters, called spark gap transmitters, transmitted information by wireless telegraphy, using pulses of the carrier wave to spell out text messages in Morse code. They could not transmit audio because the carrier consisted of strings of damped waves, pulses of radio waves that declined to zero, and sounded like a buzz in receivers. In effect they were already amplitude modulated.\nContinuous waves.\nThe first AM transmission was made by Canadian-born American researcher Reginald Fessenden on 23 December 1900 using a spark gap transmitter with a specially designed high frequency 10\u00a0kHz interrupter, over a distance of at Cobb Island, Maryland, US. His first transmitted words were, \"Hello. One, two, three, four. Is it snowing where you are, Mr. Thiessen?\". Though his words were \"perfectly intelligible\", the spark created a loud and unpleasant noise.\nFessenden was a significant figure in the development of AM radio. He was one of the first researchers to realize, from experiments like the above, that the existing technology for producing radio waves, the spark transmitter, was not usable for amplitude modulation, and that a new kind of transmitter, one that produced sinusoidal \"continuous waves\", was needed. This was a radical idea at the time, because experts believed the impulsive spark was necessary to produce radio frequency waves, and Fessenden was ridiculed. He invented and helped develop one of the first continuous wave transmitters \u2013 the Alexanderson alternator, with which he made what is considered the first AM public entertainment broadcast on Christmas Eve, 1906. He also discovered the principle on which AM is based, heterodyning, and invented one of the first detectors able to rectify and receive AM, the electrolytic detector or \"liquid baretter\", in 1902. Other radio detectors invented for wireless telegraphy, such as the Fleming valve (1904) and the crystal detector (1906) also proved able to rectify AM signals, so the technological hurdle was generating AM waves; receiving them was not a problem.\nEarly technologies.\nEarly experiments in AM radio transmission, conducted by Fessenden, Valdemar Poulsen, Ernst Ruhmer, Quirino Majorana, Charles Herrold, and Lee de Forest, were hampered by the lack of a technology for amplification. The first practical continuous wave AM transmitters were based on either the huge, expensive Alexanderson alternator, developed 1906\u20131910, or versions of the Poulsen arc transmitter (arc converter), invented in 1903. \nThe modifications necessary to transmit AM were clumsy and resulted in very low quality audio. Modulation was usually accomplished by a carbon microphone inserted directly in the antenna or ground wire; its varying resistance varied the current to the antenna. The limited power handling ability of the microphone severely limited the power of the first radiotelephones; many of the microphones were water-cooled.\nVacuum tubes.\nThe 1912 discovery of the amplifying ability of the Audion tube, invented in 1906 by Lee de Forest, solved these problems. The vacuum tube feedback oscillator, invented in 1912 by Edwin Armstrong and Alexander Meissner, was a cheap source of continuous waves and could be easily modulated to make an AM transmitter. Modulation did not have to be done at the output but could be applied to the signal before the final amplifier tube, so the microphone or other audio source didn't have to modulate a high-power radio signal. Wartime research greatly advanced the art of AM modulation, and after the war the availability of cheap tubes sparked a great increase in the number of radio stations experimenting with AM transmission of news or music. The vacuum tube was responsible for the rise of AM broadcasting around 1920, the first electronic mass communication medium. Amplitude modulation was virtually the only type used for radio broadcasting until FM broadcasting began after World War II.\nAt the same time as AM radio began, telephone companies such as AT&amp;T were developing the other large application for AM: sending multiple telephone calls through a single wire by modulating them on separate carrier frequencies, called \"frequency division multiplexing\".\nSingle-sideband.\nIn 1915, John Renshaw Carson formulated the first mathematical description of amplitude modulation, showing that a signal and carrier frequency combined in a nonlinear device creates a sideband on both sides of the carrier frequency. Passing the modulated signal through another nonlinear device can extract the original baseband signal. His analysis also showed that only one sideband was necessary to transmit the audio signal, and Carson patented single-sideband modulation (SSB) on 1 December 1915. This advanced variant of amplitude modulation was adopted by AT&amp;T for longwave transatlantic telephone service beginning 7 January 1927. After WW-II, it was developed for military aircraft communication.\nAnalysis.\nThe carrier wave (sine wave) of frequency \"fc\" and amplitude \"A\" is expressed by\nformula_4.\nThe message signal, such as an audio signal that is used for modulating the carrier, is \"m\"(\"t\"), and has a frequency \"fm\", much lower than \"fc\":\nformula_5,\nwhere \"m\" is the amplitude sensitivity, \"M\" is the amplitude of modulation. If \"m\" &lt; 1, \"(1 + m(t)/A)\" is always positive for undermodulation. If \"m\" &gt; 1 then overmodulation occurs and reconstruction of message signal from the transmitted signal would lead in loss of original signal. Amplitude modulation results when the carrier \"c(t)\" is multiplied by the positive quantity \"(1 + m(t)/A)\":\nformula_6\nIn this simple case \"m\" is identical to the modulation index, discussed below. With \"m\" = 0.5 the amplitude modulated signal \"y\"(\"t\") thus corresponds to the top graph (labelled \"50% Modulation\") in figure 4.\nUsing prosthaphaeresis identities, \"y\"(\"t\") can be shown to be the sum of three sine waves:\nformula_7\nTherefore, the modulated signal has three components: the carrier wave \"c(t)\" which is unchanged in frequency, and two sidebands with frequencies slightly above and below the carrier frequency \"fc\".\nSpectrum.\nA useful modulation signal \"m(t)\" is usually more complex than a single sine wave, as treated above. However, by the principle of Fourier decomposition, \"m(t)\" can be expressed as the sum of a set of sine waves of various frequencies, amplitudes, and phases. Carrying out the multiplication of \"1 + m(t)\" with \"c(t)\" as above, the result consists of a sum of sine waves. Again, the carrier \"c(t)\" is present unchanged, but each frequency component of \"m\" at \"fi\" has two sidebands at frequencies \"fc + fi\" and \"fc \u2013 fi\". The collection of the former frequencies above the carrier frequency is known as the upper sideband, and those below constitute the lower sideband. The modulation \"m(t)\" may be considered to consist of an equal mix of positive and negative frequency components, as shown in the top of figure 2. One can view the sidebands as that modulation \"m(t)\" having simply been shifted in frequency by \"fc\" as depicted at the bottom right of figure 2.\nThe short-term spectrum of modulation, changing as it would for a human voice for instance, the frequency content (horizontal axis) may be plotted as a function of time (vertical axis), as in figure 3. It can again be seen that as the modulation frequency content varies, an upper sideband is generated according to those frequencies shifted \"above\" the carrier frequency, and the same content mirror-imaged in the lower sideband below the carrier frequency. At all times, the carrier itself remains constant, and of greater power than the total sideband power.\nPower and spectrum efficiency.\nThe RF bandwidth of an AM transmission (refer to figure 2, but only considering positive frequencies) is twice the bandwidth of the modulating (or \"baseband\") signal, since the upper and lower sidebands around the carrier frequency each have a bandwidth as wide as the highest modulating frequency. Although the bandwidth of an AM signal is narrower than one using frequency modulation (FM), it is twice as wide as single-sideband techniques; it thus may be viewed as spectrally inefficient. Within a frequency band, only half as many transmissions (or \"channels\") can thus be accommodated. For this reason analog television employs a variant of single-sideband (known as vestigial sideband, somewhat of a compromise in terms of bandwidth) in order to reduce the required channel spacing.\nAnother improvement over standard AM is obtained through reduction or suppression of the carrier component of the modulated spectrum. In figure 2 this is the spike in between the sidebands; even with full (100%) sine wave modulation, the power in the carrier component is twice that in the sidebands, yet it carries no unique information. Thus there is a great advantage in efficiency in reducing or totally suppressing the carrier, either in conjunction with elimination of one sideband (single-sideband suppressed-carrier transmission) or with both sidebands remaining (double sideband suppressed carrier). While these suppressed carrier transmissions are efficient in terms of transmitter power, they require more sophisticated receivers employing synchronous detection and regeneration of the carrier frequency. For that reason, standard AM continues to be widely used, especially in broadcast transmission, to allow for the use of inexpensive receivers using envelope detection. Even (analog) television, with a (largely) suppressed lower sideband, includes sufficient carrier power for use of envelope detection. But for communications systems where both transmitters and receivers can be optimized, suppression of both one sideband and the carrier represent a net advantage and are frequently employed.\nA technique used widely in broadcast AM transmitters is an application of the Hapburg carrier, first proposed in the 1930s but impractical with the technology then available. During periods of low modulation the carrier power would be reduced and would return to full power during periods of high modulation levels. This has the effect of reducing the overall power demand of the transmitter and is most effective on speech type programmes. Various trade names are used for its implementation by the transmitter manufacturers from the late 80's onwards.\nModulation index.\nThe AM modulation index is a measure based on the ratio of the modulation excursions of the RF signal to the level of the unmodulated carrier. It is thus defined as:\nformula_8\nwhere formula_9 and formula_10 are the modulation amplitude and carrier amplitude, respectively; the modulation amplitude is the peak (positive or negative) change in the RF amplitude from its unmodulated value. Modulation index is normally expressed as a percentage, and may be displayed on a meter connected to an AM transmitter.\nSo if formula_11, carrier amplitude varies by 50% above (and below) its unmodulated level, as is shown in the first waveform, below. For formula_12, it varies by 100% as shown in the illustration below it. With 100% modulation the wave amplitude sometimes reaches zero, and this represents full modulation using standard AM and is often a target (in order to obtain the highest possible signal-to-noise ratio) but mustn't be exceeded. Increasing the modulating signal beyond that point, known as overmodulation, causes a standard AM modulator (see below) to fail, as the negative excursions of the wave envelope cannot become less than zero, resulting in distortion (\"clipping\") of the received modulation. Transmitters typically incorporate a limiter circuit to avoid overmodulation, and/or a compressor circuit (especially for voice communications) in order to still approach 100% modulation for maximum intelligibility above the noise. Such circuits are sometimes referred to as a vogad.\nHowever it is possible to talk about a modulation index exceeding 100%, without introducing distortion, in the case of double-sideband reduced-carrier transmission. In that case, negative excursions beyond zero entail a reversal of the carrier phase, as shown in the third waveform below. This cannot be produced using the efficient high-level (output stage) modulation techniques (see below) which are widely used especially in high power broadcast transmitters. Rather, a special modulator produces such a waveform at a low level followed by a linear amplifier. What's more, a standard AM receiver using an envelope detector is incapable of properly demodulating such a signal. Rather, synchronous detection is required. \nThus double-sideband transmission is generally \"not\" referred to as \"AM\" even though it generates an identical RF waveform as standard AM as long as the modulation index is below 100%. Such systems more often attempt a radical reduction of the carrier level compared to the sidebands (where the useful information is present) to the point of double-sideband suppressed-carrier transmission where the carrier is (ideally) reduced to zero. In all such cases the term \"modulation index\" loses its value as it refers to the ratio of the modulation amplitude to a rather small (or zero) remaining carrier amplitude.\nModulation methods.\nModulation circuit designs may be classified as low- or high-level (depending on whether they modulate in a low-power domain\u2014followed by amplification for transmission\u2014or in the high-power domain of the transmitted signal).\nLow-level generation.\nIn modern radio systems, modulated signals are generated via digital signal processing (DSP). With DSP many types of AM are possible with software control (including DSB with carrier, SSB suppressed-carrier and independent sideband, or ISB). Calculated digital samples are converted to voltages with a digital-to-analog converter, typically at a frequency less than the desired RF-output frequency. The analog signal must then be shifted in frequency and linearly amplified to the desired frequency and power level (linear amplification must be used to prevent modulation distortion).\nThis low-level method for AM is used in many Amateur Radio transceivers.\nAM may also be generated at a low level, using analog methods described in the next section.\nHigh-level generation.\nHigh-power AM transmitters (such as those used for AM broadcasting) are based on high-efficiency class-D and class-E power amplifier stages, modulated by varying the supply voltage.\nOlder designs (for broadcast and amateur radio) also generate AM by controlling the gain of the transmitter's final amplifier (generally class-C, for efficiency). The following types are for vacuum tube transmitters (but similar options are available with transistors):\nDemodulation methods.\nThe simplest form of an AM demodulator consists of a diode configured as an envelope detector. In 1904, John Ambrose Fleming developed such a circuit for a radio-wave detector in the crystal radio. Adding variable capacitors to the crystal detector enables tuning to a specific frequency.\nAnother type of demodulator, the product detector, can provide better-quality demodulation with additional circuit complexity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1141", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1141", "title": "Augustin-Jean Fresnel", "text": "French optical physicist (1788\u20131827)\nAugustin-Jean Fresnel (10 May 1788\u00a0\u2013 14 July 1827) was a French civil engineer and physicist whose research in optics led to the almost unanimous acceptance of the wave theory of light, fully supplanting Newton's corpuscular theory, from the late 1830s\u200a until the end of the 19th century. He is perhaps better known for inventing the catadioptric (reflective/refractive) Fresnel lens and for pioneering the use of \"stepped\" lenses to extend the visibility of lighthouses, saving countless lives at sea. The simpler dioptric (purely refractive) stepped lens, first proposed by Count Buffon\u200a and independently reinvented by Fresnel, is used in screen magnifiers and in condenser lenses for overhead projectors.\nFresnel gave the first satisfactory explanation of diffraction by straight edges, including the first satisfactory wave-based explanation of rectilinear propagation. By further supposing that light waves are purely transverse, Fresnel explained the nature of polarization. He then worked on double refraction.\nFresnel had a lifelong battle with tuberculosis, to which he succumbed at the age of 39. He lived just long enough to receive recognition from his peers, including (on his deathbed) the Rumford Medal of the Royal Society, and his name is ubiquitous in the modern terminology of optics and waves. After the wave theory of light was subsumed by Maxwell's electromagnetic theory in the 1860s, some attention was diverted from the magnitude of Fresnel's contribution. In the period between Fresnel's unification of physical optics and Maxwell's wider unification, a contemporary authority, Humphrey Lloyd, described Fresnel's transverse-wave theory as \"the noblest fabric which has ever adorned the domain of physical science, Newton's system of the universe alone excepted\".\u200a\nEarly life.\nFamily.\nAugustin-Jean Fresnel (also called Augustin Jean or simply Augustin), born in Broglie, Normandy, on 10 May 1788, was the second of four sons of the architect Jacques Fresnel and his wife Augustine, \"n\u00e9e\" M\u00e9rim\u00e9e. The family moved twice\u2014in 1789/90 to Cherbourg, and in 1794\u200a to Jacques's home town of Mathieu, where Augustine would spend 25 years as a widow. \nThe first son, Louis, was admitted to the \u00c9cole Polytechnique, became a lieutenant in the artillery, and was killed in action at Jaca, Spain. The third, L\u00e9onor, followed Augustin into civil engineering, succeeded him as secretary of the Lighthouse Commission, and helped to edit his collected works. The fourth, Fulgence Fresnel, became a linguist, diplomat, and orientalist, and occasionally assisted Augustin with negotiations. Fulgence died in Baghdad in 1855 having led a mission to explore Babylon.\nMadame Fresnel's younger brother, Jean Fran\u00e7ois \"L\u00e9onor\" M\u00e9rim\u00e9e, father of the writer Prosper M\u00e9rim\u00e9e, was a painter who turned his attention to the chemistry of painting. He became the Permanent Secretary of the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts and (until 1814) a professor at the \u00c9cole Polytechnique.\nEducation.\nThe Fresnel brothers were initially home-schooled by their mother. The sickly Augustin was considered the slow one, not inclined to memorization; but the popular story that he hardly began to read until the age of eight is disputed. At the age of nine or ten he was undistinguished except for his ability to turn tree-branches into toy bows and guns that worked far too well, earning himself the title \"l'homme de g\u00e9nie\" (the man of genius) from his accomplices, and a united crackdown from their elders.\nIn 1801, Augustin was sent to the \"\u00c9cole Centrale\" at Caen, as company for Louis. But Augustin lifted his performance: in late 1804 he was accepted into the \u00c9cole Polytechnique, being placed 17th in the entrance examination. As the detailed records of the \u00c9cole Polytechnique begin in 1808, we know little of Augustin's time there, except that he made few if any friends and\u2014in spite of continuing poor health\u2014excelled in drawing and geometry: in his first year he took a prize for his solution to a geometry problem posed by Adrien-Marie Legendre. Graduating in 1806, he then enrolled at the \u00c9cole Nationale des Ponts et Chauss\u00e9es (National School of Bridges and Roads, also known as \"ENPC\" or \"\u00c9cole des Ponts\"), from which he graduated in 1809, entering the service of the Corps des Ponts et Chauss\u00e9es as an \"ing\u00e9nieur ordinaire aspirant\" (ordinary engineer in training). Directly or indirectly, he was to remain in the employment of the \"Corps des Ponts\" for the rest of his life.\nReligious formation.\nFresnel's parents were Roman Catholics of the Jansenist sect, characterized by an extreme Augustinian view of original sin. Religion took first place in the boys' home-schooling. In\u00a01802, his mother said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I pray God to give my son the grace to employ the great talents, which he has received, for his own benefit, and for the God of all. Much will be asked from him to whom much has been given, and most will be required of him who has received most.\nAugustin remained a Jansenist. He regarded his intellectual talents as gifts from God, and considered it his duty to use them for the benefit of others. According to his fellow engineer Alphonse Duleau, who helped to nurse him through his final illness, Fresnel saw the study of nature as part of the study of the power and goodness of God. He placed virtue above science and genius. In his last days he prayed for \"strength of soul\", not against death alone, but against \"the interruption of discoveries\u00a0... of which he hoped to derive useful applications\".\u200a\nJansenism is considered heretical by the Roman Catholic Church, and Grattan-Guinness suggests this is why Fresnel never gained a permanent academic teaching post; his only teaching appointment was at the Ath\u00e9n\u00e9e in the winter of 1819\u201320. The article on Fresnel in the \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" does not mention his Jansenism, but describes him as \"a deeply religious man and remarkable for his keen sense of duty\".\u200a\nEngineering assignments.\nFresnel was initially posted to the western of Vend\u00e9e. There, in 1811, he anticipated what became known as the Solvay process for producing soda\u00a0ash, except that recycling of the ammonia was not considered. That difference may explain why leading chemists, who learned of his discovery through his uncle L\u00e9onor, eventually thought it uneconomic.\nAbout 1812, Fresnel was sent to Nyons, in the southern of Dr\u00f4me, to assist with the imperial highway that was to connect Spain and Italy. It is from Nyons that we have the first evidence of his interest in optics. On 15 May 1814, while work was slack due to Napoleon's defeat, Fresnel wrote a postscript to his brother L\u00e9onor, saying in part:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I would also like to have papers that might tell me about the discoveries of French physicists on the polarization of light. I\u00a0saw in the \"Moniteur\" of a few months ago that Biot had read to the Institute a very interesting memoir on the \"polarization of light\". Though I\u00a0break my head, I\u00a0cannot guess what that is.\nAs late as 28 December he was still waiting for information, but by 10 February 1815 he had received Biot's memoir. (The had taken over the functions of the French and other in 1795. In\u00a01816 the regained its name and autonomy, but remained part of the institute.)\nIn March 1815, perceiving Napoleon's return from Elba as \"an attack on civilization\", Fresnel departed without leave, hastened to Toulouse and offered his services to the royalist resistance, but soon found himself on the sick list. Returning to Nyons in defeat, he was threatened and had his windows broken. During the Hundred Days he was placed on suspension, which he was eventually allowed to spend at his mother's house in Mathieu. There he used his enforced leisure to begin his optical experiments.\nContributions to physical optics.\nFresnel made major contributions to several areas of physical optics. These included studies of diffraction (1815\u20131818), where he explained the colored fringes seen in shadows of objects illuminated by narrow beams, and conducted double-mirror experiments. He studied polarization (1816\u20131823), discovering that the two images produced by a birefringent crystal could not be combined to create a diffraction pattern. A third area that he studied was double refraction (1821\u20131826), where he found that neither of the two refractions in a topaz crystal could have been produced by ordinary spherical secondary waves.\nLighthouses and the Fresnel lens.\nOn 21 June 1819, Fresnel was \"temporarily\" seconded by the \"Commission des Phares\" (Commission of Lighthouses) to review possible improvements in lighthouse illumination.\nBy the end of August 1819, Fresnel recommended \"lentilles \u00e0 \u00e9chelons\" (lenses by steps) to replace the reflectors then in use, which reflected only about half of the incident light. Where Buffon's version was biconvex and in one piece, Fresnel's was plano-convex and made of multiple prisms for easier construction. In a public spectacle on the evening of 13 April 1821, his design was demonstrated by comparison with the most recent reflectors, which it suddenly rendered obsolete.\nFresnel's next lens was a rotating apparatus with eight \"bull's-eye\" panels, made in annular arcs by Saint-Gobain, giving eight rotating beams\u2014to be seen by mariners as a periodic flash. Above and behind each main panel was a smaller, sloping bull's-eye panel of trapezoidal outline with trapezoidal elements. The official test, conducted on the unfinished \"Arc de Triomphe\" on 20 August 1822, was witnessed by the commission\u2014and by Louis XVIII and his entourage\u2014from 32km away. The apparatus was reassembled at Cordouan Lighthouse under Fresnel's supervision. On 25 July 1823, the world's first lighthouse Fresnel lens was lit. \nIn May 1824, Fresnel was promoted to secretary of the \"Commission des Phares\", becoming the first member of that body to draw a salary, albeit in the concurrent role of Engineer-in-Chief. \nIn the same year he designed the first \"fixed\" lens\u2014for spreading light evenly around the horizon while minimizing waste above or below, in a beehive-shaped design. The second Fresnel lens to enter service was a fixed lens, of third order, installed at Dunkirk by 1 February 1825. It had a 16-sided polygonal plan.\nIn 1825, Fresnel extended his fixed-lens design by adding a rotating array outside the fixed array. Each panel of the rotating array was to refract part of the fixed light from a horizontal fan into a narrow beam.\nAlso in 1825, Fresnel unveiled the \"Carte des Phares\" (Lighthouse Map), calling for a system of 51 lighthouses plus smaller harbor lights, in a hierarchy of lens sizes (called \"orders\", the first order being the largest), with different characteristics to facilitate recognition: a constant light (from a fixed lens), one flash per minute (from a rotating lens with eight panels), and two per minute (sixteen panels).\nIn late 1825, to reduce the loss of light in the reflecting elements, Fresnel proposed to replace each mirror with a catadioptric prism, through which the light would travel by refraction through the first surface, then total internal reflection off the second surface, then refraction through the third surface. The result was the lighthouse lens as we now know it. In\u00a01826 he assembled a small model for use on the Canal Saint-Martin.\nHonors.\nFresnel was elected to the \"Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Philomathique de Paris\" in April 1819, and in 1822 became one of the editors of the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9's\u200a \"Bulletin des Sciences\". As early as May 1817, at Arago's suggestion, Fresnel applied for membership of the Acad\u00e9mie des Sciences, but received only one vote. The successful candidate on that occasion was Joseph Fourier. In November 1822, Fourier's elevation to Permanent Secretary of the Acad\u00e9mie created a vacancy in the physics section, which was filled in February 1823 by Pierre Louis Dulong, with 36 votes to Fresnel's 20. But in May 1823, after another vacancy was left by the death of Jacques Charles,\u2009 Fresnel's election was unanimous. In 1824, Fresnel was made a \"chevalier de la L\u00e9gion d'honneur\" (Knight of the Legion of Honour).\nMeanwhile, in Britain, the wave theory was yet to take hold; Fresnel wrote to Thomas Young in November 1824, saying in part:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am far from denying the value that I\u00a0attach to the praise of English scholars, or pretending that they would not have flattered me agreeably. But for a long time this sensibility, or vanity, which is called the love of glory, has been much blunted in me: I\u00a0work far less to capture the public's votes than to obtain an inner approbation which has always been the sweetest reward of my efforts. Doubtless I\u00a0have often needed the sting of vanity to excite me to pursue my researches in moments of disgust or discouragement; but all the compliments I\u00a0received from \"MM.\"\u00a0Arago, Laplace, and Biot never gave me as much pleasure as the discovery of a theoretical truth and the confirmation of my calculations by experiment.\nBut \"the praise of English scholars\" soon followed. On 9 June 1825, Fresnel was made a Foreign Member of the Royal Society of London. In 1827 he was awarded the society's Rumford Medal for the year 1824, \"For\u00a0his Development of the Undulatory Theory as applied to the Phenomena of Polarized Light, and for his various important discoveries in Physical Optics\".\u200a\nA monument to Fresnel at his birthplace (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;) was dedicated on 14 September 1884 with a speech by Jules Jamin, Permanent Secretary of the Acad\u00e9mie des Sciences.\u00a0 \"FRESNEL\" is among the 72 names embossed on the Eiffel Tower (on the south-east side, fourth from the left). In the 19th century, as every lighthouse in France acquired a Fresnel lens, every one acquired a bust of Fresnel, seemingly watching over the coastline that he had made safer. The lunar features \"Promontorium Fresnel\" and \"Rimae Fresnel\" were later named after him.\nDecline and death.\nFresnel's health, which had always been poor, deteriorated in the winter of 1822\u20131823, increasing the urgency of his original research, and (in\u00a0part) preventing him from contributing an article on polarization and double refraction for the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\". The memoirs on circular and elliptical polarization and optical rotation, and on the detailed derivation of the Fresnel equations and their application to total internal reflection, date from this period. In the spring he recovered enough, in his own view, to supervise the lens installation at Cordouan. Soon afterwards, it became clear that his condition was tuberculosis.\nIn 1824, he was advised that if he wanted to live longer, he needed to scale back his activities. Perceiving his lighthouse work to be his most important duty, he resigned as an examiner at the \u00c9cole Polytechnique, and closed his scientific notebooks. His last note to the Acad\u00e9mie, read on 13 June 1825, described the first radiometer and attributed the observed repulsive force to a temperature difference. Although his fundamental research ceased, his advocacy did not; as late as August or September 1826, he found the time to answer Herschel's queries on the wave theory. It was Herschel who recommended Fresnel for the Royal Society's Rumford Medal.\nFresnel's cough worsened in the winter of 1826\u20131827, leaving him too ill to return to Mathieu in the spring. The Acad\u00e9mie meeting of 30 April 1827 was the last that he attended. In early June he was carried to Ville-d'Avray, west of Paris. There his mother joined him. On 6 July, Arago arrived to deliver the Rumford Medal. Sensing Arago's distress, Fresnel whispered that \"the most beautiful crown means little, when it is laid on the grave of a friend\". Fresnel did not have the strength to reply to the Royal Society. He died eight days later, on Bastille Day.\nPosthumous publications.\nFresnel's \"second memoir\" on double refraction was not printed until late 1827, a few months after his death. Until then, the best published source on his work on double refraction was an extract of that memoir, printed in 1822. His final treatment of partial reflection and total internal reflection, read to the Acad\u00e9mie in January 1823, was thought to be lost until it was rediscovered among the papers of the deceased Joseph Fourier (1768\u20131830), and was printed in 1831. Until then, it was known chiefly through an extract printed in 1823 and 1825. The memoir introducing the parallelepiped form of the Fresnel rhomb, read in March 1818, was mislaid until 1846, and then attracted such interest that it was soon republished in English. Most of Fresnel's writings on polarized light before 1821\u2014including his first theory of chromatic polarization (submitted 7 October 1816) and the crucial \"supplement\" of January 1818\u200a\u2014were not published in full until his \"Oeuvres compl\u00e8tes\" (\"complete works\") began to appear in 1866. The \"supplement\" of July 1816, proposing the \"efficacious ray\" and reporting the famous double-mirror experiment, met the same fate, as did the \"first memoir\" on double refraction.\nPublication of Fresnel's collected works was itself delayed by the deaths of successive editors. The task was initially entrusted to F\u00e9lix Savary, who died in 1841. It was restarted twenty years later by the Ministry of Public Instruction. Of the three editors eventually named in the \"Oeuvres\", S\u00e9narmont died in 1862, Verdet in 1866, and L\u00e9onor Fresnel in 1869, by which time only two of the three volumes had appeared. At the beginning of vol.\u00a03 (1870), the completion of the project is described in a long footnote by \"J.\u00a0Lissajous\".\nNot included in the \"Oeuvres\"\u200a are two short notes by Fresnel on magnetism, which were discovered among Amp\u00e8re's manuscripts.104 In response to \u00d8rsted's discovery of electromagnetism in 1820, Amp\u00e8re initially supposed that the field of a permanent magnet was due to a macroscopic circulating current. Fresnel suggested instead that there was a \"microscopic\" current circulating around each particle of the magnet. In his first note, he argued that microscopic currents, unlike macroscopic currents, would explain why a hollow cylindrical magnet does not lose its magnetism when cut longitudinally. In his second note, dated 5 July 1821, he further argued that a macroscopic current had the counterfactual implication that a permanent magnet should be hot, whereas microscopic currents circulating around the molecules might avoid the heating mechanism.101\u2013104 He was not to know that the fundamental units of permanent magnetism are even smaller than molecules (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;). The two notes, together with Amp\u00e8re's acknowledgment, were eventually published in 1885.\nLost works.\nFresnel's essay \"R\u00eaveries\" of 1814 has not survived. The article \"Sur les Diff\u00e9rents Syst\u00e8mes relatifs \u00e0 la Th\u00e9orie de la Lumi\u00e8re\" (\"On the Different Systems relating to the Theory of Light\"), which Fresnel wrote for the newly launched English journal \"European Review\", was received by the publisher's agent in Paris in September 1824. The journal failed before Fresnel's contribution could be published. Fresnel tried unsuccessfully to recover the manuscript. The editors of his collected works were unable to find it, and concluded that it was probably lost.\nUnfinished work.\nAether drag and aether density.\nIn 1810, Arago found experimentally that the degree of refraction of starlight does not depend on the direction of the earth's motion relative to the line of sight. In\u00a01818, Fresnel showed that this result could be explained by the wave theory, on the hypothesis that if an object with refractive index formula_1 moved at velocity formula_2 relative to the external aether (taken as stationary), then the velocity of light inside the object gained the additional component &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. He supported that hypothesis by supposing that if the density of the external aether was taken as unity, the density of the internal aether was &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, of which the excess, namely &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, was dragged along at velocity &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, whence the \"average\" velocity of the internal aether was &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The factor in parentheses, which Fresnel originally expressed in terms of wavelengths, became known as the \"Fresnel drag coefficient\".\nIn his analysis of double refraction, Fresnel supposed that the different refractive indices in different directions within the \"same medium\" were due to a directional variation in elasticity, not density (because the concept of mass per unit volume is not directional). But in his treatment of partial reflection, he supposed that the different refractive indices of \"different media\" were due to different aether densities, not different elasticities.\nDispersion.\nThe analogy between light waves and transverse waves in elastic solids does not predict \"dispersion\"\u2014that is, the frequency-dependence of the speed of propagation, which enables prisms to produce spectra and causes lenses to suffer from chromatic aberration. Fresnel, in \"De la Lumi\u00e8re\" and in the second supplement to his first memoir on double refraction, suggested that dispersion could be accounted for if the particles of the medium exerted forces on each other over distances that were significant fractions of a wavelength. Later, more than once, Fresnel referred to the demonstration of this result as being contained in a note appended to his \"second memoir\" on double refraction. No such note appeared in print, and the relevant manuscripts found after his death showed only that, around 1824, he was comparing refractive indices (measured by Fraunhofer) with a theoretical formula, the meaning of which was not fully explained.\nIn the 1830s, Fresnel's suggestion was taken up by Cauchy, Baden Powell, and Philip Kelland, and it was found to be tolerably consistent with the variation of refractive indices with wavelength over the visible spectrum for a variety of transparent media (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;). These investigations were enough to show that the wave theory was at least compatible with dispersion; if the model of dispersion was to be accurate over a wider range of frequencies, it needed to be modified so as to take account of resonances within the medium (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;).\nConical refraction.\nThe analytical complexity of Fresnel's derivation of the ray-velocity surface was an implicit challenge to find a shorter path to the result. This was answered by MacCullagh in 1830, and by William Rowan Hamilton in 1832.\nLegacy.\nWithin a century of Fresnel's initial stepped-lens proposal, more than 10,000 lights with Fresnel lenses were protecting lives and property around the world. Concerning the other benefits, the science historian Theresa H. Levitt has remarked:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Everywhere I looked, the story repeated itself. The moment a Fresnel lens appeared at a location was the moment that region became linked into the world economy.\nIn the history of physical optics, Fresnel's successful revival of the wave theory nominates him as the pivotal figure between Newton, who held that light consisted of corpuscles, and James Clerk Maxwell, who established that light waves are electromagnetic. Whereas Albert Einstein described Maxwell's work as \"the most profound and the most fruitful that physics has experienced since the time of Newton\",\u200a commentators of the era between Fresnel and Maxwell made similarly strong statements about Fresnel:\nWhat Whewell called the \"true theory\" has since undergone two major revisions. The first, by Maxwell, specified the physical fields whose variations constitute the waves of light. Without the benefit of this knowledge, Fresnel managed to construct the world's first coherent theory of light, showing in retrospect that his methods are applicable to multiple types of waves. The second revision, initiated by Einstein's explanation of the photoelectric effect, supposed that the energy of light waves was divided into quanta, which were eventually identified with particles called photons. But photons did not exactly correspond to Newton's corpuscles; for example, Newton's explanation of ordinary refraction required the corpuscles to travel faster in media of higher refractive index, which photons do not. Neither did photons displace waves; rather, they led to the paradox of wave\u2013particle duality. Moreover, the phenomena studied by Fresnel, which included nearly all the optical phenomena known at his time, are still most easily explained in terms of the \"wave\" nature of light. So it was that, as late as 1927, the astronomer Eug\u00e8ne Michel Antoniadi declared Fresnel to be \"the dominant figure in optics\".\u202f\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1143", "revid": "1455149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1143", "title": "Abbot", "text": "Religious title\nAbbot is an ecclesiastical title given to the head of an independent monastery for men in various Western Christian traditions. The name is derived from \"abba\", the Aramaic form of the Hebrew \"ab\", and means \"father\". The female equivalent is abbess.\nOrigins.\nThe title had its origin in the monasteries of Egypt and Syria, spread through the eastern Mediterranean, and soon became accepted generally in all languages as the designation of the head of a monastery. The word is derived from the Aramaic ' meaning \"father\" or ', meaning \"my father\" (it still has this meaning in contemporary Arabic: \u0623\u0628, Hebrew: \u05d0\u05d1\u05d0 and Aramaic: \u0710\u0712\u0710) In the Septuagint, it was written as \"abbas\". At first it was employed as a respectful title for any monk, but it was soon restricted by canon law to certain priestly superiors. At times it was applied to various priests, e.g. at the court of the Frankish monarchy the ' (\"of the palace\"') and ' (\"of the camp\") were chaplains to the Merovingian and Carolingian sovereigns' court and army respectively. The title of abbot came into fairly general use in western monastic orders whose members include priests.\nMonastic history.\nAn abbot (from , ', from (\"father\"), from (), from '/' (, \"father\"); compare '; \"\") is the head and chief governor of a community of monks, called also in the East \"hegumen\" or \"archimandrite\". The English version for a female monastic head is abbess.\nEarly history.\nIn Egypt, the first home of monasticism, the jurisdiction of the abbot, or archimandrite, was but loosely defined. Sometimes he ruled over only one community, sometimes over several, each of which had its own abbot as well. Saint John Cassian speaks of an abbot of the Thebaid who had 500 monks under him. By the Rule of St Benedict, which, until the Cluniac reforms, was the norm in the West, the abbot has jurisdiction over only one community. The rule, as was inevitable, was subject to frequent violations; but it was not until the foundation of the Cluniac Order that the idea of a supreme abbot, exercising jurisdiction over all the houses of an order, was definitely recognised.\nMonks, as a rule, were laymen, nor at the outset was the abbot any exception. For the reception of the sacraments, and for other religious offices, the abbot and his monks were commanded to attend the nearest church. This rule proved inconvenient when a monastery was situated in a desert or at a distance from a city, and necessity compelled the ordination of some monks. This innovation was not introduced without a struggle, ecclesiastical dignity being regarded as inconsistent with the higher spiritual life, but, before the close of the 5th century, at least in the East, abbots seem almost universally to have become deacons, if not priests. The change spread more slowly in the West, where the office of abbot was commonly filled by laymen till the end of the 7th century. The ecclesiastical leadership exercised by abbots despite their frequent lay status is proved by their attendance and votes at ecclesiastical councils. Thus at the first Council of Constantinople, AD 448, 23 archimandrites or abbots sign, with 30 bishops.\nThe second Council of Nicaea, AD 787, recognized the right of abbots to ordain their monks to the inferior orders below the diaconate, a power usually reserved to bishops.\nAbbots used to be subject to episcopal jurisdiction, and continued generally so, in fact, in the West till the 11th century. The Code of Justinian (lib. i. tit. iii. de Ep. leg. xl.) expressly subordinates the abbot to episcopal oversight. The first case recorded of the partial exemption of an abbot from episcopal control is that of Faustus, abbot of Lerins, at the council of Arles, AD 456; but the exorbitant claims and exactions of bishops, to which this repugnance to episcopal control is to be traced, far more than to the arrogance of abbots, rendered it increasingly frequent, and, in the 6th century, the practice of exempting religious houses partly or altogether from episcopal control, and making them responsible to the pope alone, received an impulse from Pope Gregory the Great. These exceptions, introduced with a good object, had grown into a widespread evil by the 12th century, virtually creating an \"imperium in imperio,\" and depriving the bishop of all authority over the chief centres of influence in his diocese.\nLater Middle Ages.\nIn the 12th century, the abbots of Fulda claimed precedence of the archbishop of Cologne. Abbots more and more assumed almost episcopal state, and in defiance of the prohibition of early councils and the protests of St Bernard and others, adopted the episcopal insignia of mitre, ring, gloves and sandals.\nIt has been maintained that the right to wear mitres was sometimes granted by the popes to abbots before the 11th century, but the documents on which this claim is based are not genuine (J. Braun, \"Liturgische Gewandung\", p.\u00a0453). The first undoubted instance is the bull by which Alexander II in 1063 granted the use of the mitre to Egelsinus, abbot of the monastery of St Augustine at Canterbury. The mitred abbots in England were those of Abingdon, St Alban's, Bardney, Battle, Bury St Edmunds, St Augustine's Canterbury, Colchester, Croyland, Evesham, Glastonbury, Gloucester, St Benet's Hulme, Hyde, Malmesbury, Peterborough, Ramsey, Reading, Selby, Shrewsbury, Tavistock, Thorney, Westminster, Winchcombe, and St Mary's York. Of these the precedence was yielded to the abbot of Glastonbury, until in AD 1154 Adrian IV (Nicholas Breakspear) granted it to the abbot of St Alban's, in which monastery he had been brought up. Next after the abbot of St Alban's ranked the abbot of Westminster and then Ramsey. Elsewhere, the mitred abbots that sat in the Estates of Scotland were of Arbroath, Cambuskenneth, Coupar Angus, Dunfermline, Holyrood, Iona, Kelso, Kilwinning, Kinloss, Lindores, Paisley, Melrose, Scone, St Andrews Priory and Sweetheart. To distinguish abbots from bishops, it was ordained that their mitre should be made of less costly materials, and should not be ornamented with gold, a rule which was soon entirely disregarded, and that the crook of their pastoral staff (the crosier) should turn inwards instead of outwards, indicating that their jurisdiction was limited to their own house.\nThe adoption of certain episcopal insignia (pontificalia) by abbots was followed by an encroachment on episcopal functions, which had to be specially but ineffectually guarded against by the Lateran council, AD 1123. In the East abbots, if in priests' orders and with the consent of the bishop, were, as we have seen, permitted by the second Nicene council, AD 787, to confer the tonsure and admit to the order of reader; but gradually abbots, in the West also, advanced higher claims, until we find them in AD 1489 permitted by Innocent IV to confer both the subdiaconate and diaconate. Of course, they always and everywhere had the power of admitting their own monks and vesting them with the religious habit.\nThe power of the abbot was paternal but absolute, limited, however, by the canon law. One of the main goals of monasticism was the purgation of self and selfishness, and obedience was seen as a path to that perfection. It was sacred duty to execute the abbot's orders, and even to act without his orders was sometimes considered a transgression. Examples among the Egyptian monks of this submission to the commands of the superiors, exalted into a virtue by those who regarded the entire crushing of the individual will as a goal, are detailed by Cassian and others, e.g. a monk watering a dry stick, day after day, for months, or endeavoring to remove a huge rock immensely exceeding his powers.\nAppointments.\nWhen a vacancy occurred, the bishop of the diocese chose the abbot out of the monks of the monastery, but the right of election was transferred by jurisdiction to the monks themselves, reserving to the bishop the confirmation of the election and the benediction of the new abbot. In abbeys exempt from the archbishop's diocesan jurisdiction, the confirmation and benediction had to be conferred by the pope in person, the house being taxed with the expenses of the new abbot's journey to Rome. It was necessary that an abbot should be at least 30 years of age, of legitimate birth, a monk of the house for at least 10 years, unless it furnished no suitable candidate, when a liberty was allowed of electing from another monastery, well instructed himself, and able to instruct others, one also who had learned how to command by having practised obedience. In some exceptional cases an abbot was allowed to name his own successor. Cassian speaks of an abbot in Egypt doing this; and in later times we have another example in the case of St Bruno. Popes and sovereigns gradually encroached on the rights of the monks, until in Italy the pope had usurped the nomination of all abbots, and the king in France, with the exception of Cluny, Premontr\u00e9 and other houses, chiefs of their order. The election was for life, unless the abbot was canonically deprived by the chiefs of his order, or when he was directly subject to them, by the pope or the bishop, and also in England it was for a term of 8\u201312 years.\nThe ceremony of the formal admission of a Benedictine abbot in medieval times is thus prescribed by the consuetudinary of Abingdon. The newly elected abbot was to put off his shoes at the door of the church, and proceed barefoot to meet the members of the house advancing in a procession. After proceeding up the nave, he was to kneel and pray at the topmost step of the entrance of the choir, into which he was to be introduced by the bishop or his commissary, and placed in his stall. The monks, then kneeling, gave him the kiss of peace on the hand, and rising, on the mouth, the abbot holding his staff of office. He then put on his shoes in the vestry, and a chapter was held, and the bishop or his delegate preached a suitable sermon.\nGeneral information.\nBefore the late modern era, the abbot was treated with the utmost reverence by the brethren of his house. When he appeared either in church or chapter all present rose and bowed. His letters were received kneeling, as were those of the pope and the king. No monk might sit in his presence, or leave it, without his permission, reflecting the hierarchical etiquette of families and society. The highest place was assigned to him, both in church and at table. In the East he was commanded to eat with the other monks. In the West, the Rule of St Benedict appointed him a separate table, at which he might entertain guests and strangers. Because this permission opened the door to luxurious living, Synods of Aachen decreed that the abbot should dine in the refectory, and be content with the ordinary fare of the monks, unless he had to entertain a guest. These ordinances proved, however, generally ineffective to secure strictness of diet, and contemporaneous literature abounds with satirical remarks and complaints concerning the inordinate extravagance of the tables of the abbots. When the abbot condescended to dine in the refectory, his chaplains waited upon him with the dishes, a servant, if necessary, assisting them. When abbots dined in their own private hall, the Rule of St Benedict charged them to invite their monks to their table, provided there was room, on which occasions the guests were to abstain from quarrels, slanderous talk and idle gossiping.\nThe ordinary attire of the abbot was according to rule to be the same as that of the monks. But by the 10th century the rule was commonly set aside, and we find frequent complaints of abbots dressing in silk, and adopting sumptuous attire. Some even laid aside the monastic habit altogether, and assumed a secular dress. With the increase of wealth and power, abbots had lost much of their special religious character, and become great lords, chiefly distinguished from lay lords by celibacy. Thus we hear of abbots going out to hunt, with their men carrying bows and arrows; keeping horses, dogs and huntsmen; and special mention is made of an abbot of Leicester , c. 1360, who was the most skilled of all the nobility in hare hunting. In magnificence of equipage and retinue the abbots vied with the first nobles of the realm. They rode on mules with gilded bridles, rich saddles and housings, carrying hawks on their wrist, followed by an immense train of attendants. The bells of the churches were rung as they passed. They associated on equal terms with laymen of the highest distinction, and shared all their pleasures and pursuits. This rank and power was, however, often used most beneficially. For instance, we read of Richard Whiting, the last abbot of Glastonbury, judicially murdered by Henry VIII, that his house was a kind of well-ordered court, where as many as 300 sons of noblemen and gentlemen, who had been sent to him for virtuous education, had been brought up, besides others of a lesser rank, whom he fitted for the universities. His table, attendance and officers were an honour to the nation. He would entertain as many as 500 persons of rank at one time, besides relieving the poor of the vicinity twice a week. He had his country houses and fisheries, and when he travelled to attend parliament his retinue amounted to upwards of 100 persons. The abbots of Cluny and Vend\u00f4me were, by virtue of their office, cardinals of the Roman church.\nIn the process of time, the title abbot was extended to clerics who had no connection with the monastic system, as to the principal of a body of parochial clergy; and under the Carolingians to the chief chaplain of the king, ', or military chaplain of the emperor, ' It even came to be adopted by purely secular officials. Thus the chief magistrate of the republic at Genoa was called \"\".\nLay abbots (M. Lat. ', ', ', ', ' or ', ', or sometimes simply ') were the outcome of the growth of the feudal system from the 8th century onwards. The practice of commendation, by which\u2014to meet a contemporary emergency\u2014the revenues of the community were handed over to a lay lord, in return for his protection,\nearly suggested to the emperors and kings the expedient of rewarding their warriors with rich abbeys held \"in commendam.\"\nDuring the Carolingian epoch, the custom grew up of granting these as regular heritable fiefs or benefices, and by the 10th century, before the great Cluniac reform, the system was firmly established. Even the abbey of St Denis was held in commendam by Hugh Capet. The example of the kings was followed by the feudal nobles, sometimes by making a temporary concession permanent, sometimes without any form of commendation whatever. In England the abuse was rife in the 8th century, as may be gathered from the acts of the council of Cloveshoe. These lay abbacies were not merely a question of overlordship, but implied the concentration in lay hands of all the rights, immunities and jurisdiction of the foundations, i.e. the more or less complete secularization of spiritual institutions. The lay abbot took his recognized rank in the feudal hierarchy, and was free to dispose of his fief as in the case of any other. The enfeoffment of abbeys differed in form and degree. Sometimes the monks were directly subject to the lay abbot; sometimes he appointed a substitute to perform the spiritual functions, known usually as dean (), but also as abbot (', ', \").\nWhen the great reform of the 11th century had put an end to the direct jurisdiction of the lay abbots, the honorary title of abbot continued to be held by certain of the great feudal families, as late as the 13th century and later, with the head of the community retaining the title of dean. The connection of the lesser lay abbots with the abbeys, especially in the south of France, lasted longer; and certain feudal families retained the title of () for centuries, together with certain rights over the abbey lands or revenues. The abuse was not confined to the West. John, patriarch of Antioch at the beginning of the 12th century, informs us that in his time most monasteries had been handed over to laymen, \", for life, or for part of their lives, by the emperors.\nGiraldus Cambrensis reported (\"Itinerary\", ii.iv) the common customs of lay abbots in the late 12th-century Church of Wales:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;for a bad custom has prevailed amongst the clergy, of appointing the most powerful people of a parish stewards, or, rather, patrons, of their churches; who, in process of time, from a desire of gain, have usurped the whole right, appropriating to their own use the possession of all the lands, leaving only to the clergy the altars, with their tenths and oblations, and assigning even these to their sons and relations in the church. Such defenders, or rather destroyers, of the church, have caused themselves to be called abbots, and presumed to attribute to themselves a title, as well as estates, to which they have no just claim.\nIn conventual cathedrals, where the bishop occupied the place of the abbot, the functions usually devolving on the superior of the monastery were performed by a prior.\nModern practices.\nIn the Roman Catholic Church and Evangelical-Lutheran Churches, abbots continue to be elected by the monks of an abbey to lead them as their religious superior in those orders and monasteries that make use of the term (some orders of monks, as the Carthusians for instance, have only priors). In Catholicism, a monastery must have been granted the status of an abbey by the pope, and such monasteries are normally raised to this level after showing a degree of stability\u2014a certain number of monks in vows, a certain number of years of establishment, a certain firmness to the foundation in economic, vocational and legal aspects. Prior to this, the monastery would be a mere priory, headed by a prior who acts as superior but without the same degree of legal authority that an abbot has.\nThe abbot is chosen by the monks from among the fully professed monks. Once chosen, he must request blessing: the blessing of an abbot is celebrated by the bishop in whose diocese the monastery is or, with his permission, another abbot or bishop. The ceremony of such a blessing is similar in some aspects to the consecration of a bishop, with the new abbot being presented with the mitre, the ring, and the crosier as symbols of office and receiving the laying on of hands and blessing from the celebrant. Though the ceremony installs the new abbot into a position of legal authority, it does not confer further sacramental authority- it is not a further degree of Holy Orders (although some abbots have been ordained to the episcopacy).\nOnce he has received this blessing, the abbot not only becomes father of his monks in a spiritual sense, but their major superior under canon law, and has the additional authority to confer the ministries of acolyte and lector (formerly, he could confer the minor orders, which are not sacraments, that these ministries have replaced). The abbey is a species of \"exempt religious\" in that it is, for the most part, answerable to the pope, or to the abbot primate, rather than to the local bishop.\nThe abbot wears the same habit as his fellow monks, though by tradition he adds to it a pectoral cross.\nTerritorial abbots follow all of the above, but in addition must receive a mandate of authority from the pope over the territory around the monastery for which they are responsible.\nAbbatial hierarchy.\nIn some monastic families, there is a hierarchy of precedence or authority among abbots. In some cases, this is the result of an abbey being considered the \"mother\" of several \"daughter\" abbeys founded as dependent priories of the \"mother\". In other cases, abbeys have affiliated in networks known as \"congregations\". Some monastic families recognize one abbey as the motherhouse of the entire order.\nModern abbots not as superior.\nThe title abb\u00e9 (French; Ital. \"abate\"), as commonly used in the Catholic Church on the European continent, is the equivalent of the English \"Father\" (parallel etymology), being loosely applied to all who have received the tonsure. This use of the title is said to have originated in the right conceded to the king of France, by the concordat between Pope Leo X and Francis I (1516), to appoint commendatory abbots (') to most of the abbeys in France. The expectation of obtaining these sinecures drew young men towards the church in considerable numbers, and the class of abb\u00e9s so formed\u00a0\u2013 ' they were sometimes called, and sometimes (ironically) \"\" (\"abb\u00e9s of holy hope; or in a jeu de mots, \"of St. Hope\")\u00a0\u2013 came to hold a recognized position. The connection many of them had with the church was of the slenderest kind, consisting mainly in adopting the title of abb\u00e9, after a remarkably moderate course of theological study, practising celibacy and wearing distinctive dress, a short dark-violet coat with narrow collar. Being men of presumed learning and undoubted leisure, many of the class found admission to the houses of the French nobility as tutors or advisers. Nearly every great family had its abb\u00e9. The class did not survive the Revolution; but the courtesy title of abb\u00e9, having long lost all connection in people's minds with any special ecclesiastical function, remained as a convenient general term applicable to any clergyman.\nEastern Christian.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Catholic Churches, the abbot is referred to as the \"hegumen\". The Superior of a monastery of nuns is called the \"H\u0113gum\u00e9n\u0113\". The title of \"archimandrite\" (literally the head of the enclosure) used to mean something similar.\nIn the East, the principle set forth in the \"Corpus Juris Civilis\" still applies, whereby most abbots are immediately subject to the local bishop. Those monasteries which enjoy the status of being \"stauropegic\" will be subject only to a primate or his Synod of Bishops and not the local bishop.\nHonorary and other uses of the title.\nAlthough currently in the Western Church the title \"abbot\" is given only abbots of monasteries, the title archimandrite is given to \"monastics\" (i.e., celibate) priests in the East, even when not attached to a monastery, as an honor for service, similar to the title of monsignor in the Latin Church of the Catholic Church. In the Eastern Orthodox Church, only monastics are permitted to be elevated to the rank of archimandrite. Married priests are elevated to the parallel rank of Archpriest or Protopresbyter. Normally there are no celibate priests who are not monastics in the Orthodox Church, with the exception of married priests who have been widowed. Since the time of Catherine II the ranks of Abbot and Archimandrite have been given as honorary titles in the Russian Church, and may be given to any monastic, even if he does not in fact serve as the superior of a monastery. In Greek practice the title or function of Abbot corresponds to a person who serves as the head of a monastery, although the title of the Archimandrite may be given to any celibate priest who could serve as the head of a monastery.\nIn the German Evangelical Church, the German title of \"Abt\" (abbot) is sometimes bestowed, like the French \"abb\u00e9\", as an honorary distinction, and additionally designates the heads of monasteries, with a number of these that accepted the Evangelical-Lutheran faith at the time of the Reformation. Of these the most noteworthy is Loccum Abbey in Hanover, founded as a Cistercian house in 1163 by Count Wilbrand of Hallermund, and Lutheranised in 1593. The abbot of Loccum, who still carries a pastoral staff, takes precedence over all the clergy of Hanover, and was \"ex officio\" a member of the consistory of the kingdom. The governing body of the abbey consists of the abbot, prior and the \"convent\", or community, of \"Stiftsherren\" (canons).\nWith respect to Anglicanism, in the Church of England, the Bishop of Norwich, by royal decree given by Henry VIII, also holds the honorary title of \"Abbot of St. Benet.\" This title hails back to England's separation from the See of Rome, when King Henry, as supreme head of the newly independent church, took over all of the monasteries, mainly for their possessions, except for St. Benet, which he spared because the abbot and his monks possessed no wealth, and lived like simple beggars, deposing the incumbent Bishop of Norwich and seating the abbot in his place, thus the dual title still held to this day. Additionally, at the enthronement of the Archbishop of Canterbury, there is a threefold enthronement, once in the throne the chancel as the diocesan bishop of Canterbury, once in the Chair of St. Augustine as the Primate of All England, and then once in the chapter-house as Titular Abbot of Canterbury.\nThere are several Benedictine abbeys throughout the Anglican Communion. Most of them have mitred abbots.\nAbbots in art and literature.\n\"The Abbot\" is one of the archetypes traditionally illustrated in scenes of \"Danse Macabre\".\nThe lives of numerous abbots make up a significant contribution to Christian hagiography, one of the most well-known being the \"Life of St. Benedict of Nursia\" by St. Gregory the Great.\nDuring the years 1106\u20131107 AD, Daniel, a Russian Orthodox abbot, made a pilgrimage to the Holy Land and recorded his experiences. His diary was much-read throughout Russia, and at least seventy-five manuscript copies survive. Saint Joseph, Abbot of Volokolamsk, Russia (1439\u20131515), wrote a number of influential works against heresy, and about monastic and liturgical discipline, and Christian philanthropy.\nIn the \"Tales of Redwall\" series, the creatures of Redwall are led by an abbot or abbess. These \"abbots\" are appointed by the brothers and sisters of Redwall to serve as a superior and provide paternal care, much like real abbots.\n\"The Abbot\" was a nickname of RZA from the Wu-Tang Clan.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1144", "revid": "50263247", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1144", "title": "Ardipithecus", "text": "Extinct genus of hominins\nArdipithecus is a genus of an extinct hominine that lived during the Late Miocene and Early Pliocene epochs in the Afar Depression, Ethiopia. Originally described as one of the earliest ancestors of humans after they diverged from the chimpanzees, the relation of this genus to human ancestors and whether it is a hominin is now a matter of debate. Two fossil species are described in the literature: \"A.\u00a0ramidus\", which lived about 4.4 million years ago during the early Pliocene, and \"A.\u00a0kadabba\", dated to approximately 5.6 million years ago (late Miocene). Initial behavioral analysis indicated that \"Ardipithecus\" could be very similar to chimpanzees; however, more recent analysis based on canine size and lack of canine sexual dimorphism indicates that \"Ardipithecus\" was characterised by reduced aggression, and that they more closely resemble bonobos.\nSome analyses describe \"Australopithecus\" as being sister to \"Ardipithecus ramidus\" specifically. This means that \"Australopithecus\" is distinctly more closely related to \"Ardipithecus ramidus\" than \"Ardipithecus kadabba\". Cladistically, then, \"Australopithecus\" (and eventually \"Homo sapiens\") indeed emerged within the \"Ardipithecus\" lineage, and this lineage is not literally extinct.\n\"Ardipithecus ramidus\".\n\"A. ramidus\" was named in September 1994. The first fossil found was dated to 4.4 million years ago on the basis of its stratigraphic position between two volcanic strata: the basal Gaala Tuff Complex (G.A.T.C.) and the Daam Aatu Basaltic Tuff (D.A.B.T.). The name \"Ardipithecus ramidus\" stems mostly from the Afar language, in which \"Ardi\" means \"ground/floor\" and \"ramid\" means \"root\". The \"pithecus\" portion of the name is from the Greek word for \"ape\".\nLike most hominids, but unlike all previously recognized hominins, it had a grasping hallux or big toe adapted for locomotion in the trees. It is not confirmed how many other features of its skeleton reflect adaptation to bipedalism on the ground as well. Like later hominins, \"Ardipithecus\" had reduced canine teeth and reduced canine sexual dimorphism.\nIn 1992\u20131993 a research team headed by Tim White discovered the first \"A. ramidus\" fossils\u2014seventeen fragments including skull, mandible, teeth and arm bones\u2014from the Afar Depression in the Middle Awash river valley of Ethiopia. More fragments were recovered in 1994, amounting to 45% of the total skeleton. This fossil was originally described as a species of \"Australopithecus\", but White and his colleagues later published a note in the same journal renaming the fossil under a new genus, \"Ardipithecus\". Between 1999 and 2003, a multidisciplinary team led by Sileshi Semaw discovered bones and teeth of nine \"A. ramidus\" individuals at As Duma in the Gona area of Ethiopia's Afar Region. The fossils were dated to between 4.35 and 4.45 million years old.\n\"Ardipithecus ramidus\" had a small brain, measuring between 300 and 350\u00a0cm3. This is slightly smaller than a modern bonobo or female chimpanzee brain, but much smaller than the brain of australopithecines like Lucy (~400 to 550\u00a0cm3) and roughly 20% the size of the modern \"Homo sapiens\" brain. Like common chimpanzees, \"A. ramidus\" was much more prognathic than modern humans.\nThe teeth of \"A. ramidus\" lacked the specialization of other apes, and suggest that it was a generalized omnivore and frugivore (fruit eater) with a diet that did not depend heavily on foliage, fibrous plant material (roots, tubers, etc.), or hard and or abrasive food. The size of the upper canine tooth in \"A. ramidus\" males was not distinctly different from that of females. Their upper canines were less sharp than those of modern common chimpanzees in part because of this decreased upper canine size, as larger upper canines can be honed through wear against teeth in the lower mouth. The features of the upper canine in \"A. ramidus\" contrast with the sexual dimorphism observed in common chimpanzees, where males have significantly larger and sharper upper canine teeth than females. Of the living apes, bonobos have the smallest canine sexual dimorphism, although still greater than that displayed by \"A. ramidus\".\nThe less pronounced nature of the upper canine teeth in \"A. ramidus\" has been used to infer aspects of the social behavior of the species and more ancestral hominids. In particular, it has been used to suggest that the last common ancestor of hominids and African apes was characterized by relatively little aggression between males and between groups. This is markedly different from social patterns in common chimpanzees, among which intermale and intergroup aggression are typically high. Researchers in a 2009 study said that this condition \"compromises the living chimpanzee as a behavioral model for the ancestral hominid condition.\" Bonobo canine size and canine sexual dimorphism more closely resembles that of \"A. ramidus\", and as a result, bonobos are now suggested as a behavioural model.\n\"A. ramidus\" existed more recently than the most recent common ancestor of humans and chimpanzees (CLCA or \"Pan\"-\"Homo\" LCA) and thus is not fully representative of that common ancestor. Nevertheless, it is in some ways unlike chimpanzees, suggesting that the common ancestor differs from the modern chimpanzee. After the chimpanzee and human lineages diverged, both underwent substantial evolutionary change. Chimp feet are specialized for grasping trees; \"A. ramidus\" feet are better suited for walking. The canine teeth of \"A. ramidus\" are smaller, and equal in size between males and females, which suggests reduced male-to-male conflict, increased pair-bonding, and increased parental investment. \"Thus, fundamental reproductive and social behavioral changes probably occurred in hominids long before they had enlarged brains and began to use stone tools,\" the research team concluded.\nArdi.\nOn October 1, 2009, paleontologists formally announced the discovery of the relatively complete \"A. ramidus\" fossil skeleton first unearthed in 1994. The fossil is the remains of a small-brained female, nicknamed \"Ardi\", and includes most of the skull and teeth, as well as the pelvis, hands, and feet. It was discovered in Ethiopia's harsh Afar desert at a site called Aramis in the Middle Awash region. Radiometric dating of the layers of volcanic ash encasing the deposits suggest that Ardi lived about 4.3 to 4.5 million years ago. This date, however, has been questioned by others. Fleagle and Kappelman suggest that the region in which Ardi was found is difficult to date radiometrically, and they argue that Ardi should be dated at 3.9 million years.&lt;ref name=\"10.1038/nature09709\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nThe fossil is regarded by its describers as shedding light on a stage of human evolution about which little was known, more than a million years before Lucy (\"Australopithecus afarensis\"), the iconic early human ancestor candidate who lived 3.2 million years ago, and was discovered in 1974 just away from Ardi's discovery site. However, because the \"Ardi\" skeleton is no more than 200,000 years older than the earliest fossils of \"Australopithecus\", and may in fact be younger than they are, some researchers doubt that it can represent a direct ancestor of \"Australopithecus\".\nSome researchers infer from the form of her pelvis and limbs and the presence of her abductable hallux, that \"Ardi\" was a facultative biped: bipedal when moving on the ground, but quadrupedal when moving about in tree branches. \"A. ramidus\" had a more primitive walking ability than later hominids, and could not walk or run for long distances. The teeth suggest omnivory, and are more generalised than those of modern apes.\n\"Ardipithecus kadabba\".\n\"Ardipithecus kadabba\" is \"known only from teeth and bits and pieces of skeletal bones\", and is dated to approximately 5.6 million years ago. It has been described as a \"probable chronospecies\" (i.e. ancestor) of \"A. ramidus\". Although originally considered a subspecies of \"A. ramidus\", in 2004 anthropologists Yohannes Haile-Selassie, Gen Suwa, and Tim D. White published an article elevating \"A. kadabba\" to species level on the basis of newly discovered teeth from Ethiopia. These teeth show \"primitive morphology and wear pattern\" which demonstrate that \"A. kadabba\" is a distinct species from \"A. ramidus\".\nThe specific name comes from the Afar word for \"basal family ancestor\".\nClassification.\nDue to several shared characteristics with chimpanzees, its closeness to ape divergence period, and due to its fossil incompleteness, the exact position of \"Ardipithecus\" in the fossil record is a subject of controversy. Primatologist Esteban Sarmiento had systematically compared and concluded that there is not sufficient anatomical evidence to support an exclusively human lineage. Sarmiento noted that \"Ardipithecus\" does not share any characteristics exclusive to humans, and some of its characteristics (those in the wrist and basicranium) suggest it diverged from humans prior to the human\u2013gorilla last common ancestor. His comparative (narrow allometry) study in 2011 on the molar and body segment lengths (which included living primates of similar body size) noted that some dimensions including short upper limbs, and metacarpals are reminiscent of humans, but other dimensions such as long toes and relative molar surface area are great ape-like. Sarmiento concluded that such length measures can change back and forth during evolution and are not very good indicators of relatedness (homoplasy).\nHowever, some later studies still argue for its classification in the human lineage. In 2014, it was reported that the hand bones of \"Ardipithecus\", \"Australopithecus sediba\" and \"A. afarensis\" have the third metacarpal styloid process, which is absent in other apes. Unique brain organisations (such as lateral shift of the carotid foramina, mediolateral abbreviation of the lateral tympanic, and a shortened, trapezoidal basioccipital element) in \"Ardipithecus\" are also found only in the \"Australopithecus\" and \"Homo\". Comparison of the tooth root morphology with those of the earlier \"Sahelanthropus\" also indicated strong resemblance, also pointing to inclusion to the human line.\nEvolutionary tree according to a 2019 study:\nPaleobiology.\nThe \"Ardipithecus\" length measures are good indicators of function and together with dental isotope data and the fauna and flora from the fossil site indicate \"Ardipithecus\" was mainly a terrestrial quadruped collecting a large portion of its food on the ground. Its arboreal behaviors would have been limited and suspension from branches solely from the upper limbs rare. A comparative study in 2013 on carbon and oxygen stable isotopes within modern and fossil tooth enamel revealed that \"Ardipithecus\" fed both arboreally (on trees) and on the ground in a more open habitat, unlike chimpanzees.\nIn 2015, Australian anthropologists Gary Clark and Maciej Henneberg said that \"Ardipithecus\" adults have a facial anatomy more similar to chimpanzee subadults than adults, with a less-projecting face and smaller canines (large canines in primate males are used to compete within mating hierarchies), and attributed this to a decrease in craniofacial growth in favour of brain growth. This is only seen in humans, so they argued that the species may show the first trend towards human social, parenting and sexual psychology. Previously, it was assumed that such ancient human ancestors behaved much like chimps, but this is no longer considered to be a viable comparison. This view has yet to be corroborated by more detailed studies of the growth of \"A. ramidus\". The study also provides support for Stephen Jay Gould's theory in \"Ontogeny and Phylogeny\" that the paedomorphic (childlike) form of early hominin craniofacial morphology results from dissociation of growth trajectories.\nClark and Henneberg also argued that such shortening of the skull\u2014which may have caused a descension of the larynx\u2014as well as lordosis\u2014allowing better movement of the larynx\u2014increased vocal ability, significantly pushing back the origin of language to well before the evolution of \"Homo\". They argued that self domestication was aided by the development of vocalization, living in a pro-social society. They conceded that chimps and \"A. ramidus\" likely had the same vocal capabilities, but said that \"A. ramidus\" made use of more complex vocalizations, and vocalized at the same level as a human infant due to selective pressure to become more social. This would have allowed their society to become more complex. They also noted that the base of the skull stopped growing with the brain by the end of juvenility, whereas in chimps it continues growing with the rest of the body into adulthood; and considered this evidence of a switch from a gross skeletal anatomy trajectory to a neurological development trajectory due to selective pressure for sociability. Nonetheless, their conclusions are highly speculative.\nAccording to Scott Simpson, the Gona Project's physical anthropologist, the fossil evidence from the Middle Awash indicates that both \"A. kadabba\" and \"A. ramidus\" lived in \"a mosaic of woodland and grasslands with lakes, swamps and springs nearby,\" but further research is needed to determine which habitat \"Ardipithecus\" at Gona preferred.\nGiant snake predation.\nIndigenous people living where large boas and pythons occur are well within the prey size range of those species; an adult male Aeta would constitute greater than or equal to 60% of the mass of a large female reticulated python, which is not a heavy meal by snake standards and especially not for a species whose natural diet includes pigs weighing up to 60 kg. Plio-Plestiocene hominins before the divergence of \"Homo erectus\" and reaching back to \"Ardipithecus ramidus\" averaged 30-52 kg in mass and thus, making them comparably susceptible to giant snake predation.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1146", "revid": "24198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1146", "title": "Assembly line", "text": "Manufacturing process\nAn assembly line, often called \"progressive assembly\", is a manufacturing process where the unfinished product moves in a direct line from workstation to workstation, with parts added in sequence until the final product is completed. By mechanically moving parts to workstations and transferring the unfinished product from one workstation to another, a finished product can be assembled faster and with less labor than having workers carry parts to a stationary product.\nAssembly lines are common methods of assembling complex items such as automobiles and other transportation equipment, household appliances and electronic goods.\nWorkers in charge of the works of assembly line are called assemblers.\nConcepts.\nAssembly lines are designed for the sequential organization of workers, tools or machines, and parts. The motion of workers is minimized to the extent possible. All parts or assemblies are handled either by conveyors or motorized vehicles such as forklifts, or gravity, with no manual trucking. Heavy lifting is done by machines such as overhead cranes or forklifts. Each worker typically performs one simple operation unless job rotation strategies are applied.\nAccording to Henry Ford:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDesigning assembly lines is a well-established mathematical challenge, referred to as an assembly line balancing problem. In the simple assembly line balancing problem the aim is to assign a set of tasks that need to be performed on the workpiece to a sequence of workstations. Each task requires a given task duration for completion. The assignment of tasks to stations is typically limited by two constraints: (1) a precedence graph which indicates what other tasks need to be completed before a particular task can be initiated (e.g. not putting in a screw before drilling the hole) and (2) a cycle time which restricts the sum of task processing times which can be completed at each workstation before the work-piece is moved to the next station by the conveyor belt. Major planning problems for operating assembly lines include supply chain integration, inventory control and production scheduling.\nSimple example.\nConsider the assembly of a car: assume that certain steps in the assembly line are to install the engine, install the hood, and install the wheels (in that order, with arbitrary interstitial steps); only one of these steps can be done at a time. In traditional production, only one car would be assembled at a time. If engine installation takes 20 minutes, hood installation takes five minutes, and wheels installation takes 10 minutes, then a car can be produced every 35 minutes.\nIn an assembly line, car assembly is split between several stations, all working simultaneously. When a station is finished with a car, it passes it on to the next. By having three stations, three cars can be operated on at the same time, each at a different stage of assembly.\nAfter finishing its work on the first car, the engine installation crew can begin working on the second car. While the engine installation crew works on the second car, the first car can be moved to the hood station and fitted with a hood, then to the wheels station and be fitted with wheels. After the engine has been installed on the second car, the second car moves to the hood assembly. At the same time, the third car moves to the engine assembly. When the third car's engine has been mounted, it then can be moved to the hood station; meanwhile, subsequent cars (if any) can be moved to the engine installation station.\nAssuming no loss of time when moving a car from one station to another, the longest stage on the assembly line determines the throughput (20 minutes for the engine installation) so a car can be produced every 20 minutes, once the first car taking 35 minutes has been produced.\nHistory.\nBefore the Industrial Revolution, most manufactured products were made individually by hand. A single craftsman or team of craftsmen would create each part of a product. They would use their skills and tools such as files and knives to create the individual parts. They would then assemble them into the final product, making cut-and-try changes in the parts until they fit and could work together (craft production).\nDivision of labor was practiced by Ancient Greeks, Chinese and other ancient civilizations. In Ancient Greece it was discussed by Plato and Xenophon. Adam Smith discussed the division of labour in the manufacture of pins at length in his book \"The Wealth of Nations\" (published in 1776).\nThe Venetian Arsenal, dating to about 1104, operated similar to a production line. Ships moved down a canal and were fitted by the various shops they passed. At the peak of its efficiency in the early 16th century, the Arsenal employed some 16,000 people who could apparently produce nearly one ship each day and could fit out, arm, and provision a newly built galley with standardized parts on an assembly-line basis. Although the Arsenal lasted until the early Industrial Revolution, production line methods did not become common even then.\nIndustrial Revolution.\nThe Industrial Revolution led to a proliferation of manufacturing and invention. Many industries, notably textiles, firearms, clocks and watches, horse-drawn vehicles, railway locomotives, sewing machines, and bicycles, saw expeditious improvement in materials handling, machining, and assembly during the 19th century, although modern concepts such as industrial engineering and logistics had not yet been named.\nThe automatic flour mill built by Oliver Evans in 1785 was called the beginning of modern bulk material handling by Roe (1916). Evans's mill used a leather belt bucket elevator, screw conveyors, canvas belt conveyors, and other mechanical devices to completely automate the process of making flour. The innovation spread to other mills and breweries.\nProbably the earliest industrial example of a linear and continuous assembly process is the Portsmouth Block Mills, built between 1801 and 1803. Marc Isambard Brunel (father of Isambard Kingdom Brunel), with the help of Henry Maudslay and others, designed 22 types of machine tools to make the parts for the rigging blocks used by the Royal Navy. This factory was so successful that it remained in use until the 1960s, with the workshop still visible at HM Dockyard in Portsmouth, and still containing some of the original machinery.\nOne of the earliest examples of an almost modern factory layout, designed for easy material handling, was the Bridgewater Foundry. The factory grounds were bordered by the Bridgewater Canal and the Liverpool and Manchester Railway. The buildings were arranged in a line with a railway for carrying the work going through the buildings. Cranes were used for lifting the heavy work, which sometimes weighed in the tens of tons. The work passed sequentially through to erection of framework and final assembly.\nThe first flow assembly line was initiated at the factory of Richard Garrett &amp; Sons, Leiston Works in Leiston in the English county of Suffolk for the manufacture of portable steam engines. The assembly line area was called 'The Long Shop' on account of its length and was fully operational by early 1853. The boiler was brought up from the foundry and put at the start of the line, and as it progressed through the building it would stop at various stages where new parts would be added. From the upper level, where other parts were made, the lighter parts would be lowered over a balcony and then fixed onto the machine on the ground level. When the machine reached the end of the shop, it would be completed.\nInterchangeable parts.\nDuring the early 19th century, the development of machine tools such as the screw-cutting lathe, metal planer, and milling machine, and of toolpath control via jigs and fixtures, provided the prerequisites for the modern assembly line by making interchangeable parts a practical reality.\nLate 19th-century steam and electric conveyors.\nSteam-powered conveyor lifts began being used for loading and unloading ships some time in the last quarter of the 19th century. Hounshell (1984) shows a c.\u20091885 sketch of an electric-powered conveyor moving cans through a filling line in a canning factory.\nThe meatpacking industry of Chicago is believed to be one of the first industrial assembly lines (or disassembly lines) to be utilized in the United States starting in 1867. Workers would stand at fixed stations and a pulley system would bring the meat to each worker and they would complete one task. Henry Ford and others have written about the influence of this slaughterhouse practice on the later developments at Ford Motor Company.\n20th century.\nAccording to Domm, the implementation of mass production of an automobile via an assembly line may be credited to Ransom Olds, who used it to build the first mass-produced automobile, the Oldsmobile Curved Dash. Olds patented the assembly line concept, which he put to work in his Olds Motor Vehicle Company factory in 1901.\nAt Ford Motor Company, the assembly line was introduced by William \"Pa\" Klann upon his return from visiting Swift &amp; Company's slaughterhouse in Chicago and viewing what was referred to as the \"disassembly line\", where carcasses were butchered as they moved along a conveyor. The efficiency of one person removing the same piece over and over without moving to another station caught his attention. He reported the idea to Peter E. Martin, soon to be head of Ford production, who was doubtful at the time but encouraged him to proceed. Others at Ford have claimed to have put the idea forth to Henry Ford, but Pa Klann's slaughterhouse revelation is well documented in the archives at the Henry Ford Museum and elsewhere, making him an important contributor to the modern automated assembly line concept. Ford was appreciative, having visited the highly automated 40-acre Sears mail order handling facility around 1906. At Ford, the process was an evolution by trial and error of a team consisting primarily of Peter E. Martin, the factory superintendent; Charles E. Sorensen, Martin's assistant; Clarence W. Avery; C. Harold Wills, draftsman and toolmaker; Charles Ebender; and J\u00f3zsef Galamb. Some of the groundwork for such development had recently been laid by the intelligent layout of machine tool placement that Walter Flanders had been doing at Ford up to 1908.\nThe moving assembly line was developed for the Ford Model T and began operation on October 7, 1913, at the Highland Park Ford Plant, and continued to evolve after that, using time and motion study. The assembly line, driven by conveyor belts, reduced production time for a Model T to just 93 minutes by dividing the process into 45 steps. Producing cars quicker than paint of the day could dry, it had an immense influence on the world.\nIn 1922, Ford (through his ghostwriter Crowther) said of his 1913 assembly line:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I believe that this was the first moving line ever installed. The idea came in a general way from the overhead trolley that the Chicago packers use in dressing beef.\nCharles E. Sorensen, in his 1956 memoir \"My Forty Years with Ford\", presented a different version of development that was not so much about individual \"inventors\" as a gradual, logical development of industrial engineering:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What was worked out at Ford was the practice of moving the work from one worker to another until it became a complete unit, then arranging the flow of these units at the right time and the right place to a moving final assembly line from which came a finished product. Regardless of earlier uses of some of these principles, the direct line of succession of mass production and its intensification into automation stems directly from what we worked out at Ford Motor Company between 1908 and 1913. Henry Ford is generally regarded as the father of mass production. He was not. He was the sponsor of it.\nAs a result of these developments in method, Ford's cars came off the line in three-minute intervals or six feet per minute. This was much faster than previous methods, increasing production by eight to one (requiring 12.5 man-hours before, 1 hour 33 minutes after), while using less manpower. It was so successful, paint became a bottleneck. Only japan black would dry fast enough, forcing the company to drop the variety of colours available before 1914, until fast-drying Duco lacquer was developed in 1926.\nThe assembly line technique was an integral part of the diffusion of the automobile into American society. Decreased costs of production allowed the cost of the Model T to fall within the budget of the American middle class. In 1908, the price of a Model T was around $825, and by 1912 it had decreased to around $575. This price reduction is comparable to a reduction from $15,000 to $10,000 in dollar terms from the year 2000. In 1914, an assembly line worker could buy a Model T with four months' pay.\nFord's complex safety procedures\u2014especially assigning each worker to a specific location instead of allowing them to roam about\u2014dramatically reduced the rate of injury. The combination of high wages and high efficiency is called \"Fordism\", and was copied by most major industries. The efficiency gains from the assembly line also coincided with the take-off of the United States. The assembly line forced workers to work at a certain pace with very repetitive motions which led to more output per worker while other countries were using less productive methods.\nIn the automotive industry, its success was dominating, and quickly spread worldwide. Ford France and Ford Britain in 1911, Ford Denmark 1923, Ford Germany and Ford Japan 1925; in 1919, Vulcan (Southport, Lancashire) was the first native European manufacturer to adopt it. Soon, companies had to have assembly lines, or risk going broke by not being able to compete; by 1930, 250 companies which did not had disappeared.\nThe massive demand for military hardware in World War II prompted assembly-line techniques in shipbuilding and aircraft production. Thousands of Liberty ships were built making extensive use of prefabrication, enabling ship assembly to be completed in weeks or even days. After having produced fewer than 3,000 planes for the United States Military in 1939, American aircraft manufacturers built over 300,000 planes in World War II. Vultee pioneered the use of the powered assembly line for aircraft manufacturing. Other companies quickly followed. As William S. Knudsen (having worked at Ford, GM and the National Defense Advisory Commission) observed, \"We won because we smothered the enemy in an avalanche of production, the like of which he had never seen, nor dreamed possible.\"\nImproved working conditions.\nIn his 1922 autobiography, Henry Ford mentions several benefits of the assembly line including:\nThe gains in productivity allowed Ford to increase worker pay from $1.50 per day to $5.00 per day once employees reached three years of service on the assembly line. Ford continued on to reduce the hourly work week while continuously lowering the Model T price. These goals appear altruistic; however, it has been argued that they were implemented by Ford in order to reduce high employee turnover: when the assembly line was introduced in 1913, it was discovered that \"every time the company wanted to add 100 men to its factory personnel, it was necessary to hire 963\" in order to counteract the natural distaste the assembly line seems to have inspired.\nSociological problems.\nSociological work has explored the social alienation and boredom that many workers feel because of the repetition of doing the same specialized task all day long.\nKarl Marx expressed in his theory of alienation the belief that, in order to achieve job satisfaction, workers need to see themselves in the objects they have created, that products should be \"mirrors in which workers see their reflected essential nature\". Marx viewed labour as a chance for people to externalize facets of their personalities. Marxists argue that performing repetitive, specialized tasks causes a feeling of disconnection between what a worker does all day, who they really are, and what they would ideally be able to contribute to society. Furthermore, Marx views these specialised jobs as insecure, since the worker is expendable as soon as costs rise and technology can replace more expensive human labour.\nSince workers have to stand in the same place for hours and repeat the same motion hundreds of times per day, repetitive stress injuries are a possible pathology of occupational safety. Industrial noise also proved dangerous. When it was not too high, workers were often prohibited from talking. Charles Piaget, a skilled worker at the LIP factory, recalled that besides being prohibited from speaking, the semi-skilled workers had only 25 centimeters in which to move. Industrial ergonomics later tried to minimize physical trauma.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1148", "revid": "915833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1148", "title": "Adelaide", "text": "Capital city of South Australia, Australia\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox_Australian_place/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdelaide ( ; ) is the capital and most populous city of South Australia, as well as the fifth-most populous city in Australia. The name \"Adelaide\" may refer to either Greater Adelaide (including the Adelaide Hills) or the Adelaide city centre; the demonym \"Adelaidean\" is used to denote the city and the residents of Adelaide. The traditional owners of the Adelaide region are the Kaurna, with the name referring to the area of the city centre and surrounding Park Lands, in the Kaurna language. Adelaide is situated on the Adelaide Plains north of the Fleurieu Peninsula, between the Gulf St Vincent in the west and the Mount Lofty Ranges in the east. Its metropolitan area encompasses over 430 suburbs, extending from Gawler in the north to Sellicks Beach in the south and from the western coast to the eastern foothills of the Mount Lofty Ranges.\nNamed in honour of Adelaide of Saxe-Meiningen, wife of King William IV, the city was founded in 1836 as the planned capital for the only freely settled British province in Australia, distinguishing it from Australia's penal colonies. Colonel William Light, one of Adelaide's founding fathers, designed the city centre and chose its location close to the River Torrens. Light's design, now listed as national heritage, set out the city centre in a grid layout known as \"Light's Vision\", interspaced by wide boulevards and large public squares, and entirely surrounded by park lands. Colonial Adelaide was noted for its leading examples of religious freedom and progressive political reforms and became known as the \"City of Churches\" due to its diversity of faiths. It was Australia's third-most populous city until the postwar era. \nToday, Adelaide is one of Australia's most visited travel destinations and hosts , such as the Adelaide 500, Tour Down Under, Gather Round, LIV Golf Adelaide, and the Adelaide Fringe, the world's second largest annual arts festival. The city has also been renowned for its automotive industry, having been the original host of the Australian Grand Prix in the FIA Formula One World Championship from 1985 to 1995. Other features include its food and wine industries, its coastline and hills, its large defence and manufacturing operations, and its emerging space sector, including the Australian Space Agency being headquartered there. With one of the world's largest foreign-born populations, Adelaide has consistently ranked within the top-ten most liveable cities globally for much of the 21st century, being named in 2021 the most liveable city in the country and third in the world. Its aesthetic appeal has also been recognised by \"Architectural Digest\", which ranked Adelaide as the most beautiful city in the world in 2024.\nAs South Australia's government and commercial centre, Adelaide is the site of many governmental and financial institutions. Most of these are concentrated in the central business district along the cultural boulevards of North Terrace and King William Street. Adelaide has also been classed as a Gamma\u00a0+\u00a0level global city as categorised by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network, with the city further linking economic regions to the worldwide economy. Adelaide is connected by extensive bus, train and tram networks, all of which are operated by Adelaide Metro, with its main railway terminus at the Adelaide railway station. The city is also served by Adelaide Airport and Port Adelaide, both of which are among the busiest airports and seaports in Australia, respectively.\nHistory.\nTimeline of Adelaide history\nBefore European settlement.\nThe area around modern-day Adelaide was originally inhabited by the Kaurna people, one of many Aboriginal tribes in South Australia. The city and parklands area also known as \"Tarndanyangga\" (a dual name for Victoria Square in the Kaurna language), \"Tandanya\", \"Tarndanya\" or \"Tarntanya\". The name means 'male red kangaroo rock', referring to a rock formation on the site that has now been destroyed.\nThe surrounding area was an open, grassy plain with patches of trees and shrubs, which had been managed by hundreds of generations. Kaurna country encompassed the plains stretching north and south of Tarntanya, as well as the wooded foothills of the Mt Lofty Ranges. The River Torrens was known as the Karrawirra Pari (Red Gum forest river). About 300 Kaurna populated the Adelaide area, and were referred to by the settlers as the Cowandilla.\nThe more than 20 local clans across the plain lived seminomadic lives, with extensive mound settlements where huts were built repeatedly over centuries and a complex social structure, including a class of sorcerers separated from regular society.\nWithin a few decades of European settlement of South Australia, Kaurna culture was almost completely lost. The last speaker of Kaurna language died in 1929. Extensive documentation by early missionaries and other researchers has enabled a modern revival of both, which has included a commitment by local and state governments to rename or include Kaurna names for many local places.\n19th century.\nBased on the ideas of Edward Gibbon Wakefield about colonial reform, Robert Gouger petitioned the British government to create a new colony in Australia, resulting in the passage of the South Australia Act 1834. Physical establishment of the colony began with the arrival of the first British colonisers in February 1836. The first governor \nproclaimed the commencement of colonial government in South Australia on 28 December 1836, near The Old Gum Tree in what is now the suburb of Glenelg North. The event is commemorated in South Australia as Proclamation Day. The site of the colony's capital was surveyed and laid out by Colonel William Light, the first surveyor-general of South Australia, with his own original, unique, topographically sensitive design. The city was named after Queen Adelaide.\nAdelaide was established as a planned colony of free immigrants, promising civil liberties and freedom from religious persecution, based upon the ideas of Edward Gibbon Wakefield. Wakefield had read accounts of Australian settlement while in prison in London for attempting to abduct an heiress, and realised that the eastern colonies suffered from a lack of available labour, due to the practice of giving land grants to all arrivals. Wakefield's idea was for the Government to survey and sell the land at a rate that would maintain land values high enough to be unaffordable for labourers and journeymen. Funds raised from the sale of land were to be used to bring out working-class emigrants, who would have to work hard for the monied settlers to ever afford their own land. As a result of this policy, Adelaide does not share the convict settlement history of other Australian cities like Sydney, Brisbane and Hobart.\nAs it was believed that in a colony of free settlers there would be little crime, no provision was made for a gaol in Colonel Light's 1837 plan. But by mid-1837 the \"South Australian Register\" was warning of escaped convicts from New South Wales and tenders for a temporary gaol were sought. Following a burglary, a murder, and two attempted murders in Adelaide during March 1838, Governor Hindmarsh created the South Australian Police Force (now the South Australia Police) in April 1838 under 21-year-old Henry Inman. The first sheriff, Samuel Smart, was wounded during a robbery, and on 2 May 1838 one of the offenders, Michael Magee, became the first person to be hanged in South Australia. William Baker Ashton was appointed governor of the temporary gaol in 1839, and in 1840 George Strickland Kingston was commissioned to design Adelaide's new gaol. Construction of Adelaide Gaol commenced in 1841.\nAdelaide's early history was marked by economic uncertainty and questionable leadership. The first governor of South Australia, John Hindmarsh, clashed frequently with others, in particular the Resident Commissioner, James Hurtle Fisher. The rural area surrounding Adelaide was surveyed by Light in preparation to sell a total of over of land. Adelaide's early economy started to get on its feet in 1838 with the arrival of livestock from Victoria, New South Wales and Tasmania. Wool production provided an early basis for the South Australian economy. By 1860, wheat farms had been established from Encounter Bay in the south to Clare in the north.\nGeorge Gawler took over from Hindmarsh in late 1838 and, despite being under orders from the \"Select Committee on South Australia\" in Britain not to undertake any public works, promptly oversaw construction of a governor's house, the Adelaide Gaol, police barracks, a hospital, a customs house and a wharf at Port Adelaide. He was criticised for his response to the Maria massacre. Gawler was recalled and replaced by George Edward Grey in 1841. Grey slashed public expenditure against heavy opposition, although its impact was negligible at this point: silver was discovered in Glen Osmond that year, agriculture was well underway, and other mines sprung up all over the state, aiding Adelaide's commercial development. The city exported meat, wool, wine, fruit and wheat by the time Grey left in 1845, contrasting with a low point in 1842 when one-third of Adelaide houses were abandoned.\nTrade links with the rest of the Australian states were established after the Murray River was successfully navigated in 1853 by Francis Cadell, an Adelaide resident. South Australia became a self-governing colony in 1856 with the ratification of a new constitution by the British parliament. Secret ballots were introduced, and a bicameral parliament was elected on 9 March 1857, by which time 109,917 people lived in the province.\nIn 1860, the Thorndon Park reservoir was opened, providing an alternative water source to the now turbid River Torrens. Gas street lighting was implemented in 1867, the University of Adelaide was founded in 1874, the South Australian Art Gallery opened in 1881 and the Happy Valley Reservoir opened in 1896. In the 1890s Australia was affected by a severe economic depression, ending a hectic era of land booms and tumultuous expansionism. Financial institutions in Melbourne and banks in Sydney closed. The national fertility rate fell and immigration was reduced to a trickle.\nThe value of South Australia's exports nearly halved. Drought and poor harvests from 1884 compounded the problems, with some families leaving for Western Australia. Adelaide was not as badly hit as the larger gold-rush cities of Sydney and Melbourne, and silver and lead discoveries at Broken Hill provided some relief. Only one year of deficit was recorded, but the price paid was retrenchments and lean public spending. Wine and copper were the only industries not to suffer a downturn.\n20th century.\nAdelaide was Australia's third largest city for most of the 20th century. Electric street lighting was introduced in 1900 and electric trams were transporting passengers in 1909. 28,000 men were sent to fight in World War I. Historian F. K. Crowley examined the reports of visitors in the early 20th century, noting that \"many visitors to Adelaide admired the foresighted planning of its founders\", as well as pondering the riches of the young city.\nAdelaide enjoyed a postwar boom, entering a time of relative prosperity. Its population grew, and it became the third most populous metropolitan area in the country, after Sydney and Melbourne. Its prosperity was short-lived, with the return of droughts and the Great Depression of the 1930s. It later returned to fortune under strong government leadership. Secondary industries helped reduce the state's dependence on primary industries. World War II brought industrial stimulus and diversification to Adelaide under the Playford Government, which advocated Adelaide as a safe place for manufacturing due to its less vulnerable location. Shipbuilding was expanded at the nearby port of Whyalla.\nThe South Australian Government in this period built on former wartime manufacturing industries but neglected cultural facilities which meant South Australia's economy lagged behind. International manufacturers like Holden and Chrysler made use of these factories around the Adelaide area in suburbs like Elizabeth, completing its transformation from an agricultural service centre to a 20th-century motor city. The Mannum\u2013Adelaide pipeline brought River Murray water to Adelaide in 1955 and an airport opened at West Beach in 1955. Flinders University and the Flinders Medical Centre were established in the 1960s at Bedford Park, south of the city. Today, Flinders Medical Centre is one of the largest teaching hospitals in South Australia. In the post-war years around the early 1960s, Adelaide was surpassed by Brisbane as Australia's third largest city.\nThe Dunstan Governments of the 1970s saw something of an Adelaide \"cultural revival\", establishing a wide array of social reforms. The city became noted for its progressivism as South Australia became the first Australian state or territory to decriminalise homosexuality between consenting adults in 1975. Adelaide became a centre for the arts, building upon the biennial \"Adelaide Festival of Arts\" that commenced in 1960. The State Bank collapsed in 1991 during an economic recession. The effects lasted until 2004, when Standard &amp; Poor's reinstated South Australia's AAA credit rating. Adelaide's tallest building, completed in 2020, is called the Adelaidean and is located at 11 Frome Street.\n21st century.\nIn the early years of the 21st century, a significant increase in the state government's spending on Adelaide's infrastructure occurred. The Rann government invested A$535\u00a0million in a major upgrade of the Adelaide Oval to enable Australian Football League to be played in the city centre and more than A$2 billion to build a new Royal Adelaide Hospital on land adjacent to the Adelaide Railway Station. The Glenelg tramline was extended through the city to Hindmarsh down to East Terrace and the suburban railway line extended south to Seaford.\nFollowing a period of stagnation in the 1990s and 2000s, Adelaide began several major developments and redevelopments. The Adelaide Convention Centre was redeveloped and expanded at a cost of A$350\u00a0million beginning in 2012. Three historic buildings were adapted for modern use: the Torrens Building in Victoria Square as the Adelaide campus for Carnegie Mellon University, University College London, and Torrens University; the Stock Exchange building as the Science Exchange of the Royal Institution Australia; and the Glenside Psychiatric Hospital as the Adelaide Studios of the SA Film Corporation. The government invested more than A$2\u00a0billion to build a desalination plant, powered by renewable energy, as an \"insurance policy\" against droughts affecting Adelaide's water supply. The Adelaide Festival, Fringe, and Womadelaide became annual events.\nGeography.\nAdelaide is north of the Fleurieu Peninsula, on the Adelaide Plains between the Gulf St Vincent and the relatively low-lying Mount Lofty Ranges (Mount Lofty, the highest point, is 710 metres above sea level). The city stretches from the coast to the foothills, and from Gawler at its northern extent to Sellicks Beach in the south. According to Regional Development Australia, an Australian government planning initiative, the \"Adelaide Metropolitan Region\" has a total land area of , while a more expansive definition by the Australian Bureau of Statistics defines a \"Greater Adelaide\" statistical area totalling . The city sits at an average elevation of above sea level. Mount Lofty, east of the Adelaide metropolitan region in the Adelaide Hills at an elevation of , is the tallest point of the city and in the state south of Burra. The city borders the Temperate Grassland of South Australia in the east, an endangered vegetation community.\nMuch of Adelaide was bushland before British settlement, with some variation \u2013 sandhills, swamps and marshlands were prevalent around the coast. The loss of the sandhills to urban development had a particularly destructive effect on the coastline due to erosion. Where practical, the government has implemented programs to rebuild and vegetate sandhills at several of Adelaide's beachside suburbs. Tennyson Dunes is the largest contiguous, tertiary dune system contained entirely within Metropolitan Adelaide, providing refuge for a variety of remnant species formerly found along the entire coastline. Much of the original vegetation has been cleared with what is left to be found in reserves such as the Cleland National Park and Belair National Park. A number of creeks and rivers flow through the Adelaide region. The largest are the Torrens and Onkaparinga catchments. Adelaide relies on its many reservoirs for water supply with the Happy Valley Reservoir supplying around 40% and the much larger Mount Bold Reservoir 10% of Adelaide's domestic requirements respectively.\nGeology.\nAdelaide and its surrounding area is one of the most seismically active regions in Australia. On 1 March 1954 at 3:40\u00a0am Adelaide experienced its largest recorded earthquake to date, with the epicentre 12\u00a0km from the city centre at Darlington, and a reported magnitude of 5.6. There have been smaller earthquakes in 2010, 2011, 2014, 2017, 2018 and 2022.\nThe uplands of the Adelaide Hills, part of the southern Mount Lofty Ranges to the east of Adelaide, are defined on their western side by a number of arcuate faults (the Para, Eden, Clarendon and Willunga Faults), and consist of rocks such as siltstone, dolomite and quartzite, dating from the Neoproterozoic to the middle Cambrian, laid down in the Adelaide Rift Complex, the oldest part of the Adelaide Superbasin.\nMost of the Adelaide metropolitan area lies in the downthrown St Vincent Basin and its embayments, including the Adelaide Plains Sub-basin, and the Golden Grove, Noarlunga and Willunga Embayments. These basins contain deposits of Tertiary marine and non-marine sands and limestones, which form important aquifers. These deposits are overlain by Quaternary alluvial fans and piedmont slope deposits, derived from erosion of the uplands, consisting of sands, clays and gravels, interfingering to the west with transgressive Pleistocene to Holocene marine sands and coastal sediments of the shoreline of Gulf St Vincent.\nUrban layout.\nAdelaide is a planned city, designed by the first Surveyor-General of South Australia, Colonel William Light. His plan, sometimes referred to as \"Light's Vision\" (also the name of a statue of him on Montefiore Hill), arranged Adelaide in a grid, with in the Adelaide city centre and a ring of parks, known as the Adelaide Parklands, surrounding it. Light's selection of the location for the city was initially unpopular with the early settlers, as well as South Australia's first governor, John Hindmarsh, due to its distance from the harbour at Port Adelaide, and the lack of fresh water there.\nLight successfully persisted with his choice of location against this initial opposition. Recent evidence suggests that Light worked closely with George Kingston as well as a team of men to set out Adelaide, using various templates for city plans going back to Ancient Greece, including Italian Renaissance designs and the similar layouts of the American cities Philadelphia and Savannah\u2013which, like Adelaide, follow the same layout of a central city square, four complementing city squares surrounding it and a parklands area that surrounds the city centre.\nThe benefits of Light's design are numerous: Adelaide has had wide multi-lane roads from its beginning, an easily navigable cardinal direction grid layout and an expansive green ring around the city centre. There are two sets of ring roads in Adelaide that have resulted from the original design. The inner ring route (A21) borders the parklands, and the outer route (A3/A13/A16/A17) completely bypasses the inner city via (in clockwise order) Grand Junction Road, Hampstead Road, Ascot Avenue, Portrush Road, Cross Road and South Road.\nSuburban expansion has to some extent outgrown Light's original plan. Numerous former outlying villages and \"country towns\", as well as the satellite city of Elizabeth, have been enveloped by its suburban sprawl. Expanding developments in the Adelaide Hills region led to the construction of the South Eastern Freeway to cope with growth, which has subsequently led to new developments and further improvements to that transport corridor. Similarly, the booming development in Adelaide's South led to the construction of the Southern Expressway.\nNew roads are not the only transport infrastructure developed to cope with the urban growth. The O-Bahn Busway and Adelaide Metro are examples of a unique solution to Tea Tree Gully's transport woes in the 1980s. The development of the nearby suburb of Golden Grove in the late 1980s followed a planned approach to urban growth.\nIn the 1960s, a Metropolitan Adelaide Transport Study Plan was proposed to cater for the future growth of the city. The plan involved the construction of freeways, expressways and the upgrade of certain aspects of the public transport system. The then premier Steele Hall approved many parts of the plan and the government went as far as purchasing land for the project. The later Labor government elected under Don Dunstan shelved the plan, but allowed the purchased land to remain vacant, should the future need for freeways arise. In 1980, the Liberal party won government and premier David Tonkin committed his government to selling off the land acquired for the MATS plan, ensuring that even when needs changed, the construction of most MATS-proposed freeways would be impractical. Some parts of this land have been used for transport, (e.g. the O-Bahn Busway and Southern Expressway), while most has been progressively subdivided for residential use.\nIn 2008, the SA Government announced plans for a network of transport-oriented developments across the Adelaide metropolitan area and purchased a 10 hectare industrial site at Bowden for $52.5\u00a0million as the first of these developments.\nHousing.\nHistorically, Adelaide's suburban residential areas have been characterised by single-storey detached houses built on blocks. A relative lack of suitable, locally available timber for construction purposes led to the early development of a brick-making industry, as well as the use of stone, for houses and other buildings. By 1891, 68% of houses were built of stone, 15% of timber, and 10% of brick, with brick also being widely used in stone houses for quoins, door and window surrounds, and chimneys and fireplaces.\nThere is a wide variety in the styles of these houses. Until the 1960s, most of the more substantial houses were built of red brick, though many front walls were of ornamental stone. Then cream bricks became fashionable, and in the 1970s, deep red and brown bricks became popular. Until the 1970s, roofs tended to be clad with (painted) corrugated iron or cement or clay tiles, usually red \"terracotta\". Since then, Colorbond corrugated steel has dominated. Most roofs are pitched. Flat roofs are not common.\nUp to the 1970s, most houses were of \"double brick\" construction on concrete footings, with timber floors laid on joists supported by \"dwarf walls\". Later houses have mainly been of \"brick veneer\" construction \u2013 structural timber or, more recently, lightweight steel frame on a concrete slab foundation, lined with Gyprock, and with an outer skin of brickwork, to cope with Adelaide's reactive soils, particularly Keswick Clay, black earth and some red-brown earth soils. The use of precast concrete panels for floor and wall construction has also increased. In addition to this, a significant factor in Adelaide's suburban history is the role of the South Australian Housing Trust.\nClimate.\nAdelaide has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (\"Csa\") under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification. The city has hot, dry summers and cool winters with moderate rainfall. Most rain falls in the winter months, leading to the suggestion that the climate be classified as a \"cold monsoon\". Rainfall is unreliable, light and infrequent throughout summer, although heavy falls can occur. The winter has fairly reliable rainfall with June being the wettest month of the year, averaging around 80\u00a0mm. Frosts are occasional, with the most notable occurrences in 1908 and 1982. Hail may occur in winter.\nAdelaide is a windy city with significant wind chill in winter, which makes the temperature seem colder than it actually is. Snowfall in the metropolitan area is extremely rare, although light and sporadic falls in the nearby hills and at Mount Lofty occur during winter. Dewpoints in the summer typically range from . There are usually several days in summer where the temperature reaches or above.\nWhile conditions vary from year-to-year, a warming trend has been increasing in recent years, and with drought conditions experienced in SA in 2024\u221225, Adelaide has had to rely on desalination to augment its water supply.\nTemperature extremes range from \u22122.6\u00a0\u00b0C (31.4\u00a0\u00b0F), 8 June 1982 to 47.7\u00a0\u00b0C (117.9\u00a0\u00b0F), 24 January 2019. The city features 90.6 clear days annually.\nThe average sea temperature ranges from in August to in February.\nLiveability.\nAdelaide was consistently ranked in the world's 10 most liveable cities through the 2010s by The Economist Intelligence Unit. \nIn June 2021, \"The Economist\" ranked Adelaide the third most liveable city in the world, behind Auckland and Osaka. In June 2023, Adelaide was ranked the twelfth most liveable city in the world by the Economist Intelligence Unit.\nIn December 2021, Adelaide was named the world's second National Park City, after the state government had lobbied for this title.\nIt was ranked the most liveable city in Australia by the Property Council of Australia, based on surveys of residents' views of their own city, between 2010 and 2013, dropping to second place in 2014.\nGovernance.\nAdelaide, as the capital of South Australia, is the seat of the Government of South Australia. The bicameral Parliament of South Australia consists of the lower house known as the House of Assembly and the upper house known as the Legislative Council. General elections are held every four years, the last being the 2022 South Australian state election.\nAs Adelaide is South Australia's capital and most populous city, the State Government co-operates extensively with the City of Adelaide. In 2006, the Ministry for the City of Adelaide was created to facilitate the State Government's collaboration with the Adelaide City Council and the Lord Mayor to improve Adelaide's image. The State Parliament's Capital City Committee is also involved in the governance of the City of Adelaide, being primarily concerned with the planning of Adelaide's urban development and growth.\nReflecting South Australia's status as Australia's most centralised state, Adelaide elects a substantial majority of the South Australian House of Assembly. Of the 47 seats in the chamber, 34 seats (three-quarters of the legislature) are based in Adelaide, and two rural seats include Adelaide suburbs.\nLocal governments.\n \nThe Adelaide metropolitan area is divided between nineteen local government areas. At its centre, the City of Adelaide administers the Adelaide city centre, North Adelaide, and the surrounding Adelaide Parklands. It is the oldest municipal authority in Australia and was established in 1840, when Adelaide and Australia's first mayor, James Hurtle Fisher, was elected. From 1919 onwards, the city has had a Lord Mayor, the current being Lord Mayor \"The Right Honourable\" Jane Lomax-Smith.\nDemography.\nAdelaide's inhabitants are known as Adelaideans.\nCompared with Australia's other state capitals, Adelaide is growing at a rate similar to Sydney and Hobart (see List of cities in Australia by population). In 2024, it had a metropolitan population (including suburbs) of 1,469,163, making it Australia's fifth-largest city. 77% of the population of South Australia are residents of the Adelaide metropolitan area, making South Australia one of the most centralised states.\nMajor areas of population growth in recent years have been in outer suburbs such as Mawson Lakes and Golden Grove. Adelaide's inhabitants occupy 366,912 houses, 57,695 semi-detached, row terrace or town houses and 49,413 flats, units or apartments.\nAbout one sixth (17.1%) of the population had university qualifications. The number of Adelaideans with vocational qualifications (such as tradespersons) fell from 62.1% of the labour force in the 1991 census to 52.4% in the 2001 census.\nAdelaide is ageing more rapidly than other Australian capital cities. More than a quarter (27.5%) of Adelaide's population is aged 55\u00a0years or older, in comparison to the national average of 25.6%. Adelaide has the lowest number of children (under-15-year-olds), who comprised 17.7% of the population, compared to the national average of 19.3%.\nAncestry and immigration.\nAt the 2021 census, the most commonly nominated ancestries were: \nOverseas-born Adelaideans composed 31.3% of the total population at the 2021 census. The five largest groups of overseas-born were from England (5.7%), India (3.1%), Mainland China (1.8%), Vietnam (1.2%) and Italy (1.1%).\nSuburbs including Newton, Payneham and Campbelltown in the east and Torrensville, West Lakes and Fulham to the west, have large Greek and Italian communities. The Italian consulate is located in the western suburb of Hindmarsh. Large Vietnamese populations are settled in the north-western suburbs of Woodville, Kilkenny, Pennington, Mansfield Park and Athol Park and also Parafield Gardens and Pooraka in Adelaide's north. Migrants from India and Sri Lanka have settled into inner suburban areas of Adelaide including the inner northern suburbs of Blair Athol, Kilburn and Enfield and the inner southern suburbs of Plympton, Park Holme and Kurralta Park.\nSuburbs such as Para Hills, Salisbury, Ingle Farm and Blair Athol in the north and Findon, West Croydon and Seaton and other Western suburbs have sizeable Afghan communities. Chinese migrants favour settling in the eastern and north eastern suburbs including Kensington Gardens, Greenacres, Modbury and Golden Grove. Mawson Lakes has a large international student population, due to its proximity to the University of South Australia campus.\nAt the 2021 census, 1.7% of Adelaide's population identified as being Indigenous \u2014 Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders.\nLanguage.\nAt the 2016 census, 75.4% of the population spoke English at home. The other languages most commonly spoken at home were Italian (2.1%), Standard Mandarin (2.1%), Greek (1.7%) Vietnamese (1.4%), and Cantonese (0.7%). The Kaurna language, spoken by the area's original inhabitants, had no living speakers in the middle of the 20th century, but since the 1990s there has been a sustained revival effort from academics and Kaurna elders.\nReligion.\nAdelaide was founded on a vision of religious tolerance that attracted a wide variety of religious practitioners. This led to it being known as \"The City of Churches\". But approximately 28% of the population expressed no religious affiliation in the 2011 Census, compared with the national average of 22.3%, making Adelaide one of Australia's least religious cities. According to 2021 census, 39.8% population of Adelaide identifies as Christian, with the largest denominations being Catholic (16.4%), Anglican (7.0%), Uniting Church (3.9%) and Greek Orthodox (2.4%). Non-Christian faith communities representing 9.5% from Adelaide's population, includes Islam (2.8%), Hinduism (2.7%) and Buddhism (2.3%).\nThe Jewish community of the city dates back to 1840. Eight years later, 58 Jews lived in the city. A synagogue was built in 1871, when 435 Jews lived in the city. Many took part in the city councils, such as Judah Moss Solomon (1852\u201366). Three Jews have been elected to the position of city mayor. In 1968, the Jewish population of Adelaide numbered about 1,200; in 2001, according to the Australian census, 979 persons declared themselves to be Jewish by religion. In 2011, over 1,000 Jews were living in the city, served by an Orthodox synagogue, Adelaide Hebrew Congregation and a Reform synagogue, Beit Shalom, in addition to a virtual Jewish museum. Massada College, a Jewish day school opened in the city in 1976 and closed in 2011. The Adelaide Holocaust Museum and Andrew Steiner Education Centre opened in 2020.\nThe \"Afghan\" community in Australia first became established in the 1860s when camels and their Pathan, Punjabi, Baluchi and Sindhi handlers began to be used to open up settlement in the continent's arid interior. Until eventually superseded by the advent of the railways and motor vehicles, camels played an invaluable economic and social role in transporting heavy loads of goods to and from isolated settlements and mines. This is acknowledged by the name of The Ghan, the passenger train operating between Adelaide, Alice Springs, and Darwin. The Central Adelaide Mosque is regarded as Australia's oldest permanent mosque; an earlier mosque at Marree in northern South Australia, dating from 1861 to 1862 and subsequently abandoned or demolished, has now been rebuilt.\nEconomy.\nSouth Australia's largest employment sectors are health care and social assistance, surpassing manufacturing in SA as the largest employer since 2006\u201307. In 2009\u201310, manufacturing in SA had average annual employment of 83,700 persons compared with 103,300 for health care and social assistance. Health care and social assistance represented nearly 13% of the state average annual employment. The Adelaide Hills wine region is an iconic and viable economic region for both the state and country in terms of wine production and sale. The 2014 vintage is reported as consisting of red grapes crushed valued at A$8,196,142 and white grapes crushed valued at $14,777,631.\nThe retail trade is the second largest employer in SA (2009\u201310), with over 91,900 jobs, and 12 per cent of the state workforce.\nManufacturing, defence technology, high-tech electronic systems and research, commodity export and corresponding service industries all play a role in the SA economy. Almost half of all cars produced in Australia were made in Adelaide at the Holden Elizabeth Plant in Elizabeth. The site ceased operating in November 2017.\nThe collapse of the State Bank in 1992 resulted in large levels of state public debt (as much as A$4\u00a0billion). The collapse meant that successive governments enacted lean budgets, cutting spending, which was a setback to the further economic development of the city and state. The debt has more recently been reduced with the State Government once again receiving a AAA+ Credit Rating.\nThe global media conglomerate News Corporation was founded in, and until 2004 incorporated in, Adelaide and it is still considered its \"spiritual\" home by its founder, Rupert Murdoch. Australia's largest oil company, Santos, prominent South Australian brewery, Coopers, and national retailer Harris Scarfe also call Adelaide their home.\nIn 2018, at which time more than 80 organisations employed 800 people in the space sector in South Australia, Adelaide was chosen for the headquarters of a new Australian Space Agency. The agency opened its in 2020. It is working to triple the size of the Australian space industry and create 20,000 new jobs by 2030.\nDefence industry.\nAdelaide is home to a large proportion of Australia's defence industries, which contribute over A$1\u00a0billion to South Australia's Gross State Product. The principal government military research institution, the Defence Science and Technology Organisation, and other defence technology organisations such as BAE Systems Australia and Lockheed Martin Australia, are north of Salisbury and west of Elizabeth in an area now called \"Edinburgh Parks\", adjacent to RAAF Base Edinburgh.\nOthers, such as Saab Systems and Raytheon, are in or near Technology Park. ASC Pty Ltd, is based in the industrial suburb of Osborne and is also a part of Technology Park. South Australia was charged with constructing Australia's s and more recently the A$6\u00a0billion contract to construct the Royal Australian Navy's new air-warfare destroyers.\nEmployment statistics.\nAs of November\u00a02015[ [update]], Greater Adelaide had an unemployment rate of 7.4% with a youth unemployment rate of 15%.\nThe median weekly individual income for people aged 15\u00a0years and over was $447 per week in 2006, compared with $466 nationally. The median family income was $1,137 per week, compared with $1,171 nationally. Adelaide's housing and living costs are substantially lower than that of other Australian cities, with housing being notably cheaper. The median Adelaide house price is half that of Sydney and two-thirds that of Melbourne. The three-month trend unemployment rate to March 2007 was 6.2%. The Northern suburbs' unemployment rate is disproportionately higher than the other regions of Adelaide at 8.3%, while the East and South are lower than the Adelaide average at 4.9% and 5.0% respectively.\nHouse prices.\nOver the decade March 2001 \u2013 March 2010, Metropolitan Adelaide median house prices approximately tripled. (approx. 285% \u2013 approx. 11%p.a. compounding)\nIn the five years March 2007 \u2013 March 2012, prices increased by approx. 27% \u2013 approx. 5%p.a. compounding. March 2012 \u2013 March 2017 saw a further increase of 19% \u2013 approx. 3.5%p.a. compounding.\nIn summary:\nEach quarter, The Alternative and Direct Investment Securities Association (ADISA) publishes a list of median house sale prices by suburb and Local Government Area. (Previously, this was done by REISA) Due to the small sizes of many of Adelaide's suburbs, the low volumes of sales in these suburbs, and (over time) the huge variations in the numbers of sales in a suburb in a quarter, statistical analysis of \"the most expensive suburb\" is unreliable; the suburbs appearing in the \"top 10 most expensive suburbs this quarter\" list is constantly varying. Quarterly Reports for the last two years can be found on the REISA website.\nEducation and research.\nEducation forms an increasingly important part of the city's economy, with the South Australian Government and educational institutions attempting to position Adelaide as \"Australia's education hub\" and marketing it as a \"Learning City\". The number of international students studying in Adelaide has increased rapidly in recent years to 30,726 in 2015, of which 1,824 were secondary school students. \nAdelaide is the birthplace of three Nobel laureates, more than any other Australian city: physicist William Lawrence Bragg and pathologists Howard Florey and Robin Warren, all of whom completed secondary and tertiary education at St Peter's College and the University of Adelaide.\nAdelaide is also the hometown of mathematician Terence Tao.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nThere are two systems of primary and secondary schools, a public system operated by the South Australian Government's Department for Education, and a private system of independent and Catholic schools. South Australian schools provide education under the Australian Curriculum for reception to Year 10 students. In Years 10 to 12, students study for the South Australian Certificate of Education (SACE). They have the option of incorporating vocational education and training (VET) courses or a flexible learning option (FLO). South Australia also has 24 schools that use International Baccalaureate programs as an alternative to the Australian Curriculum or SACE. These programs include the IB Primary Years Programme, the IB Middle Years Programme, and the IB Diploma Programme.\nFor South Australian students who cannot attend a traditional school, including students who live in rural or remote areas, the state government runs the Open Access College (OAC), which provides virtual teaching. The OAC has a campus in Marden which caters to students from reception to Year 12 and adults who haven't been able to complete their SACE. Guardians are also able to apply for their child to be educated from home as long as they provide an education program which meets the same requirements as the Australian Curriculum as well as opportunities for social interaction.\nTertiary education.\nThere are three public universities local to Adelaide, as well as one private university and three constituent colleges of foreign universities. Flinders University of South Australia, the University of Adelaide, the University of South Australia and Torrens University Australia\u2014part of the Laureate International Universities are based in Adelaide. The University of Adelaide was ranked in the top 150 universities worldwide. Flinders ranked in the top 250 and Uni SA in the top 300. Torrens University Australia is part of an international network of over 70 higher education institutions in more than 30 countries worldwide. \nThe University of Adelaide, with 25,000 students, is Australia's third-oldest university and a member of the leading \"Group of Eight\". It has five campuses throughout the state, including two in the city-centre, and a campus in Singapore. The University of South Australia, with 37,000 students, has two North Terrace campuses, three other campuses in the metropolitan area and campuses in the regional cities of Whyalla and Mount Gambier. The University of Adelaide and the University of South Australia have had multiple proposals to merge into a single university. A proposal in 2018 failed due to uncertainty as to the new name and leadership of the merged university. In 2022, the universities announced a new merger proposal, with the name and leadership issues settled and support from the South Australian government.\nFlinders University, with 25,184 students, is based in the southern suburb of Bedford Park, alongside the Flinders Medical Centre, with additional campuses in neighbouring Tonsley and in Victoria Square in the city centre.\nIn 2024, the University of the Sunshine Coast opened a new campus in Adelaide where undergraduate and master's courses in ICT and business are offered.\nThe Adelaide College of Divinity is at Brooklyn Park.\nThere are several South Australian TAFE (Technical and Further Education) campuses in the metropolitan area that provide a range of vocational education and training. The Adelaide College of the Arts, as a school of TAFE SA, provides nationally recognised training in visual and performing arts.\nStudyAdelaide, a collaboration between the South Australian government and the tertiary education sector, maintains an on-line list of schools, universities, and higher education institutions in SA.\nResearch.\nIn addition to the universities, Adelaide is home to research institutes, including the Royal Institution of Australia, established in 2009 as a counterpart to the two-hundred-year-old Royal Institution of Great Britain. Many of the organisations involved in research tend to be geographically clustered throughout the Adelaide metropolitan area:\nCultural life.\nWhile established as a British province, and very much English in terms of its culture, Adelaide attracted immigrants from other parts of Europe early on, including German and other European non-conformists escaping religious persecution. The first German Lutherans arrived in 1838, bringing with them the vine cuttings that they used to found the acclaimed wineries of the Barossa Valley.\nThe Royal Adelaide Show is an annual agricultural show and state fair, established in 1839 and now a huge event held in the Adelaide Showground annually.\nAdelaide's arts scene flourished in the 1960s and 1970s with the support of successive premiers from both major political parties. The renowned Adelaide Festival of Arts was established in 1960 under Thomas Playford, which in the same year spawned an unofficial uncurated series of performances and exhibits which grew into the Adelaide Fringe. Construction of the Adelaide Festival Centre began under Steele Hall in 1970 and was completed under the subsequent government of Don Dunstan, who also established the South Australian Film Corporation in 1972 and the State Opera of South Australia in 1976.\nOver time, the Adelaide Festival expanded to include Adelaide Writers' Week and WOMADelaide, and other separate festivals were established, such as the Adelaide Cabaret Festival (2002), the Adelaide Festival of Ideas (1999), the Adelaide Film Festival (2013), FEAST (1999, a queer culture), Tasting Australia (1997, a food and wine affair), and Illuminate Adelaide (2021). With the Festival, the Fringe, WOMADelaide, Writers' Week and the Adelaide 500 street motor racing event (along with evening music concerts) all happening in early March, the period became known colloquially as \"Mad March\".\nIn 2014, Ghil'ad Zuckermann founded the Adelaide Language Festival.\nThere are many international cultural fairs, most notably the German Sch\u00fctzenfest and Greek Glendi. Adelaide holds an annual Christmas pageant, the world's largest Christmas parade.\nNorth Terrace institutions.\nAs the state capital, Adelaide has a great number of cultural institutions, many of them along the boulevard of North Terrace. The Art Gallery of South Australia, with about 35,000 works, holds Australia's second largest state-based collection. Adjacent are the South Australian Museum and State Library of South Australia. The Adelaide Botanic Garden, National Wine Centre and Tandanya National Aboriginal Cultural Institute are nearby in the East End of the city. In the back of the State Library lies the Migration Museum, Australia's oldest museum of its kind.\nFurther west, the Lion Arts Centre is home to ACE Open, which showcases contemporary art; Dance Hub SA; and other studios and arts industry spaces. The Mercury Cinema and the JamFactory ceramics and design gallery are just around the corner.\nPerforming arts venues.\nThe Adelaide Festival Centre (which includes the Dunstan Playhouse, Festival Theatre and Space Theatre), on the banks of the Torrens, is the focal point for much of the cultural activity in the city and home to the State Theatre Company of South Australia. Other live music and theatre venues include the Adelaide Entertainment Centre; Adelaide Oval; Memorial Drive Park; Thebarton Theatre; Adelaide Town Hall; Her Majesty's Theatre; Queen's Theatre; Holden Street Theatres; and the Hopgood Theatre.\nThe Lion Arts Factory, within the Lion Arts Centre, hosts contemporary music in a wide range of genres, as does \"The Gov\" in Hindmarsh. The city also has numerous smaller theatres, pubs and cabaret bars which host performances.\nMusic.\nIn 2015, it was said that there were now more live music venues per capita in Adelaide than any other capital city in the southern hemisphere, \"Lonely Planet\" labelled Adelaide \"Australia's live music city\", and the city was recognised as a \"City of Music\" by the UNESCO Creative Cities Network. Although there were many pubs hosting live music in the CBD in past, the number has slowly diminished. The Grace Emily on Waymouth Street, which was refurbished as a live music venue around 2000, is popular with musicians and patrons alike. The Crown &amp; Anchor (\"the Cranker\") was saved from demolition in 2024 after a vigorous campaign by the public as well as many musicians and politicians. New legislation passed on 11 September 2024 designates the entire Adelaide CBD as a \"live music venue area\", and gives protection to selected live music venues.\nIn addition to its own WOMAD (WOMADelaide), Adelaide has attracted several touring music festivals, including Creamfields, Laneway, and Groovin' (some since defunct).\nAdelaide has produced musical groups and individuals who have achieved national and international fame. These include the Adelaide Symphony Orchestra, the Adelaide Youth Orchestra, rock bands The Angels, Atlas Genius, Cold Chisel, The Superjesus, Wolf &amp; Cub, roots/blues group The Audreys, internationally acclaimed metal acts I Killed The Prom Queen and Double Dragon, popular Australian hip-hop outfit Hilltop Hoods, as well as pop acts like Sia, Orianthi, Guy Sebastian, and Wes Carr, and the internationally successful tribute act, The Australian Pink Floyd Show.\nNoted rocker Jimmy Barnes (formerly lead vocalist with Cold Chisel) spent most of his youth in the northern suburb of Elizabeth. Australian singer-songwriter Paul Kelly grew up in Adelaide and was head prefect at Rostrevor College. The first \"Australian Idol\" winner, Guy Sebastian, hails from the north-eastern suburb of Golden Grove.\nTelevision.\nAdelaide is served by numerous digital free-to-air television channels:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAll of the five Australian national television networks broadcast both high-definition digital and standard-definition digital television services in Adelaide. They share three transmission towers on the ridge near the summit of Mount Lofty. There are two other transmission sites at 25 Grenfell Street, Adelaide and Elizabeth Downs. The two government-funded stations are run by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC South Australia) and the Special Broadcasting Service (SBS). The Seven Network and Network Ten both own their Adelaide stations (SAS-7 and ADS-10 respectively). Adelaide's NWS-9 is part of the Nine Network. Adelaide also has a community television station, Channel 44.\nAs part of a nationwide phase-out of analogue television in Australia, Adelaide's analogue television service was shut down on 2 April 2013.\nThe Foxtel pay TV service is also available via cable or satellite to the entire metropolitan area.\nAll the major broadcasting networks also operate online on-demand television services, alongside internet-only services such as Stan, Fetch TV, Netflix, YouTube, Disney+, and Kayo Sports.\nRadio.\nThere are 20 radio stations that serve the metropolitan area, as well as four stations that serve only parts of the metropolitan area; six commercial stations, six community stations, six national stations and two narrowcast stations.\nDAB+ digital radio has been broadcasting in metropolitan Adelaide since 20 May 2009, and currently offers a choice of 41 stations all operated by the existing licensed radio broadcasters, which includes high-quality simulcast of all AM and FM stations.\nSport.\nThe main sports played professionally in Adelaide are Australian Rules football, soccer, cricket, netball, and basketball. Adelaide is the home of two Australian Football League teams: the Adelaide Football Club and Port Adelaide Football Club, and one A-League soccer team, Adelaide United. A local Australian rules football league, the South Australian National Football League (SANFL), is made up of 10 teams from around Adelaide. The SANFL has been in operation since 1877 when it began as the South Australian Football Association (SAFA) before changing its name to the SANFL in 1927. The SANFL is the oldest surviving football league of any code played in Australia.\nUntil the completion of the 2012\u201314 renovation and upgrade of the Adelaide Oval, most large sporting events took place at either Football Park (the then home base of the Adelaide Crows, and the then Port Adelaide home game venue), or the historic Adelaide Oval, home of the South Australia Redbacks and the Adelaide Strikers cricket teams. Since completion of the upgrade, home games for Adelaide Crows and Port Adelaide now take place at Adelaide Oval.\nSince 1884, Adelaide Oval has also hosted an international cricket test every summer, along with a number of One Day International cricket matches. Memorial Drive Park, adjacent to the Adelaide Oval, used to host Davis Cup and other major tennis events, including the Australian Open and the Adelaide International. Adelaide's professional association football team, Adelaide United, play in the A-League. Founded in 2003, their home ground is Coopers Stadium, which has a capacity of 16,500 and is one of the few purpose-built soccer stadia in Australia. Prior to United's foundation, Adelaide City and West Adelaide represented the city in the National Soccer League. The two sides, which contest the Adelaide derby against one another, now play in the National Premier Leagues South Australia.\nFor two years, 1997 and 1998, Adelaide was represented in Australia's top level rugby league, after the New South Wales Rugby League had played a single game per season at the Adelaide Oval for five years starting in 1991. The Adelaide Rams were formed and played in the breakaway Super League (SL) competition in 1997 before moving to the new National Rugby League in 1998. Initially playing at the Adelaide Oval, the club moved to the more suitable Hindmarsh Stadium late in the 1998 season. As part of a peace deal with the Australian Rugby League to end the Super League war, the club's owners News Limited (who were also owners of the SL) suddenly closed the club only weeks before the start of the 1999 season.\nAdelaide has two professional basketball teams, the men's team being the Adelaide 36ers which plays in the National Basketball League (NBL) and the women's team, the Adelaide Lightning which plays in the Women's National Basketball League (WNBL). The Adelaide 36ers play at the Adelaide Entertainment Centre while the Adelaide Lightning play at the Adelaide Arena (Previously Titanium Security Arena). Adelaide has a professional netball team, the Adelaide Thunderbirds, which plays in the national netball competition, the Super Netball championship, with home games played at Netball SA Stadium. The Thunderbirds occasionally play games or finals at the Titanium Security Arena, while international netball matches are usually played at the 10,500 seat Adelaide Entertainment Centre. The Titanium Security Arena has a capacity of 8,000 and is the largest purpose-built basketball stadium in Australia.\nSince 1999 Adelaide and its surrounding areas have hosted the Tour Down Under bicycle race, organised and directed by Adelaide-based Michael Turtur. Turtur won an Olympic gold medal for Australia in the 4000\u00a0m team pursuit at the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics. The Tour Down Under is the largest cycling event outside Europe and was the first event outside Europe to be granted UCI ProTour status.\nThe 2024 Women's Tour Down Under cycle stage race was held in and around Adelaide, South Australia from 12 to 14 January 2024\nAdelaide maintains a franchise in the Australian Baseball League, the Adelaide Giants. They have been playing since 2009, and their home stadium (until 2016) was Norwood Oval. From 2016 the team moved to the Diamond Sports Stadium located near the Adelaide International Airport due to renovations at Norwood.\nAdelaide also has an ice hockey team, Adelaide Adrenaline in the Australian Ice Hockey League (AIHL). It was national champions in 2009 and plays its games at the IceArenA.\nThe Australian Grand Prix for World Championship Formula One racing was hosted by Adelaide from 1985 to 1995 on the Adelaide Street Circuit which was laid out in the city's East End as well as the eastern parklands including the Victoria Park Racecourse. The Grand Prix became a source of pride, and losing the event to Melbourne in a surprise announcement in mid-1993 left a void that has since been filled with the Adelaide 500 for V8 Supercar racing, held on a modified version of the same street circuit. The Classic Adelaide, a rally of classic sporting vehicles, is also held in the city and its surrounds.\nAdelaide formerly had three horse racing venues. Victoria Park, Cheltenham Park Racecourse, both of which have now closed, and Morphettville Racecourse that remains the home of the South Australian Jockey Club. It also has Globe Derby Park for Harness racing that opened in 1969, and by 1973 had become Adelaide's premier harness racing venue taking over from the Wayville Showgrounds, as well as Greyhound Park for greyhound racing that opened in 1972.\nThe World Solar Challenge race attracts teams from around the world, most of which are fielded by universities or corporations, although some are fielded by high schools. The race has a 20-years' history spanning nine races, with the inaugural event taking place in 1987. Adelaide hosted the 2012 World Bowls Championships at Lockleys Bowling Club, becoming the third city in the world to have held the championships twice, having previously hosted the event in 1996.\nDirt track speedway is also popular in Adelaide with three operating speedways. Adelaide Motorsport Park, located adjacent to the Adelaide International Raceway road racing circuit at Virginia ( north of the city centre) has been in continuous operation since 1979 after the closure of the popular Rowley Park Speedway. Gillman Speedway located in the semi-industrial suburb of Gillman, has been in operation since 1998 and caters to Motorcycle speedway and Sidecars, while the Sidewinders Speedway located in Wingfield is also a motorcycle speedway dedicated to Under-16 riders and has been in operation since 1978.\nIn 2016, backed by South Australia's Peregrine Corporation opened up a multi-purpose facility; a state-of-the-art motorsporting park and a hotel alongside its newer OTR service station outside a small township of Tailem Bend currently named The Bend Motorsport Park. Design for thrill seekers and rev-heads the facility currently host South Australia's second Supercars motoring event during a round in August.\nAdelaide is home to the Great Southern Slam, the world's largest roller derby tournament. The tournament has been held biennially over Australia's Queen's Birthday holiday weekend since 2010. In 2014, and 2016 the tournament featured 45 teams playing in two divisions. In 2018, the tournament has expanded to 48 teams competing in three divisions.\nInfrastructure.\nTransport.\nBeing centrally located on the Australian mainland, Adelaide forms a strategic transport hub for east\u2013west and north\u2013south routes. The city itself has a metropolitan public transport system managed by and known as the Adelaide Metro. The Adelaide Metro consists of a contracted bus system including the O-Bahn Busway, 7 commuter rail lines (diesel and electric), and a small tram network operating between inner suburb Hindmarsh, the city centre, and seaside Glenelg with more recent small offshoots in the city (to Botanical Gardens and Festival Plaza). Tramways were largely dismantled in the 1950s, but saw a revival in the 2010s with upgrades and extensions.\nRoad transport in Adelaide has historically been easier than many of the other Australian cities, with a well-defined city layout and wide multiple-lane roads from the beginning of its development. Adelaide was known as a \"twenty-minute city\", with commuters having been able to travel from metropolitan outskirts to the city proper in roughly twenty minutes. However, such arterial roads often experience traffic congestion as the city grows.\nThe Adelaide metropolitan area has one freeway and four expressways. In order of construction, they are:\nAirports.\nThe Adelaide metropolitan area has two commercial airports, Adelaide Airport and Parafield Airport. Adelaide Airport, in Adelaide's south-western suburbs, serves almost 9 million passengers annually, with an extensive number of direct flight routes within Australia, as well as other destinations in Oceania, Asia and North America. Parafield Airport, Adelaide's second airport north of the city centre, is used for small aircraft, pilot training and recreational aviation purposes. Parafield Airport served as Adelaide's main aerodrome until the opening of the Adelaide Airport in February 1955.\nAdelaide is also home to a military airport, known as RAAF Base Edinburgh, located in the northern suburbs. It was built in 1955 in a joint initiative with the United Kingdom for weapon development.\nHealth.\nAdelaide's two largest hospitals are the Royal Adelaide Hospital (RAH) in Adelaide Parklands, a teaching hospital affiliated with the University of Adelaide (800 beds), and the Flinders Medical Centre (580 beds) at Bedford Park, affiliated with Flinders University. The RAH also operates additional campuses for specialist care throughout the suburbs including the Hampstead Rehabilitation Centre (150 beds) at Northfield and the Glenside Campus (129 beds) for acute mental health services.\nOther major public hospitals are the Women's and Children's Hospital (305 beds), at North Adelaide; the Queen Elizabeth Hospital (340 beds) at Woodville; Modbury Hospital (174 beds) at Modbury; and the Lyell McEwin Hospital (198 beds) at Elizabeth Vale. Numerous private hospitals are also located throughout the city, with the largest operators being not-for-profits Adelaide Community Healthcare Alliance (three hospitals) and Calvary Care (four hospitals).\nIn 2017, the RAH was relocated from the city's East End to a new AU$2.3\u00a0billion facility built over former railyards in the West End. The state-of-the-art hospital forms part of a new biomedical precinct called BioMed City that collocates the South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute (SAHMRI), the University of Adelaide Health and Medical Sciences building, the University of South Australia's Health Innovation Building, and the state's Dental Hospital. SAHMRI, with additional external funding, has built a $300\u00a0million second facility completed in 2024, which was intended to house the Australian Bragg Centre with Australia's first proton therapy unit. Construction is underway for the Women's and Children's Hospital to be relocated to the precinct adjacent the RAH by 2030.\nThe largest provider of community health care within Adelaide is the not-for-profit Royal District Nursing Service, which provides out of hospital care and hospital avoidance care.\nEnergy.\nAdelaide's energy requirements were originally met by the Adelaide Electric Supply Company, which was nationalised by the Playford government in 1946, becoming the Electricity Trust of South Australia (ETSA). Despite significant public opposition and the Labor party's anti-privatisation stance which left the Liberal party one vote short of the numbers needed to pass the legislation, ETSA was privatised by the Olsen Government in 1999 by way of a 200-year lease for the distribution network (ETSA\u00a0Utilities, later renamed SA Power Networks) and the outright purchase of ETSA Power by the Cheung Kong Holdings for $3.5\u00a0billion (11 times ETSA's annual earnings) after Labor MP Trevor Crothers resigned from the party and voted with the government.\nThe electricity retail market was opened to competition in 2003 and although competition was expected to result in lower retail costs, prices increased by 23.7% in the market's first year. In 2004, the privatisation was deemed to be a failure with consumers paying 60% more for their power and with the state government estimated to lose $3\u00a0billion in power generation net income in the first ten years of privatisation. In 2012, the industry came under scrutiny for allegedly reducing supply by shutting down generators during periods of peak demand to force prices up. Increased media attention also revealed that in 2009 the state government had approved a 46% increase in retail prices to cover expected increases in the costs of generation while generation costs had in fact fallen 35% by 2012. South Australia has the highest retail price for electricity in the country.\nPrivatisation led to competition from a variety of companies who now separately provide for the generation, transmission, distribution and retail sales of gas and electricity. Electricity generation comes from a range of technologies and operators. ElectraNet operates the high-voltage electricity transmission network. SA Power Networks distributes electricity to end users. The largest electricity and gas retailing companies are also the largest generating companies.\nThe largest fossil fuel power stations are the Torrens Island Power Station gas-fired plant operated by AGL Energy and the Pelican Point Power Station operated by Engie. South Australia also has wind and solar power and connections to the national grid. Gas is supplied from the Moomba Gas Processing Plant in the Cooper Basin via the Moomba Adelaide Pipeline System and the SEAGas pipeline from Victoria.\nIn 2011, South Australia generated 18% of its electricity from wind power, and had 51% of the installed capacity of wind generators in Australia.\nDue to almost universal blackouts within the city during September 2016, the state worked with Tesla to produce the world's largest electricity battery at Hornsdale Power Reserve which has increased that state's electrical security to the extent in which large blackouts are no longer an event.\nWater.\nThe provision of water services is by the government-owned SA Water. Adelaide's water is supplied from its seven reservoirs: Mount Bold, Happy Valley, Myponga, Millbrook, Hope Valley, Little Para and South Para. The yield from these reservoir catchments can be as little as 10% of the city's requirements (90GL per annum) in drought years and about 60% in average years. The remaining demand is met by the pumping of water from the River Murray.\nA sea-water desalination plant capable of supplying 100GL per annum was built during the 2001\u20132009 drought; however, it operated at about 8% of its capacity until 2019. In December 2018, the State and Federal Governments agreed to fund a $2m study to determine how the plant could be used to reduce reliance on river water, in an effort to help save the Murray River basin and mouth (including the Coorong) from further ecological damage.\nCommunications.\nAdelaideFree WiFi is a citywide free Wi-Fi network covering most of the inner city areas of Adelaide, primarily the Adelaide CBD and Northern Adelaide precincts. It was officially launched at the Adelaide Central Markets on Tuesday 25 June 2014. It was originally provided by Internode with infrastructure provided by outdoor Cisco WiFi N access points attached to the top of lighting poles, as well as inside cafes and businesses across the city. In 2023, a new agreement was reached between the City of Adelaide and TPG Telecom to replace the network infrastructure, improving network speed and coverage.\nSister cities.\nThe City of Adelaide has been involved in the sister cities movement since 1972. As of 2023[ [update]] it has long-term international partnership arrangements with five cities, known as sister cities, based on formal agreements between Adelaide and each city. This allows collaboration in the cultural, educational, business, and technical spheres. The five sister cities are:\nThree cities are known as friendship cities, based on informal partnerships between three cities that promote collaboration and a friendly relationship between three cities:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1151", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1151", "title": "AK47", "text": ""}
{"id": "1152", "revid": "711914", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1152", "title": "Alan Garner", "text": "English novelist (born 1934)\nAlan Garner (born 17 October 1934) is an English novelist best known for his children's fantasy novels and his retellings of traditional British folk tales. Much of his work is rooted in the landscape, history and folklore of his native county of Cheshire, North West England, being set in the region and making use of the native Cheshire dialect.\nBorn in Congleton, Garner grew up in Alderley Edge, and spent much of his youth in the wooded area known locally as \"The Edge\", where he gained an early interest in the folklore of the region. Studying at Manchester Grammar School and then briefly at Oxford University, in 1957 he moved to the village of Blackden, where he bought and renovated an Early Modern Period (circa 1590) building known as Toad Hall. His first novel, \"The Weirdstone of Brisingamen\", was published in 1960. A children's fantasy novel set on the Edge, it incorporated elements of local folklore in its plot and characters. Garner wrote a sequel, \"The Moon of Gomrath\" (1963), and a third book, \"Boneland\" (2012). He wrote several fantasy novels, including \"Elidor\" (1965), \"The Owl Service\" (1967) and \"Red Shift\" (1973).\nTurning away from fantasy as a genre, Garner produced \"The Stone Book Quartet\" (1979), a series of four short novellas detailing a day in the life of four generations of his family. He also published a series of British folk tales which he had rewritten in a series of books entitled \"Alan Garner's Fairy Tales of Gold\" (1979), \"Alan Garner's Book of British Fairy Tales\" (1984) and \"A Bag of Moonshine\" (1986). In his subsequent novels, \"Strandloper\" (1996) and \"Thursbitch\" (2003), he continued writing tales revolving around Cheshire, although without the fantasy elements which had characterised his earlier work.\nBiography.\nEarly life: 1934\u201356.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I had to get aback [to familial ways of doing things], by using skills that had been denied to my ancestors; but I had nothing that they would have called worthwhile. My ability was in language and languages. I had to use that, somehow. And writing was a manual craft. But what did I know that I could write about? I knew the land.\"\nAlan Garner, 2010\nGarner was born in the front room of his grandmother's house in Congleton, Cheshire, on 17 October 1934. He was raised in Alderley Edge, a well-to-do village that had effectively become a suburb of Manchester. His \"rural working-class family\", had been connected to Alderley Edge since at least the sixteenth century and could be traced back to the death of William Garner in 1592. Garner has stated that his family had passed on \"a genuine oral tradition\" involving folk tales about The Edge, which included a description of a king and his army of knights who slept under it, guarded by a wizard. In the mid-nineteenth century Alan's great-great-grandfather Robert had carved the face of a bearded wizard onto the face of a cliff next to a well, known locally at that time as the Wizard's Well.\nRobert Garner and his other relatives had all been craftsmen, and, according to Garner, each successive generation had tried to \"improve on, or do something different from, the previous generation\". Garner's grandfather, Joseph Garner, \"could read, but didn't and so was virtually unlettered\". Instead, he taught his grandson the folk tales he knew about The Edge. Garner later remarked that as a result, he was \"aware of [the Edge's] magic\" as a child, and he and his friends often played there. The story of the king and the wizard living under the hill played an important part in his life, becoming, he explained, \"deeply embedded in my psyche\" and heavily influencing his later novels.\nGarner faced several life-threatening childhood illnesses, which left him bed ridden for much of the time. He attended a local village school, where he found that, despite being praised for his intelligence, he was punished for speaking in his native Cheshire dialect; for instance, when he was six his primary school teacher washed his mouth out with soapy water. Garner then won a place at Manchester Grammar School, where he received his secondary education; entry was means-tested, resulting in his school fees being waived. Rather than focusing his interest on creative writing, it was here that he excelled at sprinting. He used to go jogging along the highway, and later claimed that in doing so he was sometimes accompanied by the mathematician Alan Turing, who shared his fascination for the Disney film \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\". Garner was then conscripted into national service, serving for a time with the Royal Artillery while posted to Woolwich in Southeast London.\nAt school, Garner had developed a keen interest in the work of Aeschylus and Homer, as well as the Ancient Greek language. Thus, he decided to pursue the study of Classics at Magdalen College, Oxford, passing his entrance exams in January 1953; at the time he had thoughts of becoming a professional academic. He was the first member of his family to receive anything more than a basic education, and he noted that this removed him from his \"cultural background\" and led to something of a schism with other members of his family, who \"could not cope with me, and I could not cope with\" them. Looking back, he remarked, \"I soon learned that it was not a good idea to come home excited over irregular verbs\". In 1955, he joined the university theatrical society, playing the role of Mark Antony in a performance of William Shakespeare's \"Antony and Cleopatra\" where he co-starred alongside Dudley Moore and where Kenneth Baker was the stage manager. In August 1956, he decided that he wished to devote himself to novel writing, and decided to abandon his university education without taking a degree; he left Oxford in late 1956. He nevertheless felt that the academic rigour which he learned during his university studies has remained \"a permanent strength through all my life\".\n\"The Weirdstone of Brisingamen\" and \"The Moon of Gomrath\": 1957\u201364.\nAged 22, Garner was out cycling when he came across a hand-painted sign announcing that an agricultural cottage in Toad Hall \u2013 a late medieval building situated in Blackden, seven miles from Alderley Edge \u2013 was on sale for \u00a3510. Although he personally could not afford it, he was lent the money by the local Oddfellow lodge, enabling him to purchase and move into the cottage in June 1957. In the late nineteenth century the Hall had been divided into two agricultural labourers' cottages, but Garner was able to purchase the second for \u00a3150 about a year later; he proceeded to knock down the dividing walls and convert both halves back into a single home.\nGarner had begun writing his first novel, \"The Weirdstone of Brisingamen: A Tale of Alderley\", in September 1956. However it was while at Toad Hall that he finished the book. Set in Alderley Edge, it revolves around two children, Susan and Colin, who are sent to live in the area with their mother's old nursemaid, Bess, and her husband, Gowther Mossock. While exploring the Edge, they encounter a race of malevolent creatures, the \"svart alfar\", who dwell in the Edge's abandoned mines and who seem intent on capturing them. They are rescued by the wizard Cadellin, who reveals that the forces of darkness are massing at the Edge in search of a powerful magical talisman, the eponymous \"weirdstone of Brisingamen\".\nWhilst writing in his spare time Garner attempted to gain employment as a teacher, but soon gave that up, believing that \"I couldn't write and teach; the energies were too similar.\" Instead, he worked off and on as a general labourer for four years, remaining unemployed for much of that time.\nGarner sent his debut novel to the publishing company Collins, where it was picked up by the company's head, Sir William Collins, who was on the lookout for new fantasy novels following the recent commercial and critical success of J. R. R. Tolkien's \"The Lord of the Rings\" (1954\u201355). Garner, who went on to become a personal friend of Collins, would later relate that \"Billy Collins saw a title with funny-looking words in it on the stockpile, and he decided to publish it.\" On its release in 1960, \"The Weirdstone of Brisingamen\" proved to be a critical and commercial success, later being described as \"a tour de force of the imagination, a novel that showed almost every writer who came afterwards what it was possible to achieve in novels ostensibly published for children.\" Garner himself however would later denounce his first novel as \"a fairly bad book\" in 1968.\nWith his first book published, Garner abandoned his work as a labourer and gained a job as a freelance television reporter, living a \"hand to mouth\" lifestyle on a \"shoestring\" budget. He also began a sequel to \"The Weirdstone of Brisingamen\", which would be known as \"The Moon of Gomrath\". \"The Moon of Gomrath\" also revolves around the adventures of Colin and Susan, with the latter being possessed by a malevolent creature called the Brollachan who has recently re-entered the world, having been freed from its underground prison by workmen. With the help of the wizard Cadellin, the Brollachan is exorcised, but Susan's soul also leaves her body, being sent to another dimension, leaving Colin to find a way to bring it back. Critic Neil Philip characterised it as \"an artistic advance\" but \"a less satisfying story\". In a 1989 interview, Garner stated that he had left scope for a third book following the adventures of Colin and Susan, envisioning a trilogy, but that he had intentionally decided not to write it, instead moving on to write something different. However \"Boneland\", the conclusion to the sequence, was belatedly published in August 2012.\n\"Elidor\", \"The Owl Service\" and \"Red Shift\": 1964\u201373.\nIn 1962, Garner began work on a radio play entitled \"Elidor\", which eventually became a novel of the same name. Set in contemporary Manchester, \"Elidor\" tells the story of four children who enter a derelict Victorian church and find a portal to the magical realm of Elidor. In Elidor, they are entrusted by King Malebron to help rescue four treasures which have been stolen by the forces of evil, who are attempting to take control of the kingdom. The children succeed and return to Manchester with the treasures, but are pursued by the malevolent forces who need the items to seal their victory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"As I turned toward writing, which is partially intellectual in its function, but is primarily intuitive and emotional in its execution, I turned towards that which was numinous and emotional in me, and that was the legend of King Arthur Asleep Under the Hill. It stood for all that I'd had to give up in order to understand what I'd had to give up. And so my first two books, which are very poor on characterization because I was somehow numbed in that area, are very strong on imagery and landscape, because the landscape I had inherited along with the legend.\"\nAlan Garner, 1989\nBefore writing \"Elidor\", Garner had seen a dinner service set which could be arranged to make pictures of either flowers or owls. Inspired by this design, he produced his fourth novel, \"The Owl Service\". The story, which was heavily influenced by the Medieval Welsh tale of Math fab Mathonwy from the \"Mabinogion\", was critically acclaimed, winning both the Carnegie Medal and Guardian Children's Fiction Prize. It also sparked discussions among critics as to whether Garner should properly be considered a children's writer, given that this book in particular was deemed equally suitable for an adult readership.\nIt took Garner six years to write his next novel, \"Red Shift\". The book centres on three intertwined love stories, one set in the present, another during the English Civil War, and the third in the second century CE. Philip referred to it as \"a complex book but not a complicated one: the bare lines of story and emotion stand clear\".\nAcademic specialist in children's literature Maria Nikolajeva characterised \"Red Shift\" as \"a difficult book\" for an unprepared reader, identifying its main themes as those of \"loneliness and failure to communicate\". Ultimately, she thought that repeated re-readings of the novel bring about the realisation that \"it is a perfectly realistic story with much more depth and psychologically more credible than the most so-called \"realistic\" juvenile novels.\"\n\"The Stone Book\" series and folkloric collections: 1974\u201394.\nFrom 1976 to 1978, Garner published a series of four novellas, which have come to be collectively known as \"The Stone Book\" quartet: \"The Stone Book\", \"Granny Reardun\", \"The Aimer Gate\", and \"Tom Fobble's Day\". Each focused on a day in the life of a child in the Garner family, each from a different generation.\nIn a 1989 interview, Garner noted that although writing \"The Stone Book Quartet\" had been \"exhausting\", it had been \"the most rewarding of everything\" he'd done to date. Philip described the quartet as \"a complete command of the material he had been working and reworking since the start of his career\".\nGarner pays particular attention to language, and strives to render the cadence of the Cheshire tongue in modern English. This he explains by the sense of anger he felt on reading \"Sir Gawain and the Green Knight\": the footnotes would not have been needed by his father.\nIn 1981, the literary critic Neil Philip published an analysis of Garner's novels as \"A Fine Anger\", which was based on his doctoral thesis, produced for the University of London in 1980. In this study he noted that \"\"The Stone Book\" quartet marks a watershed in Garner's writing career, and provides a suitable moment for an evaluation of his work thus far.\"\n\"Strandloper\", \"Thursbitch\", \"Boneland\", \"Where Shall We Run To?\" and \"Treacle Walker\": 1996\u2013present.\nIn 1996, Garner's novel \"Strandloper\" was published. \nIn 1997, he next wrote \"The Voice That Thunders, a\" collection of essays and public talks that contains much autobiographical material (including an account of his life with bipolar disorder), as well as critical reflection upon folklore and language, literature and education, the nature of myth and time. In \"The Voice That Thunders,\" he reveals the commercial pressure placed upon him during the decade-long drought which preceded \"Strandloper\" to 'forsake \"literature\", and become instead a \"popular\" writer, cashing in on my established name by producing sequels to, and making series of, the earlier books'. Garner feared that \"making series ... would render sterile the existing work, the life that produced it, and bring about my artistic and spiritual death\" and felt unable to comply.\nGarner's novel \"Thursbitch\" was published in 2003. \nThe novel \"Boneland\" was published in 2012, nominally completing a trilogy begun some 50 years earlier with \"The Weirdstone of Brisingamen\".\nIn August 2018, Garner published his first set of memoirs, \"Where Shall We Run To?\", which describes his childhood during the Second World War.\nThe novel \"Treacle Walker\" was published in October 2021 and nominated to the shortlist for the 2022 Booker Prize.\nIn October 2024, a week before his 90th birthday, Garner published a second set of memoirs, \"Powsels and Thrums\", framed and inspired by his grandfather. This book contains short essays on a variety of people and events in Garner's life from his starting at Manchester Grammar in 1946 through to his discovery of Alderley Edge in the 1950s, interspersed with poems.\nPersonal life.\nWith his first wife Ann Cook he had three children. In 1972, he married for a second time, this time to Griselda Greaves, a teacher and critic with whom he had two children. In a 2014 interview conducted with Mike Pitts for \"British Archaeology\" magazine, Garner stated that \"I don't have anything to do with the literary world. I avoid writers. I don't like them. Most of my close personal friends are professional archaeologists.\"\nLiterary style.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I have four filing cabinets of correspondence from readers, and over the years the message is clear and unwavering. Readers under the age of eighteen read what I write with more passion, understanding, and clarity of perception than do adults. Adults bog down, claim that I'm difficult, obscurantist, wilful, and sometimes simply trying to confuse. I'm not; I'm just trying to get the simple story simply told... I didn't consciously set out to write for children, but somehow I connect with them. I think that's something to do with my psychopathology, and I'm not equipped to evaluate it.\"\nAlan Garner, 1989\nAlthough Garner's early work is often labelled as \"children's literature\", Garner himself rejects such a description, informing one interviewer that \"I certainly have never written for children\" but that instead, he has always written purely for himself. Neil Philip, in his critical study of Garner's work (1981), commented that up until that point \"Everything Alan Garner has published has been published for children\", although he went on to relate that \"It may be that Garner's is a case\" where the division between children's and adults' literature is \"meaningless\" and that his fiction is instead \"enjoyed by a type of person, no matter what their age.\" He said \"An adult point of view would not give me the ability to be as fresh in my vision as a child's point of view, because the child is still discovering the universe and many adults are not.\" \nPhilip offered the opinion that the \"essence of his work\" was \"the struggle to render the complex in simple, bare terms; to couch the abstract in the concrete and communicate it directly to the reader\". He added that Garner's work is \"intensely autobiographical, in both obvious and subtle ways\". Highlighting Garner's use of mythological and folkloric sources, Philip stated that his work explores \"the disjointed and troubled psychological and emotional landscape of the twentieth century through the symbolism of myth and folklore.\" He also expressed the opinion that \"Time is Garner's most consistent theme\".\nThe English author and academic Catherine Butler noted that Garner was attentive to the \"geological, archaeological and cultural history of his settings, and careful to integrate his fiction with the physical reality beyond the page.\" As a part of this, Garner had included maps of Alderley Edge in both \"The Weirdstone of Brisingamen\" and \"The Moon of Gomrath\". Garner has spent much time investigating the areas that he deals with in his books; writing in the \"Times Literary Supplement\" in 1968, Garner commented that in preparation for writing his book \"Elidor\":\nI had to read extensively textbooks on physics, Celtic symbolism, unicorns, medieval watermarks, megalithic archaeology; study the writings of Jung; brush up my Plato; visit Avebury, Silbury and Coventry Cathedral; spend a lot of time with demolition gangs on slum clearance sites; and listen to the whole of Britten's \"War Requiem\" nearly every day.\nRecognition and legacy.\nIn a paper published in the \"Children's Literature Association Quarterly\", Maria Nikolajeva characterised Garner as \"one of the most controversial\" authors of modern children's literature.\nIn the fiftieth anniversary edition of \"The Weirdstone of Brisingamen\", published by HarperCollins in 2010, several notable British fantasists praised Garner and his work. Susan Cooper wrote that \"The power and range of Alan Garner's astounding talent has grown with every book he's written\", and David Almond called him one of Britain's \"greatest writers\" whose works \"really matter\". Philip Pullman, the author of the \"His Dark Materials\" trilogy, went further:\nGarner is indisputably the great originator, the most important British writer of fantasy since Tolkien, and in many respects better than Tolkien, because deeper and more truthful... Any country except Britain would have long ago recognised his importance, and celebrated it with postage stamps and statues and street-names. But that's the way with us: our greatest prophets go unnoticed by the politicians and the owners of media empires. I salute him with the most heartfelt respect and admiration.\nAnother British fantasy writer, Neil Gaiman, claimed that \"Garner's fiction is something special\" in that it was \"smart and challenging, based in the here and the now, in which real English places emerged from the shadows of folklore, and in which people found themselves walking, living and battling their way through the dreams and patterns of myth.\" Praise also came from Nick Lake, the editorial director of HarperCollins Children's Books, who proclaimed that \"Garner is, quite simply, one of the greatest and most influential writers this country has ever produced.\" Emma Donoghue recalls reading \"Red Shift\" as a teenager: \"It looked like other Garners I had read: a children's fantasy. But \"Red Shift\", with its passionately bickering adolescent lovers and vertiginous plunges through the wormhole of time, shook me to my core every time I read it, and still does... Garner makes the past numinous, terrifyingly real: anything but passed.\"\nAwards.\nThe biennial Hans Christian Andersen Award conferred by the International Board on Books for Young People is the highest recognition available to a writer or illustrator of children's books. Garner was the sole runner-up for the writing award in 1978.\nGarner was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) for services to literature in the 2001 New Year's Honours list. He received the British Fantasy Society's occasional Karl Edward Wagner Award in 2003 and the World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement in 2012. In January 2011, the University of Warwick awarded the degree of Doctor of Letters (honoris causa). On that occasion he gave a half-hour interview about his work. He has also been awarded honorary doctorates from the University of Salford (2011) and the University of Huddersfield in (2012). He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 2012. \nHe has been recognised several times for particular works.\nWorks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1153", "revid": "432544", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1153", "title": "Amhrann na bhFiann", "text": ""}
{"id": "1154", "revid": "38020738", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1154", "title": "August 2", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearAugust 2 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1155", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1155", "title": "Atlantic (disambiguation)", "text": "The Atlantic Ocean is the second largest of the world's oceans, that separates the old world from the new world.\nAtlantic may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "1158", "revid": "22869356", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1158", "title": "Algebraic number", "text": "Type of complex number\nIn mathematics, an algebraic number is a number that is a root of a non-zero polynomial in one variable with integer (or, equivalently, rational) coefficients. For example, the golden ratio formula_1 is an algebraic number, because it is a root of the polynomial formula_2, i.e., a solution to the equation formula_3, and the complex number formula_4 is algebraic because it is a root of the polynomial formula_5. Algebraic numbers include all integers, rational numbers, and \"n\"-th roots of integers.\nAlgebraic complex numbers are closed under addition, subtraction, multiplication and division, and hence form a field, denoted formula_6. The set of algebraic real numbers formula_7 is also a field.\nNumbers which are not algebraic are called transcendental and include \u03c0 and e. There are countably infinite algebraic numbers, hence almost all real (or complex) numbers (in the sense of Lebesgue measure) are transcendental.\nExamples.\n is the root of a non-zero polynomial, namely \"bx\" \u2212 \"a\".\n 1), the roots are further qualified as quadratic integers.\n 0. This polynomial is irreducible over the rationals and so the three cosines are \"conjugate\" algebraic numbers. Likewise, tan, tan, tan, and tan satisfy the irreducible polynomial \"x\"4 \u2212 4\"x\"3 \u2212 6\"x\"2 + 4\"x\" + 1 \n 0, and so are conjugate algebraic integers. This is the equivalent of angles which, when measured in degrees, have rational numbers.\nProperties.\nDegree of simple extensions of the rationals as a criterion to algebraicity.\nFor any &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the simple extension of the rationals by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, denoted by formula_11 (whose elements are the formula_12 for formula_13 a rational function with rational coefficients which is defined at formula_14), is of finite degree if and only if &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is an algebraic number.\nThe condition of finite degree means that there is a fixed set of numbers formula_15 of finite cardinality &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; with elements in formula_11 such that formula_17; that is, each element of formula_11 can be written as a sum formula_19 for some rational coefficients formula_20.\nSince the formula_21 are themselves members of formula_11, each can be expressed as sums of products of rational numbers and powers of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and therefore this condition is equivalent to the requirement that for some finite formula_23, formula_24\nThe latter condition is equivalent to formula_25, itself a member of formula_11, being expressible as formula_27 for some rationals formula_28, so formula_29 or, equivalently, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a root of formula_30; that is, an algebraic number with a minimal polynomial of degree not larger than formula_31.\nIt can similarly be proven that for any finite set of algebraic numbers formula_32, formula_33... formula_34, the field extension formula_35 has a finite degree.\nField.\nThe sum, difference, product, and quotient (if the denominator is nonzero) of two algebraic numbers is again algebraic:\nFor any two algebraic numbers &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, this follows directly from the fact that the simple extension formula_36, for formula_37 being either formula_38, formula_39, formula_40 or (for formula_41) formula_42, is a linear subspace of the finite-degree field extension formula_43, and therefore has a finite degree itself, from which it follows (as shown above) that formula_37 is algebraic.\nAn alternative way of showing this is constructively, by using the resultant.\nAlgebraic numbers thus form a field formula_45 (sometimes denoted by formula_46, but that usually denotes the adele ring).\nAlgebraic closure.\nEvery root of a polynomial equation whose coefficients are \"algebraic numbers\" is again algebraic. That can be rephrased by saying that the field of algebraic numbers is algebraically closed. In fact, it is the smallest algebraically closed field containing the rationals and so it is called the algebraic closure of the rationals.\nThat the field of algebraic numbers is algebraically closed can be proven as follows: Let &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; be a root of a polynomial formula_47 with coefficients that are algebraic numbers formula_48, formula_32, formula_33... formula_34. The field extension formula_52 then has a finite degree with respect to formula_53. The simple extension formula_54 then has a finite degree with respect to formula_55 (since all powers of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; can be expressed by powers of up to formula_56). Therefore, formula_57 also has a finite degree with respect to formula_53. Since formula_59 is a linear subspace of formula_54, it must also have a finite degree with respect to formula_53, so &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; must be an algebraic number.\nRelated fields.\nNumbers defined by radicals.\nAny number that can be obtained from the integers using a finite number of additions, subtractions, multiplications, divisions, and taking (possibly complex) nth roots where n is a positive integer are algebraic. The converse, however, is not true: there are algebraic numbers that cannot be obtained in this manner. These numbers are roots of polynomials of degree\u00a05 or higher, a result of Galois theory (see Quintic equations and the Abel\u2013Ruffini theorem). For example, the equation:\nformula_62\nhas a unique real root, \u2248\u00a01.1673, that cannot be expressed in terms of only radicals and arithmetic operations.\nClosed-form number.\nAlgebraic numbers are all numbers that can be defined explicitly or implicitly in terms of polynomials, starting from the rational numbers. One may generalize this to \"closed-form numbers\", which may be defined in various ways. Most broadly, all numbers that can be defined explicitly or implicitly in terms of polynomials, exponentials, and logarithms are called \"elementary numbers\", and these include the algebraic numbers, plus some transcendental numbers. Most narrowly, one may consider numbers \"explicitly\" defined in terms of polynomials, exponentials, and logarithms \u2013 this does not include all algebraic numbers, but does include some simple transcendental numbers such as e or ln\u00a02.\nAlgebraic integers.\nAn \"algebraic integer\" is an algebraic number that is a root of a polynomial with integer coefficients with leading coefficient 1 (a monic polynomial). Examples of algebraic integers are formula_63 formula_64 and formula_65 Therefore, the algebraic integers constitute a proper superset of the integers, as the latter are the roots of monic polynomials \"x\" \u2212 \"k\" for all formula_66. In this sense, algebraic integers are to algebraic numbers what integers are to rational numbers.\nThe sum, difference and product of algebraic integers are again algebraic integers, which means that the algebraic integers form a ring. The name \"algebraic integer\" comes from the fact that the only rational numbers that are algebraic integers are the integers, and because the algebraic integers in any number field are in many ways analogous to the integers. If \"K\" is a number field, its ring of integers is the subring of algebraic integers in \"K\", and is frequently denoted as \"OK\". These are the prototypical examples of Dedekind domains.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1160", "revid": "23068335", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1160", "title": "Automorphism", "text": "Isomorphism of an object to itself\nIn mathematics, an automorphism is an isomorphism from a mathematical object to itself. It is, in some sense, a symmetry of the object, and a way of mapping the object to itself while preserving all of its structure. The set of all automorphisms of an object forms a group, called the automorphism group. It is, loosely speaking, the symmetry group of the object.\nDefinition.\nIn an algebraic structure such as a group, a ring, or vector space, an \"automorphism\" is simply a bijective homomorphism of an object into itself. (The definition of a homomorphism depends on the type of algebraic structure; see, for example, group homomorphism, ring homomorphism, and linear operator.) \nMore generally, for an object in some category, an automorphism is a morphism of the object to itself that has an inverse morphism; that is, a morphism formula_1 is an automorphism if there is a morphism formula_2 such that formula_3 where formula_4 is the identity morphism of X. For algebraic structures, the two definitions are equivalent; in this case, the identity morphism is simply the identity function, and is often called the \"trivial automorphism\".\nAutomorphism group.\nThe automorphisms of an object X form a group under composition of morphisms, which is called the \"automorphism group\" of X. This results straightforwardly from the definition of a category.\nThe automorphism group of an object \"X\" in a category \"C\" is often denoted Aut\"C\"(\"X\"), or simply Aut(\"X\") if the category is clear from context.\nHistory.\nOne of the earliest group automorphisms (automorphism of a group, not simply a group of automorphisms of points) was given by the Irish mathematician William Rowan Hamilton in 1856, in his icosian calculus, where he discovered an order two automorphism, writing:\nso that formula_12 is a new fifth root of unity, connected with the former fifth root formula_13 by relations of perfect reciprocity.\nInner and outer automorphisms.\nIn some categories\u2014notably groups, rings, and Lie algebras\u2014it is possible to separate automorphisms into two types, called \"inner\" and \"outer\" automorphisms.\nIn the case of groups, the inner automorphisms are the conjugations by the elements of the group itself. For each element \"a\" of a group \"G\", conjugation by \"a\" is the operation \"\u03c6\"\"a\" : \"G\" \u2192 \"G\" given by \"\u03c6\"\"a\"(\"g\") = \"aga\"\u22121 (or \"a\"\u22121\"ga\"; usage varies). One can easily check that conjugation by \"a\" is a group automorphism. The inner automorphisms form a normal subgroup of Aut(\"G\"), denoted by Inn(\"G\"); this is called Goursat's lemma.\nThe other automorphisms are called outer automorphisms. The quotient group Aut(\"G\") / Inn(\"G\") is usually denoted by Out(\"G\"); the non-trivial elements are the cosets that contain the outer automorphisms.\nThe same definition holds in any unital ring or algebra where \"a\" is any invertible element. For Lie algebras the definition is slightly different."}
{"id": "1162", "revid": "11555324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1162", "title": "Accordion", "text": "Bellows-driven free-reed aerophone musical instrument\nAccordions (from 19th-century German ', from '\u2014\"musical chord, concord of sounds\") are a family of box-shaped musical instruments of the bellows-driven free reed aerophone type (producing sound as air flows past a reed in a frame). The essential characteristic of the accordion is to combine in one instrument a melody section, also called the diskant, usually on the right-hand keyboard, with an accompaniment or Basso continuo functionality on the left-hand. The musician normally plays the melody on buttons or keys on the right-hand side (referred to as the keyboard or sometimes the \"manual\"), and the accompaniment on bass or pre-set chord buttons on the left-hand side. A person who plays the accordion is called an accordionist.\nThe accordion belongs to the free-reed aerophone family. Other instruments in this family include the concertina, harmonica, and bandoneon. The concertina and bandoneon do not have the melody\u2013accompaniment duality. The harmoneon is also related and, while having the descant vs. melody dualism, tries to make it less pronounced. The harmonium and American reed organ are in the same family, but are typically larger than an accordion and sit on a surface or the floor.\nThe accordion is played by compressing or expanding the bellows while pressing buttons or keys, causing \"pallets\" to open, which allow air to flow across strips of brass or steel, called \"reeds\". These vibrate to produce sound inside the body. Valves on opposing reeds of each note are used to make the instrument's reeds sound louder without air leaking from each reed block.\nThe accordion is widely spread across the world because of the waves of migration from Europe to the Americas and other regions. In some countries (for example: Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Mexico, and Panama) it is used in popular music (for example: Chamam\u00e9 in Argentina; gaucho, forr\u00f3, and sertanejo in Brazil; vallenato in Colombia; merengue in the Dominican Republic; and norte\u00f1o in Mexico), whereas in other regions (such as Europe, North America, and other countries in South America) it tends to be more used for dance-pop and folk music.\nIn Europe and North America, some popular music acts also make use of the instrument. Additionally, the accordion is used in cajun, zydeco, jazz, and klezmer music, and in both solo and orchestral performances of classical music. Many conservatories in Europe have classical accordion departments. \nOriginal name.\nThe oldest name for this group of instruments is \"harmonika\", from the\n meaning \"harmonic, musical\". \nToday, native versions of the name \"accordion\" are more common. These names refer to the type of accordion patented by Cyrill Demian, which concerned \"automatically coupled chords on the bass side\".\nHistory.\nThe accordion's basic form is believed to have been invented in Berlin, in 1822, by Christian Friedrich Ludwig Buschmann, although one instrument was discovered in 2006 that appears to have been built earlier.\nThe accordion is one of several European inventions of the early 19th century that use free reeds driven by a bellows. An instrument called \"accordion\" was first patented in 1829 by Cyrill Demian in Vienna.\nThe earliest history of the accordion in Russia is poorly documented. Nevertheless, according to Russian researchers, the earliest known simple accordions were made in Tula, Russia, by and around 1830, after they received an early accordion from Germany. By the late 1840s, the instrument was already very widespread; together the factories of the two masters were producing 10,000 instruments a year. By 1866, over 50,000 instruments were being produced yearly by Tula and neighbouring villages, and by 1874 the yearly production was over 700,000. By the 1860s, Novgorod, Vyatka and Saratov governorates also had significant accordion production. By the 1880s, the list included Oryol, Ryazan, Moscow, Tver, Vologda, Kostroma, Nizhny Novgorod and Simbirsk, and many of these places created their own varieties of the instrument.\nCyrill Demian's instrument bore little resemblance to modern instruments. It only had a left-hand buttonboard, with the right hand simply operating the bellows. One key feature for which Demian sought the patent was the sounding of an entire chord by depressing one key. His instrument could also sound two chords with the same key, one for each bellow direction (a \"bisonoric\" action). At that time in Vienna, mouth harmonicas with \"Kanzellen\" (chambers) had already been available for many years, along with bigger instruments driven by hand bellows. The diatonic key arrangement was also already used on mouth-blown instruments. Demian's patent thus covered an accompanying instrument: an accordion played with the left hand, opposite to how contemporary chromatic hand harmonicas were played, small and light enough for travelers to take with them and used to accompany singing. The patent also described instruments with both bass and treble sections, although Demian preferred the bass-only instrument owing to its cost and weight advantages.\nThe accordion was introduced from Germany into Britain in about the year 1828. The instrument was noted in \"The Times\" in 1831 as one new to British audiences and was not favourably reviewed, but nevertheless it soon became popular. It had also become popular with New Yorkers by the mid-1840s.\nAfter Demian's invention, other accordions appeared, some featuring only the right-handed keyboard for playing melodies. It took English inventor Charles Wheatstone to bring both chords and keyboard together in one squeezebox. His 1844 patent for what he called a \"concertina\" also featured the ability to easily tune the reeds from the outside with a simple tool.\nThe Austrian musician Adolf M\u00fcller described a great variety of instruments in his 1854 book \"\". At the time, Vienna and London had a close musical relationship, with musicians often performing in both cities in the same year, so it is possible that Wheatstone was aware of this type of instrument and may have used them to put his key-arrangement ideas into practice.\nJeune's \"flutina\" resembles Wheatstone's concertina in internal construction and tone colour, but it appears to complement Demian's accordion functionally. The flutina is a one-sided bisonoric melody-only instrument whose keys are operated with the right hand while the bellows are operated with the left. When the two instruments are combined, the result is quite similar to diatonic button accordions still manufactured today.\nFurther innovations followed and continue to the present. Various buttonboard and keyboard systems have been developed, as well as voicings (the combination of multiple tones at different octaves), with mechanisms to switch between different voices during performance, and different methods of internal construction to improve tone, stability, and durability. Modern accordions may incorporate electronics such as condenser microphones and tone and volume controls so that the accordion can be plugged into a PA system or keyboard amplifier for live shows. Some 2010s-era accordions may incorporate MIDI sensors and circuitry, enabling the accordion to be plugged into a synth module and produce accordion sounds or other synthesized instrument sounds, such as piano or organ.\nConstruction.\nAccordions have many configurations and types. What may be easy to do with one type of accordion could be technically challenging or impossible with another, and proficiency with one layout may not translate to another.\nThe most obvious difference between accordions is their right-hand sides. Piano accordions use a piano-style musical keyboard; button accordions use a buttonboard. Button accordions are furthermore differentiated by their usage of a chromatic or diatonic buttonboard for the right-hand side.\nAccordions may be either bisonoric, producing different pitches depending on the direction of bellows movement, or unisonoric, producing the same pitch in both directions. Piano accordions are unisonoric. Chromatic button accordions also tend to be unisonoric, while diatonic button accordions tend to be bisonoric, though notable exceptions exist.\nAccordion size is not standardized, and may vary significantly from model to model. Accordions vary not only in their dimensions and weight, but also in the number of buttons or keys present in the right- and left-hand keyboards. For example, piano accordions may have as few as 8 bass buttons (two rows of four), or up to 140 (seven rows of twenty) or beyond. Accordions also vary by their available registers and by their specific tuning and voicing.\nDespite these differences, all accordions share several common components.\nUniversal components.\nBellows.\nThe bellows is the most recognizable part of the instrument, and the primary means of articulation. The production of sound in an accordion is in direct proportion to the motion of the bellows by the player. In a sense, the role of the bellows can be compared to the role of moving a violin's bow on bowed strings. For a more direct analogy, the bellows can be compared to the role of breathing for a singer. The bellows is located between the right- and left-hand keyboards, and is made from pleated layers of cloth and cardboard, with added leather and metal. It is used to create pressure and vacuum, driving air across the internal reeds and producing sound by their vibrations, applied pressure increases the volume.\nThe keyboard touch is not expressive and does not affect dynamics: all expression is effected through the bellows. Bellows effects include:\nBody.\nThe accordion's body consists of two boxes, commonly made of wood, joined by the bellows. These boxes house reed chambers for the right- and left-hand keyboards. Each side has grilles in order to facilitate the transmission of air in and out of the instrument and to allow the sound to project. The grille at the right-hand side is usually larger and is often shaped for decorative purposes. The right-hand keyboard is normally used for playing the melody and the left-hand one for playing the accompaniment; however, skilled players can reverse these roles and play melodies with the left hand.\nThe size and weight of an accordion varies depending on its type, layout and playing range, which can be as small as to have only one or two rows of basses and a single octave on the right-hand keyboard, to the most common 120-bass accordion and through to large and heavy 160-bass free-bass converter models.\nPallet mechanism.\nThe accordion is an aerophone. The keyboard mechanisms of the instrument either enable the air flow, or disable it:\nVariable components.\nThe term \"accordion\" covers a wide range of instruments, with varying components. All instruments have reed ranks of some format, apart from reedless digital accordions. Not all have switches to change registers or ranks, as some have only one treble register and one bass register. The most typical accordion is the piano accordion, which is used for many musical genres. Another type of accordion is the button accordion, which is used in musical traditions including Cajun, Conjunto and Tejano music, Swiss and Slovenian-Austro-German Alpine music, and Argentinian tango music. The Helikon-style accordion has multiple flared horns projecting out of the left side to strengthen the bass tone. The word \"Helikon\" refers to a deep-pitched tuba.\nRight-hand keyboard systems.\nDifferent systems exist for the right-hand keyboard of an accordion, which is normally used for playing the melody (while it can also play chords). Some use a button layout arranged in one way or another, while others use a piano-style keyboard. Each system has different claimed benefits by those who prefer it. They are also used to define one accordion or another as a different \"type\":\nLeft-hand keyboard systems.\nDifferent systems are also in use for the left-hand keyboard, which is normally used for playing the accompaniment. These usually use distinct bass buttons and often have buttons with concavities or studs to help the player navigate the layout despite not being able to see the buttons while playing. There are three general categories:\nReed ranks and switches.\nInside the accordion are the reeds that generate the instrument tones. These are organized in different sounding \"banks\", which can be further combined into \"registers\" producing differing \"timbres\". All but the smaller accordions are equipped with switches that control which combination of reed banks operate, organized from high to low registers. Each register stop produces a separate sound timbre, many of which also differ in octaves or in how different octaves are combined. See the accordion reed ranks and switches article for further explanation and audio samples. All but the smaller accordions usually have treble switches. The larger and more expensive accordions often also have bass switches to give options for the reed bank on the bass side.\nClassification of chromatic and piano type accordions.\nIn describing or pricing an accordion, the first factor is size, expressed in number of keys on either side. For a piano type, this could for one example be 37/96, meaning 37 treble keys (three octaves plus one note) on the treble side and 96 bass keys. A second aspect of size is the width of the white keys, which means that even accordions with the same number of keys have keyboards of different lengths, ranging from for a child's accordion to for an adult-sized instrument. After size, the price and weight of an accordion is largely dependent on the number of reed ranks on either side, either on a cassotto or not, and to a lesser degree on the number of combinations available through register switches. The next, but important, factor is the quality of the reeds, the highest grade called \"a mano\" (meaning \"hand-made\"), the next \"tipo a mano\" (\"like hand-made\"), lower grades including \"export\" and several more.\nPrice is also affected by the use of costly woods, luxury decorations, and features such as a palm switch, grille mute, and so on. Some accordion makers sell a range of different models, from a less-expensive base model to a more costly luxury model. Typically, the register switches are described as \"Reeds: 5 + 3\", meaning five reeds on the treble side and three on the bass, and \"Registers: 13 + M, 7\", meaning 13 register buttons on the treble side plus a special \"master\" that activates all ranks, like the \"tutti\" or \"full organ\" switch on an organ, and seven register switches on the bass side. Another factor affecting the price is the presence of electronics, such as condenser microphones, volume and tone controls, or MIDI sensors and connections.\nStraps.\nThe larger piano and chromatic button accordions are usually heavier than other smaller squeezeboxes, and are equipped with two shoulder straps to make it easier to balance the weight and increase bellows control while sitting, and avoid dropping the instrument while standing. Other accordions, such as the diatonic button accordion, have only a single shoulder strap and a right hand thumb strap. All accordions have a (mostly adjustable) leather strap on the left-hand side to keep the player's hand in position while drawing the bellows. There are also straps above and below the bellows to keep it securely closed when the instrument is not being played.\nElectronic and digital.\nIn the 2010s, a range of electronic and digital accordions were introduced. They have an electronic sound module which creates the accordion sound, and most use MIDI systems to encode the keypresses and transmit them to the sound module. A digital accordion can have hundreds of sounds, which can include different types of accordions and even non-accordion sounds, such as pipe organ, piano, or guitar. Sensors are used on the buttons and keys, such as magnetic reed switches. Sensors are also used on the bellows to transmit the pushing and pulling of the bellows to the sound module. Digital accordions may have features not found in acoustic instruments, such as a piano-style sustain pedal, a modulation control for changing keys, and a portamento effect.\nAs an electronic instrument, these types of accordions are plugged into a PA system or keyboard amplifier to produce sound. Some digital accordions have a small internal speaker and amplifier, so they can be used without a PA system or keyboard amplifier, at least for practicing and small venues like coffeehouses. One benefit of electronic accordions is that they can be practiced with headphones, making them inaudible to other people nearby. On a digital accordion, the volume of the right-hand keyboard and the left-hand buttons can be independently adjusted.\nAcoustic-digital hybrid accordions also exist. They are acoustic accordions (with reeds, bellows, and so on), but they also contain sensors, electronics, and MIDI connections, which provides a wider range of sound options. An acoustic-digital hybrid may be manufactured in this form, or it may be an acoustic accordion which has had aftermarket electronics sensors and connections added. Several companies sell aftermarket electronics kits, but they are typically installed by professional accordion technicians, because of the complex and delicate nature of the internal parts of an accordion.\nUnusual accordions.\nVarious hybrid accordions have been created between instruments of different buttonboards and actions. Many remain curiosities \u2013 only a few have remained in use:\nManufacturing process.\nThe most expensive accordions are typically fully hand-made, particularly the reeds; completely hand-made reeds have a better tonal quality than even the best automatically manufactured ones. Some accordions have been modified by individuals striving to bring a more pure sound out of low-end instruments, such as the ones improved by Yutaka Usui, a Japanese craftsman.\nThe manufacture of an accordion is only a partly automated process. In a sense, all accordions are handmade, since there is always some hand assembly of the small parts required. The general process involves making the individual parts, assembling the subsections, assembling the entire instrument, and final decorating and packaging.\nNotable centres of production are the Italian cities of Stradella and Castelfidardo, with many small and medium size manufacturers especially at the latter. Castelfidardo honours the memory of Paolo Soprani who was one of the first large-scale producers. Maugein Freres has built accordions in the French town of Tulle since 1919, and the company is now the last complete-process manufacturer of accordions in France. German companies such as Hohner and Weltmeister made large numbers of accordions, but production diminished by the end of the 20th century. Hohner still manufactures its top-end models in Germany, and \"Weltmeister\" instruments are still handmade by HARMONA Akkordeon GmbH in Klingenthal.\nUse in various music genres.\nThe accordion has traditionally been used to perform folk or ethnic music, popular music, and transcriptions from the operatic and light-classical music repertoire. It was also used by the Kikuyu tribe in Kenya and is the main instrument in the traditional Mwomboko dance. Today the instrument is sometimes heard in contemporary pop styles, such as rock and pop-rock, and occasionally even in serious classical music concerts, as well as advertisements.\nUse in traditional music.\nThe accordion's popularity spread rapidly: it has mostly been associated with the common people, and was propagated by Europeans who emigrated around the world. The accordion in both button and piano forms became a favorite of folk musicians and has been integrated into traditional music styles all over the world: see the list of music styles that incorporate the accordion.\nUse in jazz.\nNotable jazz accordionists.\nEarly jazz accordionists include Charles Melrose, who recorded \"Wailing Blues/Barrel House Stomp\" (1930, Voc. 1503) with the Cellar Boys; Buster Moten, who played second piano and accordion in the Bennie Moten orchestra; and Jack Cornell, who did recordings with Irving Mills.\nLater jazz accordionists from the United States include Steve Bach, Milton DeLugg, Orlando DiGirolamo, Angelo Di Pippo, Dominic Frontiere, Guy Klucevsek, Yuri Lemeshev, Frank Marocco, Dr. William Schimmel, John Serry Sr., Lee Tomboulian, and Art Van Damme. French jazz accordionists include Richard Galliano, Bernard Lubat, and Vincent Peirani. Norwegian jazz accordionists include Asmund Bj\u00f8rken, Stian Carstensen, Gabriel Fliflet, Frode Haltli, and Eivin One Pedersen.\nLeft hand techniques.\nThe constraints of the Stradella bass system, limiting the left hand to preset chord buttons, is a barrier to some jazz chord conventions. Jazz accordionists expand the range of chord possibilities by using more than one chord button simultaneously, or by using combinations of a chord button and a bass note other than the typical root of the chord. An example of the former technique is used to play a minor seventh chord. To play an Am7(add9) chord, the Am and Em preset buttons are pressed simultaneously, along with an A bassnote. An example of the latter technique is used to play the half-diminished chord. To play an E\u00f87, a Gm preset button is pressed along with an E bassnote.\nFor the left hand, the free-bass system is used in jazz as a means of creating complex chord voicings. Jazz harmony that would otherwise be difficult to replicate with the Stradella bass system, such as tritone substitutions, become more accessible using a free-bass accordion.\nUse in popular music.\nThe accordion appeared in popular music from the 1900s to the 1960s. This half-century is often called the \"golden age of the accordion\". Five players, Pietro Frosini, the two brothers Count Guido Deiro and Pietro Deiro and Slovenian brothers Vilko Ovsenik and Slavko Avsenik, Charles Magnante were major influences at this time.\nMost vaudeville theaters closed during the Great Depression, but accordionists during the 1930s\u20131950s taught and performed for radio. Included among this group was the concert virtuoso John Serry, Sr. During the 1950s through the 1980s the accordion received significant exposure on television with performances by Myron Floren on \"The Lawrence Welk Show\". In the late 1950s and early 1960s, the accordion declined in popularity because of the rise of rock and roll. The first accordionist to appear and perform at the Newport Jazz Festival was Angelo DiPippo. He can be seen playing his accordion in the motion picture \"The Godfather\". He also composed and performed with his accordion on part of the soundtrack of Woody Allen's movie \"To Rome With Love\". He was featured twice on \"The Tonight Show\" with Johnny Carson.Richard Galliano is an internationally known accordionist whose repertoire covers jazz, tango nuevo, Latin, and classical. Some popular bands use the instrument to create distinctive sounds.\nGrammy Award-winning parodist \"Weird Al\" Yankovic plays the accordion on many of his musical tracks, particularly his polkas. Yankovic was trained in the accordion as a child.\nUse in rock music.\nThe accordion has also been used in the rock genre, most notably by John Linnell of They Might Be Giants, featuring more prominently in the band's earlier works. The instrument is still frequently used during live performances, and continues to make appearances in their studio albums.\nAccordion is also used in the music of the Dropkick Murphys and Gogol Bordello. Tom Waits used the accordion extensively (often played by Dr. William Schimmel) on his album \"Rain Dogs\" and \"Franks Wild Years\". \nThe folk metal subgenre also employs accordionists, but they are otherwise generally rare in other genres. Full-time accordionists in folk metal seem even rarer, but they are still utilized for studio work, as flexible keyboardists are usually more accessible for live performances.\nThe Finnish symphonic folk-metal band Turisas used to have a full-time accordionist, employing classical and polka sensibilities alongside a violinist. One of their accordionists, Netta Skog, is now a member of Ensiferum, another folk-metal band. Another Finnish metal band, Korpiklaani, invokes a type of Finnish polka called humppa, and also has a full-time accordionist.\nSarah Kiener, the former hurdy-gurdy player for the Swiss melodic-death-folk metal band Eluveitie, played a Helvetic accordion known as a \"zuger\u00f6rgeli\".\nUse in classical music.\nAlthough best known as a folk instrument, it has grown in popularity among classical composers. The earliest surviving concert piece is \"\", written in 1836 by Louise Reisner of Paris. Other composers, including the Russian Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, the Italian Umberto Giordano, and the American Charles Ives, wrote works for the diatonic button accordion.\nThe first composer to write specifically for the chromatic accordion was Paul Hindemith. In 1922, the Austrian Alban Berg included an accordion in \"Wozzeck\", Op. 7. In 1937, the first accordion concerto was composed in Russia. Other notable composers have written for the accordion during the first half of the 20th century. Included among this group was the Italian-American John Serry Sr., whose \"Concerto for Free Bass Accordion\" was completed in 1964. In addition, the American accordionist Robert Davine composed his \"Divertimento for Flute, Clarinet, Bassoon and Accordion\" as a work for chamber orchestra. American composer William P. Perry featured the accordion in his orchestral suite \"Six Title Themes in Search of a Movie\" (2008). The experimental composer Howard Skempton began his musical career as an accordionist, and has written numerous solo works for it. In his work \"Drang\" (1999), British composer John Palmer pushed the expressive possibilities of the accordion/bayan. Luciano Berio wrote \"Sequenza XIII\" (1995) for accordionist Teodoro Anzellotti. Accordionists like Mogens Ellegaard, Joseph Macerollo, Nick Ariondo, Friedrich Lips, Hugo Noth, Dr. William Schimmel (also a composer), Stefan Hussong, Teodoro Anzellotti, and Geir Draugsvoll, encouraged composers to write new music for the accordion (solo and chamber music) and also started playing baroque music on the free bass accordion.\nFrench composer Henri Dutilleux used an accordion in both his late song cycles \"Correspondences\" (2003) and \"Le Temps L'Horloge\" (2009). Russian-born composer Sofia Gubaidulina has composed solos, concertos, and chamber works for accordion. Astor Piazzolla's concert tangos are performed widely. Piazzolla performed on the bandoneon, but his works are also performed on or accordion. Dr. William schimmel and \"The Tango Project\" recorded a number of hit recordings and appeared in the movie \"Scent of a Woman\" with Al Pacino which earned Pacino an Oscar. Their recordings were used in many films.\nAustralia.\nThe earliest mention of the novel accordion instrument in Australian music occurs in the 1830s. The accordion initially competed against cheaper and more convenient reed instruments such as mouth organ, concertina and melodeon. Frank Fracchia was an Australian accordion composer and copies of his works \"My dear, can you come out tonight\" and \"Dancing with you\" are preserved in Australian libraries. Other Australian composers who arranged music for accordion include Reginald Stoneham. The popularity of the accordion peaked in the late 1930s and continued until the 1950s. The accordion was particularly favoured by buskers.\nBosnia and Herzegovina.\nThe accordion is a traditional instrument in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is the dominant instrument used in sevdalinka, a traditional genre of folk music from Bosnia and Herzegovina.\nBrazil.\nThe accordion was brought to Brazil by settlers and immigrants from Europe, especially from Italy and Germany, who mainly settled in the south (Rio Grande do Sul, Santa Catarina and Paran\u00e1). The first instrument brought was a \"Concertina\" (a 120 button chromatic accordion). The instrument was popular in the 1950s, and it was common to find several accordions in the same house. There are many different configurations and tunes which were adapted from the cultures that came from Europe.\nAccordion is the official symbol instrument of the Rio Grande do Sul state, where it was voted by unanimity in the deputy chamber. During the boom of accordions there were around 65 factories in Brazil, where most of them (52) in the south, in Rio Grande do Sul state, with only 7 outside the south. One of the most famous and genuinely Brazilian brands was Accorde\u00f5es Todeschini from Bento Gon\u00e7alves-RS, closed in 1973. The Todeschini accordion is very appreciated today and survives with very few maintainers. The most notable musicians of button accordions are Renato Borghetti, Adelar Bertussi, Albino Manique and Edson Dutra.\nCompared to many other countries, the instrument is very popular in mainstream pop music. In some parts of the country, such as the northeast it is the most popular melodic instrument. As opposed to most European folk accordions, a very dry tuning is usually used in Brazil. Outside the south, the accordion (predominantly the piano accordion) is used in almost all styles of Forr\u00f3 (in particular in the subgenres of Xote and Bai\u00e3o) as the principal instrument, Luiz Gonzaga (the \"King of the Bai\u00e3o\") and Dominguinhos being among the notable musicians in this style from the northeast. In this musical style the typical combination is a trio of accordion, triangle and zabumba (a type of drum).\nThis style has gained popularity recently, in particular among the student population of the southeast of the country (in the Forr\u00f3 Universit\u00e1rio genre, with important exponents today being Falamansa, and trios such as Trio Dona Zefa, Trio Virgulino and Trio Alvorada). Moreover, the accordion is the principal instrument in Junina music (music of the S\u00e3o Jo\u00e3o Festival), with Mario Zan having been a very important exponent of this music. It is an important instrument in Sertanejo (and Caipira) music, which originated in the midwest and southeast of Brazil, and subsequently has gained popularity throughout the country.\nChina.\nThe number of accordionists in China exceeds every other country in the world, and possibly every country combined. Introduced in 1926, the accordion has risen to popularity in China throughout the years, thanks to Russian teachers and its being a popular instrument in the People's Liberation Army, and remains popular.\nIn the late 20th century, the development of high performance standards for the accordion within China's halls of academe was also influenced by several American virtuosos including Robert Davine, who was invited by the Ministry of Culture of the People's Republic to present Master Classes and to broaden its national program of music for the accordion in 1984.\nColombia.\nThe accordion is also a traditional instrument in Colombia, commonly associated with the vallenato and cumbia genres. The accordion has been used by tropipop musicians such as Carlos Vives, Andr\u00e9s Cabas, Fonseca (singer) and Bacilos, as well as rock musicians such as Juanes and pop musicians as Shakira. Vallenato, who emerged in the early twentieth century in Valledupar, and have come to symbolize the folk music of Colombia.\nEvery year in April, Colombia holds one of the most important musical festivals in the country: the Vallenato Legend Festival. The festival holds contests for best accordion player. Once every decade, the \"King of Kings\" accordion competition takes place, where winners of the previous festivals compete for the highest possible award for a vallenato accordion player: the \"Pilonera Mayor\" prize. This is the world's largest competitive accordion festival.\nCzech Republic.\nAccordion is often played at traditional Czech pubs, such as U Flek\u00fa, Prague.\nMalaysia.\nThe accordion is an important instrument to \"ronggeng\" performed among the Malay and Peranakan; it is also often interchangable with the harmonium in playing the ghazal; was one notable accordionist who frequently collaborated with folk pop singer Siti Nurhaliza.\nMexico.\nNorte\u00f1o heavily relies on the accordion; it is a genre related to polka. Ram\u00f3n Ayala, known in Mexico as the \"King of the Accordion\", is a norte\u00f1o musician. Cumbia, which features the accordion, is also popular with musicians such as Celso Pi\u00f1a, creating a more contemporary style. U.S.-born Mexican musician Julieta Venegas incorporates the sound of the instrument into rock, pop and folk. She was influenced by her fellow Chicanos Los Lobos who also use the music of the accordion.\nNorth Korea.\nAccording to Barbara Demick in \"Nothing to Envy\", the accordion is known as \"the people's instrument\" and all North Korean teachers were expected to learn the accordion.\nUnited States.\nAccordions are played in Tejano music, Cajun and Creole music, zydeco, klezmer, and polka.\nDuring the post-World War II era from the 1940s to the 1960s, accordions were widely used in the United States for performances of traditional Western classical music within the configuration of large free-reed symphonic orchestras both in live performances on the concert hall stage and in phonograph recordings. Included among the leading accordion orchestras were: The New York Accordion Symphony in New York City, The Springfield Accordion Orchestra in Massachusetts, The Houston Accordion Symphony in Houston, Texas and The Philadelphia Accordion Orchestra in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Prominent orchestra members included: Joe Biviano (President of the American Accordionists Association) Carmen Carrozza, Orlando Di Girolamo (President of the American Symphony Society), Tony Mecca (who collaborated with Leonard Bernstein), Angelo Di Pippo (jazz accordionist and arranger for Robert Merrill), John Serry Sr. and Alfonso Veltri (Director of the National Conservatory of Music). By the 1960s recordings by such orchestras were even praised for their high level of musicality in \"The Billboard\" magazine.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
