{"id": "5593", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5593", "title": "Cyprus", "text": "Island country in West Asia and the Mediterranean Sea\nCyprus, officially the Republic of Cyprus, is an island country in the eastern Mediterranean Sea, located off the coast of the Levant in West Asia. Cyprus\u2019 capital is Nicosia, while its largest municipality is Limassol. The northeast portion of the island is governed by the self-declared, largely unrecognised Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, which is separated from the Republic of Cyprus by the United Nations Buffer Zone. In the south of the island of Cyprus are the British sovereign military bases of Akrotiri and Dhekelia. The island is the third largest and third most populous in the Mediterranean, after Sicily and Sardinia.\nCyprus was first settled by hunter-gatherers around 13,000 years ago, with farming communities emerging by 8500 BC. The late Bronze Age saw the emergence of Alashiya, an urbanised society closely connected to the wider Mediterranean world. Cyprus experienced waves of settlement by Mycenaean Greeks at the end of the 2nd millennium BC. Owing to its rich natural resources (particularly copper) and strategic position at the crossroads of Europe, Africa, and Asia, the island was subsequently contested and occupied by several empires, including the Assyrians, Egyptians, and Persians, from whom it was seized in 333 BC by Alexander the Great. Successive rule by Ptolemaic Egypt, the Classical and Eastern Roman Empire, Arab caliphates, the French Lusignans, and the Venetians was followed by over three centuries of Ottoman dominion (1571\u20131878). Cyprus was placed under British administration in 1878 pursuant to the Cyprus Convention and formally annexed by the United Kingdom in 1914.\nThe island's future became a matter of disagreement between its Greek and Turkish communities. Greek Cypriots sought \"enosis,\" or union with Greece, which became a Greek national policy in the 1950s. Turkish Cypriots initially advocated for continued British rule, then demanded the annexation of the island to Turkey, with which they established the policy of \"taksim:\" portioning Cyprus and creating a Turkish polity in the north of the island. Following nationalist violence in the 1950s, Cyprus was granted independence in 1960. The crisis of 1963\u201364 brought further intercommunal violence between the two communities, displaced more than 25,000 Turkish Cypriots into enclaves, and ended Turkish Cypriot political representation. On 15 July 1974, a coup d'\u00e9tat was staged by Greek Cypriot nationalists and elements of the Greek military junta. This action precipitated the Turkish invasion of Cyprus on 20 July, which captured the present-day territory of Northern Cyprus and displaced over 150,000 Greek Cypriots and 50,000 Turkish Cypriots. A separate Turkish Cypriot state in the north was established by unilateral declaration in 1983, which was widely condemned by the international community and remains recognised only by Turkey. These events and the resulting political situation remain subject to an ongoing dispute.\nCyprus is a developed representative democracy with an advanced high-income economy and very high human development. The island's intense Mediterranean climate and rich cultural heritage, which features both Greek and Turkish elements, make it a major tourist destination. Cyprus is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations and a founding member of the Non-Aligned Movement until it joined the European Union in 2004; it joined the eurozone in 2008. Cyprus has long maintained good relations with NATO and announced in 2024 its intention to officially join.\nEtymology.\nThe earliest attested reference to \"Cyprus\" is the 15th\u00a0century\u00a0BC Mycenaean Greek , \"ku-pi-ri-jo\", meaning \"Cypriot\" (Greek: ), written in Linear B syllabic script.\nThe classical Greek form of the name is (\"K\u00fdpros\").\nThe etymology of the name is unknown.\nSuggestions include:\nThrough overseas trade, the island has given its name to the Classical Latin word for copper through the phrase \"aes Cyprium\", \"metal of Cyprus\", later shortened to \"Cuprum\".\nThe standard demonym relating to Cyprus or its people or culture is \"Cypriot\". The terms \"Cypriote\" and \"Cyprian\" (later a personal name) are also used, though less frequently.\nThe state's official name in Greek literally translates to \"Cypriot Republic\" in English, but this translation is not used officially; \"Republic of Cyprus\" is used instead.\nHistory.\nPrehistoric and ancient period.\nHunter-gatherers first arrived on Cyprus around 13\u201312,000 years ago (11,000 to 10,000 BC), based on dating of sites like Aetokremnos on the south coast and the inland site of Vretsia Roudias. The arrival of the first humans coincides with the extinction of the high Cypriot pygmy hippopotamus and tall Cyprus dwarf elephant, the only large mammals native to the island. Neolithic farming communities emerged on the island by around 10,500 years ago (8500 BC).\nRemains of an eight-month-old cat were discovered buried with a human body at a separate Neolithic site in Cyprus. The grave is estimated to be 9,500 years old (7500\u00a0BC), predating ancient Egyptian civilisation and pushing back the earliest known feline-human association significantly. The remarkably well-preserved Neolithic village of Khirokitia is a UNESCO World Heritage Site, dating to approximately 6800\u00a0BC.\nDuring the Late Bronze Age, from around 1650 BC Cyprus (identified in whole or part as Alashiya in contemporary texts) became more connected to the wider Mediterranean world driven by the trade in copper extracted from the Troodos Mountains, which stimulated the development of urbanised settlements across the island, with records suggesting that Cyprus at this time was ruled by \"kings\" who corresponded with the leaders of other Mediterranean states (like the pharaohs of the New Kingdom of Egypt, as documented in the Amarna letters). The first recorded name of a Cypriot king is \"Kushmeshusha\", as appears on letters sent to Ugarit in the 13th\u00a0century\u00a0BC.\nAt the end of the Bronze Age, the island experienced two waves of Greek settlement. The first wave consisted of Mycenaean Greek traders, who started visiting Cyprus around 1400\u00a0BC. A major wave of Greek settlement is believed to have taken place following the Late Bronze Age collapse of Mycenaean Greece from 1100 to 1050\u00a0BC, with the island's predominantly Greek character dating from this period. Cyprus occupies an important role in Greek mythology, being the birthplace of Aphrodite and Adonis, and home to King Cinyras, Teucer and Pygmalion. Literary evidence suggests an early Phoenician presence at Kition, which was under Tyrian rule at the beginning of the 10th century BC. Some Phoenician merchants who were believed to come from Tyre colonised the area and expanded the political influence of Kition. After c.\u00a0850\u00a0BC, the Phoenicians rebuilt and reused the sanctuaries [at the Kathari site].\nCyprus is at a strategic location in the Eastern Mediterranean. It was ruled by the Neo-Assyrian Empire for a century starting in 708\u00a0BC, before a brief spell under Egyptian rule and eventually Achaemenid rule in 545\u00a0BC. The Cypriots, led by Onesilus, king of Salamis, joined their fellow Greeks in the Ionian cities during the unsuccessful Ionian Revolt in 499\u00a0BC against the Achaemenids. The revolt was suppressed, but Cyprus managed to maintain a high degree of autonomy and remained inclined towards the Greek world. \nDuring the whole period of the Persian rule, there is a continuity in the reign of the Cypriot kings and during their rebellions they were crushed by Persian rulers from Asia Minor, which is an indication that the Cypriots were ruling the island with directly regulated relations with the Great King and there was not a Persian satrap. The Kingdoms of Cyprus enjoyed special privileges and a semi-autonomous status, but they were still considered vassal subjects of the Great King.\nThe island was conquered by Alexander the Great in 333\u00a0BC and Cypriot navy helped Alexander during the siege of Tyre (332 BC). The Cypriot fleet was also sent to help Amphoterus. In addition, Alexander had two Cypriot generals Stasander and Stasanor both from the Soli and later both became satraps in Alexander's empire.\nFollowing Alexander's death, the division of his empire, and the subsequent Wars of the Diadochi, Cyprus became part of the Hellenistic empire of Ptolemaic Egypt. It was during this period that the island was fully Hellenised. In 58\u00a0BC Cyprus was acquired by the Roman Republic and became Roman Cyprus in 22 BC.\nMiddle Ages.\nWhen the Roman Empire was divided into Eastern and Western parts in 286, Cyprus became part of the East Roman Empire (also called the Byzantine Empire); the island would remain part of the empire for some 900 years. Under Byzantine rule, the Greek orientation that had been prominent since antiquity developed the strong Hellenistic-Christian character that continues to be a hallmark of the Greek Cypriot community.\nBeginning in 649, Cyprus endured repeated attacks and raids launched by Umayyad Caliphate. Many were quick raids, but others were large-scale attacks in which many Cypriots were killed and great wealth carried off or destroyed. The city of Salamis was destroyed and never rebuilt. Byzantine control remained stronger in the northern coast, the Arabs exerted more influence in the south. In 688, Emperor Justinian\u00a0II and Caliph Abd al-Malik signed a treaty whereby Cyprus would be paying an equal amount of tribute to the Caliphate and tax to the Empire, but would remain politically neutral to both while being retained as a province administered by the Empire. There are no Byzantine churches which survive from this period, and the island entered a period of impoverishment. Full Byzantine rule was restored in 965, when Emperor Nikephoros\u00a0II Phokas scored decisive victories on land and sea.\nIn 1156 Raynald of Ch\u00e2tillon and Thoros II of Armenia brutally sacked Cyprus over a period of three weeks, stealing so much plunder and capturing so many of the leading citizens and their families for ransom, that the island took generations to recover. Several Greek priests were mutilated and sent away to Constantinople.\nIn 1185 Isaac Komnenos, a member of the Byzantine imperial family, took over Cyprus and declared it independent of the Empire. In 1191, during the Third Crusade, Richard I of England captured the island from Isaac. He used it as a major supply base that was relatively safe from the Saracens. A year later Richard sold the island to the Knights Templar, who, following a bloody revolt, in turn sold it to Guy of Lusignan. His brother and successor Aimery was recognised as King of Cyprus by Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor.\nFollowing the death in 1473 of James\u00a0II, the last Lusignan king, the Republic of Venice assumed control of the island, while the late king's Venetian widow, Queen Catherine Cornaro, reigned as figurehead. Venice formally annexed the Kingdom of Cyprus in 1489, following the abdication of Catherine. The Venetians fortified Nicosia by building the Walls of Nicosia, and used it as an important commercial hub. Throughout Venetian rule, the Ottoman Empire frequently raided Cyprus. In 1539 the Ottomans destroyed Limassol and so fearing the worst, the Venetians also fortified Famagusta and Kyrenia.\nAlthough the Lusignan French aristocracy remained the dominant social class in Cyprus throughout the medieval period, the former assumption that Greeks were treated only as serfs on the island is no longer considered by academics to be accurate. It is now accepted that the medieval period saw increasing numbers of Greek Cypriots elevated to the upper classes, a growing Greek middle ranks, and the Lusignan royal household even marrying Greeks. This included King John\u00a0II of Cyprus who married Helena Palaiologina.\nOttoman Cyprus.\nIn 1570, a full-scale Ottoman assault with 60,000 troops brought the island under Ottoman control, despite stiff resistance by the inhabitants of Nicosia and Famagusta. Ottoman forces capturing Cyprus massacred many Greek and Armenian Christian inhabitants. The previous Latin elite were destroyed and the first significant demographic change since antiquity took place with the formation of a Muslim community. Soldiers who fought in the conquest settled on the island and Turkish peasants and craftsmen were brought to the island from Anatolia. This new community also included banished Anatolian tribes, \"undesirable\" persons and members of various \"troublesome\" Muslim sects, as well as a number of new converts on the island.\nThe Ottomans abolished the feudal system previously in place and applied the millet system to Cyprus, under which non-Muslim peoples were governed by their own religious authorities. In a reversal from the days of Latin rule, the head of the Church of Cyprus was invested as leader of the Greek Cypriot population and acted as mediator between Christian Greek Cypriots and the Ottoman authorities. This status ensured that the Church of Cyprus was in a position to end the Catholic Church's constant expansion efforts on the island. Ottoman rule of Cyprus was at times indifferent, at times oppressive, depending on the temperaments of the sultans and local officials.\nThe ratio of Muslims to Christians fluctuated throughout the period of Ottoman domination. In 1777\u201378, 47,000 Muslims constituted a majority over the island's 37,000 Christians. By 1872, the population of the island had risen to 144,000, comprising 44,000 Muslims and 100,000 Christians. The Muslim population included numerous crypto-Christians, including the Linobambaki, a crypto-Catholic community that arose due to religious persecution of the Catholic community by the Ottoman authorities; this community would assimilate into the Turkish Cypriot community during British rule.\nAs soon as the Greek War of Independence broke out in 1821, several Greek Cypriots left for Greece to join the Greek forces. In response, the Ottoman governor of Cyprus arrested and executed 486 prominent Greek Cypriots, including the Archbishop of Cyprus, Kyprianos, and four other bishops. In 1828, modern Greece's first president Ioannis Kapodistrias called for union of Cyprus with Greece, and numerous minor uprisings took place. Reaction to Ottoman misrule led to uprisings by both Greek and Turkish Cypriots, although none were successful. After centuries of neglect by the Ottoman Empire, the poverty of most of the people and the ever-present tax collectors fuelled Greek nationalism, and by the 20th century the idea of \"union\" with newly independent Greece was firmly rooted among Greek Cypriots.\nUnder Ottoman rule, numeracy, school enrolment and literacy rates were all low. They persisted some time after Ottoman rule ended, and then increased rapidly during the twentieth century.\nBritish Cyprus.\nIn the aftermath of the Russo-Turkish War (1877\u20131878) and the Congress of Berlin, Cyprus was leased to the British Empire which de facto took over its administration in 1878 (though, in terms of sovereignty, Cyprus remained a \"de jure\" Ottoman territory until 5 November 1914, together with Egypt and Sudan) in exchange for guarantees that Britain would use the island as a base to protect the Ottoman Empire against possible Russian aggression.\nThe island would serve Britain as a key military base for its colonial routes. By 1906, when the Famagusta harbour was completed, Cyprus was a strategic naval outpost overlooking the Suez Canal, the crucial main route to India which was then Britain's most important overseas possession. Following the outbreak of the First World War and the decision of the Ottoman Empire to join the war on the side of the Central Powers, on 5 November 1914 the British Empire formally annexed Cyprus and declared the Ottoman \"Khedivate\" of Egypt and Sudan a \"Sultanate\" and British protectorate.\nIn October 1915, Britain offered Cyprus to Greece, ruled by King Constantine I of Greece, on the condition that Greece join the war on the side of the British and went to Serbia\u2019s assistance, in order to fulfill her Treaty obligations under the Serbo-Greek pact of May 1913. It gave Greece a golden \n\u201copportunity\u201d in achieving \"enosis\" with Cyprus. Alternatively it was a\n\u201clost opportunity\u201d when the Zaimis administration declined the British proposal.\nIn 1923, under the Treaty of Lausanne, the nascent Turkish republic relinquished any claim to Cyprus, and in 1925 it was declared a British crown colony. During the Second World War, many Greek and Turkish Cypriots enlisted in the Cyprus Regiment.\nThe Greek Cypriot population, meanwhile, had become hopeful that the British administration would lead to \"enosis\". The idea of \"enosis\" was historically part of the \"Megali Idea\", a greater political ambition of a Greek state encompassing the territories with large Greek populations in the former Ottoman Empire, including Cyprus and Asia Minor with a capital in Constantinople, and was actively pursued by the Cypriot Orthodox Church, which had its members educated in Greece. These religious officials, together with Greek military officers and professionals, some of whom still pursued the \"Megali Idea\", would later found the guerrilla organisation EOKA \"(Ethniki Organosis Kyprion Agoniston\" or National Organisation of Cypriot Fighters). The Greek Cypriots viewed the island as historically Greek and believed that union with Greece was a natural right. In the 1950s, the pursuit of \"enosis\" became a part of the Greek national policy.\nInitially, the Turkish Cypriots favoured the continuation of the British rule. However, they were alarmed by the Greek Cypriot calls for \"enosis\", as they saw the union of Crete with Greece, which led to the exodus of Cretan Turks, as a precedent to be avoided, and they took a pro-partition stance in response to the militant activity of EOKA. The Turkish Cypriots also viewed themselves as a distinct ethnic group of the island and believed in their having a separate right to self-determination from Greek Cypriots. Meanwhile, in the 1950s, Turkish leader Menderes considered Cyprus an \"extension of Anatolia\", rejected the partition of Cyprus along ethnic lines and favoured the annexation of the whole island to Turkey. Nationalistic slogans centred on the idea that \"Cyprus is Turkish\" and the ruling party declared Cyprus to be a part of the Turkish homeland that was vital to its security. Upon realising that the fact that the Turkish Cypriot population was only 20% of the islanders made annexation unfeasible, the national policy was changed to favour partition. The slogan \"Partition or Death\" was frequently used in Turkish Cypriot and Turkish protests starting in the late 1950s and continuing throughout the 1960s. Although after the Z\u00fcrich and London conferences Turkey seemed to accept the existence of the Cypriot state and to distance itself from its policy of favouring the partition of the island, the goal of the Turkish and Turkish Cypriot leaders remained that of creating an independent Turkish state in the northern part of the island.\nIn January 1950, the Church of Cyprus organised a referendum under the supervision of clerics and with no Turkish Cypriot participation, where 96% of the participating Greek Cypriots voted in favour of \"enosis\". The Greeks were 80.2% of the total island's population at the time (census 1946). Restricted autonomy under a constitution was proposed by the British administration but eventually rejected. In 1955 the EOKA organisation was founded, seeking union with Greece through armed struggle. At the same time the Turkish Resistance Organisation (TMT), calling for Taksim, or partition, was established by the Turkish Cypriots as a counterweight. British officials also tolerated the creation of the Turkish underground organisation TMT The Secretary of State for the Colonies in a letter dated 15 July 1958 had advised the Governor of Cyprus not to act against TMT despite its illegal actions so as not to harm British relations with the Turkish government.\nIndependence and inter-communal violence.\nDuring British rule, the future of the island became a matter of disagreement between the two prominent ethnic communities, Greek Cypriots, who made up 77% of the population in 1960, and Turkish Cypriots, who made up 18% of the population. From the 19th century onwards, the Greek Cypriot population pursued \"enosis\", union with Greece, which became a Greek national policy in the 1950s. The Turkish Cypriot population initially advocated the continuation of the British rule, then demanded the annexation of the island to Turkey, and in the 1950s, together with Turkey, established a policy of \"taksim\", the partition of Cyprus and the creation of a Turkish polity in the north.\nCyprus was granted independence in 1960, following an armed campaign spearheaded by EOKA. As per the Z\u00fcrich and London Agreement, Cyprus officially attained independence on 16 August 1960, and at the time had a total population of 573,566; of whom 442,138 (77.1%) were Greeks, 104,320 (18.2%) Turks, and 27,108 (4.7%) others. The UK retained the two Sovereign Base Areas of Akrotiri and Dhekelia, while government posts and public offices were allocated by ethnic quotas, giving the minority Turkish Cypriots a permanent veto, 30% in parliament and administration, and granting the three mother-states guarantor rights.\nHowever, the division of power as foreseen by the constitution soon resulted in legal impasses and discontent on both sides, and nationalist militants started training again, with the military support of Greece and Turkey respectively. The Greek Cypriot leadership believed that the rights given to Turkish Cypriots under the 1960 constitution were too extensive and designed the Akritas plan, which was aimed at reforming the constitution in favour of Greek Cypriots, persuading the international community about the correctness of the changes and violently subjugating Turkish Cypriots in a few days should they not accept the plan. Tensions were heightened when Cypriot President Archbishop Makarios\u00a0III called for constitutional changes, which were rejected by Turkey and opposed by Turkish Cypriots.\nIntercommunal violence erupted on 21 December 1963, when two Turkish Cypriots were killed at an incident involving the Greek Cypriot police. The violence resulted in the death of 364\u00a0Turkish and 174\u00a0Greek Cypriots, destruction of 109 Turkish Cypriot or mixed villages and displacement of 25,000\u201330,000 Turkish Cypriots. The crisis resulted in the end of the Turkish Cypriot involvement in the administration and their claiming that it had lost its legitimacy; the nature of this event is still controversial. In some areas, Greek Cypriots prevented Turkish Cypriots from travelling and entering government buildings, while some Turkish Cypriots willingly withdrew due to the calls of the Turkish Cypriot administration. Turkish Cypriots started living in enclaves. The republic's structure was changed, unilaterally, by Makarios, and Nicosia was divided by the Green Line, with the deployment of UNFICYP troops.\nIn 1964, Turkey threatened to invade Cyprus in response to the continuing Cypriot intercommunal violence, but this was stopped by a strongly worded telegram from the US President Lyndon B. Johnson on 5 June, warning that the US would not stand beside Turkey in case of a consequential Soviet invasion of Turkish territory. Meanwhile, by 1964, \"enosis\" was a Greek policy and would not be abandoned; Makarios and the Greek prime minister Georgios Papandreou agreed that \"enosis\" should be the ultimate aim and King Constantine wished Cyprus \"a speedy union with the mother country\". Greece dispatched 10,000 troops to Cyprus to counter a possible Turkish invasion.\nThe crisis of 1963\u201364 had brought further intercommunal violence between the two communities, displaced more than 25,000 Turkish Cypriots into enclaves and brought the end of Turkish Cypriot representation in the republic.\n1974 coup d'\u00e9tat, invasion, and division.\nOn 15 July 1974, the Greek military junta under Dimitrios Ioannides carried out a coup d'\u00e9tat in Cyprus, to unite the island with Greece. The coup ousted president Makarios\u00a0III and replaced him with pro-enosis nationalist Nikos Sampson. In response to the coup, five days later, on 20 July 1974, the Turkish army invaded the island, citing a right to intervene to restore the constitutional order from the 1960 Treaty of Guarantee. This justification has been rejected by the United Nations and the international community.\nThe Turkish air force began bombing Greek positions in Cyprus, and hundreds of paratroopers were dropped in the area between Nicosia and Kyrenia, where well-armed Turkish Cypriot enclaves had been long-established; while off the Kyrenia coast, Turkish troop ships landed 6,000 men as well as tanks, trucks and armoured vehicles.\nThree days later, when a ceasefire had been agreed, Turkey had landed 30,000 troops on the island and captured Kyrenia, the corridor linking Kyrenia to Nicosia, and the Turkish Cypriot quarter of Nicosia itself. The junta in Athens, and then the Sampson regime in Cyprus fell from power. In Nicosia, Glafkos Clerides temporarily assumed the presidency. But after the peace negotiations in Geneva, the Turkish government reinforced their Kyrenia bridgehead and started a second invasion on 14 August. The invasion resulted in Morphou, Karpass, Famagusta and the Mesaoria coming under Turkish control.\nInternational pressure led to a ceasefire, and by then 36% of the island had been taken over by the Turks and 180,000 Greek Cypriots had been evicted from their homes in the north. At the same time, around 50,000 Turkish Cypriots were displaced to the north and settled in the properties of the displaced Greek Cypriots. Among a variety of sanctions against Turkey, in mid-1975 the US Congress imposed an arms embargo on Turkey for using US-supplied equipment during the Turkish invasion of Cyprus in 1974. There were 1,534 Greek Cypriots and 502 Turkish Cypriots missing as a result of the fighting from 1963 to 1974.\nThe Republic of Cyprus has \"de jure\" sovereignty over the entire island, including its territorial waters and exclusive economic zone, with the exception of the Sovereign Base Areas of Akrotiri and Dhekelia, which remain under the UK's control according to the London and Z\u00fcrich Agreements. However, the island is \"de facto\" partitioned into two main parts: the area under the effective control of the Republic of Cyprus, in the south and west and comprising about 59% of the island's area, and the north, administered by the self-declared Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, covering about 36% of the island's area. Another nearly 4% of the island's area is covered by the UN buffer zone. The international community considers the northern part of the island to be territory of the Republic of Cyprus occupied by Turkish forces. The occupation is viewed as illegal under international law and amounting to illegal occupation of EU territory since Cyprus became a member of the European Union.\nPost-division.\nAfter the restoration of constitutional order and the return of Archbishop Makarios\u00a0III to Cyprus in December 1974, Turkish troops remained, occupying the northeastern portion of the island. In 1983, the Turkish Cypriot parliament, led by the Turkish Cypriot leader Rauf Denkta\u015f, proclaimed the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC), which is recognised only by Turkey.\nThe events of the summer of 1974 dominate the politics on the island, as well as Greco-Turkish relations. Turkish settlers have been settled in the north with the encouragement of the Turkish and Turkish Cypriot states. The Republic of Cyprus considers their presence a violation of the Geneva Convention, whilst many Turkish settlers have since severed their ties to Turkey and their second generation considers Cyprus to be their homeland.\nThe Turkish invasion, the ensuing occupation and the declaration of independence by the TRNC have been condemned by United Nations resolutions, which are reaffirmed by the Security Council every year.\n21st century.\nAttempts to resolve the Cyprus dispute have continued. In 2004, the Annan Plan, drafted by then UN Secretary General Kofi Annan, was put to a referendum in both Cypriot administrations. 65% of Turkish Cypriots voted in support of the plan and 74% Greek Cypriots voted against the plan, saying that it disproportionately favoured Turkish Cypriots and gave unreasonable influence over the nation to Turkey. In total, 66.7% of the voters rejected the Annan Plan.\nOn 1 May 2004, Cyprus joined the European Union, together with nine other countries. Cyprus was accepted into the EU as a whole, although the EU legislation is suspended in Northern Cyprus until a final settlement of the Cyprus problem.\nEfforts have been made to enhance freedom of movement between the two sides. In April 2003, Northern Cyprus unilaterally eased checkpoint restrictions, permitting Cypriots to cross between the two sides for the first time in 30 years. In March 2008, a wall that had stood for decades at the boundary between the Republic of Cyprus and the UN buffer zone was demolished. The wall had cut across Ledra Street in the heart of Nicosia and was seen as a strong symbol of the island's 32-year division. On 3 April 2008, Ledra Street was reopened in the presence of Greek and Turkish Cypriot officials. The two sides relaunched reunification talks in 2015, but these collapsed in 2017.\nThe European Union warned in February 2019 that Cyprus was selling EU passports to Russian oligarchs, and thus would allow organised crime syndicates to infiltrate the EU. In 2020, leaked documents revealed a wider range of former and current officials from Afghanistan, China, Dubai, Lebanon, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Ukraine and Vietnam who bought a Cypriot citizenship prior to a change of the law in July 2019. Since 2020 Cyprus and Turkey have been engaged in a dispute over the extent of their exclusive economic zones, ostensibly sparked by oil and gas exploration in the area.\nIn November 2023, the Cyprus Confidential data leak published by the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists showed the country's financial network entertaining strong links with Russian oligarchs and high-up figures in the Kremlin, supporting the regime of Vladimir Putin.\nIn July 2024, on the 50th anniversary of the Turkish invasion of Northern Cyprus, Turkish President Erdo\u011fan rejected a United Nations-endorsed plan for a federal government and supported the idea of having two separate states within Cyprus. Greek Cypriots immediately rejected Erdo\u011fan's two-state proposal, calling it a \"non-starter\".\nGeography.\nCyprus is the third largest island in the Mediterranean Sea, after the Italian islands of Sicily and Sardinia, both in terms of area and population. It is also the world's 80th largest by area and world's 51st largest by population. It measures long from end to end and wide at its widest point, with Turkey to the north. It lies between latitudes 34\u00b0 and 36\u00b0 N, and longitudes 32\u00b0 and 35\u00b0 E.\nOther neighbouring territories include Lebanon and Syria to the east and southeast (, respectively), Israel to the southeast, the Gaza Strip 427 kilometres (265\u00a0mi) to the southeast, Egypt to the south, and Greece to the northwest: to the small Dodecanesian island of Kastellorizo (Megisti), to Rhodes and to the Greek mainland. Cyprus is at the crossroads of three continents, with some sources placing Cyprus in Europe, and some sources placing Cyprus in Western Asia and the Middle East.\nThe physical relief of the island is dominated by two mountain ranges, the Troodos Mountains and the smaller Kyrenia Range, and the central plain they encompass, the Mesaoria. The Mesaoria plain is drained by the Pedieos River, the longest on the island. The Troodos Mountains cover most of the southern and western portions of the island and account for roughly half its area. The highest point on Cyprus is Mount Olympus at , in the centre of the Troodos range. The narrow Kyrenia Range, extending along the northern coastline, occupies substantially less area, and elevations are lower, reaching a maximum of . The island lies within the Anatolian Plate.\nCyprus contains the Cyprus Mediterranean forests ecoregion. It had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 7.06/10, ranking it 59th globally out of 172 countries.\nGeopolitically, the island is subdivided into four main segments. The Republic of Cyprus occupies the southern two-thirds of the island (59.74%). The Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus occupies the northern third (34.85%), and the United Nations-controlled Green Line provides a buffer zone that separates the two and covers 2.67% of the island. Lastly, there are two bases under British sovereignty on the island: Akrotiri and Dhekelia, covering the remaining 2.74%.\nClimate.\nCyprus has a subtropical climate \u2013 Mediterranean and semi-arid type (in the north-eastern part of the island) \u2013 K\u00f6ppen climate classifications \"Csa\" and \"BSh\", with very mild winters (on the coast) and warm to hot summers. Snow is possible only in the Troodos Mountains in the central part of island. Rain occurs mainly in winter, with summer being generally dry.\nCyprus has one of the warmest climates in the Mediterranean part of the European Union. The average annual temperature on the coast is around during the day and at night. Generally, summers last about eight months, beginning in April with average temperatures of during the day and at night, and ending in November with average temperatures of during the day and at night, although in the remaining four months temperatures sometimes exceed .\nSunshine hours on the coast are around 3,200 per year, from an average of 5\u20136 hours of sunshine per day in December to an average of 12\u201313 hours in July. This is about double that of cities in the northern half of Europe; for comparison, London receives about 1,540 per year. In December, London receives about 50 hours of sunshine while coastal locations in Cyprus about 180 hours (almost as much as in May in London).\nWater supply.\nCyprus suffers from a chronic shortage of water. The country relies heavily on rain to provide household water, but in the past 30\u00a0years average yearly precipitation has decreased. Between 2001 and 2004, exceptionally heavy annual rainfall pushed water reserves up, with supply exceeding demand, allowing total storage in the island's reservoirs to rise to an all-time high by the start of 2005.\nHowever, since then demand has increased annually \u2013 a result of local population growth, foreigners moving to Cyprus and the number of visiting tourists \u2013 while supply has fallen as a result of more frequent droughts (2006 European heat wave, 2018 European heat wave, 2019 European heat waves, 2022 European heat waves).\nDams remain the principal source of water both for domestic and agricultural use; Cyprus has a total of 108 dams and reservoirs, with a total water storage capacity of about . Water desalination plants are gradually being constructed to deal with recent years of prolonged drought.\nThe Government has invested heavily in the creation of water desalination plants which have supplied almost 50 per cent of domestic water since 2001. Efforts have also been made to raise public awareness of the situation and to encourage domestic water users to take more responsibility for the conservation of this increasingly scarce commodity.\nTurkey has built a water pipeline under the Mediterranean Sea from Anamur on its southern coast to the northern coast of Cyprus, to supply Northern Cyprus with potable and irrigation water \"(see Northern Cyprus Water Supply Project)\".\nFlora and fauna.\nCyprus is home to a number of endemic species, including the Cypriot mouse, the golden oak and the Cyprus cedar.\nGovernment and politics.\nCyprus is a presidential republic. The head of state and of the government is elected by a process of universal suffrage for a five-year term. Executive power is exercised by the government with legislative power vested in the House of Representatives whilst the Judiciary is independent of both the executive and the legislature.\nThe 1960 Constitution provided for a presidential system of government with independent executive, legislative and judicial branches as well as a complex system of checks and balances including a weighted power-sharing ratio designed to protect the interests of the Turkish Cypriots. The executive was led by a Greek Cypriot president and a Turkish Cypriot vice-president elected by their respective communities for five-year terms and each possessing a right of veto over certain types of legislation and executive decisions. Legislative power rested on the House of Representatives who were also elected on the basis of separate voters' rolls.\nSince 1965, following clashes between the two communities, the Turkish Cypriot seats in the House have remained vacant. In 1974 Cyprus was divided de facto when the Turkish army occupied the northern third of the island. The Turkish Cypriots subsequently declared independence in 1983 as the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus but were recognised only by Turkey. In 1985 the TRNC adopted a constitution and held its first elections. The United Nations recognises the sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus over the entire island of Cyprus.\nAs of 2007, the House of Representatives had 56 members elected for a five-year term by proportional representation, and three observer members representing the Armenian, Latin and Maronite minorities. Twenty-four seats were allocated to the Turkish community but have remained vacant since 1964. The political environment was dominated by the communist AKEL, the liberal conservative Democratic Rally, the centrist Democratic Party, and the social-democratic EDEK.\nIn 2008, Dimitris Christofias became the country's first Communist head of state. Due to his involvement in the 2012\u20132013 Cypriot financial crisis, Christofias did not run for re-election in 2013. The Presidential election in 2013 resulted in Democratic Rally candidate Nicos Anastasiades winning 57.48% of the vote. As a result, Anastasiades was sworn in on 28 February 2013. Anastasiades was re-elected with 56% of the vote in the 2018 presidential election. On 28 February 2023, Nikos Christodoulides, the winner of the 2023 presidential election run-off, was sworn in as the eighth president of the Republic of Cyprus.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe Republic of Cyprus is divided into six districts: Nicosia, Famagusta, Kyrenia, Larnaca, Limassol and Paphos.\nExclaves and enclaves.\nCyprus has four exclaves, all in territory that belongs to the British Sovereign Base Area of Dhekelia. The first two are the villages of Ormidhia and Xylotymvou. The third is the Dhekelia Power Station, which is divided by a British road into two parts. The northern part is the EAC refugee settlement. The southern part, even though located by the sea, is also an exclave because it has no territorial waters of its own, those being UK waters.\nThe UN buffer zone runs up against Dhekelia and picks up again from its east side off Ayios Nikolaos and is connected to the rest of Dhekelia by a thin land corridor. In that sense the buffer zone turns the Paralimni area on the southeast corner of the island into a de facto, though not de jure, exclave.\nForeign relations.\nThe Republic of Cyprus is a member of the following international groups: Australia Group, CN, CE, CFSP, EBRD, EIB, EU, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICCt, ITUC, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Interpol, IOC, IOM, IPU, ITU, MIGA, NAM, NSG, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WCO, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTO.\nCyprus is the 88th most peaceful country in the world, according to the 2024 Global Peace Index.\nMilitary.\nThe Cypriot National Guard is the main military institution of the Republic of Cyprus. It is a combined arms force, with land, air and naval elements. Historically all male citizens were required to spend 24 months serving in the National Guard after their 17th birthday, but in 2016 this period of compulsory service was reduced to 14 months.\nAnnually, approximately 10,000 persons are trained in recruit centres. Depending on their awarded speciality the conscript recruits are then transferred to speciality training camps or to operational units.\nWhile until 2016 the armed forces were mainly conscript based, since then a large professional enlisted institution has been adopted (\u03a3\u03a5\u039f\u03a0), which combined with the reduction of conscript service produces an approximate 3:1 ratio between conscript and professional enlisted.\nLaw, justice and human rights.\nThe Cyprus Police (Greek: , ) is the only National Police Service of the Republic of Cyprus and is under the Ministry of Justice and Public Order since 1993.\nIn \"Freedom in the World 2011\", Freedom House rated Cyprus as \"free\". In January 2011, the Report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on the question of Human Rights in Cyprus noted that the ongoing division of Cyprus continues to affect human rights throughout the island \"including freedom of movement, human rights pertaining to the question of missing persons, discrimination, the right to life, freedom of religion, and economic, social and cultural rights\". The constant focus on the division of the island can sometimes mask other human rights issues. Prostitution is rife, and the island has been criticised for its role in the sex trade as one of the main routes of human trafficking from Eastern Europe.\nIn 2014, Turkey was ordered by the European Court of Human Rights to pay well over $100m in compensation to Cyprus for the invasion; Ankara announced that it would ignore the judgment. In 2014, a group of Cypriot refugees and a European parliamentarian, later joined by the Cypriot government, filed a complaint to the International Court of Justice, accusing Turkey of violating the Geneva Conventions by directly or indirectly transferring its civilian population into occupied territory. Other violations of the Geneva and the Hague Conventions\u2014both ratified by Turkey\u2014amount to what archaeologist Sophocles Hadjisavvas called \"the organised destruction of Greek and Christian heritage in the north\". These violations include looting of cultural treasures, deliberate destruction of churches, neglect of works of art, and altering the names of important historical sites, which was condemned by the International Council on Monuments and Sites. Hadjisavvas has asserted that these actions are motivated by a Turkish policy of erasing the Greek presence in Northern Cyprus within a framework of ethnic cleansing. But some perpetrators are just motivated by greed and are seeking profit. Art law expert Alessandro Chechi has classified the connection of cultural heritage destruction to ethnic cleansing as the \"Greek Cypriot viewpoint\", which he reports as having been dismissed by two PACE reports. Chechi asserts joint Greek and Turkish Cypriot responsibility for the destruction of cultural heritage in Cyprus, noting the destruction of Turkish Cypriot heritage in the hands of Greek Cypriot extremists.\nEconomy.\nIn the early 21st century, Cyprus boasted a prosperous service-based economy that made it the wealthiest of the ten countries that joined the European Union in 2004. However, the Cypriot economy was later damaged by the 2008 financial crisis and the Eurozone crisis. In June 2012, the Cypriot government announced it would need \u20ac1.8 billion in foreign aid to support the Cyprus Popular Bank, and this was followed by Fitch downgrading Cyprus's credit rating to junk status. Fitch stated Cyprus would need an additional \u20ac4 billion to support its banks and the downgrade was mainly due to the exposure of Bank of Cyprus, Cyprus Popular Bank, and Hellenic Bank, Cyprus's three largest banks, to the Greek government-debt crisis.\nThe 2012\u20132013 Cypriot financial crisis led to an agreement with the Eurogroup in March 2013 to split Cyprus Popular Bank, into a \"bad\" bank which would be wound down over time and a \"good\" bank which would be absorbed by the Bank of Cyprus. In return for a \u20ac10 billion bailout from the European Commission, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund, often referred to as the \"troika\", the Cypriot government was required to impose a significant haircut on uninsured deposits, a large proportion of which were held by wealthy Russians who used Cyprus as a tax haven. Insured deposits of \u20ac100,000 or less were not affected.\nCyprus made a staggering economic recovery in the 2010s, and according to the 2023 International Monetary Fund estimates, Cyprus's per capita GDP at $54,611 is the highest in Southern Europe, though slightly below the European Union average. Tourism, financial services and shipping are significant parts of the economy, and Cyprus has been sought as a base for several offshore businesses due its low tax rates and ease of doing business. Robust growth was achieved in the 1980s and 1990s, due to the focus placed by Cypriot governments on meeting the criteria for admission to the European Union. The Cypriot government adopted the euro as the national currency on 1 January 2008, replacing the Cypriot pound.\nCyprus is the last EU member fully isolated from energy interconnections and it is expected that it will be connected to European network via the EuroAsia Interconnector, a 2000 MW high-voltage direct current undersea power cable. EuroAsia Interconnector will connect Greek, Cypriot, and Israeli power grids. It is a leading Project of Common Interest of the European Union and also priority Electricity Highway Interconnector Project.\nIn recent years significant quantities of offshore natural gas have been discovered in the area known as Aphrodite (at the exploratory drilling block 12) in Cyprus's exclusive economic zone (EEZ), about south of Limassol at 33\u00b05'40\u2033N and 32\u00b059'0\u2033E. However, Turkey's offshore drilling companies have accessed both natural gas and oil resources since 2013. Cyprus demarcated its maritime border with Egypt in 2003, with Lebanon in 2007, and with Israel in 2010. In August 2011, the US-based firm Noble Energy entered into a production-sharing agreement with the Cypriot government regarding the block's commercial development.\nTurkey, which does not recognise the border agreements of Cyprus with its neighbours, threatened to mobilise its naval forces if Cyprus proceeded with plans to begin drilling at Block\u00a012. Cyprus's drilling efforts have the support of the US, EU, and UN, and on 19 September 2011 drilling in Block\u00a012 began without any incidents being reported.\nInfrastructure.\nCyprus is one of only three EU nations in which vehicles drive on the left-hand side of the road, a remnant of British rule. A series of motorways runs along the coast from Paphos to Ayia Napa, with two motorways running inland to Nicosia, one from Limassol and one from Larnaca.\nPer capita private car ownership is the 29th-highest in the world. There were approximately 344,000 privately owned vehicles, and a total of 517,000 registered motor vehicles in the Republic of Cyprus in 2006. In 2006, plans were announced to improve and expand bus services and other public transport throughout Cyprus, with the financial backing of the European Union Development Bank. In 2010 the new bus network was implemented.\nCyprus has two international airports in the government-controlled areas, the busier one being in Larnaca and the other in Paphos. The Ercan International Airport is the only active one in the non-government-controlled areas, but all international flights there must have a stopover in Turkey.\nThe main harbours of the island are Limassol and Larnaca, which serve cargo, passenger and cruise ships.\nCyta, the state-owned telecommunications company, manages most telecommunications and Internet connections on the island. However, following deregulation of the sector, a few private telecommunications companies emerged, including epic, Cablenet, OTEnet Telecom, Omega Telecom and PrimeTel. In the non-government-controlled areas of Cyprus, two different companies administer the mobile phone network: Turkcell and KKTC Telsim.\nDemographics.\nAccording to the Republic of Cyprus's website, the population in the government controlled areas was 918,100 at the 2021 Census, with the most populous district being Nicosia (38%), followed by Limassol (28%). The Nicosia Metropolitan area, consisting of seven municipalities, is the largest urban area on the island with a population of 255,309.\nAs per the first population census after independence, carried out in December 1960 and covering the entire island, Cyprus had a total population of 573,566, of whom 442,138 (77.1%) were Greeks, 104,320 (18.2%) Turks, and 27,108 (4.7%) others. The CIA World Factbook calculated that in 2001, Greek Cypriots comprised 77%, Turkish Cypriots 18%, and others 5% of the total Cypriot population.\nDue to the inter-communal ethnic tensions between 1963 and 1974, an island-wide census was regarded as impossible. Nevertheless, the Cypriot government conducted one in 1973, without the Turkish Cypriot populace. According to this census, the Greek Cypriot population was 482,000. One year later, in 1974, the Cypriot government's Department of Statistics and Research estimated the total population of Cyprus at 641,000; of whom 506,000 (78.9%) were Greeks, and 118,000 (18.4%) Turkish. After the military occupation of part of the island in 1974, the government of Cyprus conducted six more censuses: in 1976, 1982, 1992, 2001, 2011 and 2021; these excluded the Turkish population which was resident in non-government-controlled areas of the island.\nIn addition to this, the Republic of Cyprus is home to 110,200 foreign permanent residents and an estimated 10,000\u201330,000 undocumented illegal immigrants. As of 2011, there were 10,520 people of Russian origin living in Cyprus.\nAccording to the 2006 census carried out by Northern Cyprus, there were 256,644 (de jure) people living in Northern Cyprus. 178,031 were citizens of Northern Cyprus, of whom 147,405 were born in Cyprus (112,534 from the north; 32,538 from the south; 371 did not indicate what region of Cyprus they were from); 27,333 born in Turkey; 2,482 born in the UK and 913 born in Bulgaria. Of the 147,405 citizens born in Cyprus, 120,031 say both parents were born in Cyprus; 16,824 say both parents born in Turkey; 10,361 have one parent born in Turkey and one parent born in Cyprus.\nIn 2010, the International Crisis Group estimated that the total population of the island was 1.1 million, of which there were an estimated 300,000 residents in the north, perhaps half of whom were either born in Turkey or are children of such settlers.\nY-Dna haplogroups are found at the following frequencies in Cyprus: J (43.07% including 6.20% J1), E1b1b (20.00%), R1 (12.30% including 9.2% R1b), F (9.20%), I (7.70%), K (4.60%), A (3.10%). J, K, F and E1b1b haplogroups consist of lineages with differential distribution within Middle East, North Africa and Europe.\nOutside Cyprus there are significant and thriving diasporas \u2013 both a Greek Cypriot diaspora and a Turkish Cypriot diaspora \u2013 in the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada, the United States, Greece and Turkey.\nAccording to Council of Europe, approximately 1,250 Romani people live in Cyprus.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReligion.\nThe majority of Greek Cypriots identify as Christians, specifically Greek Orthodox, whereas most Turkish Cypriots are adherents of Sunni Islam. The first President of Cyprus, Makarios\u00a0III, was an archbishop.\nHala Sultan Tekke, situated near the Larnaca Salt Lake is an object of pilgrimage for Muslims.\nAccording to the 2001 census carried out in the government-controlled areas, 94.8% of the population was Eastern Orthodox, 0.9% Armenian and Maronite, 1.5% Latin Catholic, 1.0% Church of England, and 0.6% Muslim. There is also a Jewish community on Cyprus. The remaining 1.3% adhered to other religious denominations or did not state their religion. The Greek Orthodox, Armenian Apostolic Church, and both the Maronite and Latin Catholics are constitutionally recognised denominations and exempt from taxes.\nLanguages.\nCyprus has two official languages, Greek and Turkish. Armenian and Cypriot Maronite Arabic are recognised as minority languages. Although without official status, English is widely spoken and features widely on road signs and in public notices and advertisements. English was the sole official language during British colonial rule and the lingua franca until 1960, and continued to be used (de facto) in courts of law until 1989 and in legislation until 1996. In 2010, 80.4% of Cypriots were proficient in English as a second language. Russian is widely spoken among the country's minorities, residents and citizens of post-Soviet countries, and Pontic Greeks. Russian, after English and Greek, is the third language used on many signs of shops and restaurants, particularly in Limassol and Paphos. In addition, in 2006, 12% of the population spoke French and 5% spoke German.\nThe everyday spoken language of Greek Cypriots is Cypriot Greek, and that of Turkish Cypriots is Cypriot Turkish. These vernaculars both differ from their standard registers significantly.\nEducation.\nCyprus has a highly developed system of primary and secondary education offering both public and private education. The high quality of instruction can be attributed in part to the fact that nearly 7% of the GDP is spent on education which makes Cyprus one of the top three spenders of education in the EU along with Denmark and Sweden. Cyprus was ranked 25th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.\nState schools are generally seen as equivalent in quality of education to private-sector institutions. However, the value of a state high-school diploma is limited by the fact that the grades obtained account for only around 25% of the final grade for each topic, with the remaining 75% assigned by the teacher during the semester, in a minimally transparent way. Cypriot universities (like universities in Greece) ignore high school grades almost entirely for admissions purposes. While a high-school diploma is mandatory for university attendance, admissions are decided almost exclusively on the basis of scores at centrally administered university entrance examinations that all university candidates are required to take.\nThe majority of Cypriots receive their higher education at Greek, British, Turkish, other European and North American universities. Cyprus currently has the highest percentage of citizens of working age who have higher-level education in the EU at 30% which is ahead of Finland's 29.5%. In addition, 47% of its population aged 25\u201334 have tertiary education, which is the highest in the EU. The body of Cypriot students is highly mobile, with 78.7% studying in a university outside Cyprus.\nCulture.\nGreek and Turkish Cypriots share many cultural traits, while also possessing some differences. Several traditional foods (such as souvla and halloumi) and beverages are similar, as well as expressions and ways of life. Hospitality and buying or offering food and drinks for guests or others are common among both. In both communities, music, dance and art are integral parts of social life and many artistic, verbal and nonverbal expressions, traditional dances such as tsifteteli, similarities in dance costumes and importance placed on social activities are shared between the communities. However, the two communities have distinct religions and religious cultures, with the Greek Cypriots traditionally being Greek Orthodox and Turkish Cypriots traditionally being Sunni Muslims, which has partly hindered cultural exchange. Greek Cypriots have influences from Greece and Christianity, while Turkish Cypriots have influences from Turkey and Islam.\nThe Limassol Carnival Festival is an annual carnival which is held at Limassol, in Cyprus. The event which is very popular in Cyprus was introduced in the 20th century.\nArts.\nThe art history of Cyprus can be said to stretch back up to 10,000 years, following the discovery of a series of Chalcolithic period carved figures in the villages of Khoirokoitia and Lempa. The island is the home to numerous examples of high quality religious icon painting from the Middle Ages as well as many painted churches. Cypriot architecture was heavily influenced by French Gothic and Italian renaissance introduced in the island during the era of Latin domination (1191\u20131571).\nA well known traditional art that dates at least from the 14th\u00a0century is the Lefkara lace, which originates from the village of Lefkara. Lefkara lace is recognised as an intangible cultural heritage (ICH) by UNESCO, and it is characterised by distinct design patterns, and its intricate, time-consuming production process. Another local form of art that originated from Lefkara is the production of Cypriot Filigree (locally known as \"Trifourenio\"), a type of jewellery that is made with twisted threads of silver.\nIn modern times Cypriot art history begins with the painter Vassilis Vryonides (1883\u20131958) who studied at the Academy of Fine Arts in Venice. Arguably the two founding fathers of modern Cypriot art were Adamantios Diamantis (1900\u20131994) who studied at London's Royal College of Art and \nChristophoros Savva (1924\u20131968) who also studied in London, at Saint Martin's School of Art. In 1960, Savva founded, together with Welsh artist Glyn Hughes, Apophasis [Decision], the first independent cultural centre of the newly established Republic of Cyprus. In 1968, Savva was among the artists representing Cyprus in its inaugural Pavilion at the 34th Venice Biennale. English Cypriot Artist http:// 1931\u20132014. In many ways these two artists set the template for subsequent Cypriot art and both their artistic styles and the patterns of their education remain influential to this day. In particular the majority of Cypriot artists still train in England while others train at art schools in Greece and local art institutions such as the Cyprus College of Art, University of Nicosia and the Frederick Institute of Technology.\nOne of the features of Cypriot art is a tendency towards figurative painting although conceptual art is being rigorously promoted by a number of art \"institutions\" and most notably the Nicosia Municipal Art Centre. Municipal art galleries exist in all the main towns and there is a large and lively commercial art scene.\nOther notable Greek Cypriot artists include Panayiotis Kalorkoti, Nicos Nicolaides, Stass Paraskos, Telemachos Kanthos, and Chris Achilleos; and Turkish Cypriot artists include \u0130smet G\u00fcney, Ruzen Atakan and Mutlu \u00c7erkez.\nMusic.\nThe traditional folk music of Cyprus has several common elements with Greek, Turkish, and Arabic Music, all of which have descended from Byzantine music, including Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot dances such as the tillirkotissa, as well as the Middle Eastern-inspired \"tsifteteli\" and \"arapies\". There is also a form of musical poetry known as \"chattista\" which is often performed at traditional feasts and celebrations. The instruments commonly associated with Cyprus folk music are the violin (\"fkiolin\"), lute (\"laouto\"), Cyprus flute (\"pithkiavlin\"), oud (\"outi\"), kanonaki and percussions (including the \"tamboutsia\"). Composers associated with traditional Cypriot music include Solon Michaelides, Marios Tokas, Evagoras Karageorgis and Savvas Salides. Among musicians is also the acclaimed pianist Cyprien Katsaris, composer Andreas G. Orphanides, and composer and artistic director of the European Capital of Culture initiative Marios Joannou Elia.\nPopular music in Cyprus is generally influenced by the Greek \"La\u00efka\" scene; artists who play in this genre include international platinum star Anna Vissi, Evridiki, and Sarbel. Hip hop and R&amp;B have been supported by the emergence of Cypriot rap and the urban music scene at Ayia Napa, while in the last years the reggae scene is growing, especially through the participation of many Cypriot artists at the annual Reggae Sunjam festival. Is also noted Cypriot rock music and \"\u00c9ntekhno\" rock is often associated with artists such as Michalis Hatzigiannis and Alkinoos Ioannidis. Metal also has a small following in Cyprus represented by bands such as Armageddon (rev.16:16), Blynd, Winter's Verge, Methysos and Quadraphonic.\nLiterature.\nLiterary production of the antiquity includes the \"Cypria\", an epic poem, probably composed in the late 7th\u00a0century\u00a0BC and attributed to Stasinus. The \"Cypria\" is one of the first specimens of Greek and European poetry. The Cypriot Zeno of Citium was the founder of the Stoic school of philosophy.\nEpic poetry, notably the \"acritic songs\", flourished during the Middle Ages. Two chronicles, one written by Leontios Machairas and the other by Georgios Boustronios, cover the entire Middle Ages until the end of Frankish rule (4th\u00a0century\u20131489). \"Po\u00e8mes d'amour\" written in medieval Greek Cypriot date back from the 16th\u00a0century. Some of them are actual translations of poems written by Petrarch, Bembo, Ariosto and G.\u00a0Sannazzaro. Many Cypriot scholars fled Cyprus at troubled times, such as Ioannis Kigalas (c.\u00a01622\u20131687) who migrated from Cyprus to Italy in the 17th\u00a0century, several of his works have survived in books of other scholars.\nHasan Hilmi Efendi, a Turkish Cypriot poet, was rewarded by the Ottoman sultan Mahmud\u00a0II and said to be the \"sultan of the poems\".\nModern Greek Cypriot literary figures include the poet and writer Costas Montis, poet Kyriakos Charalambides, poet Michalis Pasiardis, writer Nicos Nicolaides, Stylianos Atteshlis, Altheides, Loukis Akritas and Demetris Th. Gotsis. Dimitris Lipertis, Vasilis Michaelides and Pavlos Liasides are folk poets who wrote poems mainly in the Cypriot-Greek dialect. Among leading Turkish Cypriot writers are Osman T\u00fcrkay, twice nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature, \u00d6zker Ya\u015f\u0131n, Neriman Cahit, Urkiye Mine Balman, Mehmet Ya\u015f\u0131n and Ne\u015fe Ya\u015f\u0131n.\nThere is an increasingly strong presence of both temporary and permanent emigre Cypriot writers in world literature, as well as writings by second and third-generation Cypriot writers born or raised abroad, often writing in English. This includes writers such as Michael Paraskos and Stephanos Stephanides.\nExamples of Cyprus in foreign literature include the works of Shakespeare, with most of the play \"Othello\" by William Shakespeare set on the island of Cyprus. British writer Lawrence Durrell lived in Cyprus from 1952 until 1956, during his time working for the British colonial government on the island, and wrote the book \"Bitter Lemons\" about his time in Cyprus which won the second Duff Cooper Prize in 1957.\nMass media.\nIn the 2015 Freedom of the Press report of Freedom House, the Republic of Cyprus and Northern Cyprus were ranked \"free\". The Republic of Cyprus scored 25/100 in press freedom, 5/30 in Legal Environment, 11/40 in Political Environment, and 9/30 in Economic Environment (the lower scores the better). In the 2025 World Press Freedom Index, Reporters Without Borders ranked the Republic of Cyprus 77th out of 180 countries and stated that \"[a]lthough freedom of the press is guaranteed by the constitution, the government, the Orthodox Church and business interests have significant influence over the media in Cyprus.\"\nThe law provides for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights in practice. An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system combine to ensure freedom of speech and of the press. The law prohibits arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, and the government generally respects these prohibitions in practice.\nLocal television companies in Cyprus include the state owned Cyprus Broadcasting Corporation which runs two television channels. In addition on the Greek side of the island there are the private channels ANT1 Cyprus, Plus TV, Mega Channel, Sigma TV, Nimonia TV (NTV) and New Extra. In Northern Cyprus, the local channels are BRT, the Turkish Cypriot equivalent to the Cyprus Broadcasting Corporation, and a number of private channels. The majority of local arts and cultural programming is produced by the Cyprus Broadcasting Corporation and BRT, with local arts documentaries, review programmes and filmed drama series.\nCinema.\nThe most worldwide known Cypriot director, to have worked abroad, is Michael Cacoyannis.\nIn the late 1960s and early 1970s, George Filis produced and directed \"Gregoris Afxentiou\", \"Etsi Prodothike i Kypros\", and \"The Mega Document\". In 1994, Cypriot film production received a boost with the establishment of the Cinema Advisory Committee. In 2000, the annual amount set aside for filmmaking in the national budget was CYP\u00a3500,000 (about \u20ac850,000). In addition to government grants, Cypriot co-productions are eligible for funding from the Council of Europe's Eurimages Fund, which finances European film co-productions. To date, four feature films on which a Cypriot was an executive producer have received funding from Eurimages. The first was \"I Sphagi tou Kokora\" (1996), followed by \"Hellados\" (unreleased), \"To Tama\" (1999), and \"O Dromos gia tin Ithaki\" (2000).\nCuisine.\nDuring the medieval period, under the French Lusignan monarchs of Cyprus an elaborate form of courtly cuisine developed, fusing French, Byzantine and Middle Eastern forms. The Lusignan kings were known for importing Syrian cooks to Cyprus, and it has been suggested that one of the key routes for the importation of Middle Eastern recipes into France and other Western European countries, such as blancmange, was via the Lusignan Kingdom of Cyprus. These recipes became known in the West as \"vyands de Chypre\", or foods of Cyprus, and the food historian William Woys Weaver has identified over one hundred of them in English, French, Italian and German recipe books of the Middle Ages. One that became particularly popular across Europe in the medieval and early modern periods was a stew made with chicken or fish called \"malmonia\", which in English became mawmeny.\nAnother example of a Cypriot food ingredient entering the Western European canon is the cauliflower, still popular and used in a variety of ways on the island today, which was associated with Cyprus from the early Middle Ages. Writing in the 12th and 13th centuries the Arab botanists Ibn al-'Awwam and Ibn al-Baitar claimed the vegetable had its origins in Cyprus, and this association with the island was echoed in Western Europe, where cauliflowers were originally known as Cyprus cabbage or \"Cyprus colewart\". There was also a long and extensive trade in cauliflower seeds from Cyprus, until well into the sixteenth century.\nAlthough much of the Lusignan food culture was lost after the fall of Cyprus to the Ottomans in 1571, a number of dishes that would have been familiar to the Lusignans survive today, including various forms of tahini and houmous, zalatina, skordalia and pickled wild song birds called ambelopoulia. Ambelopoulia, which is today highly controversial, and illegal, was exported in vast quantities from Cyprus during the Lusignan and Venetian periods, particularly to Italy and France. In 1533 the English traveller to Cyprus, John Locke, claimed to have seen the pickled wild birds packed into large jars, of which 1200 jars were exported from Cyprus annually.\nAlso familiar to the Lusignans would have been Halloumi cheese, which some food writers today claim originated in Cyprus during the Byzantine period although the name of the cheese itself is thought by academics to be of Arabic origin. There is no surviving written documentary evidence of the cheese being associated with Cyprus before the year 1554, when the Italian historian Florio Bustron wrote of a sheep-milk cheese from Cyprus he called \"calumi\". Halloumi (Hellim) is commonly served sliced, grilled, fried and sometimes fresh, as an appetiser or meze dish.\nSeafood and fish dishes include squid, octopus, red mullet, and sea bass. Cucumber and tomato are used widely in salads. Common vegetable preparations include potatoes in olive oil and parsley, pickled cauliflower and beets, asparagus and taro. Other traditional delicacies are meat marinated in dried coriander seeds and wine, and eventually dried and smoked, such as \"lountza\" (smoked pork loin), charcoal-grilled lamb, souvlaki (pork and chicken cooked over charcoal), and sheftalia (minced meat wrapped in mesentery). \"Pourgouri\" (bulgur, cracked wheat) is the traditional source of carbohydrate other than bread, and is used to make the delicacy koubes.\nFresh vegetables and fruits are common ingredients. Frequently used vegetables include courgettes, green peppers, okra, green beans, artichokes, carrots, tomatoes, cucumbers, lettuce and grape leaves, and pulses such as beans, broad beans, peas, black-eyed beans, chick-peas and lentils. The most common fruits and nuts are pears, apples, grapes, oranges, mandarines, nectarines, medlar, blackberries, cherry, strawberries, figs, watermelon, melon, avocado, lemon, pistachio, almond, chestnut, walnut, and hazelnut.\nCyprus is also well known for its desserts, including \"lokum\" (also known as Turkish delight) and Soutzoukos. This island has protected geographical indication (PGI) for its \"lokum\" produced in the village of Geroskipou.\nSports.\nSport governing bodies include the Cyprus Football Association, Cyprus Basketball Federation, Cyprus Volleyball Federation, Cyprus Automobile Association, Cyprus Badminton Federation, Cyprus Cricket Association, Cyprus Rugby Federation and the Cyprus Pool Association.\nNotable sports teams in the Cyprus leagues include APOEL FC, Anorthosis Famagusta FC, AC Omonia, AEL Limassol FC, Apollon Limassol FC, Nea Salamis Famagusta FC, Olympiakos Nicosia, AEK Larnaca FC, Aris Limassol FC, AEL Limassol B.C., Keravnos B.C. and Apollon Limassol B.C. Stadiums or sports venues include the GSP Stadium (the largest in the Republic of Cyprus-controlled areas), Tsirion Stadium (second largest), Neo GSZ Stadium, Antonis Papadopoulos Stadium, Ammochostos Stadium. Makario Stadium and Alphamega Stadium.\nIn the 2008\u201309 season, Anorthosis Famagusta FC was the first Cypriot team to qualify for the UEFA Champions League Group stage. Next season, APOEL FC qualified for the UEFA Champions League group stage, and reached the last 8 of the 2011\u201312 UEFA Champions League after finishing top of its group and beating French Olympique Lyonnais in the Round of 16.\nThe Cyprus national rugby union team known as \"The Moufflons\" currently holds the record for most consecutive international wins, which is especially notable as the Cyprus Rugby Federation was only formed in 2006.\nFootballer Sotiris Kaiafas won the European Golden Shoe in the 1975\u201376 season; Cyprus is the smallest country by population to have one of its players win the award. Tennis player Marcos Baghdatis was ranked 8th in the world, was a finalist at the Australian Open, and reached the Wimbledon semi-final, all in 2006. High jumper Kyriakos Ioannou achieved a jump of 2.35m at the 11th IAAF World Championships in Athletics in Osaka, Japan, in 2007, winning the bronze medal. He has been ranked third in the world. In motorsports, Tio Ellinas is a successful race car driver, currently racing in the GP3 Series for Marussia Manor Motorsport. There is also mixed martial artist Costas Philippou, who competed in UFC's middleweight division from 2011 until 2015. Costas holds a 6\u20134 record in UFC bouts.\nAlso notable for a Mediterranean island, the siblings Christopher and Sophia Papamichalopoulou qualified for the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. They were the only athletes who managed to qualify and thus represented Cyprus at the 2010 Winter Olympics.\nThe country's first ever Olympic medal, a silver medal, was won by the sailor Pavlos Kontides, at the 2012 Summer Olympics in the Men's Laser class.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGeneral Information\nGovernment\nTourism\nCuisine\nArchaeology\nOfficial publications"}
{"id": "5595", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5595", "title": "Geography of Cyprus", "text": "Cyprus is an island in the Eastern Basin of the Mediterranean Sea. It is the third-largest island in the Mediterranean, after the Italian islands of Sicily and Sardinia, and the 80th-largest island in the world by area. It is located south of the Anatolian Peninsula, yet it belongs to the Cyprus Arc. Geographically, Cyprus is located in West Asia, but the country is considered a European country in political geography. Cyprus also had lengthy periods of mainly Greek and intermittent Anatolian, Levantine, Byzantine, Ottoman, and Western European influence.\nThe island is dominated by two mountain ranges, the Troodos Mountains and the Kyrenia Mountains or Pentadaktylos, and the central plain, the Mesaoria, between them. The Troodos Mountains cover most of the southern and western portions of the island and account for roughly half its area. The narrow Kyrenia Range extends along the northern coastline. It is not as high as the Troodos Mountains, and it occupies substantially less area. The two mountain ranges run generally parallel to the Taurus Mountains on the Turkish mainland, the outlines of which are visible from northern Cyprus. Coastal lowlands, varying in width, surround the island.\nGeopolitically, the island is divided into four segments. The Republic of Cyprus, the only internationally recognized government, occupies the southern 60% of the island, and has been a member state of the European Union since 1 May 2004. The Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, diplomatically recognized only by Turkey, governs the northern third of the island, which is around 36% of the territory. The United Nations-controlled Green Line is a buffer zone that separates the two and it is about 4%. Lastly, two areas\u2014Akrotiri and Dhekelia\u2014remain under British sovereignty for military purposes, collectively forming the Sovereign Base Areas of Akrotiri and Dhekelia (SBA). The SBAs are located on the southern coast of the island and together encompass 254\u00a0km2, or 2.8% of the island.\nTerrain.\nThe rugged Troodos Mountains, whose principal range stretches from Pomos Point in the northwest almost to Larnaca Bay on the east, are the single most conspicuous feature of the landscape. Intensive uplifting and folding in the formative period left the area highly fragmented, so that subordinate ranges and spurs veer off at many angles, their slopes incised by steep-sided valleys. In the southwest, the mountains descend in a series of stepped foothills to the coastal plain.\nWhile the Troodos Mountains are a massif formed of molten igneous rock, the Kyrenia Range is a narrow limestone ridge that rises suddenly from the plains. Its easternmost extension becomes a series of foothills on the Karpas Peninsula. That peninsula points toward Asia Minor, to which Cyprus belongs geologically. The Kyrenia Range is also known as the Pentadactylon Mountains, due to a summit resembling five fingers.\nEven the highest peaks of the Kyrenia Range are hardly more than half the height of the great dome of the Troodos massif, Mount Olympus (), but their seemingly inaccessible, jagged slopes make them considerably more spectacular. British writer Lawrence Durrell, in Bitter Lemons, wrote of the Troodos as \"an unlovely jumble of crags and heavyweight rocks\" and of the Kyrenia Range as belonging to \"the world of Gothic Europe, its lofty crags studded with crusader castles.\"\nRich copper deposits were discovered in antiquity on the slopes of the Troodos. The massive sulphide deposits formed as a part of an ophiolite complex at a spreading centre under the Mediterranean Sea which was tectonically uplifted during the Pleistocene and emplaced in its current location.\nDrainage.\nIn much of the island, access to a year-round supply of water is difficult. This is traditionally attributed to deforestation which damaged the island's drainage system through erosion, but Grove and Rackham question this view. A network of winter rivers rises in the Troodos Mountains and flows out from them in all directions. The Yialias River and the Pedhieos River flow eastward across the Mesaoria into Famagusta Bay; the Serraghis River flows northwest through the Morphou plain. All of the island's rivers, however, are dry in the summer. An extensive system of dams and waterways has been constructed to bring water to farming areas.\nThe central Mesaoria plain is the agricultural heartland of the island, but its productiveness for wheat and barley depends very much on winter rainfall; other crops are grown under irrigation.This broad, central plain, open to the sea at either end, was once covered with rich forests. However, the timber was needed by ancient conquerors for their sailing vessels, so little evidence of the woodland remains . The now-divided capital of the island, Nicosia, lies in the middle of this central plain.\nNatural vegetation.\nDespite its small size, Cyprus has a variety of natural vegetation. This includes forests of conifers and broadleaved trees such as pine (\"Pinus brutia\"), cedar, cypresses, and oaks. Ancient authors write that most of Cyprus, even Messaoria, was heavily forested, and there are still considerable forests on the Troodos and Kyrenia ranges, and locally at lower altitudes. About 12% of the whole island is classified as woodland. Where there is no forest, tall shrub communities of golden oak (\"Quercus alnifolia\"), strawberry tree (\"Arbutus andrachne\"), terebinth (\"Pistacia terebinthus\"), olive (\"Olea europaea\"), kermes oak (\"Quercus coccifera\"), and styrax (\"Styrax officinalis\") are found, but such maquis is uncommon. Over most of the island untilled ground bears a grazed covering of garrigue, largely composed of low bushes of Cistus, \"Genista sphacelata\", \"Calicotome villosa\", \"Lithospermum hispidulum\", \"Phagnalon rupestre,\" and, locally, \"Pistacia lentiscus\". Where grazing is excessive this covering is soon reduced, and an impoverished batha remains, consisting principally of \"Thymus capitatus\", \"Sarcopoterium spinosum\", and a few stunted herbs.\nClimate.\nThe intense Mediterranean climate, warm and rather dry, with rainfall mainly between November and March, favours agriculture. In general, the island experiences extremely mild wet winters and dry hot summers. Variations in temperature and rainfall are governed by altitude and, to a lesser extent, distance from the coast. Hot, dry summers from mid-May to mid-September and rainy, rather changeable winters from November to mid-March are separated by short autumn and spring seasons.\nArea and boundaries.\nArea:\n\"Total:\"\n9,251\u00a0km2 (of which are under the control of the Republic of Cyprus and of which are under the administration of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus)\n\"Land:\"\n9,241\u00a0km2\n\"Water:\"\n10\u00a0km2\nLand boundaries:\n0\u00a0km\nCoastline:\n648\u00a0km\nMaritime claims:\n\"Territorial sea:\"\n\"Continental shelf:\"\n200\u00a0m depth or to the depth of exploitation\n\"Exclusive Economic Zone:\"\nElevation extremes:\n\"Lowest point:\"\nMediterranean Sea 0\u00a0m\n\"Highest point:\"\nOlympus 1,952\u00a0m\nResource and land use.\nNatural resources:\ncopper, pyrite, asbestos, gypsum, timber, salt, marble, clay earth pigment\nLand use:\n\"arable land:\"\n9.90%\n\"permanent crops:\"\n3.24%\n\"other:\"\n86.86% (2012)\nIrrigated land:\n457.9\u00a0km2 (2007)\nTotal renewable water resources:\n0.78\u00a0km3 (2011)\nFreshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural):\n\"total:\"\n0.18\u00a0km3/yr (10%/3%/86%)\n\"per capital:\"\n164.7 m3/yr (2009)\nEnvironmental concerns.\nNatural hazards:\nmoderate earthquake activity; droughts\nEnvironment \u2013 current issues:\nwater resource problems (no natural reservoir catchments, seasonal disparity in rainfall, sea water intrusion to island's largest aquifer, increased salination in the north); water pollution from sewage and industrial wastes; coastal degradation; loss of wildlife habitats from urbanization.\nEnvironment \u2013 international agreements:\n\"party to:\"\nAir Pollution, Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands\n\"signed, but not ratified:\" none\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "5596", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5596", "title": "Demographics of Cyprus", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe people of Cyprus are broadly divided into two main ethnic communities, Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots, who share many cultural traits but maintain distinct identities based on ethnicity, religion, language, and close ties with Greece and Turkey respectively. Before the dispute started in 1964 the peoples of Cyprus (then 77.1% Greek Cypriots, 18.2% Turkish Cypriots, &lt;5% other communities, primarily Armenians, Maronites, and other Lebanese) were dispersed over the entire island.\nThe Turkish invasion of Cyprus in 1974 de facto partitioned the island into two political areas: 99.5% of Greek Cypriots now live in the south part of the Republic of Cyprus while 98.7% of Turkish Cypriots live in northern areas. (99.2% of other nationalities live in the Greek Cypriot areas in the center, west, east and south). Greek and Cypriot dialect are predominantly spoken in the east, west, south and centre, where the majority are Greek Cypriots, and Turkish in the north, where the majority are Turkish Cypriots. English is widely used throughout the island, as a common language.\nThe total population of Cyprus as of the end of 2006 was slightly over 1 million, comprising 789,300 in the territory controlled by the government of the Republic of Cyprus and 294,406 in the northern areas of Cyprus. The population of the northern areas of Cyprus has increased following the immigration of 150,000\u2013160,000 Turkish mainlanders, which the UN confirmed to have arrived illegally. On this basis, the Republic of Cyprus government does not include this group in the population statistics of the Republic of Cyprus Statistical Service.\n923,381 in Republic of Cyprus controlled area (2021 census)\n476,214 in Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (2023 population estimate).\nPopulation.\nPopulation by citizenship\n\"Republic of Cyprus government controlled area\":\n1992 census: 95.8% Cypriot, 4.2% Non-Cypriot\n2001 census: 90.6% Cypriot, 9.4% Non-Cypriot\n2011 census: 78.6% Cypriot, 21.4% Non-Cypriot (preliminary)\n2021 census: 77.9% Cypriot, 21.7% non-Cypriot \n\"northern areas of Cyprus\":\n2006 census (de facto population): 66.7% NC, 29.3% Turkey, 4.0% other\nVital statistics.\nCyprus (1901\u20131990).\nHistorical data about main demographic indicators from 1901 to 1990, for the entire island:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n1 The numbers of births and deaths 1901\u20131932 are estimates calculated from the birth and death rates.\nArea under the effective control of the Republic of Cyprus.\nHistorical data about main demographic indicators from 1990 to 2022, for the southern part of the island:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nLife expectancy.\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Structure of the population (Census 01.X.2011) (Data refer to government controlled areas):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.I.2021) (Data refer to government controlled areas): \nHistorical population.\nTurkish Cypriots were the majority of the population registered for taxation between 1777 and 1800. However, it is likely that the Muslim population never exceeded 35-40 per cent of the total population of Cyprus. Rather, many Orthodox Christians registered as Muslims in order to reduce taxation from the government.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the census from 1881 to 1960, all Muslims are counted as Turks, only Greek Orthodox are counted as Greeks. There were small populations of Greek-speaking Muslims and Turkish-speaking Greek Orthodox.\nIn total, between 1955 and 1973, 16,519 Turks and 71,036 Greeks emigrated from the country. Of the emigrated Turkish Cypriots in this period, only 290 went to Turkey. In the 2011 census, 208 people stated their ethnic origin as being Latin.\nFertility.\nIn 2020, 39% of children born in Cyprus were to mothers of foreign origin, both from non-EU countries and from other EU member states.\nImmigration.\nLarge-scale demographic changes have been caused since 1964 by the movements of peoples across the island and the later influx of settlers from Turkey to northern Cyprus. According to the 2011 Census there are 170,383 non-citizens living in Cyprus, of whom 106,270 are EU citizens and 64,113 are from third countries. The largest EU groups by nationality are Greeks (29,321), Romanians (23,706) and Bulgarians (18,536). The largest non-EU groups are British (24,046), Filipinos (9,413), Russians (8,164), Sri Lankans (7,269) and Vietnamese (7,028). There are an estimated 20\u201325,000 undocumented migrants from third countries also living in the Republic, though migrant rights groups dispute these figures. The demographic changes in society have led to some racist incidents, and the formation of the charity KISA in response.\nThe demographic character of northern Cyprus changed after the Turkish invasion in 1974 and especially during the last 10\u201315 years. TRNC census carried out in April 2006 showed that out of a total population of 256,644 in northern Cyprus, 132,635, or 52%, were Turkish Cypriots in the sense that they were born in Cyprus of at least one Cyprus-born parent (for 120,007 of these both parents were Cyprus-born). In addition, 43,062 so called TRNC citizens (17%) had at least one non-Cypriot Turkish-born parent, 2,334 so called TRNC citizens (1%) had parents born in other countries, 70,525 residents (27%) had Turkish citizenship, and 8,088 (3%) were citizens of other countries (mainly UK, Bulgaria, and Iran).\nBased on these census data, it is estimated that 113,687 northern Cyprus residents, or 44% of the population, are not Turkish Cypriots properly speaking, but are in fact \"Turkish immigrants\" or \"Turkish settlers\" from Anatolia. Alternative sources suggest that the Turkish Cypriots in northern Cyprus are today outnumbered by the Turkish settlers, contrary to the picture presented by the 2006 so called TRNC census.\nSettlement in northern Cyprus, especially if accompanied by naturalization, is in violation of article 49 of the Geneva Conventions Protocol of 1977, since the Turkish occupation has been declared illegal by the UN. The UN General Assembly have stated the settlement of Turkish mainlanders, \"constitute[s] a form of colonialism and attempt to change illegally the demographic structure of Cyprus\". The Republic of Cyprus considers these Turkish immigrants to be \"illegal settlers\" and does not include them in the population estimates for the entire island published by the Republic of Cyprus Statistical Service.\nNationality group.\nAccording to the 2021 census, 74.6% of the population in the area under the control of the Republic of Cyprus were born in Cyprus, with 77.9% holding Cypriot citizenship.https://https://\nNote that citizenship and place of birth do not fully correlate. For example, 27,986 people living in areas under the control of the Republic of Cyprus were born in the United Kingdom, but only 18,918 are registered as having British citizenship. \nThe national identities of citizens in the area under the control of the Republic of Cyprus, according to the 2011 census are:\nLanguages.\nGreek and Turkish are the official languages according to Article 3 of the Constitution of Cyprus. In Northern Cyprus, the official language is Turkish (Article 2 of the 1983 Constitution of Northern Cyprus). English is widely spoken on the island.\nReligion.\nThe Greek Cypriot community adheres to the Autocephalous Greek Orthodox Church of Cyprus and the Turkish Cypriot community adheres to Islam. The religious groups of Armenians, Maronites and Latins (about 9,000 people in total) opted, in accordance with the 1960 constitution, to belong to the Greek Cypriot community.\nThe 2011 census of the government-controlled area notes that 89.1% of the population follows Greek Orthodox Christianity, 2.9% are Roman Catholic, 2% are Protestants, 1.8% are Muslims and 1% are Buddhists; Maronite Catholics, Armenian Orthodox, Jewish, Jehovah\u2019s Witnesses and Baha\u2019is make up the remainder. Cyprus is also the home of 6,000 Jewish people who have a Synagogue in Larnaca.\nEducation.\nCyprus has a well-developed system of primary and secondary education. The majority of Cypriots earn their higher education at Greek, British, or American universities, while there are also sizeable emigrant communities in the United Kingdom and Australia. Private colleges and state-supported universities have been developed by both the Turkish and Greek communities.\nDemographic statistics.\nThe following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.\n\"The data in subsections Age structure through Divorce rate are for the area controlled by the Republic of Cyprus government only.\" The estimates are for 2007 from the Republic of Cyprus \"Statistical Abstract 2007\" (pp.\u00a063\u201388) unless indicated otherwise.\n0\u201314 years: 17.47% or 137,900 ( 70,700 males/67,200 females)\n15\u201364 years: 70.07% or 553,100 ( 274,300 males/278,800 females)\n65 years and over: 12.46% or 98,300 ( 44,600 males/53,700 females)\n1.4%\nTotal immigrants: 19,143\nTotal emigrants: 11,753\nNet migration: +7,390\nNet migration rate: 9.4 migrant(s)/1,000 population\nAt birth: 1.086 male(s)/female\nUnder 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female\n15\u201364 years: 0.98 male(s)/female\n65 years and over: 0.83 male(s)/female\nTotal population: 0.99 male(s)/female\n\"Estimates for 2006\"\nMarriage rates.\nNumber of marriages:\nMarriages of residents of Cyprus: 5,252\nTotal marriages (including tourists): 12,617\nMarriage rates:\nResidents of Cyprus: 6.8/1,000 population\nTotal marriages (including tourists): 16.4/1,000 population\nMean age at marriage:\nGroom 33.7\nBride 30.5\nTotal Divorces: 2,000\nDivorce Rate: 2.27/1,000 population\nNoun: Cypriot(s)\nAdjective: Cypriot\nAdult prevalence rate: 0.1% (2003 est.)\nPeople living with HIV/AIDS: fewer than 1,000 (1999 est.); 518 cases reported between 1986 and 2006 (58% Cypriots, 42% foreigners/visitors);\nDeaths: 85 reported between 1986 and 2006.\nHIV/AIDS.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The information presented here concerns only part of Cyprus, due to an absence of reliable information concerning the island as a whole\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5597", "revid": "20611691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5597", "title": "Politics of Cyprus", "text": "Political system of Cyprus\nMinistries.\nThe Ministers form the \"Council of Ministers\", including other members who may not be listed, which is an independent collective body with independent powers. In bold is listed a Ministry that was not an original ministry, but created after London and Z\u00fcrich Agreements.\nLegislative branch.\nThe House of Representatives (\";\" \")\" has 59 members elected for a five-year term: 56 Greek Cypriot members chosen by proportional representation and 3 observer members representing the Maronite, Latin Catholic and Armenian minorities. 24 seats are allocated to the Turkish community, but are currently vacant.\nPolitical parties.\nThe Cyprus party political system is basically consisted by the classic four parties, named the \"Classic Quartet\" of the Cyprus political system traditionally refer to the right-wing Democratic Rally (DISY), the left-wing Progressive Party of Working People (AKEL), the Centrist movement of Democratic Party (DIKO), and the Social-Democratic movement of United Democratic Union of Centre (EDEK).\nDemocratic Rally (DISY).\nThe centre-right Democratic Rally (DISY) is the largest political party in Cyprus, currently holding 17 of the 56 seats in the House of Representatives. Founded on July 4, 1976, by veteran politician Glafcos Clerides, DISY emerged from the split of the right-wing \"Eniaion\" into two opposing parties: DISY and DIKO.\nDISY is a Christian democratic and liberal-conservative party, often described as the most Atlanticist, pro-NATO and pro-EU party in Cyprus. The party is currently led by Annita Demetriou, who also serves as the President of the Cypriot House of Representatives, making her the first woman to hold this office. Two former leaders of the party have served as Presidents of Cyprus, Glafcos Clerides (1993\u20132003) and Nicos Anastasiades (2013\u20132023). DISY is a member of the European People's Party.\nOver the years, internal disagreements, particularly regarding the Cyprus issue, have led to the formation of three splinter parties: the European Party (EvroKo), European Democracy (EvroDi) and Solidarity Movement. The current President of Cyprus, Nikos Christodoulides, was previously a member of DISY and served as Government Spokesman (2014\u20132018) and Minister of Foreign Affairs (2018\u20132022) under Anastasiades. Christodoulides sought DISY's nomination for the 2023 presidential election, but following accusations of undermining his campaign, he resigned from his ministerial role and launched an independent candidacy.\nProgressive Party of Working People (AKEL).\nThe left-wing Progressive Party of Working People (AKEL) is the second largest political party in Cyprus, currently holding 15 of the 56 seats in the House of Representatives. It was founded in 1926 with the name \"Communist Party of Cyprus\" fighting against fascism, imperialism and chauvinism, but also aiming at the independence of Cyprus from British rule.\nAKEL is a Marxist\u2013Leninist, eurosceptic and communist party, classified as left-wing to far-left. It is currently led by MP Stefanos Stefanou and it is a member of The Left in the European Parliament. One party leader, Demetris Christofias, served as the President of Cyprus (2008\u20132013) for one term, without seeking re-election. Other presidents that were supported by AKEL were Archbishop Makarios III, Spyros Kyprianou, George Vassiliou and Tassos Papadopoulos.\nDemocratic Party (DIKO).\nDIKO is variously described as centrist, centre-left or centre-right; internationally, it is a member of the Progressive Alliance, which groups together mainly centre-left parties. DIKO claims to be the most loyal follower of the policies of Archbishop Makarios, the founding father of the Republic of Cyprus. It is currently led by Nikolas Papadopoulos, son of Tassos Papadopoulos, former President of Cyprus and of DIKO.\nAt its inception in 1976, DIKO maintained the right-wing ideology of its parent-party, Eniaion. However, in June 2003, under the leadership of Tassos Papadopoulos, DIKO announced a shift away from its traditional centre-right stance and declared an intention to move towards social democracy. The party has adopted a firm and hardline stance on the Cyprus problem, particularly in its strong opposition to the Annan Plan in 2004. While DIKO supports European integration and advocates a non-aligned foreign policy, it has also expressed support for Cyprus joining NATO's Partnership for Peace.\nTwo former leaders of the party have served as Presidents of Cyprus, Spyros Kyprianou (1977\u20131988) and Tassos Papadopoulos (2003\u20132008). The current President of Cyprus, Nikos Christodoulides, although running as an independent, was supported by DIKO, making the party the largest in the current government.\nInternal disagreements over the Cyprus problem led to the creation of the splinter party Democratic Alignment (DIPA), in 2018, led by the former president of DIKO, Marios Garoyian.\nUnited Democratic Union of Centre (EDEK).\nThe EDEK Socialist Party, officially the Movement for Social Democracy, is a progressive centre, social-democratic party in Cyprus founded in 1969 by Vassos Lyssaridis with strong anti-imperialist and Greek-Cypriot nationalist roots. Initially inspired by Third-World socialism and non-alignment, it transitioned into a European-style social-democratic party while retaining its nationalist stance, often opposing federal solutions to the Cyprus problem. It consistently garners around 10% of votes, putting it in the 4th place of the Cypriot party list, maintaining a modest parliamentary presence.\nIn the 1980s and 1990s, it gradually transitioned into a European-style social-democratic party, joining the Socialist International and the Party of European Socialists, while maintaining nationalist positions on the Cyprus problem. In 2000 the party presintency passed to Yiannakis Omirou. In 2004, continuing its moderate centre path, involving also to the EU parliament elections, with several Members of the European Parliament, like Kyriakos Mavronikolas.\nTwo former leaders of the party have served as president of the Cypriot parliament, Dr Vassos Lyssaridis 1985-1991 and Yiannakis Omirou 2011-2016. Also in 2023 it supporter the current government.\nLatest elections.\nEuropean.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe island is divided into 6 administrative divisions: Nicosia (Lefkosia), Limassol (Lemesos), Larnaca, Paphos, Famagusta (Ammochostos), and Kyrenia.\nExclaves and enclaves.\nCyprus has four exclaves, all in territory that belongs to the British Sovereign Base Area of Dhekelia. The first two are the villages of Ormidhia and Xylotymvou. Additionally there is the Dhekelia Power Station, which is divided by a British road into two parts. The northern part is an enclave, like the two villages, whereas the southern part is located by the sea and therefore not an enclave \u2014although it has no territorial waters of its own.\nThe UN buffer zone separating the territory controlled by the Turkish Cypriot administration from the rest of Cyprus runs up against Dhekelia and picks up again from its east side, off of Ayios Nikolaos (connected to the rest of Dhekelia by a thin land corridor). In that sense, the buffer zone turns the south-east corner of the island, the Paralimni area, into a \"de facto\", though not \"de jure\", exclave.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5598", "revid": "49632817", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5598", "title": "Economy of Cyprus", "text": "The economy of Cyprus is a high-income economy as classified by the World Bank, and was included by the International Monetary Fund in its list of advanced economies in 2001. Cyprus adopted the euro as its official currency on 1 January 2008, replacing the Cypriot pound at an irrevocable fixed exchange rate of CYP 0.585274 per \u20ac1.\nThe Cypriot financial crisis, part of the wider European debt crisis, dominated the country's economic affairs in the 2010s. In March 2013, the Cypriot government reached an agreement with its eurozone partners to split the country's second biggest bank, the Cyprus Popular Bank (also known as Laiki Bank), into a \"bad\" bank which would be wound down over time and a \"good\" bank which would be absorbed by the larger Bank of Cyprus. In return for a \u20ac10\u00a0billion bailout from the European Commission, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund, the Cypriot government would be required to impose a significant haircut on uninsured deposits. Insured deposits of \u20ac100,000 or less would not be affected. After a three-and-a-half-year recession, Cyprus returned to growth in the first quarter of 2015. Cyprus successfully concluded its three-year financial assistance programme at the end of March 2016, having borrowed a total of \u20ac6.3\u00a0billion from the European Stability Mechanism and \u20ac1\u00a0billion from the IMF. The remaining \u20ac2.7\u00a0billion of the ESM bailout was never dispensed, due to the Cypriot government's better than expected finances over the course of the programme.\nEconomy in the government-controlled area.\nCyprus has an open, free-market, service-based economy with some light manufacturing. Internationally, Cyprus promotes its geographical location as a \"bridge\" between East and West, along with its educated English-speaking population, moderate local costs, good airline connections, and telecommunications.\nSince gaining independence from the United Kingdom in 1960, Cyprus has had a record of successful economic performance, reflected in strong growth, full employment conditions and relative stability. The underdeveloped agrarian economy inherited from colonial rule has been transformed into a modern economy, with dynamic services, industrial and agricultural sectors and an advanced physical and social infrastructure. The Cypriots are among the most prosperous people in the Mediterranean region, with GDP per capita in 2025 surpassing $42,000 in nominal terms and $65,000 on the basis of purchasing power parity.\nTheir standard of living is reflected in the country's \"very high\" Human Development Index, by which it ranks 29th out of 191 countries in the world.\nHowever, after more than three decades of unbroken growth, the Cypriot economy contracted in 2009. This reflected the exposure of Cyprus to the Great Recession and European debt crisis. Furthermore, Cyprus was dealt a severe blow by the Evangelos Florakis Naval Base explosion in July 2011, with the cost to the economy estimated at \u20ac1\u20133\u00a0billion, or up to 17% of GDP.\nThe economic achievements of Cyprus during the preceding decades have been significant, bearing in mind the severe economic and social dislocation created by the Turkish invasion of 1974 and the continuing occupation of the northern part of the island by Turkey. The Turkish invasion inflicted a serious blow to the Cyprus economy and in particular to agriculture, tourism, mining and Quarrying: 70 percent of the island's wealth-producing resources were lost, the tourist industry lost 65 percent of its hotels and tourist accommodation, the industrial sector lost 46 percent, and mining and quarrying lost 56 percent of production. The loss of the port of Famagusta, which handled 83 percent of the general cargo, and the closure of Nicosia International Airport, in the buffer zone, were additional setbacks.\nThe success of Cyprus in the economic sphere has been attributed, \"inter alia\", to the adoption of a market-oriented economic system, the pursuance of sound macroeconomic policies by the government as well as the existence of a dynamic and flexible entrepreneurship and a highly educated labor force. Moreover, the economy benefited from the close cooperation between the public and private sectors.\nIn the past 30 years, the economy has shifted from agriculture to light manufacturing and services. The services sector, including tourism, contributes almost 80% to GDP and employs more than 70% of the labor force. Industry and construction account for approximately one-fifth of GDP and labor, while agriculture is responsible for 2.1% of GDP and 8.5% of the labor force. Potatoes and citrus are the principal export crops. After robust growth rates in the 1980s (average annual growth was 6.1%), economic performance in the 1990s was mixed: real GDP growth was 9.7% in 1992, 1.7% in 1993, 6.0% in 1994, 6.0% in 1995, 1.9% in 1996 and 2.3% in 1997. This pattern underlined the economy's vulnerability to swings in tourist arrivals (i.e., to economic and political conditions in Cyprus, Western Europe, and the Middle East) and the need to diversify the economy. Declining competitiveness in tourism and especially in manufacturing are expected to act as a drag on growth until structural changes are effected. Overvaluation of the Cypriot pound prior to the adoption of the euro in 2008 had kept inflation in check.\nTrade is vital to the Cypriot economy \u2014 the island is not self-sufficient in food and until the recent offshore gas discoveries had few known natural resources \u2013 and the trade deficit continues to grow. Cyprus must import fuels, most raw materials, heavy machinery, and transportation equipment. More than 50% of its trade is with the rest of the European Union, especially Greece and the United Kingdom, while the Middle East receives 20% of exports. In 1991, Cyprus introduced a value-added tax (VAT), which is at 19% as of 13 January 2014. Cyprus ratified the new world trade agreement (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, GATT) in 1995 and began implementing it fully on 1 January 1996. European Union accession negotiations started on 31 March 1998, and concluded when Cyprus joined the European Union as a full member in 2004.\nInvestment climate.\nThe Cyprus legal system is founded on English law, and is therefore familiar to most international financiers. Cyprus's legislation was aligned with EU norms in the period leading up to EU accession in 2004. Restrictions on foreign direct investment were removed, permitting 100% foreign ownership in many cases. Foreign portfolio investment in the Cyprus Stock Exchange was also liberalized. In 2002 a modern, business-friendly tax system was put in place with a 12.5% corporate tax rate, one of the lowest in the EU. Cyprus has concluded treaties on double taxation with more than 40 countries, and, as a member of the Eurozone, has no exchange restrictions. Non-residents and foreign investors may freely repatriate proceeds from investments in Cyprus.\nRole as a financial hub.\nIn the years following the dissolution of the Soviet Union it gained great popularity as a portal for investment from the West into Russia and Eastern Europe, becoming for companies of that origin the most common tax haven. More recently, there have been increasing investment flows from the West through Cyprus into Asia, particularly China and India, South America and the Middle East. In addition, businesses from outside the EU use Cyprus as their entry-point for investment into Europe. The business services sector remains the fastest growing sector of the economy, and had overtaken all other sectors in importance. CIPA has been fundamental towards this trend.\nFollowing the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Cyprus businesses and individuals have come under scrutiny and criticism for allowing EU and US sanctions to be breached with belated attempts to stop them or bring the culprits to justice. A number of professional law and accounting firms have been identified as helping Russian Oligarchs evade sanctions.\nIn January 2024, during a Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly, Cypriot President Nikos Christodoulides maintained that Cyprus had fully implemented all European Union sanctions against Russia. Around the same time of his speech, it was reported that Russian deposits held in Cypriot banks had fallen 76% from 2014 to 2022. The number of Russian clients using Cypriot banks also dropped 82% in the same period.\nAgriculture.\nCyprus produced in 2018:\nin addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products.\nOil and gas.\nSurveys suggest more than 100\u00a0trillion cubic feet (2.831\u00a0trillion cubic metres) of reserves lie untapped in the eastern Mediterranean basin between Cyprus and Israel \u2013 almost equal to the world's total annual consumption of natural gas. In 2011, Noble Energy estimated that a pipeline to Leviathan gas field could be in operation as soon as 2014 or 2015. In January 2012, Noble Energy announced a natural gas field discovery. It attracted Shell, Delek and Avner as partners. Several production sharing contracts for exploration were signed with international companies, including Eni, KOGAS, TotalEnergies, ExxonMobil and QatarEnergy. It is necessary to develop infrastructure for landing the gas in Cyprus and for liquefaction for export.\nRole as a shipping hub.\nCyprus constitutes one of the largest ship management centers in the world; around 50 ship management companies and marine-related foreign enterprises are conducting their international activities in the country while the majority of the largest ship management companies in the world have established fully fledged offices on the island. Its geographical position at the crossroads of three continents and its proximity to the Suez Canal has promoted merchant shipping as an important industry for the island nation. Cyprus has the tenth-largest registered fleet in the world, with 1,030 vessels accounting for 31,706,000 dwt as of 1 January 2013.\nTourism.\nTourism is an important factor of the island state's economy, culture, and overall brand development. With over 2 million tourist arrivals per year, it is the 40th most popular destination in the world. However, per capita of local population, it ranks 17th. The industry has been honored with various international awards, spanning from the Sustainable Destinations Global Top 100, VISION on Sustainable Tourism, Totem Tourism and Green Destination titles bestowed to Limassol and Paphos in December 2014. The island beaches have been awarded with 57 Blue Flags. Cyprus became a full member of the World Tourism Organization when it was created in 1975. According to the World Economic Forum's 2013 Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Index, Cyprus' tourism industry ranks 29th in the world in terms of overall competitiveness. In terms of Tourism Infrastructure, in relation to the tourism industry Cyprus ranks 1st in the world. The Cyprus Tourism Organization has a status of a semi-governmental organisation charged with overseeing the industry practices and promoting the island worldwide.\nTrade.\nIn 2008 fiscal aggregate value of goods and services exported by Cyprus was in the region of $1.53\u00a0billion. It primarily exported goods and services such as citrus fruits, cement, potatoes, clothing and pharmaceuticals. At that same period total financial value of goods and services imported by Cyprus was about $8.689\u00a0billion. Prominent goods and services imported by Cyprus in 2008 were consumer goods, machinery, petroleum and other lubricants, transport equipment and intermediate goods.\nCypriot trade partners.\nTraditionally Greece has been a major export and import partner of Cyprus. In fiscal 2007, it amounted for 21.1 percent of total exports of Cyprus. At that same period it was responsible for 17.7 percent of goods and services imported by Cyprus. Some other important names in this regard are UK and Italy.\nEurozone crisis.\nIn 2012, Cyprus became affected by the Eurozone financial and banking crisis. In June 2012, the Cypriot government announced it would need \u20ac1.8 billion of foreign aid to support the Cyprus Popular Bank, and this was followed by Fitch down-grading Cyprus's credit rating to junk status. Fitch said Cyprus would need an additional \u20ac4 billion to support its banks and the downgrade was mainly due to the exposure of Bank of Cyprus, Cyprus Popular Bank and Hellenic Bank (Cyprus's 3 largest banks) to the Greek financial crisis.\nIn June 2012 the Cypriot finance minister, Vassos Shiarly, stated that the European Central Bank, European Commission and IMF officials are to carry out an in-depth investigation into Cyprus' economy and banking sector to assess the level of funding it requires. The Ministry of Finance rejected the possibility that Cyprus would be forced to undergo the sweeping austerity measures that have caused turbulence in Greece, but admitted that there would be \"some negative repercussion\".\nIn November 2012 international lenders negotiating a bailout with the Cypriot government have agreed on a key capital ratio for banks and a system for the sector's supervision. Both commercial banks and cooperatives will be overseen by the Central Bank and the Ministry of Finance. They also set a core Tier 1 ratio \u2013 a measure of financial strength \u2013 of 9% by the end of 2013 for banks, which could then rise to 10% in 2014.\nIn 2014, Harris Georgiades pointed that exiting the Memorandum with the European troika required a return to the markets. This he said, required \"timely, effective and full implementation of the program.\" The Finance Minister stressed the need to implement the Memorandum of understanding without an additional loan.\nIn 2015, Cyprus was praised by the President of the European Commission for adopting the austerity measures and not hesitating to follow a tough reform program.\nIn 2016, Moody's Investors Service changed its outlook on the Cypriot banking system to positive from stable, reflecting the view that the recovery will restore banks to profitability and improve asset quality. The quick economic recovery was driven by tourism, business services and increased consumer spending. Creditor confidence was also strengthened, allowing Bank of Cyprus to reduce its Emergency Liquidity Assistance to \u20ac2.0\u00a0billion (from \u20ac9.4\u00a0billion in 2013). Within the same period, Bank of Cyprus chairman Josef Ackermann urged the European Union to pledge financial support for a permanent solution to the Cyprus dispute.\nStatistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomy of Northern Cyprus.\nThe economy of Turkish-occupied northern Cyprus is about one-fifth the size of the economy of the government-controlled area, while GDP per capita is around half. Because the \"de facto\" administration is recognized only by Turkey, it has had much difficulty arranging foreign financing, and foreign firms have hesitated to invest there. The economy mainly revolves around the agricultural sector and government service, which together employ about half of the work force.\nThe tourism sector also contributes substantially into the economy. Moreover, the small economy has seen some downfalls because the Turkish lira is legal tender. To compensate for the economy's weakness, Turkey has been known to provide significant financial aid. In both parts of the island, water shortage is a growing problem, and several desalination plants are planned.\nThe economic disparity between the two communities is pronounced. Although the economy operates on a free-market basis, the lack of private and government investment, shortages of skilled labor and experienced managers, and inflation and the devaluation of the Turkish lira continue to plague the economy.\nTrade with Turkey.\nTurkey is by far the main trading partner of Northern Cyprus, supplying 55% of imports and absorbing 48% of exports. In a landmark case, the European Court of Justice (ECJ) ruled on 5 July 1994 against the British practice of importing produce from Northern Cyprus based on certificates of origin and phytosanitary certificates granted by the \"de facto\" authorities. The ECJ decided that only goods bearing certificates of origin from the internationally recognized Republic of Cyprus could be imported by EU member states. The decision resulted in a considerable decrease of Turkish Cypriot exports to the EU: from $36.4\u00a0million (or 66.7% of total Turkish Cypriot exports) in 1993 to $24.7\u00a0million in 1996 (or 35% of total exports) in 1996. Even so, the EU continues to be the second-largest trading partner of Northern Cyprus, with a 24.7% share of total imports and 35% share of total exports.\nThe most important exports of Northern Cyprus are citrus and dairy products. These are followed by rak\u0131, scrap and clothing.\nAssistance from Turkey is the mainstay of the Turkish Cypriot economy. Under the latest economic protocol (signed 3 January 1997), Turkey has undertaken to provide loans totalling $250\u00a0million for the purpose of implementing projects included in the protocol related to public finance, tourism, banking, and privatization. Fluctuation in the Turkish lira, which suffered from hyperinflation every year until its replacement by the Turkish new lira in 2005, exerted downward pressure on the Turkish Cypriot standard of living for many years.\nThe \"de facto\" authorities have instituted a free market in foreign exchange and permit residents to hold foreign-currency denominated bank accounts. This encourages transfers from Turkish Cypriots living abroad.\nHappiness.\nEconomic factors such as the GDP and national income strongly correlate with the happiness of a nation's citizens. In a study published in 2005, citizens from a sample of countries were asked to rate how happy or unhappy they were as a whole on a scale of 1 to 7 (Ranking: 1. Completely happy, 2. Very happy, 3. Fairly happy,4. Neither happy nor unhappy, 5. Fairly unhappy, 6. Very unhappy, 7. Completely unhappy.) Cyprus had a score of 5.29. On the question of how satisfied citizens were with their main job, Cyprus scored 5.36 on a scale of 1 to 7 (Ranking: 1. Completely satisfied, 2. Very satisfied, 3. Fairly satisfied, 4. Neither satisfied nor dissatisfied, 5. Fairly dissatisfied, 6. Very dissatisfied, 7. Completely dissatisfied.) In another ranking of happiness, Northern Cyprus ranks 58 and Cyprus ranks 61, according to the 2018 World Happiness Report. The report rates 156 countries based on variables including income, healthy life expectancy, social support, freedom, trust, and generosity.\nEconomic factors play a significant role in the general life satisfaction of Cyprus citizens, especially with women who participate in the labor force at a lower rate, work in lower ranks, and work in more public and service sector jobs than the men. Women of different skill-sets and \"differing economic objectives and constraints\" participate in the tourism industry. Women participate in this industry through jobs like hotel work to serve and/or bring pride to their family, not necessarily to satisfy their own selves. In this study, women with income higher than the mean household income reported higher levels of satisfaction with their lives while those with lower income reported the opposite. When asked who they compare themselves with (those with lower, same, or higher economic status), results showed that those that compared themselves with people of higher economic statuses than them had the lowest level of life satisfaction. While the correlation of income and happiness is positive, it is significantly low; there is stronger correlation between comparison and happiness. This indicates that not only income level but income level in relation to that of others affects their amount of life satisfaction.\nClassified as a Mediterranean welfare regime, Cyprus has a weak public Welfare system. This means there is a strong reliance on the family, instead of the state, for both familial and economic support. Another finding is that being a full-time housewife has a stronger negative effect on happiness for women of Northern Cyprus than being unemployed, showing how the combination of gender and the economic factor of participating in the labor force affects life satisfaction. Economic factors also negatively correlate with the happiness levels of those that live in the capital city: citizens living in the capital express lower levels of happiness. As found in this study, citizens of Cyprus that live in its capital, Nicosia, are significantly less happy than others whether or not socio-economic variables are controlled for. Another finding was that the young people in the capital are unhappier than the rest of Cyprus; the old are not.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5600", "revid": "50465978", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5600", "title": "Transport in Cyprus", "text": " \nTransport in Cyprus consists of transport by land, water and air. Road transport is the primary mode of transport for most Cypriot citizens, and Cyprus's road transport systems are well-developed and extensively used across the island.\nBecause Cyprus no longer has a working railway system, various other methods of transport are needed to ensure the proper delivery of any cargo, be it human or freight. As the last passenger railway was dismantled in 1952, the only remaining modes of transport are by road, sea, and air.\nRoads.\nFrom the of roads in the areas controlled by the Republic of Cyprus in 2006, were paved, while were unpaved. In 1996, the Turkish Cypriot area showed a close, but smaller ratio of paved to unpaved with about out of paved and unpaved. As a legacy of British rule, Cyprus is one of only three EU nations in which vehicles drive on the left.\nPublic Transportation.\nNicosia's residents rely on private cars to go around the city. With more than 658 automobiles per 1,000 people, Cyprus has one of the highest car ownership rates in the world and the country uses very little public transportation. Only 3% of journeys in the Greater Nicosia urban region are made by public transportation. Cycling is considerably less common at 2%. The government of Cyprus and authorities of Nicosia have developed a public transportation plan to ensure access to more areas and provide more options, apart from private cars.\nPublic Transportation Companies.\nIn Cyprus, public transportation by bus is run by different companies based on the district.\nNicosia and Larnaca: NPT (Nicosia Public Transport) and LPT (Larnaca Public Transport), operated by Cyprus Public Transport (CPT)\nLimassol: EMEL (Transport Company for Limassol Commuters)\nPaphos: OSYPA (Paphos Transport Organisation)\nFamagusta: OSEA (Famagusta District Transport Organisation)\nINTERCITY BUSES: Services transport between all major cities\nPublic Buses.\nIn 2006, extensive plans were announced to improve and expand bus services and restructure public transport throughout Cyprus, with the financial backing of the European Union Development Bank. In 2010, the new revised and expanded bus network was implemented into the system.\nIn 2020, the transport companies for the districts of Nicosia and Larnaca were changed from OSEL (Nicosia District Transport Organisation) to NPT (Nicosia Public Transport) and from ZENON Larnaca Buses to LPT (Larnaca Public Transport) respectively.\nIn 2022, Cyprus Public Transport made new plans for Nicosia's Public Transport by changing route numbers, adding new bus hubs and modernising buses and the all-out feel of the transport system. The plan has been introduced in two phases and is currently completed.\nRail.\nCyprus currently has no functioning railway systems. The last of the narrow gauge systems in the country closed in 1974. There had been studies and preparatory work done to establish a modern system between the major cities, motivated by worsening traffic issues. \u0399n October 2024, a company in England showed their interest to construct a new railway system in Cyprus.\nIn 2018, Nicosia municipal authorities requested an opinion on the construction of a tram network in the city to the European Investment Bank's JASPERS strategists, who concluded a need for a phased approach. Relevant studies were also carried out in the past, but no concrete plans has materialised.\nLicensed Vehicles.\nRoad transport is the dominant form of transport on the island. Figures released by the International Road Federation in 2007 show that Cyprus holds the highest car ownership rate in the world with 742 cars per 1,000 people.\nPublic transport in Cyprus is limited to privately run bus services (except in Nicosia and Larnaca), taxis, and interurban 'shared' taxi services (locally referred to as service taxis). Thus, private car ownership in the country is the fifth highest per capita in the world. However, in 2006 extensive plans were announced to expand and improve bus services and restructure public transport throughout Cyprus, with the financial backing of the European Union Development Bank\nSea Harbours and Ports.\nThe ports of Cyprus are operated and maintained by the Cyprus Ports Authority. Major harbours of the island are Limassol Harbour, and Larnaca Harbour, which service cargo, passenger, and cruise ships. Limassol is the larger of the two, and handles a large volume of both cargo and cruise vessels. Larnaca is primarily a cargo port but played a big part in the evacuation of foreign nationals from Lebanon in 2006, and in the subsequent humanitarian aid effort. A smaller cargo dock also exists at Vasilikos, near Zygi (a small town between Larnaca and Limassol). Smaller vessels and private yachts can dock at Marinas in Cyprus.\nPublic Bicycle Sharing System.\nNextbike is the latest transportation system in Cyprus, similar to programs employed successfully in various cities around the world. Bicycles can be found at stations in Nicosia and Limassol, as well as with 1 station in Larnaca.\n\"See full article on Cyprus Merchant Marine\"\nMerchant Marine.\nTotal: 1,414 ships (with a volume of \u00a0gross tonnage\u00a0(GT) or over) totaling \u00a0GT/\u00a0tonnes deadweight (DWT)\nShips by Type: barge carrier 2, bulk carrier 442, cargo ship 495, chemical tanker 22, combination bulk 40, combination ore/oil 8, container ship 144, Liquified Gas Carrier 6, passenger ship 8, petroleum tanker 142, refrigerated cargo 41, roll-on/roll-off 45, short-sea passenger 13, specialized tanker 4, vehicle carrier 2 (1999 est.)\nAirports.\nIn 1999, Cyprus had 12 airports with paved runways. Of them, seven had runways of lengths between 2,438 and 3,047 metres, one had a length between 1,524 and 2,437 metres, three had lengths between 914 and 1524 metres, and one had a length less than 914 metres.\nOf the three airports with unpaved runways, two had lengths less than 914 metres and one had a length between 914 and 1524 metres.\nInternational airports.\nLarnaca International Airport is the island's main airport and flies to many locations worldwide.\nPaphos International Airport is the 2nd largest airport and mostly flies to Europe, via Ryanair; with occasional flights to other continents.\nNicosia International Airport is an abandoned airport. It used to be the island's main airport until 1974. It remains closed to the public.\nErcan International Airport is the main airport in the de facto state of Northern Cyprus. The airport's only destination is Turkey, serviced only by a few flight companies from Turkey. Flights to and from Ercan Airport are embargoed. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5601", "revid": "5288432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5601", "title": "Military of Cyprus", "text": ""}
{"id": "5602", "revid": "48010489", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5602", "title": "Foreign relations of Cyprus", "text": "Cyprus is a member of the United Nations&lt;ref name='S/4469'&gt; &lt;/ref&gt; along with most of its agencies as well as the Commonwealth of Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund and Council of Europe. In addition, the country has signed the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency Agreement (MIGA). Cyprus has been a member of the European Union since 2004 and in the second half of 2012 it held the Presidency of the Council of the European Union, and will hold it next in the first half of 2026.\nHistorical non-alignment.\nCyprus has historically followed a non-aligned foreign policy, although it increasingly identifies with the West in its cultural affinities and trade patterns, and maintains close relations with the European Union, Greece, Armenia, Lebanon, Israel and the United States.\nThe prime originator of Cypriot non-alignment was Archbishop of Cyprus Makarios III, the first President (1960\u20131977) of the independent republic of Cyprus. Prior to independence, Makarios - by virtue of his post as Archbishop of Cyprus and head of the Cypriot Orthodox Church - was the Greek Cypriot Ethnarch, or \"de facto\" leader of the community. A highly influential figure well before independence, he participated in the 1955 Bandung Conference. After independence, Makarios took part in the 1961 founding meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement in Belgrade.\nReasons for this neutrality may lie in the extreme pressures exerted on the infant Republic by its larger neighbours, Turkey and Greece. Intercommunal rivalries and movements for union with Greece or partial union with Turkey may have persuaded Makarios to steer clear of close affiliation with either side. In any case Cyprus became a high-profile member of the Non-Aligned Movement and retained its membership until its entry into the European Union in 2004. At the non-governmental level, Cyprus has also been a member of the popular extension of the Non-Aligned Movement, the Afro-Asian Peoples' Solidarity Organisation hosting several high-level meetings.\nImmediately after the 1974 Greek-sponsored coup d'\u00e9tat and the Turkish invasion, Makarios secured international recognition of his administration as the legitimate government of the whole island. This was disputed only by Turkey, which currently recognizes only the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, established in 1983.\nSince the 1974 crisis, the chief aim of the foreign policy of the Republic of Cyprus has been to secure the withdrawal of Turkish forces and the reunification of the island under the most favorable constitutional and territorial settlement possible. This campaign has been pursued primarily through international forums such as the United Nations and the Non-Aligned Movement, and in recent years through the European Union.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Cyprus maintains diplomatic relations with:\nBilateral relations.\nEurope.\nCyprus' 1990 application for full EU membership caused a storm in the Turkish Cypriot community, which argued that the move required their consent. Following the December 1997 EU Summit decisions on EU enlargement, accession negotiations began 31 March 1998. Cyprus joined the European Union on 1 May 2004. To fulfil its commitment as a member of the European Union, Cyprus withdrew from the Non-Aligned Movement on accession, retaining observer status.\nInternational disputes.\nThe 1974 invasion of the Turkish army divided the island nation into two. The internationally recognised Republic of Cyprus currently has effective control in the south of the island (59% of the island's land area) while its area not under its effective control makes up 37% of the island. Turkey utilising the territory occupied during the invasion recognizes a declared separatist UDI of Turkish Cypriots in 1983, contrary to multiple United Nations Security Council Resolutions. The two territories of the Republic are separated by a United Nations Buffer Zone (4% of the island); there are two UK sovereign base areas mostly within the Greek Cypriot portion of the island.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "5604", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5604", "title": "Czech republic", "text": ""}
{"id": "5607", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5607", "title": "Czech republic/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "5608", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5608", "title": "Czech republic/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "5612", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5612", "title": "Czech republic/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "5613", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5613", "title": "Czech republic/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "5615", "revid": "43413888", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5615", "title": "Cretaceous", "text": "Third and last period of the Mesozoic Era\nThe Cretaceous ( ) is a geologic period that lasted from about 143.1 to 66 Ma (million years ago). It is the third and final period of the Mesozoic Era, as well as the longest. At around 77.1 million years, it is the ninth and longest geological period of the entire Phanerozoic. The name is derived from the Latin , 'chalk', which is abundant in the latter half of the period. It is usually abbreviated K, for its German translation .\nThe Cretaceous was a period with a relatively warm climate, resulting in high eustatic sea levels that created numerous shallow inland seas. These oceans and seas were populated with now-extinct marine reptiles, ammonites, and rudists, while dinosaurs continued to dominate on land. The world was largely ice-free, although there is some evidence of brief periods of glaciation during the cooler first half, and forests extended to the poles.\nMany of the dominant taxonomic groups present in modern times can be ultimately traced back to origins in the Cretaceous. During this time, new groups of mammals and birds appeared, including the earliest relatives of placentals and marsupials (Eutheria and Metatheria respectively), with the earliest crown group birds appearing towards the end of the Cretaceous. Teleost fish, the most diverse group of modern vertebrates continued to diversify during the Cretaceous with the appearance of their most diverse subgroup Acanthomorpha during this period. During the Early Cretaceous, flowering plants appeared and began to rapidly diversify, becoming the dominant group of plants across the Earth by the end of the Cretaceous, coincident with the decline and extinction of previously widespread gymnosperm groups.\nThe Cretaceous (along with the Mesozoic) ended with the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event, a large mass extinction in which many groups, including non-avian dinosaurs, pterosaurs, and large marine reptiles, died out, widely thought to have been caused by the impact of a large asteroid that formed the Chicxulub crater in the Gulf of Mexico. The end of the Cretaceous is defined by the abrupt Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene boundary (K\u2013Pg boundary), a geologic signature associated with the mass extinction that lies between the Mesozoic and Cenozoic Eras.\nEtymology and history.\nThe Cretaceous as a separate period was first defined by Belgian geologist Jean d'Omalius d'Halloy in 1822 as the \"Terrain Cr\u00e9tac\u00e9\", using strata in the Paris Basin and named for the extensive beds of chalk (calcium carbonate deposited by the shells of marine invertebrates, principally coccoliths), found in the upper Cretaceous of Western Europe. The name Cretaceous was derived from the Latin \"creta\", meaning \"chalk\". The twofold division of the Cretaceous was implemented by Conybeare and Phillips in 1822. Alcide d'Orbigny in 1840 divided the French Cretaceous into five \"\u00e9tages\" (stages): the Neocomian, Aptian, Albian, Turonian, and Senonian, later adding the \"Urgonian\" between Neocomian and Aptian and the Cenomanian between the Albian and Turonian.\nGeology.\nSubdivisions.\nThe Cretaceous is divided into Early and Late Cretaceous epochs, or Lower and Upper Cretaceous series. In older literature, the Cretaceous is sometimes divided into three series: Neocomian (lower/early), Gallic (middle) and Senonian (upper/late). A subdivision into 12 stages, all originating from European stratigraphy, is now used worldwide. In many parts of the world, alternative local subdivisions are still in use.\nFrom youngest to oldest, the subdivisions of the Cretaceous Period are:\nBoundaries.\nThe lower boundary of the Cretaceous is currently undefined, and the Jurassic\u2013Cretaceous boundary is currently the only system boundary to lack a defined Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP). Placing a GSSP for this boundary has been difficult because of the strong regionality of most biostratigraphic markers, and the lack of any chemostratigraphic events, such as isotope excursions (large sudden changes in ratios of isotopes) that could be used to define or correlate a boundary. Calpionellids, an enigmatic group of planktonic protists with urn-shaped calcitic tests briefly abundant during the latest Jurassic to earliest Cretaceous, have been suggested as the most promising candidates for fixing the Jurassic\u2013Cretaceous boundary. In particular, the first appearance \"Calpionella alpina\", coinciding with the base of the eponymous Alpina subzone, has been proposed as the definition of the base of the Cretaceous. The working definition for the boundary has often been placed as the first appearance of the ammonite \"Strambergella jacobi\", formerly placed in the genus \"Berriasella\", but its use as a stratigraphic indicator has been questioned, as its first appearance does not correlate with that of \"C. alpina\". The boundary is officially considered by the International Commission on Stratigraphy to be approximately 145 Ma, but other estimates have been proposed based on U-Pb geochronology, ranging as young as 140 Ma.\nThe upper boundary of the Cretaceous is sharply defined, being placed at an iridium-rich layer found worldwide that is believed to be associated with the Chicxulub impact crater, with its boundaries circumscribing parts of the Yucat\u00e1n Peninsula and extending into the Gulf of Mexico. This layer has been dated at 66.043 Ma.\nAt the end of the Cretaceous, the impact of a large body with the Earth may have been the punctuation mark at the end of a progressive decline in biodiversity during the Maastrichtian age. The result was the extinction of three-quarters of Earth's plant and animal species. The impact created the sharp break known as the K\u2013Pg boundary (formerly known as the K\u2013T boundary). Earth's biodiversity required substantial time to recover from this event, despite the probable existence of an abundance of vacant ecological niches.\nDespite the severity of the K-Pg extinction event, there were significant variations in the rate of extinction between and within different clades. Species that depended on photosynthesis declined or became extinct as atmospheric particles blocked solar energy. As is the case today, photosynthesizing organisms, such as phytoplankton and land plants, formed the primary part of the food chain in the late Cretaceous, and all else that depended on them suffered, as well. Herbivorous animals, which depended on plants and plankton as their food, died out as their food sources became scarce; consequently, the top predators, such as \"Tyrannosaurus rex\", also perished. Yet only three major groups of tetrapods disappeared completely; the non-avian dinosaurs, the plesiosaurs and the pterosaurs. The other Cretaceous groups that did not survive into the Cenozoic \u2009the ichthyosaurs, last remaining temnospondyls (Koolasuchus), and nonmammalian \u2009 were already extinct millions of years before the event occurred.\nCoccolithophorids and molluscs, including ammonites, rudists, freshwater snails, and mussels, as well as organisms whose food chain included these shell builders, became extinct or suffered heavy losses. For example, ammonites are thought to have been the principal food of mosasaurs, a group of giant marine lizards related to snakes that became extinct at the boundary.\nOmnivores, insectivores, and carrion-eaters survived the extinction event, perhaps because of the increased availability of their food sources. At the end of the Cretaceous, there seem to have been no purely herbivorous or carnivorous mammals. Mammals and birds that survived the extinction fed on insects, larvae, worms, and snails, which in turn fed on dead plant and animal matter. Scientists theorise that these organisms survived the collapse of plant-based food chains because they fed on detritus.\nIn stream communities, few groups of animals became extinct. Stream communities rely less on food from living plants and more on detritus that washes in from land. This particular ecological niche buffered them from extinction. Similar, but more complex patterns have been found in the oceans. Extinction was more severe among animals living in the water column than among animals living on or in the seafloor. Animals in the water column are almost entirely dependent on primary production from living phytoplankton, while animals living on or in the ocean floor feed on detritus or can switch to detritus feeding.\nThe largest air-breathing survivors of the event, crocodilians and champsosaurs, were semiaquatic and had access to detritus. Modern crocodilians can live as scavengers and can survive for months without food and go into hibernation when conditions are unfavorable, and their young are small, grow slowly, and feed largely on invertebrates and dead organisms or fragments of organisms for their first few years. These characteristics have been linked to crocodilian survival at the end of the Cretaceous.\nGeologic formations.\nThe high sea level and warm climate of the Cretaceous meant large areas of the continents were covered by warm, shallow seas, providing habitat for many marine organisms. The Cretaceous was named for the extensive chalk deposits of this age in Europe, but in many parts of the world, the deposits from the Cretaceous are of marine limestone, a rock type that is formed under warm, shallow marine conditions. Due to the high sea level, there was extensive space for such sedimentation. Because of the relatively young age and great thickness of the system, Cretaceous rocks are evident in many areas worldwide.\nChalk is a rock type characteristic for (but not restricted to) the Cretaceous. It consists of coccoliths, microscopically small calcite skeletons of coccolithophores, a type of algae that prospered in the Cretaceous seas.\nStagnation of deep-sea currents in middle Cretaceous times caused anoxic conditions in the sea water leaving the deposited organic matter undecomposed. Half of the world's petroleum reserves were laid down at this time in the anoxic conditions of what would become the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Mexico. In many places around the world, dark anoxic shales were formed during this interval, such as the Mancos Shale of western North America. These shales are an important source rock for oil and gas, for example in the subsurface of the North Sea.\nEurope.\nIn northwestern Europe, chalk deposits from the Upper Cretaceous are characteristic for the Chalk Group, which forms the white cliffs of Dover on the south coast of England and similar cliffs on the French Normandian coast. The group is found in England, northern France, the Low Countries, northern Germany, Denmark and in the subsurface of the southern part of the North Sea. Chalk is not easily consolidated and the Chalk Group still consists of loose sediments in many places. The group also has other limestones and arenites. Among the fossils it contains are sea urchins, belemnites, ammonites and sea reptiles such as \"Mosasaurus\".\nIn southern Europe, the Cretaceous is usually a marine system consisting of competent limestone beds or incompetent marls. Because the Alpine mountain chains did not yet exist in the Cretaceous, these deposits formed on the southern edge of the European continental shelf, at the margin of the Tethys Ocean.\nNorth America.\nDuring the Cretaceous, the present North American continent was isolated from the other continents. In the Jurassic, the North Atlantic already opened, leaving a proto-ocean between Europe and North America. From north to south across the continent, the Western Interior Seaway started forming. This inland sea separated the elevated areas of Laramidia in the west and Appalachia in the east. Three dinosaur clades found in Laramidia (troodontids, therizinosaurids and oviraptorosaurs) are absent from Appalachia from the Coniacian through the Maastrichtian.\nPaleogeography.\nDuring the Cretaceous, the late-Paleozoic-to-early-Mesozoic supercontinent of Pangaea completed its tectonic breakup into the present-day continents, although their positions were substantially different at the time. As the Atlantic Ocean widened, the convergent-margin mountain building (orogenies) that had begun during the Jurassic continued in the North American Cordillera, as the Nevadan orogeny was followed by the Sevier and Laramide orogenies.\nGondwana had begun to break up during the Jurassic Period, but its fragmentation accelerated during the Cretaceous and was largely complete by the end of the period. South America, Antarctica, and Australia rifted away from Africa (though India and Madagascar remained attached to each other until around 80 million years ago); thus, the South Atlantic and Indian Oceans were newly formed. Such active rifting lifted great undersea mountain chains along the welts, raising eustatic sea levels worldwide. To the north of Africa the Tethys Sea continued to narrow. During most of the Late Cretaceous, North America would be divided in two by the Western Interior Seaway, a large interior sea, separating Laramidia to the west and Appalachia to the east, then receded late in the period, leaving thick marine deposits sandwiched between coal beds. Bivalve palaeobiogeography also indicates that Africa was split in half by a shallow sea during the Coniacian and Santonian, connecting the Tethys with the South Atlantic by way of the central Sahara and Central Africa, which were then underwater. Yet another shallow seaway ran between what is now Norway and Greenland, connecting the Tethys to the Arctic Ocean and enabling biotic exchange between the two oceans. At the peak of the Cretaceous transgression, one-third of Earth's present land area was submerged.\nThe Cretaceous is justly famous for its chalk; indeed, more chalk formed in the Cretaceous than in any other period in the Phanerozoic. Mid-ocean ridge activity\u2014or rather, the circulation of seawater through the enlarged ridges\u2014enriched the oceans in calcium; this made the oceans more saturated, as well as increased the bioavailability of the element for calcareous nanoplankton. These widespread carbonates and other sedimentary deposits make the Cretaceous rock record especially fine. Famous formations from North America include the rich marine fossils of Kansas's Smoky Hill Chalk Member and the terrestrial fauna of the late Cretaceous Hell Creek Formation. Other important Cretaceous exposures occur in Europe (e.g., the Weald) and China (the Yixian Formation). In the area that is now India, massive lava beds called the Deccan Traps erupted in the very late Cretaceous and early Paleocene.\nClimate.\nPalynological evidence indicates the Cretaceous climate had three broad phases: a Berriasian\u2013Barremian warm-dry phase, an Aptian\u2013Santonian warm-wet phase, and a Campanian\u2013Maastrichtian cool-dry phase. As in the Cenozoic, the 400,000 year eccentricity cycle was the dominant orbital cycle governing carbon flux between different reservoirs and influencing global climate. The location of the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) was roughly the same as in the present.\nThe cooling trend of the last epoch of the Jurassic, the Tithonian, continued into the Berriasian, the first age of the Cretaceous. The North Atlantic seaway opened and enabled the flow of cool water from the Boreal Ocean into the Tethys. There is evidence that snowfalls were common in the higher latitudes during this age, and the tropics became wetter than during the Triassic and Jurassic. Glaciation was restricted to high-latitude mountains, though seasonal snow may have existed farther from the poles. After the end of the first age, however, temperatures began to increase again, with a number of thermal excursions, such as the middle Valanginian Weissert Thermal Excursion (WTX), which was caused by the Paran\u00e1-Etendeka Large Igneous Province's activity. It was followed by the middle Hauterivian Faraoni Thermal Excursion (FTX) and the early Barremian Hauptblatterton Thermal Event (HTE). The HTE marked the ultimate end of the Tithonian-early Barremian Cool Interval (TEBCI). During this interval, precession was the dominant orbital driver of environmental changes in the Vocontian Basin. For much of the TEBCI, northern Gondwana experienced a monsoonal climate. A shallow thermocline existed in the mid-latitude Tethys. The TEBCI was followed by the Barremian-Aptian Warm Interval (BAWI). This hot climatic interval coincides with Manihiki and Ontong Java Plateau volcanism and with the Selli Event. Early Aptian tropical sea surface temperatures (SSTs) were 27\u201332\u00a0\u00b0C, based on TEX86 measurements from the equatorial Pacific. During the Aptian, Milankovitch cycles governed the occurrence of anoxic events by modulating the intensity of the hydrological cycle and terrestrial runoff. The early Aptian was also notable for its millennial scale hyperarid events in the mid-latitudes of Asia. The BAWI itself was followed by the Aptian-Albian Cold Snap (AACS) that began about 118 Ma. A short, relatively minor ice age may have occurred during this so-called \"cold snap\", as evidenced by glacial dropstones in the western parts of the Tethys Ocean and the expansion of calcareous nannofossils that dwelt in cold water into lower latitudes. The AACS is associated with an arid period in the Iberian Peninsula.\nTemperatures increased drastically after the end of the AACS, which ended around 111 Ma with the Paquier/Urbino Thermal Maximum, giving way to the Mid-Cretaceous Hothouse (MKH), which lasted from the early Albian until the early Campanian. Faster rates of seafloor spreading and entry of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere are believed to have initiated this period of extreme warmth, along with high flood basalt activity. The MKH was punctuated by multiple thermal maxima of extreme warmth. The Leenhardt Thermal Event (LTE) occurred around 110 Ma, followed shortly by the l'Arboudeyesse Thermal Event (ATE) a million years later. Following these two hyperthermals was the Amadeus Thermal Maximum around 106 Ma, during the middle Albian. Then, around a million years after that, occurred the Petite Verol Thermal Event (PVTE). Afterwards, around 102.5 Ma, the Event 6 Thermal Event (EV6) took place; this event was itself followed by the Breistroffer Thermal Maximum around 101 Ma, during the latest Albian. Approximately 94 Ma, the Cenomanian-Turonian Thermal Maximum occurred, with this hyperthermal being the most extreme hothouse interval of the Cretaceous and being associated with a sea level highstand. Temperatures cooled down slightly over the next few million years, but then another thermal maximum, the Coniacian Thermal Maximum, happened, with this thermal event being dated to around 87 Ma. Atmospheric CO2 levels may have varied by thousands of ppm throughout the MKH. Mean annual temperatures at the poles during the MKH exceeded 14\u00a0\u00b0C. Such hot temperatures during the MKH resulted in a very gentle temperature gradient from the equator to the poles; the latitudinal temperature gradient during the Cenomanian-Turonian Thermal Maximum was 0.54\u00a0\u00b0C per \u00b0\u2009latitude for the Southern Hemisphere and 0.49\u00a0\u00b0C per \u00b0\u2009latitude for the Northern Hemisphere, in contrast to present day values of 1.07 and 0.69\u00a0\u00b0C per \u00b0\u2009latitude for the Southern and Northern hemispheres, respectively. This meant weaker global winds, which drive the ocean currents, and resulted in less upwelling and more stagnant oceans than today. This is evidenced by widespread black shale deposition and frequent anoxic events. Tropical SSTs during the late Albian most likely averaged around 30\u00a0\u00b0C. Despite this high SST, seawater was not hypersaline at this time, as this would have required significantly higher temperatures still. On land, arid zones in the Albian regularly expanded northward in tandem with expansions of subtropical high pressure belts. The Cedar Mountain Formation's Soap Wash flora indicates a mean annual temperature of between 19 and 26\u00a0\u00b0C in Utah at the Albian-Cenomanian boundary. Tropical SSTs during the Cenomanian-Turonian Thermal Maximum were at least 30\u00a0\u00b0C, though one study estimated them as high as between 33 and 42\u00a0\u00b0C. An intermediate estimate of ~33-34\u00a0\u00b0C has also been given. Meanwhile, deep ocean temperatures were as much as warmer than today's; one study estimated that deep ocean temperatures were between 12 and 20\u00a0\u00b0C during the MKH. The poles were so warm that ectothermic reptiles were able to inhabit them.\nBeginning in the Santonian, near the end of the MKH, the global climate began to cool, with this cooling trend continuing across the Campanian. This period of cooling, driven by falling levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide, caused the end of the MKH and the transition into a cooler climatic interval, known formally as the Late Cretaceous-Early Palaeogene Cool Interval (LKEPCI). Tropical SSTs declined from around 35\u00a0\u00b0C in the early Campanian to around 28\u00a0\u00b0C in the Maastrichtian. Deep ocean temperatures declined to 9 to 12\u00a0\u00b0C, though the shallow temperature gradient between tropical and polar seas remained. Regional conditions in the Western Interior Seaway changed little between the MKH and the LKEPCI. During this period of relatively cool temperatures, the ITCZ became narrower, while the strength of both summer and winter monsoons in East Asia was directly correlated to atmospheric CO2 concentrations. Laramidia likewise had a seasonal, monsoonal climate. The Maastrichtian was a time of chaotic, highly variable climate. Two upticks in global temperatures are known to have occurred during the Maastrichtian, bucking the trend of overall cooler temperatures during the LKEPCI. Between 70 and 69 Ma and 66\u201365 Ma, isotopic ratios indicate elevated atmospheric CO2 pressures with levels of 1000\u20131400 ppmV and mean annual temperatures in west Texas between . Atmospheric CO2 and temperature relations indicate a doubling of pCO2 was accompanied by a ~0.6\u00a0\u00b0C increase in temperature. The latter warming interval, occurring at the very end of the Cretaceous, was triggered by the activity of the Deccan Traps. The LKEPCI lasted into the Late Palaeocene, when it gave way to another supergreenhouse interval.\nThe production of large quantities of magma, variously attributed to mantle plumes or to extensional tectonics, further pushed sea levels up, so that large areas of the continental crust were covered with shallow seas. The Tethys Sea connecting the tropical oceans east to west also helped to warm the global climate. Warm-adapted plant fossils are known from localities as far north as Alaska and Greenland, while dinosaur fossils have been found within 15 degrees of the Cretaceous south pole. It was suggested that there was Antarctic marine glaciation in the Turonian Age, based on isotopic evidence. However, this has subsequently been suggested to be the result of inconsistent isotopic proxies, with evidence of polar rainforests during this time interval at 82\u00b0 S. Rafting by ice of stones into marine environments occurred during much of the Cretaceous, but evidence of deposition directly from glaciers is limited to the Early Cretaceous of the Eromanga Basin in southern Australia.\nFlora.\nFlowering plants (angiosperms) make up around 90% of living plant species today. Prior to the rise of angiosperms, during the Jurassic and the Early Cretaceous, the higher flora was dominated by gymnosperm groups, including cycads, conifers, ginkgophytes, gnetophytes and close relatives, as well as the extinct Bennettitales. Other groups of plants included pteridosperms or \"seed ferns\", a collective term that refers to disparate groups of extinct seed plants with fern-like foliage, including groups such as Corystospermaceae and Caytoniales. The exact origins of angiosperms are uncertain, although molecular evidence suggests that they are not closely related to any living group of gymnosperms.\nThe earliest widely accepted evidence of flowering plants are monosulcate (single-grooved) pollen grains from the late Valanginian (~ 134 Ma) found in Israel and Italy, initially at low abundance. Molecular clock estimates conflict with fossil estimates, suggesting the diversification of crown-group angiosperms during the Late Triassic or the Jurassic, but such estimates are difficult to reconcile with the heavily sampled pollen record and the distinctive tricolpate to tricolporoidate (triple grooved) pollen of eudicot angiosperms. Among the oldest records of Angiosperm macrofossils are \"Montsechia\" from the Barremian aged Las Hoyas beds of Spain and \"Archaefructus\" from the Barremian-Aptian boundary Yixian Formation in China. Tricolpate pollen distinctive of eudicots first appears in the Late Barremian, while the earliest remains of monocots are known from the Aptian. Flowering plants underwent a rapid radiation beginning during the middle Cretaceous, becoming the dominant group of land plants by the end of the period, coincident with the decline of previously dominant groups such as conifers. The oldest known fossils of grasses are from the Albian, with the family having diversified into modern groups by the end of the Cretaceous. The oldest large angiosperm trees are known from the Turonian (c. 90 Ma) of New Jersey, with the trunk having a preserved diameter of and an estimated height of .\nDuring the Cretaceous, ferns in the order Polypodiales, which make up 80% of living fern species, would also begin to diversify.\nTerrestrial fauna.\nOn land, mammals were generally small sized, but a very relevant component of the fauna, with cimolodont multituberculates outnumbering dinosaurs in some sites. Neither true marsupials nor placentals existed until the very end, but a variety of non-marsupial metatherians and non-placental eutherians had already begun to diversify greatly, ranging as carnivores (Deltatheroida), aquatic foragers (Stagodontidae) and herbivores (\"Schowalteria\", Zhelestidae). Various \"archaic\" groups like eutriconodonts were common in the Early Cretaceous, but by the Late Cretaceous northern mammalian faunas were dominated by multituberculates and therians, with dryolestoids dominating South America.\nThe apex predators were archosaurian reptiles, especially dinosaurs, which were at their most diverse stage. Avians such as the ancestors of modern-day birds also diversified. They inhabited every continent, and were even found in cold polar latitudes. Pterosaurs were common in the early and middle Cretaceous, but as the Cretaceous proceeded they declined for poorly understood reasons (once thought to be due to competition with early birds, but now it is understood avian adaptive radiation is not consistent with pterosaur decline). By the end of the period only three highly specialized families remained; Pteranodontidae, Nyctosauridae, and Azhdarchidae.\nThe Liaoning lagerst\u00e4tte (Yixian Formation) in China is an important site, full of preserved remains of numerous types of small dinosaurs, birds and mammals, that provides a glimpse of life in the Early Cretaceous. The coelurosaur dinosaurs found there represent types of the group Maniraptora, which includes modern birds and their closest non-avian relatives, such as dromaeosaurs, oviraptorosaurs, therizinosaurs, troodontids along with other avialans. Fossils of these dinosaurs from the Liaoning lagerst\u00e4tte are notable for the presence of hair-like feathers.\nInsects diversified during the Cretaceous, and the oldest known ants, termites and some lepidopterans, akin to butterflies and moths, appeared. Aphids, grasshoppers and gall wasps appeared.\nRhynchocephalians.\nRhynchocephalians (which today only includes the tuatara) disappeared from North America and Europe after the Early Cretaceous, and were absent from North Africa and northern South America by the early Late Cretaceous. The cause of the decline of Rhynchocephalia remains unclear, but has often been suggested to be due to competition with advanced lizards and mammals. They appear to have remained diverse in high-latitude southern South America during the Late Cretaceous, where lizards remained rare, with their remains outnumbering terrestrial lizards 200:1.\nChoristodera.\nChoristoderes, a group of freshwater aquatic reptiles that first appeared during the preceding Jurassic, underwent a major evolutionary radiation in Asia during the Early Cretaceous, which represents the high point of choristoderan diversity, including long necked forms such as \"Hyphalosaurus\" and the first records of the gharial-like Neochoristodera, which appear to have evolved in the regional absence of aquatic neosuchian crocodyliformes. During the Late Cretaceous the neochoristodere \"Champsosaurus\" was widely distributed across western North America. Due to the extreme climatic warmth in the Arctic, choristoderans were able to colonise it too during the Late Cretaceous.\nMarine fauna.\nIn the seas, rays, modern sharks and teleosts became common. Marine reptiles included ichthyosaurs in the early and mid-Cretaceous (becoming extinct during the late Cretaceous Cenomanian-Turonian anoxic event), plesiosaurs throughout the entire period, and mosasaurs appearing in the Late Cretaceous. Sea turtles in the form of Cheloniidae and Panchelonioidea lived during the period and survived the extinction event. Besides Cheloniidae, Panchelonioidea is today represented by a single species; the leatherback sea turtle. The Hesperornithiformes were flightless, marine diving birds that swam like grebes.\n\"Baculites\", an ammonite genus with a straight shell, flourished in the seas along with reef-building rudist clams. Inoceramids were also particularly notable among Cretaceous bivalves, and they have been used to identify major biotic turnovers such as at the Turonian-Coniacian boundary. Predatory gastropods with drilling habits were widespread. Globotruncanid foraminifera and echinoderms such as sea urchins and starfish (sea stars) thrived. Ostracods were abundant in Cretaceous marine settings; ostracod species characterised by high male sexual investment had the highest rates of extinction and turnover. Thylacocephala, a class of crustaceans, went extinct in the Late Cretaceous. The first radiation of the diatoms (generally siliceous shelled, rather than calcareous) in the oceans occurred during the Cretaceous; freshwater diatoms did not appear until the Miocene. Calcareous nannoplankton were important components of the marine microbiota and important as biostratigraphic markers and recorders of environmental change.\nThe Cretaceous was also an important interval in the evolution of bioerosion, the production of borings and scrapings in rocks, hardgrounds and shells.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5616", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5616", "title": "Creutzfeld-Jacob Disease", "text": ""}
{"id": "5617", "revid": "21408729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5617", "title": "Creutzfeldt\u2013Jakob disease", "text": "Degenerative neurological disorder\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nCreutzfeldt\u2013Jakob disease (CJD) is an incurable, invariably fatal, neurodegenerative disease belonging to the transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE) group. Early symptoms include memory problems, behavioral changes, poor coordination, visual disturbances and auditory disturbances. Later symptoms include dementia, involuntary movements, blindness, deafness, weakness, and coma. About 70% of sufferers die within a year of diagnosis. The name \"Creutzfeldt\u2013Jakob disease\" was introduced by Walther Spielmeyer in 1922, after the German neurologists Hans Gerhard Creutzfeldt and Alfons Maria Jakob.\nCJD is caused by a prion, an infectious abnormal folding of a protein. Infectious prions are misfolded proteins that can cause normally folded proteins to also become misfolded. About 85% of cases of CJD occur for unknown reasons, while about 7.5% of cases are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Exposure to brain or spinal tissue from an infected person may also result in spread. There is no evidence that sporadic CJD can spread among people via normal contact or blood transfusions, although this is possible in variant Creutzfeldt\u2013Jakob disease. Diagnosis involves ruling out other potential causes. An electroencephalogram, spinal tap, or magnetic resonance imaging may support the diagnosis. Another diagnosis technique is the real-time quaking-induced conversion assay, which can detect the disease in early stages.\nThere is no specific treatment for CJD. Opioids may be used to help with pain, while clonazepam or sodium valproate may help with involuntary movements. CJD affects about one person per million people per year. Onset is typically around 60 years of age. The condition was first described in 1920. It is classified as a type of transmissible spongiform encephalopathy. Inherited CJD accounts for about 10% of prion disease cases. Sporadic CJD is different from bovine spongiform encephalopathy (mad cow disease) and variant Creutzfeldt\u2013Jakob disease (vCJD).\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe first symptom of CJD is usually rapidly progressive dementia, leading to memory loss, personality changes, and hallucinations. Myoclonus (jerky movements) typically occurs in 90% of cases, but may be absent at initial onset. Other frequently occurring features include anxiety, depression, paranoia, obsessive-compulsive symptoms, and psychosis. This is accompanied by physical problems such as speech impairment, balance and coordination dysfunction (ataxia), changes in gait, and rigid posture. In most people with CJD, these symptoms are accompanied by involuntary movements. Rarely, unusual symptoms like the alien limb phenomenon have been observed. The duration of the disease varies greatly, but sporadic (non-inherited) CJD can be fatal within months or even weeks. Most affected people die six months after initial symptoms appear, often of pneumonia due to impaired coughing reflexes. About 15% of people with CJD survive for two or more years.\nThe symptoms of CJD are caused by the progressive death of the brain's nerve cells, which are associated with the build-up of abnormal prion proteins forming in the brain. When brain tissue from a person with CJD is examined under a microscope, many tiny holes can be seen where the nerve cells have died. Parts of the brain may resemble a sponge where the prions were infecting the areas of the brain.\nCause.\nCJD is a type of transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE), which is caused by prions. Prions are misfolded proteins that occur in the neurons of the central nervous system (CNS). The CJD prion is dangerous because it promotes refolding of cellular prion proteins into the diseased state. The number of misfolded protein molecules will increase exponentially, and the process leads to a large quantity of insoluble proteins in affected cells. This mass of misfolded proteins disrupts neuronal cell function and causes cell death. Mutations in the gene for the prion protein can cause a misfolding of the dominantly alpha helical regions into beta pleated sheets. This change in conformation disables the protein's ability to undergo digestion. Once the prion is transmitted, the defective proteins invade the brain and induce other prion protein molecules to misfold in a self-sustaining feedback loop. These neurodegenerative diseases are commonly called \"prion diseases\".\nPrPC, the normal fibril cellular proteins responsible for a wide range of CNS functions, are misfolded by what current research suggests are small, highly neurotoxic oligomeric aggregates, known as PrPSc, which interact with cell surfaces to disrupt neuronal function. The binding of prion oligomers to normal prion protein on neurons may trigger toxic signals similar to how oligomeric \u03b2-amyloid causes synaptic damage in Alzheimer\u2019s disease. Different conformations of PrPSc (often termed prion \u201cstrains\u201d) are thought to cause the distinct subtypes of prion disease, explaining variations in clinical features and progression. They are thought to affect signaling processes, damaging neurons and resulting in degeneration that causes the spongiform appearance in the affected brain. Other forms of TSEs that are found in humans are Gerstmann\u2013Str\u00e4ussler\u2013Scheinker syndrome, fatal familial insomnia, kuru, and variably protease-sensitive prionopathy. Susceptibility and disease phenotype are influenced by a common polymorphism at codon 129 of the PRNP gene (methionine/valine). Notably, individuals homozygous at codon 129 are over-represented in sporadic CJD cases and tend to have shorter incubation periods.\nTransmission.\nThe defective protein can be transmitted by contaminated harvested human brain products, corneal grafts, dural grafts, or electrode implants and pituitary human growth hormone, which has been replaced by recombinant human growth hormone that poses no such risk.\nIt can be familial (fCJD) or it may appear without clear risk factors (sporadic form: sCJD). In the familial form, a mutation has occurred in the gene for PrP, \"PRNP\", in that family. All types of CJD are transmissible irrespective of how they occur in the person.\nIt is thought that humans can contract the variant form of the disease by eating food from animals infected with bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), the bovine form of TSE, also known as \"mad cow disease\". However, it can also cause sCJD in some cases.\nCannibalism has also been implicated as a transmission mechanism for abnormal prions, causing the disease known as kuru, once found primarily among women and children of the Fore people in Papua New Guinea, who previously engaged in funerary cannibalism. While the men of the tribe ate the muscle tissue of the deceased, women and children consumed other parts, such as the brain, and were more likely than men to contract kuru from infected tissue.\nPrions, the infectious agent of CJD, may not be inactivated using routine surgical instrument sterilization procedures. The World Health Organization and the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommend that instrumentation used in such cases be immediately destroyed after use; short of destruction, it is recommended that heat and chemical decontamination be used in combination to process instruments that come in contact with high-infectivity tissues. Thermal depolymerization also destroys prions in infected organic and inorganic matter, since the process chemically attacks protein at the molecular level, although more effective and practical methods involve destruction by combinations of detergents and enzymes similar to biological washing powders.\nGenetics.\nPeople can also develop CJD because they carry a mutation of the gene that codes for the prion protein (PRNP), located on chromosome 202p12-pter. This occurs in only 10\u201315% of all CJD cases. In sporadic cases, the misfolding of the prion protein is a process that is hypothesized to occur as a result of the effects of aging on cellular machinery, explaining why the disease often appears later in life. An EU study determined that \"87% of cases were sporadic, 8% genetic, 5% iatrogenic and less than 1% variant.\"\nDiagnosis.\nTesting for CJD has historically been problematic, due to the nonspecific nature of early symptoms and difficulty in safely obtaining brain tissue for confirmation. The diagnosis may initially be suspected in a person with rapidly progressing dementia, particularly when it is also found with the characteristic medical signs and symptoms such as involuntary muscle jerking, difficulty with coordination/balance and walking, and visual disturbances. Further testing can support the diagnosis and may include:\nIn recent years, studies have shown that the tumour marker neuron-specific enolase (NSE) is often elevated in CJD cases; however, its diagnostic utility is seen primarily when combined with a test for the 14-3-3 protein. As of 2010[ [update]], screening tests to identify infected asymptomatic individuals, such as blood donors, are not yet available, though methods have been proposed and evaluated.\nImaging.\nImaging of the brain may be performed during medical evaluation, both to rule out other causes and to obtain supportive evidence for diagnosis. Imaging findings are variable in their appearance and also variable in sensitivity and specificity. While imaging plays a lesser role in diagnosis of CJD, characteristic findings on brain MRI in some cases may precede onset of clinical manifestations.\nBrain MRI is the most useful imaging modality for changes related to CJD. Of the MRI sequences, diffuse-weighted imaging sequences are most sensitive. Characteristic findings are as follows:\nBrain FDG PET-CT tends to be markedly abnormal, and is increasingly used in the investigation of dementias.\nHistopathology.\nTesting of tissue remains the most definitive way of confirming the diagnosis of CJD, although even a biopsy is not always conclusive.\nIn one-third of people with sporadic CJD, deposits of \"prion protein (scrapie)\", PrPSc, can be found in the skeletal muscle or the spleen. Diagnosis of vCJD can be supported by biopsy of the tonsils, which harbor significant amounts of PrPSc; however, biopsy of brain tissue is the definitive diagnostic test for all other forms of prion disease. Due to its invasiveness, a biopsy will not be done if clinical suspicion is sufficiently high or low. A negative biopsy does not rule out CJD, since it may predominate in a specific part of the brain.\nThe classic histologic appearance is spongiform change in the gray matter: the presence of many round vacuoles from one to 50 micrometers in the neuropil, in all six cortical layers in the cerebral cortex, or with diffuse involvement of the cerebellar molecular layer. These vacuoles appear glassy or eosinophilic and may coalesce. Neuronal loss and gliosis are also seen. Plaques of amyloid-like material can be seen in the neocortex in some cases of CJD.\nHowever, extra-neuronal vacuolization can also be seen in other disease states. Diffuse cortical vacuolization occurs in Alzheimer's disease, and superficial cortical vacuolization occurs in ischemia and frontotemporal dementia. These vacuoles appear clear and punched out. Larger vacuoles encircling neurons, vessels, and glia are a possible processing artifact.\nClassification.\nTypes of CJD include:\nTreatment.\nAs of 2025, there is no cure or effective treatment for CJD. Some of the symptoms, like twitching, can be managed, but otherwise treatment is palliative care. Psychiatric symptoms like anxiety and depression can be treated with sedatives and antidepressants. Myoclonic jerks can be handled with clonazepam or sodium valproate. Opiates can help with pain. Seizures are very uncommon but can nevertheless be treated with antiepileptic drugs.\nIn 2022, results of an early-stage trial of PRN100, a monoclonal antibody against PrP, were reported: the drug appeared safe and reached the brain, but treated patients did not show clearly improved survival compared to historical controls. While not curative, this trial demonstrated the feasibility of immunotherapy for prion disease.\nPrognosis.\nLife expectancy is greatly reduced for people with Creutzfeldt\u2013Jakob disease, and the average is less than six months. As of 1981, no one was known to have lived longer than 2.5 years after the onset of CJD symptoms. One of the world's longest survivors of vCJD was Jonathan Simms, a Northern Irish man who lived for 10 years after his diagnosis and received experimental treatment with pentosan polysulfate. Simms died in 2011.\nEpidemiology.\nThe CDC monitors the occurrence of CJD in the United States through periodic reviews of national mortality data. According to the CDC:\nFurther information from the CDC:\nAlthough not fully understood, additional information suggests that CJD rates in nonwhite groups are lower than in whites. While the mean onset is approximately 67 years of age, cases of sCJD have been reported as young as 17 years and over 80 years of age. Mental capabilities rapidly deteriorate and the average amount of time from onset of symptoms to death is 7 to 9 months.\nAccording to a 2020 systematic review on the international epidemiology of CJD:\nThe intensity of CJD surveillance increases the number of reported cases, often in countries where CJD epidemics have occurred in the past and where surveillance resources are greatest. An increase in surveillance and reporting of CJD is most likely in response to BSE and vCJD. Possible factors contributing to an increase in CJD incidence are an aging population, population increase, clinician awareness, and more accurate diagnostic methods. Since CJD symptoms are similar to other neurological conditions, it is also possible that CJD is mistaken for stroke, acute nephropathy, general dementia, and hyperparathyroidism.\nHistory.\nThe disease was first described by German neurologist Hans Gerhard Creutzfeldt in 1920 and shortly afterward by Alfons Maria Jakob, giving it the name Creutzfeldt\u2013Jakob disease. Some of the clinical findings described in their first papers do not match current criteria for Creutzfeldt\u2013Jakob disease, and it has been speculated that at least two of the people in the initial studies had a different illness. An early description of familial CJD stems from the German psychiatrist and neurologist Friedrich Meggendorfer (1880\u20131953). A study published in 1997 counted more than 100 cases worldwide of transmissible CJD and new cases continued to appear at the time.\nThe first report of suspected iatrogenic CJD was published in 1974. Animal experiments showed that corneas of infected animals could transmit CJD, and the causative agent spreads along visual pathways. A second case of CJD associated with a corneal transplant was reported without details. In 1977, CJD transmission caused by silver electrodes previously used in the brain of a person with CJD was first reported. Transmission occurred despite the decontamination of the electrodes with ethanol and formaldehyde. Retrospective studies identified four other cases likely of a similar cause. The rate of transmission from a single contaminated instrument is unknown, although it is not 100%. In some cases, the exposure occurred weeks after the instruments were used on a person with CJD. In the 1980s, it was discovered that Lyodura, a dura mater transplant product, was shown to transmit CJD from the donor to the recipient. This led to the product being banned in Canada, but it was used in other countries such as Japan until 1993. A review article published in 1979 indicated that 25 dura mater cases had occurred by that date in Australia, Canada, Germany, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States.\nBy 1985, a series of case reports in the United States showed that when injected, cadaver-extracted pituitary human growth hormone could transmit CJD to humans.\nIn 1992, it was recognized that human gonadotropin administered by injection could also transmit CJD from person to person.\nStanley B. Prusiner of the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1997 \"for his discovery of Prions\u2014a new biological principle of infection\".\nYale University neuropathologist Laura Manuelidis has challenged the prion protein (PrP) explanation for the disease. In January 2007, she and her colleagues reported that they had found a virus-like particle in naturally and experimentally infected animals. \"The high infectivity of comparable, isolated virus-like particles that show no intrinsic PrP by antibody labeling, combined with their loss of infectivity when nucleic acid\u2013protein complexes are disrupted, make it likely that these 25-nm particles are the causal TSE virions\".\nAustralia.\nAustralia has documented 10 cases of healthcare-acquired CJD (iatrogenic or ICJD). Five of the deaths resulted after the patients, who were in treatment either for infertility or short stature, were treated using contaminated pituitary extract hormone but no new cases have been noted since 1991. The other five deaths occurred due to dura mater grafting procedures that were performed during brain surgery, in which the covering of the brain is repaired. There have been no other ICJD deaths documented in Australia due to transmission during healthcare procedures.\nNew Zealand.\nA case was reported in 1989 in a 25-year-old man from New Zealand, who also received dura mater transplant. Five New Zealanders have been confirmed to have died of the sporadic form of Creutzfeldt\u2013Jakob disease (CJD) in 2012.\nUnited States.\nIn 1988, there was a confirmed death from CJD of a person from Manchester, New Hampshire. Massachusetts General Hospital believed the person acquired the disease from a surgical instrument at a podiatrist's office. In 2007, Michael Homer, former Vice President of Netscape, had been experiencing consistent memory problems, which led to his diagnosis. In August 2013 the British journalist Graham Usher died in New York of CJD.\nIn September 2013, another person in Manchester was posthumously determined to have died of the disease. The person had undergone brain surgery at Catholic Medical Center three months before his death, and a surgical probe used in the procedure was subsequently reused in other operations. Public health officials identified thirteen people at three hospitals who may have been exposed to the disease through the contaminated probe but said the risk of anyone contracting CJD is \"extremely low\".\nIn January 2015, former speaker of the Utah House of Representatives Rebecca D. Lockhart died of the disease within a few weeks of diagnosis. John Carroll, former editor of \"The Baltimore Sun\" and \"Los Angeles Times\", died of CJD in Kentucky in June 2015, after having been diagnosed in January. American actress Barbara Tarbuck (\"General Hospital\", \"American Horror Story\") died of the disease on December 26, 2016. Jos\u00e9 Baselga, clinical oncologist having headed the AstraZeneca oncology division, died in Cerdanya, March 21, 2021, from CJD. In April 2024, a report was published regarding two hunters from the same lodge who, in 2022, were found to be afflicted with sporadic CJD after eating deer meat infected with chronic wasting disease (CWD), suggesting a potential link between CWD and CJD.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5618", "revid": "55983", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5618", "title": "Clockwork Orange", "text": ""}
{"id": "5620", "revid": "201597", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5620", "title": "Cerebrovascular Accident", "text": ""}
{"id": "5622", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5622", "title": "C. Northcote Parkinson", "text": "British naval historian\nCyril Northcote Parkinson (30 July 1909 \u2013 9 March 1993) was a British naval historian and author of some 60 books, the most famous of which was his best-seller \"Parkinson's Law\" (1957), in which Parkinson advanced the eponymous law stating that \"work expands so as to fill the time available for its completion\", an insight which led him to be regarded as an important scholar in public administration and management.\nEarly life and education.\nThe youngest son of William Edward Parkinson (1871\u20131927), an art master at North East County School and from 1913 principal of York School of Arts and Crafts, and his wife, Rose Emily Mary Curnow (born 1877), Parkinson attended St. Peter's School, York, where in 1929 he won an exhibition to study history at Emmanuel College, Cambridge. He received a BA degree in 1932. As an undergraduate, Parkinson developed an interest in naval history, which he pursued when the Pellew family gave him access to family papers at the recently established National Maritime Museum. The papers formed the basis of his first book, \"Edward Pellew, Viscount Exmouth, Admiral of the Red\". In 1934, then a graduate student at King's College London, he wrote his PhD thesis on \"Trade and War in the Eastern Seas, 1803\u20131810\", which was awarded the Julian Corbett Prize in Naval History for 1935.\nAcademic and military career.\nWhile a graduate student in 1934, Parkinson was commissioned into the Territorial Army in the 22nd London Regiment (The Queen's), was promoted to lieutenant the same year, and commanded an infantry company at the jubilee of King George V in 1935. In the same year, Emmanuel College, Cambridge elected him a research fellow. While at Cambridge, he commanded an infantry unit of the Cambridge University Officers' Training Corps. He was promoted to captain in 1937.\nHe became senior history master at Blundell's School in Tiverton, Devon in 1938 (and a captain in the school's OTC), then instructor at the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth in 1939. In 1940, he joined the Queen's Royal Regiment as a captain and undertook a range of staff and military teaching positions in Britain. In 1943 he married Ethelwyn Edith Graves (born 1915), a nurse tutor at Middlesex Hospital, with whom he had two children.\nDemobilized as a major in 1945, he was a lecturer in history at the University of Liverpool from 1946 to 1949. In 1950, he was appointed Raffles Professor of History at the new University of Malaya in Singapore. While there, he initiated an important series of historical monographs on the history of Malaya, publishing the first in 1960. A movement developed in the mid-1950s to establish two campuses, one in Kuala Lumpur and one in Singapore. Parkinson attempted to persuade the authorities to avoid dividing the university by maintaining it in Johor Bahru to serve both Singapore and Malaya. His efforts were unsuccessful and the two campuses were established in 1959. The Singapore campus later became the University of Singapore.\nParkinson divorced in 1952 and he married the writer and journalist Ann Fry (1921\u20131983), with whom he had two sons and a daughter. In 1958, while still in Singapore, he published his most famous work, \"Parkinson's Law\", which expanded upon a humorous article that he had published in the \"Economist\" magazine in November 1955, satirising government bureaucracies. The 120-page book of short studies, published in the United States and then in Britain, was illustrated by Osbert Lancaster and became an instant best seller. It explained the inevitability of bureaucratic expansion, arguing that 'work expands to fill the time available for its completion'. Typical of his satire and cynical humour, it included a discourse on Parkinson's Law of Triviality (debates about expenses for a nuclear plant, a bicycle shed, and refreshments), a note on why driving on the left side of the road (see road transport) is natural, and suggested that the Royal Navy would eventually have more admirals than ships. After serving as visiting professor at Harvard University in 1958, the University of Illinois and the University of California, Berkeley in 1959\u201360, he resigned his post in Singapore to become an independent writer.\nTo avoid high taxation in Britain, he moved to the Channel Islands and settled at St Martin's, Guernsey, where he purchased Les Caches Hall. In Guernsey, he was an active member of the community and was committed to the feudal heritage of the island. He financed a historical re-enactment of the Chevauche de Saint Michel (Cavalcade) by the Court of Seigneurs and wrote a newspaper article about it. He was an official member of the Royal Court of Chief Pleas in his quality of Seigneur d'Anneville as he had acquired the manorial rights of the Fief d'Anneville. Attendance at the Royal Court of Chief Pleas is considered very important in Guernsey, as it is the island's oldest court and its first historical self-governing body. In 1968 he purchased and restored Anneville Manor, the historic manor house of the Seigneurie (or fief) d'Anneville, and in 1971 he restored the Chapel of Thomas d'Anneville pertaining to the same fief. His writings from this period included a series of historical novels featuring a fictional naval officer from Guernsey, Richard Delancey, during the Napoleonic era. In the novel, Richard Delancey was Seigneur of the Fief d'Anneville.\nIn 1969 he was invited to deliver the MacMillan Memorial Lecture to the Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland. He chose the subject \"The Status of the Engineer\".\nParkinson and his 'law'.\nParkinson's law, which provides insight into a primary barrier to efficient time management, states that, \"work expands so as to fill the time available for its completion\". This articulates a situation and an unexplained force that many have come to take for granted and accept. \"In exactly the same way nobody bothered and nobody cared, before Newton's day, why an apple should drop to the ground when it might so easily fly up after leaving the tree,\" wrote \"Straits Times\" editor-in-chief, Allington Kennard, who continued, \"There is less gravity in Professor Parkinson's Law, but hardly less truth.\"\nParkinson first published his law in a humorous satirical article in \"The Economist\" on 19 November 1955, meant as a critique on the efficiency of public administration and civil service bureaucracy, and the continually rising headcount, and related cost, attached to these. That article noted that, \"Politicians and taxpayers have assumed (with occasional phases of doubt) that a rising total in the number of civil servants must reflect a growing volume of work to be done.\" The law examined two sub-laws, The Law of Multiplication of Subordinates, and The Law of Multiplication of Work, and provided 'scientific proof' of the validity of these, including mathematical formulae.\nTwo years later, the law was revisited when Parkinson's new books, \"Parkinson's Law And Other Studies in Administration\" and \"Parkinson's Law: Or The Pursuit of Progress\" were published in 1957.\nIn Singapore, where he was teaching at the time, this began a series of talks where he addressed diverse audiences in person, in print, and over the airwaves on 'Parkinson's Law'. For example, on 16 October 1957, at 10 a.m., he spoke on this at the International Women's Club programme talk held at the Y.W.C.A. at Raffles Quay. The advent of his new book as well as an interview during his debut talk was covered in an editorial in \"The Straits Times\" shortly after, entitled, \"A professor's cocktail party secret: They arrive half an hour late and rotate.\" \"Time\", which also wrote about the book, noted that its theme was \"a delightfully unprofessional diagnosis of the widespread 20th century malady \u2013 galloping orgmanship.\" Orgmanship, according to Parkinson, was \"the tendency of all administrative departments to increase the number of subordinate staff, irrespective of the amount of work (if any) to be done\", as noted by \"The Straits Times\". Parkinson, it was reported, wanted to trace the illegibility of signatures, the attempt being made to fix the point in a successful executive career at which the handwriting becomes meaningless, even to the executive himself.\n\"Straits Times\" editor-in-chief Allington Kennard's editorial, \"Twice the staff for half the work\", in mid-April 1958, touched on further aspects or sub-laws, like Parkinson's Law of Triviality, and also other interesting, if dangerous areas, like \"the problem of the retirement age, how not to pay Singapore income tax when a millionaire, the point of vanishing interest in high finance, how to get rid of the company chairman,\" etc. The author supported Parkinson's Law of Triviality \u2013 which states that, \"The time spent on any item of an agenda is in inverse proportion to the sum involved,\" with a local example where it took the Singapore City Council \"six hours to pick a new man for the gasworks and two and a half minutes to approve a $100 million budget.\" It is possible that the book, humorous though it is, may have touched a raw nerve among the administration at that time. As J. D. Scott, in his review of Parkinson's book two weeks later, notes, \"Of course, Parkinson's Law, like all satire, is serious \u2013 it wouldn't be so comic if it weren't \u2013 and because it is serious there will be some annoyance and even dismay under the smiles.\"\nHis celebrity did not remain local. Parkinson travelled to England, arriving there aboard the P&amp;O \"Canton\", in early June 1958, as reported by Reuters, and made the front page of \"The Straits Times\" on 9 June. Reporting from London on Saturday 14 June 1958, Hall Romney wrote, \"Prof. C. N. Parkinson of the University of Malaya, whose book, \"Parkinson's Law\" has sold more than 80,000 copies, has had a good deal of publicity since he arrived in England in the \"Canton\".\" Romney noted that \"a television interview was arranged, a profile of him appeared in a highbrow Sunday newspaper, columnists gave him almost as much space as they gave to Leslie Charteris, and he was honoured by the Institute of Directors, whose reception was attended by many of the most notable men in the commercial life of London.\" And then, all of a sudden, satire was answered with some honesty when, as another Reuters release republished in \"The Straits Times\" under the title \"Parkinson's Law at work in the UK,\" quoted, \"A PARLIAMENTARY committee, whose Job is to see that British Government departments do not waste the taxpayer's money, said yesterday it was alarmed at the rate of staff increases in certain sections of the War Office. Admiralty and Air Ministry...\" In March 1959, further publicity occurred when the Royal Navy in Singapore took umbrage at a remark Parkinson had made during his talk, about his new book on the wastage of public money, in Manchester, shortly before. Parkinson is reported to have said, \"Britain spent about $500 million building a naval base there [Singapore] and the only fleet which has used it is the Japanese.\" A navy spokesman, then, attempting to counter that statement said that the Royal Navy's Singapore base had only been completed in 1939, and, while it was confirmed that the Japanese had, indeed used it during the Second World War, it had been used extensively by the Royal Navy's Far East fleet, after the war. Emeritus Professor of Japanese Studies at the University of Oxford, Richard Storry, writing in the \"Oxford Mail\" on 16 May 1962, noted, \"The fall of Singapore is still viewed with anger and shame in Britain.\"\nOn Thursday 10 September 1959, at 10 p.m., Radio Singapore listeners got to experience his book, \"Parkinson's Law\", set to music by Nesta Pain. The serialised program continued until the end of February 1960. Parkinson, and Parkinson's law, continued to find its way into Singapore newspapers through the decades.\nUniversity of Malaya.\nSingapore was introduced to him almost immediately upon his arrival there, through exposure in the newspaper and a number of public appearances. Parkinson started teaching at the University of Malaya in Singapore at the beginning of April 1950.\nPublic lectures.\nThe first lecture of the Raffles Professor of History was a public lecture given at the Oei Tiong Ham Hall, on 19 May. Parkinson, who was speaking on \"The Task of the Historian,\" began by noting the new Raffles history chair was aptly named because it was Sir Stamford Raffles who had tried to found the university in 1823 and because Raffles himself was a historian. There was a large audience, including Professor Alexander Oppenheim, the university's Dean of the Faculty of Arts.\nThe text of his lecture was then reproduced and published over two issues of \"The Straits Times\" a few days later.\nOn 17 April 1953, he addressed the public on \"The Historical Aspect of the Coronation,\" at the Singapore YMCA Hall.\nSponsored by the Malayan Historical Society, Parkinson gave a talk on the \"Modern history of Taiping\" at the residence of the District Officer, Larut and Matang on 12 August 1953.\nSponsored by the Singapore branch of the Malayan Historical Society, on 5 February 1954 Parkinson gave a public lecture on \"Singapore in the sixties\" [1860s] at St. Andrew's Cathedral War Memorial Hall.\nSponsored by the Seremban branch of the Historical Society of Malaya, Parkinson spoke on Tin Mining at the King George V School, Seremban. He said, in the past, Chinese labourers were imported from China at $32 a head to work the tin fields of Malaya. He said that mining developed steadily after British protection had been established and that tin from Negri Sembilan in the 1870s came from Sungei Ujong and Rembau, and worked with capital from Malacca. He noted that Chinese working side-by-side with Europeans did better with their primitive methods and made great profits when they took over mines that Europeans abandoned.\nArranged by the Indian University Graduates Association of Singapore, Parkinson gave a talk on \"Indian Political Thought,\" at the USIS theatrette on 16 February 1955.\nOn 10 March 1955, he spoke on \"What I think about Colonialism,\" at the British Council Hall, Stamford Road, Singapore, at 6.30 p.m. In his lecture, he argued that nationalism which was generally believed to be good, and colonialism which was seen as the reverse, were not necessarily opposite ideas but the same thing seen from different angles. He thought the gifts from Britain that Malaya and Singapore should value most and retain when they became self-governing included debate, literature (not comics), armed forces' tradition (not police state), arts, tolerance and humour (not puritanism) and public spirit.\nPublic exhibitions.\nOn 18 August 1950, Parkinson opened a week-long exhibition on the \"History of English Handwriting,\" at the British Council centre, Stamford Road, Singapore.\nOn 21 March 1952, he opened an exhibition of photographs from the \"Times of London\" which had been shown widely in different parts of the world. The exhibition comprised a selection of photographs spanning 1921 to 1951. 140 photographs were on display for a month at the British Council Hall, Singapore, showing scenes ranging from the German surrender to the opening of the Festival of Britain by the late king.\nHe opened an exhibition of photographs taken by students of the University of Malaya during their tour of India, at the University Arts Theatre in Cluny Road, Singapore, 10 October 1953.\nVictor Purcell.\nTowards the end of August, Professor of Far Eastern History at Cambridge University, Dr. Victor Purcell, who was also a former Acting Secretary of Chinese Affairs in Singapore, addressed the Kuala Lumpur Rotary Club. \"The Straits Times\", quoting Purcell, noted, \"Professor C. N. Parkinson had been appointed to the Chair of History at the University of Malaya and 'we can confidently anticipate that under his direction academic research into Malaya's history will assume a creative aspect which it has not possessed before.'\"\nJohore Transfer Committee.\nIn October, Parkinson was appointed by the Senate of the University of Malaya to head a special committee of experts to consult on technical details regarding the transfer of the university to Johore. Along with him were professor R. E. Holttum (botany), and acting professors C. G. Webb (physics) and D. W. Fryer (geography).\nLibrary and Museum.\nIn November, Parkinson was appointed a member of the committee for the management of Raffles Library and Museum, replacing Professor G. G. Hough who had resigned.\nIn March 1952, Parkinson proposed a central public library for Singapore as a memorial to King George VI, commemorating that monarch's reign. He is reported to have said, \"Perhaps the day has gone by for public monuments except in a useful form. And if that be so, might not, some enterprise of local importance be graced with the late King's name? One plan he could certainly have warmly approved would be that of building a Central Public Library,\" he opined. Parkinson noted that the Raffles Library was growing in usefulness and would, in short time, outgrow the building that then housed it. He said, given the educational work that was producing a large literate population demanding books in English, Malay and Chinese, what was surely needed was a genuinely public library, air-conditioned to preserve the books, and of a design to make those books readily accessible. He suggested that the building, equipment and maintenance of the public library ought to be the responsibility of the municipality rather than the government.\nT. P. F. McNeice, then-president of the Singapore City Council, as well as leading educationists of the time, thought the suggestion \"an excellent, first-class suggestion to meet a definite and urgent need.\" McNeice also agreed that the project ought to be the responsibility of the city council. Also in favour of the idea was Director of Education A. W. Frisby, who thought that there ought to be branches of the library which could be fed by the central library, Raffles Institution Principal P. F. Howitt, Canon R. K. S. Adams (Principal of St. Andrews School) and Homer Cheng, the president of the Chinese Y.M.C.A. Principal of the Anglo-Chinese School, H. H. Peterson, suggested the authorities also consider a mobile school library.\nWhile Parkinson had originally suggested that this be a municipal and not a government undertaking, something changed. A public meeting, convened by the Friends of Singapore \u2013 Parkinson was its President \u2013 at the British Council Hall on 15 May, decided that Singapore's memorial to King George VI would take the form of a public library, possibly with mobile units and sub-libraries in the out-of-town districts. Parkinson, in addressing the assembly, noted that Raffles Library was not a free library, did not have vernacular sections, and its building could not be air-conditioned. McNeice, the municipal president, then proposed a resolution be sent to government that the meeting considered the most appropriate memorial to the late king ought to take the form of a library (or libraries) and urged the government to set up a committee with enough non-government representation to consider the matter.\nThe government got involved, and a government spokesperson spoke to \"The Straits Times\" about this on 16 May, saying that the Singapore government welcomed proposals from the public on the form in which a memorial to King George ought to take, whether a public library, as suggested by Parkinson, or some other form.\nIn the middle of 1952, the Singapore government began setting up a committee to consider the suggestions made on the form Singapore's memorial to King George VI ought to take. G. G. Thomson, the government's public relations secretary, informed \"The Straits Times\" that the committee would have official and non-government representation and added that, apart from Parkinson's suggestion of a free public library, a polytechnic had also been suggested.\nW. L. Blythe, the colonial secretary, making it clear where his vote lay, pointed out that Singapore at that time already had a library, the Raffles Library. News coverage notes that yet another committee had been formed, this time to consider what would be necessary to establish an institution along the lines of the London Polytechnic. Blythe stated that the arguments he had heard in favour of a polytechnic were very strong.\nDirector of Raffles Library and Museum, W. M. F. Tweedie, was in favour of the King George VI free public library but up to the end of November, nothing had been heard of any developments towards that end. Tweedie suggested the ground beside the British Council as being suitable for such a library, and, if the public library was built, he would suggest for all the books at the Raffles Library to be moved to the new site, so that the space thus vacated could be used for a public art gallery.\nRight after, the government, who were not supposed to have been involved in the first place \u2013 the suggestion made by Parkinson and accepted by City Council President T. P. F. McNeice that this be a municipal and not government undertaking \u2013 approved the proposal to set up a polytechnic as a memorial to King George IV.\nAnd Singapore continued with its subscription library and was without a free public library as envisioned by Parkinson. However, his call did not go unheeded. The following year, in August 1953, the Lee Foundation pledged a dollar-for-dollar match up to $375,000 towards the establishment of a national library, provided that it was a free, without-cost, public library, open to men and women of every race, class, creed, and colour.\nIt was not, however, until November 1960 that Parkinson's vision was realised, when the new library, free and for all, was completed and opened to the public.\nFilm Censorship Consultative Committee.\nThat same month he was also appointed, by the Singapore Government, chairman of a committee set up to study film censorship in the colony and suggest changes, if necessary.\nTheir terms of reference were to enquire into the existing procedure and legislation relating to cinematograph film censorship and to make recommendations with a view to improving the system, including legislation. They were also asked to consider whether the Official Film Censor should continue to be the controller of the British film quota, and to consider the memorandum of the film trade submitted to the governor earlier that year.\nInvestigating, archiving and writing Malaya's past.\nAt the beginning of December 1950, Parkinson made an appeal at the Singapore Rotary Club for old log books, diaries, newspaper files, ledgers or maps accumulated over the years. He asked that these be passed to the Raffles Library or the University of Malaya library, instead of being thrown away, as they might aid research and help those studying the history of the country to set down an account of what had happened in Malaya since 1867. \"The time will come when school-children will be taught the history of their own land rather than of Henry VIII or the capture of Quebec. Parkinson told his audience that there was a large volume of documentary evidence about Malaya written in Portuguese and Dutch. He said that the arrival of the Pluto in Singapore, one of the first vessels to pass through the Suez Canal when it opened in 1869, might be described as the moment when British Malaya was born. \"I would urge you not to scrap old correspondence just because it clutters up the office. Send it to a library where it may some day be of great value,\" he said.\nIn September 1951 the magazine \"British Malaya\" published Parkinson's letter that called for the formation of one central archives office where all the historical records of Malaya and Singapore could be properly preserved, pointing out that it would be of inestimable value to administrators, historians, economists, social science investigators and students. In his letter, Parkinson, who was still abroad in London attending the Anglo-American Conference of Historians, said that the formation of an archives office was already in discussion, and was urgent, in view of the climate where documents were liable to damage by insects and mildew. He said that many private documents relating to Malaya were kept in the U.K. where they were not appreciated because names like Maxwell, Braddell and Swettenham might mean nothing there. \"The establishment of a Malayan Archives Office would do much to encourage the transfer of these documents,\" he wrote.\nOn 22 May 1953, Parkinson convened a meeting at the British Council, Stamford Road, Singapore, to form the Singapore branch of the Malayan Historical Society.\nSpeaking at the inaugural meeting of the society's Singapore branch, Parkinson, addressing the more than 100 people attending, said the aims of the branch would be to assist in the recording of history, folklore, tradition and customs of Malaya and its people and to encourage the preservation of objects of historical and cultural interest. Of Malayan history, he said, it \"has mostly still to be written. Nor can it even be taught in the schools until that writing has been done.\"\nParkinson had been urging the Singapore and Federation Governments to set up a national archives since 1950. In June 1953 he urged the speedy establishment of a national archives, where, \"in air-conditioned rooms, on steel shelves, with proper skilled supervision and proper precaution against fire and theft, the records of Malayan history might be preserved indefinitely and at small expense. He noted that cockroaches had nibbled away at many vital documents and records, shrouding many years of Malaya's past in mystery, aided by moths and silverfish and abetted by negligent officials.\nA start had, by then, already been made \u2013 an air-conditioned room at the Federal Museum had already been set aside for storing important historical documents and preserving them from cockroaches and decay, the work of Peter Williams-Hunt, the Federation Director of Museums and Adviser on Aborigine Affairs who had died that month. He noted, however, that the problems of supervising archives and collecting old documents had still to be solved.\nIn January 1955 Parkinson formed University of Malaya's Archaeological Society and became its first president. Upon commencement, The society had a membership of 53 which was reported to be the largest of its kind in Southeast Asia at the time. \"Drive to discover the secrets of S.E. Asia. Hundreds of amateurs will delve into mysteries of the past.\"\nIn April 1956 it was reported that \"For the first time, a long-needed Standard History of Malaya is to be published for students.\" According to the news report a large-scale project, developing a ten-volume series, the result of ten years of research by University of Malaya staff, was currently in progress, detailing events dating back to the Portuguese occupation of 1511, to the, then, present day. The first volume, written by Parkinson, covered the years 1867 to 1877 and was to be published within three months thence. It was estimated that the last volume would be released after 1960. The report noted that, as at that time, Parkinson and his wife had already released two books on history for junior students, entitled \"The Heroes\" and \"Malayan Fables\".\nThree months passed by and the book remained unpublished. It was not until 1960 that British intervention in Malaya (1867\u20131877), that the first volume finally found its way onto bookshelves and into libraries. By that time, the press reported the series had expanded into a twelve-volume set.\nMalayan history syllabus.\nIn January 1951 Parkinson was interviewed by New Zealand film producer and director Wynona \"Noni\" Hope Wright. He told of his reorganisation of the Department of History during the last term to facilitate a new syllabus. The interview took place in Parkinson's sitting room beneath a frieze depicting Malaya's history, painted by Parkinson. Departing from the usual syllabus, Parkinson had decided to leave out European History almost entirely in order to give greater focus to Southeast Asia, particularly Malaya. The course, designed experimentally, takes in the study of world history up to 1497 in the first year, the impact of different European nations on Southeast Asia in the second year, and the study of Southeast Asia, particularly Malaya, after the establishment of British influence at the Straits Settlements in the third year. The students who make it through and decide to specialise in history will then have been brought to a point where they can profitably undertake original research in the history of modern Malaya, i.e. the 19th and 20th centuries, an area where, according to Parkinson, little had been done, with hardly any serious research attempted for the period after 'the transfer' in 1867. Parkinson hoped that lecturing on this syllabus would ultimately produce a full-scale history of Malaya. This would include discovering documentation from Portuguese and Dutch sources from the time when those two countries still had a foothold in Malaya. He said that, while the period of development of the Straits Settlements under the East India Company were well-documented \u2013 the bulk of these archived at the Raffles Museum, local records after 1867 were not as plentiful and that it would be necessary to reconstruct those records from microfilm copies of documents kept in the United Kingdom. The task for the staff at the History Department was made formidable because their unfamiliarity with the Dutch and Portuguese languages. \"I have no doubt that the history of Malaya must finally be written by Malayans, but we can at least do very much to prepare the way.\" Parkinson told Wright. \"Scholars trained at this University in the spirit and technique of historical research, a study divorced from all racial and religious animosities, a study concerned only with finding the truth and explaining it in a lucid and attractive literary form, should be able to make a unique contribution to the mutual understanding of East and West,\" he said. \"History apart, nothing seems to be of more vital importance in our time than the promotion of this understanding. In no field at the present time does the perpetuation of distrust and mutual incomprehension seem more dangerous. If we can, from this university, send forth graduates who can combine learning and ways of thought of the Far East and of the West, they may play a great part in overcoming the barriers of prejudice, insularity and ignorance,\" he concluded.\nRadio Malaya programs.\nIn March 1951 Parkinson wrote a historical feature, \"The China Fleet,\" for Radio Malaya, offering a what was said to be a true account in dramatic form of an incident in the annals of the East India Company that had such an influence on Malaya and other parts of Southeast Asia in the early nineteenth century.\nOn 28 January 1952, at 9.40 p.m. he talked about the founding of Singapore.\nSpecial Constabulary.\nIn the middle of April 1951, Parkinson was sworn in as special constable by ASP Watson of the Singapore Special Constabulary at the Oei Tion Ham Hall, together with other members of the staff, and students who were then placed under Parkinson's supervision. The special constabulary, The University Corp, being informed of their duties and powers of arrest were then issued batons and charged with the defence of the university in the event of trouble. Lecturer in Economics, P. Sherwood, was appointed Parkinson's assistant. These measures were taken to ensure that rioters were dispersed and ejected if they trespassed onto university grounds. Parkinson signed a notice that noted that some of the rioters who took part in the December disorders came from an area near the university buildings in Bukit Timah.\nThese precautions were taken in advance of the Maria Hertogh appeal on Monday 16 April. The case was postponed a number of times, after which it was finally heard at the end of July.\nAnglo-American Conference of Historians.\nParkinson departed Singapore on Monday 18 June 1951 for London, where he represented the University of Malaya at the Fifth Anglo-American Conference of Historians there from 9 to 14 July. He was to return in October at the start of the new academic year.\nResignation.\nIn October 1958, while still on sabbatical in America \u2013 together with his wife and two young children, he had set off for America in May 1958 for study and travel and was due to return to work in April 1959 \u2013 Parkinson, through a letter sent from New York, resigned his position at the University of Malaya. K. G. Tregonning was at that time acting head of the history department.\nParkinson had not been the only one to resign while on leave. Professor E. H. G. Dobby of the geography department had also submitted his resignation while away on sabbatical leave. After deliberations, the university council had decided, before the university's new constitution came into force on 15 January, that no legal action would be taken against Dobby \u2013 the majority of the council feeling that there was no case against Dobby as his resignation occurred before new regulations governing sabbatical leave benefits were introduced. In Parkinson's case, however, the council determined that that resignation had been submitted after the regulations came into effect, and a decision had been made to write to him, asking that he report back to work before a certain date, failing which the council said it was free to take any action they thought appropriate.\nIn July 1959, K. G. Tregonning, acting head of the history department, and history lecturer at the University of Malaya since 1952, was appointed to fill the Raffles History Chair left vacant by Parkinson's resignation. There was nothing in the press about whether the matter between Parkinson and the university had been resolved, or not.\nLater life and death.\nAfter the death of his second wife in 1984, in 1985 Parkinson married Iris Hilda Waters (died 1994) and moved to the Isle of Man. After two years there, they moved to Canterbury, Kent, where he died in March 1993, at the age of 83. He was buried in Canterbury, and the law named after him is quoted as his epitaph.\nPublished works.\nRichard Delancey series of naval novels (pub. date, internal order)\nOther nautical fiction\nOther fiction\nBiographies of fictional characters\nNaval history\nOther non-fiction\nAudio recordings\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5623", "revid": "5930111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5623", "title": "Canal", "text": "Artificial channel for water\nCanals or artificial waterways are waterways or engineered channels built for drainage management (e.g. flood control and irrigation) or for conveyancing water transport vehicles (e.g. water taxi). They carry free, calm surface flow under atmospheric pressure, and can be thought of as artificial rivers.\nIn most cases, a canal has a series of dams and locks that create reservoirs of low speed current flow. These reservoirs are referred to as \"slack water levels\", often just called \"levels\". A canal can be called a navigation canal when it parallels a natural river and shares part of the latter's discharges and drainage basin, and leverages its resources by building dams and locks to increase and lengthen its stretches of slack water levels while staying in its valley.\nA canal can cut across a drainage divide atop a ridge, generally requiring an external water source above the highest elevation. The best-known example of such a canal is the Panama Canal.\nMany canals have been built at elevations, above valleys and other waterways. Canals with sources of water at a higher level can deliver water to a destination such as a city where water is needed. The Roman Empire's aqueducts were such water supply canals.\nThe term was once used to describe certain linear features on the surface of Mars, though modern imaging has shown this to be a misnomer.\nTypes of artificial waterways.\nA \"navigation\" is a series of channels that run roughly parallel to the valley and stream bed of an unimproved river. A navigation always shares the drainage basin of the river. A vessel uses the calm parts of the river itself as well as improvements, traversing the same changes in height.\nA true \"canal\" is a channel that cuts across a drainage divide, making a navigable channel connecting two different drainage basins.\nStructures used in artificial waterways.\nBoth navigations and canals use engineered structures to improve navigation:\nSince they cut across drainage divides, rather than following the natural water level, true canals are more difficult to construct and often need additional improvements, such as viaducts and aqueducts.\nTypes of canals.\nThere are two broad types of canal:\n* Those connecting existing lakes, rivers, other canals or seas and oceans.\n* Those connected in a city network: such as the \"Canal Grande\" and others of Venice; the \"grachten\" of Amsterdam or Utrecht, and the waterways of Bangkok.\nImportance.\nHistorically, canals were of immense importance to the commerce, development, growth and vitality of a civilization. The movement of bulk raw materials such as coal and ores\u2014practically a prerequisite for further urbanization and industrialization\u2014were difficult and only marginally affordable to move without water transport. The movement of bulk raw materials, facilitated by canals, fueled the Industrial Revolution, leading to new research disciplines, new industries and economies of scale, raising the standard of living for industrialized societies.\nThe few canals still in operation in the 21st century are a fraction of the number that were once maintained during the earlier part of the Industrial Revolution. Their replacement was gradual, beginning first in the United Kingdom in the 1840s, where canal shipping was first augmented and later superseded by the much faster, less geographically constrained, and generally cheaper to maintain railway system.\nBy the early 1880s, many canals could not compete with rail transport and were abandoned. In the 20th century, oil was increasingly the heating fuel of choice, and the volume of coal shipments began to decrease. After the First World War, technological advances in motor trucks as well as expanding road networks saw increasing amounts of freight being transported by road, and the last small U.S. barge canals saw a steady decline in cargo ton-miles.\nThe once critical smaller inland waterways conceived and engineered as boat and barge canals have largely been supplanted and filled in, abandoned and left to deteriorate, or kept in service under a park service and staffed by government employees, where dams and locks are maintained for flood control or pleasure boating. Today, most ship canals (intended for larger, oceangoing vessels) primarily service bulk cargo and large ship transportation industries. \nThe longest extant canal today, the Grand Canal in northern China, still remains in heavy use, especially the portion south of the Yellow River. It stretches from Beijing to Hangzhou at 1,794 kilometres (1,115 miles).\nConstruction.\nCanals are built in one of three ways, or a combination of the three, depending on available water and available path:\nSmaller transportation canals can carry barges or narrowboats, while ship canals allow seagoing ships to travel to an inland port (e.g., Manchester Ship Canal), or from one sea or ocean to another (e.g., Caledonian Canal, Panama Canal).\nFeatures.\nAt their simplest, canals consist of a trench filled with water. Depending on the stratum the canal passes through, it may be necessary to line the cut with some form of watertight material such as clay or concrete. When this is done with clay, it is known as puddling.\nCanals need to be level, and while small irregularities in the lie of the land can be dealt with through cuttings and embankments, for larger deviations other approaches have been adopted. The most common is the pound lock, which consists of a chamber within which the water level can be raised or lowered connecting either two pieces of canal at a different level or the canal with a river or the sea. When there is a hill to be climbed, flights of many locks in short succession may be used.\nPrior to the development of the (double-gated) pound lock in 10th-century China and 15th-century Europe, vessels had to ascend and descend either with flash locks, consisting of a single gate, or with ramps, sometimes equipped with rollers. Flash locks were cumbersome and only usable where there was plenty of water available.\nCycling a lock uses a large amount of water, so builders have adopted other approaches for situations where little water is available. These include boat lifts, such as the Falkirk Wheel, which use a caisson of water in which boats float while being moved between two levels; and inclined planes where a caisson is hauled up a steep railway.\nThe crossing of a stream, road or valley, where the delay caused by a flight of locks at either side would be unacceptable, may be achieved by the construction of a navigable aqueduct, such as the Pontcysyllte Aqueduct (now a UNESCO World Heritage Site) across the valley of the River Dee in Wales.\nAnother option for dealing with hills is to tunnel through them. An example of this approach is the Harecastle Tunnel on the Trent and Mersey Canal. Tunnels are only practical for smaller canals.\nSome canals attempted to keep changes in level down to a minimum. These canals known as contour canals would take longer, winding routes, along which the land was a uniform altitude. Other, generally later, canals took more direct routes requiring the use of various methods to deal with the change in level.\nCanals have various features to tackle the problem of water supply. In cases, like the Suez Canal, the canal is open to the sea. Where the canal is not at sea level, a number of approaches have been adopted. Taking water from existing rivers or springs was an option in some cases, sometimes supplemented by other methods to deal with seasonal variations in flow. Where such sources were unavailable, reservoirs\u00a0\u2013 either separate from the canal or built into its course\u00a0\u2013 and back pumping were used to provide the required water. In other cases, water pumped from mines was used to feed the canal. In certain cases, extensive \"feeder canals\" were built to bring water from sources located far from the canal.\nWhere large amounts of goods are loaded or unloaded such as at the end of a canal, a canal basin may be built. This would normally be a section of water wider than the general canal. In some cases, the canal basins contain wharfs and cranes to assist with movement of goods.\nWhen a section of the canal needs to be sealed off so it can be drained for maintenance stop planks are frequently used. These consist of planks of wood placed across the canal to form a dam. They are generally placed in pre-existing grooves in the canal bank. On more modern canals, \"guard locks\" or gates were sometimes placed to allow a section of the canal to be quickly closed off, either for maintenance, or to prevent a major loss of water due to a canal breach.\nCanal falls.\nA \"canal fall\", or canal drop, is a vertical drop in the canal bed. These are built when the natural ground slope is steeper than the desired canal gradient. They are constructed so the falling water's kinetic energy is dissipated in order to prevent it from scouring the bed and sides of the canal.\nA canal fall is constructed by cut and fill. It may be combined with a regulator, bridge, or other structure to save costs.\nThere are various types of canal falls, based on their shape. One type is the ogee fall, where the drop follows an s-shaped curve to create a smooth transition and reduce turbulence. However, this smooth transition does not dissipate the water's kinetic energy, which leads to heavy scouring. As a result, the canal needs to be reinforced with concrete or masonry to protect it from eroding.\nAnother type of canal fall is the vertical fall, which is \"simple and economical\". These feature a \"cistern\", or depressed area just downstream from the fall, to \"cushion\" the water by providing a deep pool for its kinetic energy to be diffused in. Vertical falls work for drops of up to 1.5\u00a0m in height, and for discharge of up to 15 cubic meters per second.\nHistory.\nThe transport capacity of pack animals and carts is limited. A mule can carry an eighth-ton [] maximum load over a journey measured in days and weeks, though much more for shorter distances and periods with appropriate rest. Besides, carts need roads. Transport over water is much more efficient and cost-effective for large cargoes.\nAncient canals.\nThe oldest known canals were irrigation canals, built in Mesopotamia c.\u20094000 BC, in what is now Iraq. The Indus Valley civilization in what is now Pakistan and Northwestern India (c.\u20093000 BC) had sophisticated irrigation and storage systems developed, including the reservoirs built at Girnar in 3000 BC. This is the first time that such planned civil project had taken place in the ancient world. In Egypt, canals date back at least to the time of Pepi I Meryre (reigned 2332\u20132283 BC), who ordered a canal built to bypass the cataract on the Nile near Aswan.\nIn ancient China, large canals for river transport were established as far back as the Spring and Autumn period (8th\u20135th centuries BC), the longest one of that period being the Hong Gou (Canal of the Wild Geese), which according to the ancient historian Sima Qian connected the old states of Song, Zhang, Chen, Cai, Cao, and Wei. The Caoyun System of canals was essential for imperial taxation, which was largely assessed in kind and involved enormous shipments of rice and other grains. By far the longest canal was the Grand Canal of China, still the longest canal in the world today and the oldest extant one. It is long and was built to carry the Emperor Yang Guang between Zhuodu (Beijing) and Yuhang (Hangzhou). The project began in 605 and was completed in 609, although much of the work combined older canals, the oldest section of the canal existing since at least 486 BC. Even in its narrowest urban sections it is rarely less than wide.\nIn the 5th century\u00a0BC, Achaemenid king Xerxes I of Persia ordered the construction of the Xerxes Canal through the base of Mount Athos peninsula, Chalkidiki, northern Greece. It was constructed as part of his preparations for the Second Persian invasion of Greece, a part of the Greco-Persian Wars. It is one of the few monuments left by the Persian Empire in Europe.\nGreek engineers were also among the first to use canal locks, by which they regulated the water flow in the Ancient Suez Canal as early as the 3rd century\u00a0BC.\nThere was little experience moving bulk loads by carts, while a pack-horse would [i.e. 'could'] carry only an eighth of a ton. On a soft road a horse might be able to draw 5/8ths of a ton. But if the load were carried by a barge on a waterway, then up to 30 tons could be drawn by the same horse.\u2014 technology historian Ronald W. Clark referring to transport realities before the industrial revolution and the Canal age.\nHohokam was a society in the North American Southwest in what is now part of Arizona, United States, and Sonora, Mexico. Their irrigation systems supported the largest population in the Southwest by 1300 CE. Archaeologists working at a major archaeological dig in the 1990s in the Tucson Basin, along the Santa Cruz River, identified a culture and people that may have been the ancestors of the Hohokam. This prehistoric group occupied southern Arizona as early as 2000 BCE, and in the Early Agricultural period grew corn, lived year-round in sedentary villages, and developed sophisticated irrigation canals.\nThe large-scale Hohokam irrigation network in the Phoenix metropolitan area was the most complex in ancient North America. A portion of the ancient canals has been renovated for the Salt River Project and now helps to supply the city's water.\nThe Sinhalese constructed the 87\u00a0km (54\u00a0mi) Yodha Ela in 459 A.D. as a part of their extensive irrigation network which functioned in a way of a moving reservoir due to its single banking aspect to manage the canal pressure with the influx of water. It was also designed as an elongated reservoir passing through traps creating 66 mini catchments as it flows from Kala Wewa to Thissa Wawa. The canal was not designed for the quick conveying of water from Kala Wewa to Thissa Wawa but to create a mass of water between the two reservoirs, which would in turn provide for agriculture and the use of humans and animals.\n They also achieved a rather low gradient for its time. The canal is still in use after renovation.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn the Middle Ages, water transport was several times cheaper and faster than transport overland. Overland transport by animal drawn conveyances was used around settled areas, but unimproved roads required pack animal trains, usually of mules to carry any degree of mass, and while a mule could carry an eighth ton, it also needed teamsters to tend it and one man could only tend perhaps five mules, meaning overland bulk transport was also expensive, as men expect compensation in the form of wages, room and board. This was because long-haul roads were unpaved, more often than not too narrow for carts, much less wagons, and in poor condition, wending their way through forests, marshy or muddy quagmires as often as unimproved but dry footing. In that era, as today, greater cargoes, especially bulk goods and raw materials, could be transported by ship far more economically than by land; in the pre-railroad days of the industrial revolution, water transport was the gold standard of fast transportation. The first artificial canal in Western Europe was the Fossa Carolina built at the end of the 8th century under personal supervision of Charlemagne.\nIn Britain, the Glastonbury Canal is believed to be the first post-Roman canal and was built in the middle of the 10th century to link the River Brue at Northover with Glastonbury Abbey, a distance of about . Its initial purpose is believed to be the transport of building stone for the abbey, but later it was used for delivering produce, including grain, wine and fish, from the abbey's outlying properties. It remained in use until at least the 14th century, but possibly as late as the mid-16th century.More lasting and of more economic impact were canals like the Naviglio Grande built between 1127 and 1257 to connect Milan with the river Ticino. The Naviglio Grande is the most important of the lombard \"navigli\" and the oldest functioning canal in Europe.Later, canals were built in the Netherlands and Flanders to drain the polders and assist transportation of goods and people.\nCanal building was revived in this age because of commercial expansion from the 12th century. River navigations were improved progressively by the use of single, or flash locks. Taking boats through these used large amounts of water leading to conflicts with watermill owners and to correct this, the pound or chamber lock first appeared, in the 10th century in China and in Europe in 1373 in Vreeswijk, Netherlands. Another important development was the mitre gate, which was, it is presumed, introduced in Italy by Bertola da Novate in the 16th century. This allowed wider gates and also removed the height restriction of guillotine locks.\nTo break out of the limitations caused by river valleys, the first summit level canals were developed with the Grand Canal of China in 581\u2013617 AD whilst in Europe the first, also using single locks, was the Stecknitz Canal in Germany in 1398.\nAfrica.\nIn the Songhai Empire of West Africa, several canals were constructed under Sunni Ali and Askia Muhammad I between Kabara and Timbuktu in the 15th century. These were used primarily for irrigation and transport. Sunni Ali also attempted to construct a canal from the Niger River to Walata to facilitate conquest of the city but his progress was halted when he went to war with the Mossi Kingdoms.\nEarly modern period.\nAround 1500\u20131800 the first summit level canal to use pound locks in Europe was the Briare Canal connecting the Loire and Seine (1642), followed by the more ambitious Canal du Midi (1683) connecting the Atlantic to the Mediterranean. This included a staircase of 8 locks at B\u00e9ziers, a tunnel, and three major aqueducts.\nCanal building progressed steadily in Germany in the 17th and 18th centuries with three great rivers, the Elbe, Oder and Weser being linked by canals. In post-Roman Britain, the first early modern period canal built appears to have been the Exeter Canal, which was surveyed in 1563, and open in 1566.\nThe oldest canal in the European settlements of North America, technically a mill race built for industrial purposes, is Mother Brook between the Boston, Massachusetts neighbourhoods of Dedham and Hyde Park connecting the higher waters of the Charles River and the mouth of the Neponset River and the sea. It was constructed in 1639 to provide water power for mills.\nIn Russia, the Volga\u2013Baltic Waterway, a nationwide canal system connecting the Baltic Sea and Caspian Sea via the Neva and Volga rivers, was opened in 1718.\nIndustrial Revolution.\nThe modern canal system was mainly a product of the 18th century and early 19th century. It came into being because the Industrial Revolution (which began in Britain during the mid-18th century) demanded an economic and reliable way to transport goods and commodities in large quantities.\nBy the early 18th century, river navigations such as the Aire and Calder Navigation were becoming quite sophisticated, with pound locks and longer and longer \"cuts\" (some with intermediate locks) to avoid circuitous or difficult stretches of river. Eventually, the experience of building long multi-level cuts with their own locks gave rise to the idea of building a \"pure\" canal, a waterway designed on the basis of where goods needed to go, not where a river happened to be.\nThe claim for the first pure canal in Great Britain is debated between \"Sankey\" and \"Bridgewater\" supporters. The first true canal in what is now the United Kingdom was the Newry Canal in Northern Ireland constructed by Thomas Steers in 1741.\nThe Sankey Brook Navigation, which connected St Helens with the River Mersey, is often claimed as the first modern \"purely artificial\" canal because although originally a scheme to make the Sankey Brook navigable, it included an entirely new artificial channel that was effectively a canal along the Sankey Brook valley. However, \"Bridgewater\" supporters point out that the last quarter-mile of the navigation is indeed a canalized stretch of the Brook, and that it was the Bridgewater Canal (less obviously associated with an existing river) that captured the popular imagination and inspired further canals.\nIn the mid-eighteenth century the 3rd Duke of Bridgewater, who owned a number of coal mines in northern England, wanted a reliable way to transport his coal to the rapidly industrializing city of Manchester. He commissioned the engineer James Brindley to build a canal for that purpose. Brindley's design included an aqueduct carrying the canal over the River Irwell. This was an engineering wonder which immediately attracted tourists. The construction of this canal was funded entirely by the Duke and was called the Bridgewater Canal. It opened in 1761 and was the first major British canal.&lt;ref name=\"N/A 1978 990\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nThe new canals proved highly successful. The boats on the canal were horse-drawn with a towpath alongside the canal for the horse to walk along. This horse-drawn system proved to be highly economical and became standard across the British canal network. Commercial horse-drawn canal boats could be seen on the UK's canals until as late as the 1950s, although by then diesel-powered boats, often towing a second unpowered boat, had become standard.\nThe canal boats could carry thirty tons at a time with only one horse pulling \u2013 more than ten times the amount of cargo per horse that was possible with a cart. Because of this huge increase in supply, the Bridgewater canal reduced the price of coal in Manchester by nearly two-thirds within just a year of its opening. The Bridgewater was also a huge financial success, with it earning what had been spent on its construction within just a few years.\nThis success proved the viability of canal transport, and soon industrialists in many other parts of the country wanted canals. After the Bridgewater canal, early canals were built by groups of private individuals with an interest in improving communications. In Staffordshire the famous potter Josiah Wedgwood saw an opportunity to bring bulky cargoes of clay to his factory doors and to transport his fragile finished goods to market in Manchester, Birmingham or further away, by water, minimizing breakages. Within just a few years of the Bridgewater's opening, an embryonic national canal network came into being, with the construction of canals such as the Oxford Canal and the Trent &amp; Mersey Canal.\nThe new canal system was both cause and effect of the rapid industrialization of The Midlands and the north. The period between the 1770s and the 1830s is often referred to as the \"Golden Age\" of British canals.\nFor each canal, an Act of Parliament was necessary to authorize construction, and as people saw the high incomes achieved from canal tolls, canal proposals came to be put forward by investors interested in profiting from dividends, at least as much as by people whose businesses would profit from cheaper transport of raw materials and finished goods.\nIn a further development, there was often out-and-out speculation, where people would try to buy shares in a newly floated company to sell them on for an immediate profit, regardless of whether the canal was ever profitable, or even built. During this period of \"canal mania\", huge sums were invested in canal building, and although many schemes came to nothing, the canal system rapidly expanded to nearly 4,000 miles (over 6,400 kilometres) in length.\nMany rival canal companies were formed and competition was rampant. Perhaps the best example was Worcester Bar in Birmingham, a point where the Worcester and Birmingham Canal and the Birmingham Canal Navigations Main Line were only seven feet apart. For many years, a dispute about tolls meant that goods travelling through Birmingham had to be portaged from boats in one canal to boats in the other.\nCanal companies were initially chartered by individual states in the United States. These early canals were constructed, owned, and operated by private joint-stock companies. Four were completed when the War of 1812 broke out; these were the South Hadley Canal (opened 1795) in Massachusetts, Santee Canal (opened 1800) in South Carolina, the Middlesex Canal (opened 1802) also in Massachusetts, and the Dismal Swamp Canal (opened 1805) in Virginia. The Erie Canal (opened 1825) was chartered and owned by the state of New York and financed by bonds bought by private investors. The Erie canal runs about from Albany, New York, on the Hudson River to Buffalo, New York, at Lake Erie. The Hudson River connects Albany to the Atlantic port of New York City and the Erie Canal completed a navigable water route from the Atlantic Ocean to the Great Lakes. The canal contains 36 locks and encompasses a total elevation differential of around 565\u00a0ft. (169 m). The Erie Canal with its easy connections to most of the U.S. mid-west and New York City soon quickly paid back all its invested capital (US$7 million) and started turning a profit. By cutting transportation costs in half or more it became a large profit center for Albany and New York City as it allowed the cheap transportation of many of the agricultural products grown in the mid west of the United States to the rest of the world. From New York City these agricultural products could easily be shipped to other U.S. states or overseas. Assured of a market for their farm products the settlement of the U.S. mid-west was greatly accelerated by the Erie Canal. The profits generated by the Erie Canal project started a canal building boom in the United States that lasted until about 1850 when railroads started becoming seriously competitive in price and convenience. The Blackstone Canal (finished in 1828) in Massachusetts and Rhode Island fulfilled a similar role in the early industrial revolution between 1828 and 1848. The Blackstone Valley was a major contributor of the American Industrial Revolution where Samuel Slater built his first textile mill.\nPower canals.\nA power canal refers to a canal used for hydraulic power generation, rather than for transport. Nowadays power canals are built almost exclusively as parts of hydroelectric power stations. Parts of the United States, particularly in the Northeast, had enough fast-flowing rivers that water power was the primary means of powering factories (usually textile mills) until after the American Civil War. For example, Lowell, Massachusetts, considered to be \"The Cradle of the American Industrial Revolution,\" has of canals, built from around 1790 to 1850, that provided water power and a means of transportation for the city. The output of the system is estimated at 10,000 horsepower. Other cities with extensive power canal systems include Lawrence, Massachusetts, Holyoke, Massachusetts, Manchester, New Hampshire, and Augusta, Georgia. The most notable power canal was built in 1862 for the Niagara Falls Hydraulic Power and Manufacturing Company.\n19th century.\nCompetition, from railways from the 1830s and roads in the 20th century, made the smaller canals obsolete for most commercial transport, and many of the British canals fell into decay. Only the Manchester Ship Canal and the Aire and Calder Canal bucked this trend. Yet in other countries canals grew in size as construction techniques improved. During the 19th century in the US, the length of canals grew from to over 4,000, with a complex network making the Great Lakes navigable, in conjunction with Canada, although some canals were later drained and used as railroad rights-of-way.\nIn the United States, navigable canals reached into isolated areas and brought them in touch with the world beyond. By 1825 the Erie Canal, long with 36 locks, opened up a connection from the populated Northeast to the Great Lakes. Settlers flooded into regions serviced by such canals, since access to markets was available. The Erie Canal (as well as other canals) was instrumental in lowering the differences in commodity prices between these various markets across America. The canals caused price convergence between different regions because of their reduction in transportation costs, which allowed Americans to ship and buy goods from farther distances much cheaper. Ohio built many miles of canal, Indiana had working canals for a few decades, and the Illinois and Michigan Canal connected the Great Lakes to the Mississippi River system until replaced by a channelized river waterway.\nThree major canals with very different purposes were built in what is now Canada. The first Welland Canal, which opened in 1829 between Lake Ontario and Lake Erie, bypassing Niagara Falls and the Lachine Canal (1825), which allowed ships to skirt the nearly impassable rapids on the St. Lawrence River at Montreal, were built for commerce. The Rideau Canal, completed in 1832, connects Ottawa on the Ottawa River to Kingston, Ontario on Lake Ontario. The Rideau Canal was built as a result of the War of 1812 to provide military transportation between the British colonies of Upper Canada and Lower Canada as an alternative to part of the St. Lawrence River, which was susceptible to blockade by the United States.\nIn France, a steady linking of all the river systems \u2013 Rhine, Rh\u00f4ne, Sa\u00f4ne and Seine \u2013 and the North Sea was boosted in 1879 by the establishment of the Freycinet gauge, which specified the minimum size of locks. Canal traffic doubled in the first decades of the 20th century.\nMany notable sea canals were completed in this period, starting with the Suez Canal (1869) \u2013 which carries tonnage many times that of most other canals \u2013 and the Kiel Canal (1897), though the Panama Canal was not opened until 1914.\nIn the 19th century, a number of canals were built in Japan including the Biwako canal and the Tone canal. These canals were partially built with the help of engineers from the Netherlands and other countries.\nA major question was how to connect the Atlantic and the Pacific with a canal through narrow Central America. (The Panama Railroad opened in 1855.) The original proposal was for a sea-level canal through what is today Nicaragua, taking advantage of the relatively large Lake Nicaragua. This canal has never been built in part because of political instability, which scared off potential investors. It remains an active project (the geography has not changed), and in the 2010s Chinese involvement was developing.\nThe second choice for a Central American canal was a Panama Canal. The De Lesseps company, which ran the Suez Canal, first attempted to build a Panama Canal in the 1880s. The difficulty of the terrain and weather (rain) encountered caused the company to go bankrupt. High worker mortality from disease also discouraged further investment in the project. DeLesseps' abandoned excavating equipment sits, isolated decaying machines, today tourist attractions.\nTwenty years later, an expansionist United States, that just acquired colonies after defeating Spain in the 1898 Spanish\u2013American War, and whose Navy became more important, decided to reactivate the project. The United States and Colombia did not reach agreement on the terms of a canal treaty (see Hay\u2013Herr\u00e1n Treaty). Panama, which did not have (and still does not have) a land connection with the rest of Colombia, was already thinking of independence. In 1903 the United States, with support from Panamanians who expected the canal to provide substantial wages, revenues, and markets for local goods and services, took Panama province away from Colombia, and set up a puppet republic (Panama). Its currency, the Balboa \u2013 a name that suggests the country began as a way to get from one hemisphere to the other \u2013 was a replica of the US dollar. The US dollar was and remains legal tender (used as currency). A U.S. military zone, the Canal Zone, wide, with U.S. military stationed there (bases, 2 TV stations, channels 8 and 10, Pxs, a U.S.-style high school), split Panama in half. The Canal \u2013 a major engineering project \u2013 was built. The U.S. did not feel that conditions were stable enough to withdraw until 1979. The withdrawal from Panama contributed to President Jimmy Carter's defeat in 1980.\nModern uses.\nLarge-scale ship canals such as the Panama Canal and Suez Canal continue to operate for cargo transportation, as do European barge canals. Due to globalization, they are becoming increasingly important, resulting in expansion projects such as the Panama Canal expansion project. The expanded canal began commercial operation on 26 June 2016. The new set of locks allow transit of larger, Post-Panamax and New Panamax ships.\nThe narrow early industrial canals, however, have ceased to carry significant amounts of trade and many have been abandoned to navigation, but may still be used as a system for transportation of untreated water. In some cases railways have been built along the canal route, an example being the Croydon Canal.\nA movement that began in Britain and France to use the early industrial canals for pleasure boats, such as hotel barges, has spurred rehabilitation of stretches of historic canals. In some cases, abandoned canals such as the Kennet and Avon Canal have been restored and are now used by pleasure boaters. In Britain, canalside housing has also proven popular in recent years.\nThe Seine\u2013Nord Europe Canal is being developed into a major transportation waterway, linking France with Belgium, Germany, and the Netherlands.\nCanals have found another use in the 21st century, as easements for the installation of fibre optic telecommunications network cabling, avoiding having them buried in roadways while facilitating access and reducing the hazard of being damaged from digging equipment.\nCanals are still used to provide water for agriculture. An extensive canal system exists within the Imperial Valley in the Southern California desert to provide irrigation to agriculture within the area.\nCities on water.\nCanals are so deeply identified with Venice that many canal cities have been nicknamed \"the Venice of\u2026\". The city is built on marshy islands, with wooden piles supporting the buildings, so that the land is man-made rather than the waterways. The islands have a long history of settlement; by the 12th century, Venice was a powerful city state.\nAmsterdam was built in a similar way, with buildings on wooden piles. It became a city around 1300. Many Amsterdam canals were built as part of fortifications. They became \"grachten\" when the city was enlarged and houses were built alongside the water. Its nickname as the \"Venice of the North\" is shared with Hamburg of Germany, St. Petersburg of Russia and Bruges of Belgium.\nSuzhou was dubbed the \"Venice of the East\" by Marco Polo during his travels there in the 13th century, with its modern canalside Pingjiang Road and Shantang Street becoming major tourist attractions. Other nearby cities including Nanjing, Shanghai, Wuxi, Jiaxing, Huzhou, Nantong, Taizhou, Yangzhou, and Changzhou are located along the lower mouth of the Yangtze River and Lake Tai, yet another source of small rivers and creeks, which have been canalized and developed for centuries.\nOther cities with extensive canal networks include: Alkmaar, Amersfoort, Bolsward, Brielle, Delft, Den Bosch, Dokkum, Dordrecht, Enkhuizen, Franeker, Gouda, Haarlem, Harlingen, Leeuwarden, Leiden, Sneek and Utrecht in the Netherlands; Brugge and Gent in Flanders, Belgium; Birmingham in England; Saint Petersburg in Russia; Bydgoszcz, Gda\u0144sk, Szczecin and Wroc\u0142aw in Poland; Aveiro in Portugal; Hamburg and Berlin in Germany; Fort Lauderdale and Cape Coral in Florida, United States, Wenzhou in China, C\u1ea7n Th\u01a1 in Vietnam, Bangkok in Thailand, and Lahore in Pakistan.\nLiverpool Maritime Mercantile City was a UNESCO World Heritage Site near the centre of Liverpool, England, where a system of intertwining waterways and docks is now being developed for mainly residential and leisure use.\nCanal estates (sometimes known as bayous in the United States) are a form of subdivision popular in cities like Miami, Florida, Texas City, Texas and the Gold Coast, Queensland; the Gold Coast has over 890\u00a0km of residential canals. Wetlands are difficult areas upon which to build housing estates, so dredging part of the wetland down to a navigable channel provides fill to build up another part of the wetland above the flood level for houses. Land is built up in a finger pattern that provides a suburban street layout of waterfront housing blocks.\nBoats.\nInland canals have often had boats specifically built for them. An example of this is the British narrowboat, which is up to long and wide and was primarily built for British Midland canals. In this case the limiting factor was the size of the locks. This is also the limiting factor on the Panama canal where Panamax ships were limited to a length of and a beam of until 26 June 2016 when the opening of larger locks allowed for the passage of larger New Panamax ships. For the lockless Suez Canal the limiting factor for Suezmax ships is generally draft, which is limited to . At the other end of the scale, tub-boat canals such as the Bude Canal were limited to boats of under 10 tons for much of their length due to the capacity of their inclined planes or boat lifts. Most canals have a limit on height imposed either by bridges or by tunnels.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5626", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5626", "title": "Cognitive science", "text": "Interdisciplinary scientific study of cognitive processes\nCognitive science is the interdisciplinary, scientific study of the mind and its processes. It examines the nature, the tasks, and the functions of cognition (in a broad sense). Mental faculties of concern to cognitive scientists include perception, memory, attention, reasoning, language, and emotion. To understand these faculties, cognitive scientists borrow from fields such as psychology, philosophy, artificial intelligence, neuroscience, linguistics, and anthropology. The typical analysis of cognitive science spans many levels of organization, from learning and decision-making to logic and planning; from neural circuitry to modular brain organization. One of the fundamental concepts of cognitive science is that \"thinking can best be understood in terms of representational structures in the mind and computational procedures that operate on those structures.\"\nHistory.\nThe cognitive sciences began as an intellectual movement in the 1950s, called the cognitive revolution. Cognitive science has a prehistory traceable back to ancient Greek philosophical texts (see Plato's \"Meno\" and Aristotle's ).\nThe modern culture of cognitive science can be traced back to the early cyberneticists in the 1930s and 1940s, such as Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts, who sought to understand the organizing principles of the mind. McCulloch and Pitts developed the first variants of what are now known as artificial neural networks, models of computation inspired by the structure of biological neural networks.\nAnother precursor was the early development of the theory of computation and the digital computer in the 1940s and 1950s. Kurt G\u00f6del, Alonzo Church, Claude Shannon, Alan Turing, and John von Neumann were instrumental in these developments. The modern computer, or Von Neumann machine, would play a central role in cognitive science, both as a metaphor for the mind, and as a tool for investigation.\nThe first instance of cognitive science experiments being done at an academic institution took place at MIT Sloan School of Management, established by J.C.R. Licklider working within the psychology department and conducting experiments using computer memory as models for human cognition. In 1959, Noam Chomsky published a scathing review of B. F. Skinner's book \"Verbal Behavior\". At the time, Skinner's behaviorist paradigm dominated the field of psychology within the United States. Most psychologists focused on functional relations between stimulus and response, without positing internal representations. Chomsky argued that in order to explain language, we needed a theory like generative grammar, which not only attributed internal representations but characterized their underlying order.\nThe term \"cognitive science\" was coined by Christopher Longuet-Higgins in his 1973 commentary on the Lighthill report, which concerned the then-current state of artificial intelligence research. In the same decade, the journal \"Cognitive Science\" and the Cognitive Science Society were founded. The founding meeting of the Cognitive Science Society was held at the University of California, San Diego in 1979, which resulted in cognitive science becoming an internationally visible enterprise. In 1972, Hampshire College started the first undergraduate education program in Cognitive Science, led by Neil Stillings. In 1982, with assistance from Professor Stillings, Vassar College became the first institution in the world to grant an undergraduate degree in Cognitive Science. In 1986, the first Cognitive Science Department in the world was founded at the University of California, San Diego.\nIn the 1970s and early 1980s, as access to computers increased, artificial intelligence research expanded. Researchers such as Marvin Minsky would write computer programs in languages such as LISP to attempt to formally characterize the steps that human beings went through, for instance, in making decisions and solving problems, in the hope of better understanding human thought, and also in the hope of creating artificial minds. This approach is known as \"symbolic AI\".\nEventually the limits of the symbolic AI research program became apparent. For instance, it seemed to be unrealistic to comprehensively list human knowledge in a form usable by a symbolic computer program. The late 80s and 90s saw the rise of neural networks and connectionism as a research paradigm. Under this point of view, often attributed to James McClelland and David Rumelhart, the mind could be characterized as a set of complex associations, represented as a layered network. Critics argue that there are some phenomena which are better captured by symbolic models, and that connectionist models are often so complex as to have little explanatory power. Recently symbolic and connectionist models have been combined, making it possible to take advantage of both forms of explanation. While both connectionism and symbolic approaches have proven useful for testing various hypotheses and exploring approaches to understanding aspects of cognition and lower level brain functions, neither are biologically realistic and therefore, both suffer from a lack of neuroscientific plausibility. Connectionism has proven useful for exploring computationally how cognition emerges in development and occurs in the human brain, and has provided alternatives to strictly domain-specific / domain general approaches. For example, scientists such as Jeff Elman, Liz Bates, and Annette Karmiloff-Smith have posited that networks in the brain emerge from the dynamic interaction between them and environmental input.\nRecent developments in quantum computation, including the ability to run quantum circuits on quantum computers such as IBM Quantum Platform, has accelerated work using elements from quantum mechanics in cognitive models.\nPrinciples.\nLevels of analysis.\nA central tenet of cognitive science is that a complete understanding of the mind/brain cannot be attained by studying only a single level. An example would be the problem of remembering a phone number and recalling it later. One approach to understanding this process would be to study behavior through direct observation, or naturalistic observation. A person could be presented with a phone number and be asked to recall it after some delay of time; then the accuracy of the response could be measured. Another approach to measure cognitive ability would be to study the firings of individual neurons while a person is trying to remember the phone number. Neither of these experiments on its own would fully explain how the process of remembering a phone number works. Even if the technology to map out every neuron in the brain in real-time were available and it were known when each neuron fired it would still be impossible to know how a particular firing of neurons translates into the observed behavior. Thus an understanding of how these two levels relate to each other is imperative. Francisco Varela, in \"The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human Experience\", argues that \"the new sciences of the mind need to enlarge their horizon to encompass both lived human experience and the possibilities for transformation inherent in human experience\". On the classic cognitivist view, this can be provided by a functional level account of the process. Studying a particular phenomenon from multiple levels creates a better understanding of the processes that occur in the brain to give rise to a particular behavior.\nMarr gave a famous description of three levels of analysis:\nInterdisciplinary nature.\nCognitive science is an interdisciplinary field with contributors from various fields, including psychology, neuroscience, linguistics, philosophy of mind, computer science, anthropology and biology. Cognitive scientists work collectively in hope of understanding the mind and its interactions with the surrounding world much like other sciences do. The field regards itself as compatible with the physical sciences and uses the scientific method as well as simulation or modeling, often comparing the output of models with aspects of human cognition. Similarly to the field of psychology, there is some doubt whether there is a unified cognitive science, which have led some researchers to prefer 'cognitive sciences' in plural.\nMany, but not all, who consider themselves cognitive scientists hold a functionalist view of the mind\u2014the view that mental states and processes should be explained by their function \u2013 what they do. According to the multiple realizability account of functionalism, even non-human systems such as robots and computers can be ascribed as having cognition.\n\"Cognitive\" science, the term.\nThe term \"cognitive\" in \"cognitive science\" is used for \"any kind of mental operation or structure that can be studied in precise terms\" (Lakoff and Johnson, 1999). This conceptualization is very broad, and should not be confused with how \"cognitive\" is used in some traditions of analytic philosophy, where \"cognitive\" has to do only with formal rules and truth-conditional semantics.\nThe earliest entries for the word \"cognitive\" in the OED take it to mean roughly \"pertaining to the action or process of knowing\". The first entry, from 1586, shows the word was at one time used in the context of discussions of Platonic theories of knowledge. Most in cognitive science, however, presumably do not believe their field is the study of anything as certain as the knowledge sought by Plato.\nScope.\nCognitive science is a large field, and covers a wide array of topics on cognition. However, it should be recognized that cognitive science has not always been equally concerned with every topic that might bear relevance to the nature and operation of minds. Classical cognitivists have largely de-emphasized or avoided social and cultural factors, embodiment, emotion, consciousness, animal cognition, and comparative and evolutionary psychologies. However, with the decline of behaviorism, internal states such as affects and emotions, as well as awareness and covert attention became approachable again. For example, situated and embodied cognition theories take into account the current state of the environment as well as the role of the body in cognition. With the newfound emphasis on information processing, observable behavior was no longer the hallmark of psychological theory, but the modeling or recording of mental states.\nBelow are some of the main topics that cognitive science is concerned with; see List of cognitive science topics for a more exhaustive list.\nArtificial intelligence.\nArtificial intelligence (AI) involves the study of cognitive phenomena in machines. One of the practical goals of AI is to implement aspects of human intelligence in computers. Computers are also widely used as a tool with which to study cognitive phenomena. Computational modeling uses simulations to study how human intelligence may be structured. (See .)\nThere is some debate in the field as to whether the mind is best viewed as a huge array of small but individually feeble elements (i.e. neurons), or as a collection of higher-level structures such as symbols, schemes, plans, and rules. The former view uses connectionism to study the mind, whereas the latter emphasizes symbolic artificial intelligence. One way to view the issue is whether it is possible to accurately simulate a human brain on a computer without accurately simulating the neurons that make up the human brain.\nAttention.\nAttention is the selection of important information. The human mind is bombarded with millions of stimuli and it must have a way of deciding which of this information to process. Attention is sometimes seen as a spotlight, meaning one can only shine the light on a particular set of information. Experiments that support this metaphor include the dichotic listening task (Cherry, 1957) and studies of inattentional blindness (Mack and Rock, 1998). In the dichotic listening task, subjects are bombarded with two different messages, one in each ear, and told to focus on only one of the messages. At the end of the experiment, when asked about the content of the unattended message, subjects cannot report it.\nThe psychological construct of attention is sometimes confused with the concept of intentionality due to some degree of semantic ambiguity in their definitions. At the beginning of experimental research on attention, Wilhelm Wundt defined this term as \"that psychical process, which is operative in the clear perception of the narrow region of the content of consciousness.\" His experiments showed the limits of attention in space and time, which were 3-6 letters during an exposition of 1/10 s. Because this notion develops within the framework of the original meaning during a hundred years of research, the definition of attention would reflect the sense when it accounts for the main features initially attributed to this term \u2013 it is a process of controlling thought that continues over time. While intentionality is the power of minds to be about something, attention is the concentration of awareness on some phenomenon during a period of time, which is necessary to elevate the clear perception of the narrow region of the content of consciousness and which is feasible to control this focus in mind.\nThe significance of knowledge about the scope of attention for studying cognition is that it defines the intellectual functions of cognition such as apprehension, judgment, reasoning, and working memory. The development of attention scope increases the set of faculties responsible for the mind relies on how it perceives, remembers, considers, and evaluates in making decisions. The ground of this statement is that the more details (associated with an event) the mind may grasp for their comparison, association, and categorization, the closer apprehension, judgment, and reasoning of the event are in accord with reality. According to Latvian professor Sandra Mihailova and professor Igor Val Danilov, the more elements of the phenomenon (or phenomena ) the mind can keep in the scope of attention simultaneously, the more significant number of reasonable combinations within that event it can achieve, enhancing the probability of better understanding features and particularity of the phenomenon (phenomena). For example, three items in the focal point of consciousness yield six possible combinations (3 factorial) and four items \u2013 24 (4 factorial) combinations. The number of reasonable combinations becomes significant in the case of a focal point with six items with 720 possible combinations (6 factorial).\nBodily processes related to cognition.\nEmbodied cognition approaches to cognitive science emphasize the role of body and environment in cognition. This includes both neural and extra-neural bodily processes, and factors that range from affective and emotional processes, to posture, motor control, proprioception, and kinaesthesis, to autonomic processes that involve heartbeat and respiration, to the role of the enteric gut microbiome. It also includes accounts of how the body engages with or is coupled to social and physical environments. 4E cognition includes a broad range of views about brain-body-environment interaction, from causal embeddedness to stronger claims about how the mind extends to include tools and instruments, as well as the role of social interactions, action-oriented processes, and affordances. 4E theories range from those closer to classic cognitivism (so-called \"weak\" embodied cognition) to stronger extended and enactive versions that are sometimes referred to as radical embodied cognitive science.\nA hypothesis of pre-perceptual multimodal integration supports embodied cognition approaches and converges two competing naturalist and constructivist viewpoints about cognition and the development of emotions. According to this hypothesis supported by empirical data, cognition and emotion development are initiated by the association of affective cues with stimuli responsible for triggering the neuronal pathways of simple reflexes. This pre-perceptual multimodal integration can succeed owing to neuronal coherence in mother-child dyads beginning from pregnancy. These cognitive-reflex and emotion-reflex stimuli conjunctions further form simple innate neuronal assemblies, shaping the cognitive and emotional neuronal patterns in statistical learning that are continuously connected with the neuronal pathways of reflexes.\nKnowledge and processing of language.\nThe ability to learn and understand language is an extremely complex process. Language is acquired within the first few years of life, and all humans under normal circumstances are able to acquire language proficiently. A major driving force in the theoretical linguistic field is discovering the nature that language must have in the abstract in order to be learned in such a fashion. Some of the driving research questions in studying how the brain itself processes language include: (1) To what extent is linguistic knowledge innate or learned?, (2) Why is it more difficult for adults to acquire a second-language than it is for infants to acquire their first-language?, and (3) How are humans able to understand novel sentences?\nThe study of language processing ranges from the investigation of the sound patterns of speech to the meaning of words and whole sentences. Linguistics often divides language processing into orthography, phonetics, phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, and pragmatics. Many aspects of language can be studied from each of these components and from their interaction.\nThe study of language processing in \"cognitive science\" is closely tied to the field of linguistics. Linguistics was traditionally studied as a part of the humanities, including studies of history, art and literature. In the last fifty years or so, more and more researchers have studied knowledge and use of language as a cognitive phenomenon, the main problems being how knowledge of language can be acquired and used, and what precisely it consists of. Linguists have found that, while humans form sentences in ways apparently governed by very complex systems, they are remarkably unaware of the rules that govern their own speech. Thus linguists must resort to indirect methods to determine what those rules might be, if indeed rules as such exist. In any event, if speech is indeed governed by rules, they appear to be opaque to any conscious consideration.\nLearning and development.\nLearning and development are the processes by which we acquire knowledge and information over time. Infants are born with little or no knowledge (depending on how knowledge is defined), yet they rapidly acquire the ability to use language, walk, and recognize people and objects. Research in learning and development aims to explain the mechanisms by which these processes might take place.\nA major question in the study of cognitive development is the extent to which certain abilities are innate or learned. This is often framed in terms of the nature and nurture debate. The nativist view emphasizes that certain features are innate to an organism and are determined by its genetic endowment. The empiricist view, on the other hand, emphasizes that certain abilities are learned from the environment. Although clearly both genetic and environmental input is needed for a child to develop normally, considerable debate remains about \"how\" genetic information might guide cognitive development. In the area of language acquisition, for example, some (such as Steven Pinker) have argued that specific information containing universal grammatical rules must be contained in the genes, whereas others (such as Jeffrey Elman and colleagues in Rethinking Innateness) have argued that Pinker's claims are biologically unrealistic. They argue that genes determine the architecture of a learning system, but that specific \"facts\" about how grammar works can only be learned as a result of experience.\nMemory.\nMemory allows us to store information for later retrieval. Memory is often thought of as consisting of both a long-term and short-term store. Long-term memory allows us to store information over prolonged periods (days, weeks, years). We do not yet know the practical limit of long-term memory capacity. Short-term memory allows us to store information over short time scales (seconds or minutes).\nMemory is also often grouped into declarative and procedural forms. Declarative memory\u2014grouped into subsets of semantic and episodic forms of memory\u2014refers to our memory for facts and specific knowledge, specific meanings, and specific experiences (e.g. \"Are apples food?\", or \"What did I eat for breakfast four days ago?\"). Procedural memory allows us to remember actions and motor sequences (e.g. how to ride a bicycle) and is often dubbed implicit knowledge or memory .\nCognitive scientists study memory just as psychologists do, but tend to focus more on how memory bears on cognitive processes, and the interrelationship between cognition and memory. One example of this could be, what mental processes does a person go through to retrieve a long-lost memory? Or, what differentiates between the cognitive process of recognition (seeing hints of something before remembering it, or memory in context) and recall (retrieving a memory, as in \"fill-in-the-blank\")?\nPerception and action.\nPerception is the ability to take in information via the senses, and process it in some way. Vision and hearing are two dominant senses that allow us to perceive the environment. Some questions in the study of visual perception, for example, include: (1) How are we able to recognize objects?, (2) Why do we perceive a continuous visual environment, even though we only see small bits of it at any one time? One tool for studying visual perception is by looking at how people process optical illusions. The image on the right of a Necker cube is an example of a bistable percept, that is, the cube can be interpreted as being oriented in two different directions.\nThe study of haptic (tactile), olfactory, and gustatory stimuli also fall into the domain of perception.\nAction is taken to refer to the output of a system. In humans, this is accomplished through motor responses. Spatial planning and movement, speech production, and complex motor movements are all aspects of action.\nResearch methods.\nMany different methodologies are used to study cognitive science. As the field is highly interdisciplinary, research often cuts across multiple areas of study, drawing on research methods from psychology, neuroscience, computer science and systems theory.\nBehavioral experiments.\nIn order to have a description of what constitutes intelligent behavior, one must study behavior itself. This type of research is closely tied to that in cognitive psychology and psychophysics. By measuring behavioral responses to different stimuli, one can understand something about how those stimuli are processed. Lewandowski &amp; Strohmetz (2009) reviewed a collection of innovative uses of behavioral measurement in psychology including behavioral traces, behavioral observations, and behavioral choice. Behavioral traces are pieces of evidence that indicate behavior occurred, but the actor is not present (e.g., litter in a parking lot or readings on an electric meter). Behavioral observations involve the direct witnessing of the actor engaging in the behavior (e.g., watching how close a person sits next to another person). Behavioral choices are when a person selects between two or more options (e.g., voting behavior, choice of a punishment for another participant).\nBrain imaging.\nBrain imaging involves analyzing activity within the brain while performing various tasks. This allows us to link behavior and brain function to help understand how information is processed. Different types of imaging techniques vary in their temporal (time-based) and spatial (location-based) resolution. Brain imaging is often used in cognitive neuroscience.\nComputational modeling.\nComputational models require a mathematically and logically formal representation of a problem. Computer models are used in the simulation and experimental verification of different specific and general properties of intelligence. Computational modeling can help us understand the functional organization of a particular cognitive phenomenon.\nApproaches to cognitive modeling can be categorized as: (1) symbolic, on abstract mental functions of an intelligent mind by means of symbols; (2) subsymbolic, on the neural and associative properties of the human brain; and (3) across the symbolic\u2013subsymbolic border, including hybrid.\nAll the above approaches tend either to be generalized to the form of integrated computational models of a synthetic/abstract intelligence (i.e. cognitive architecture) in order to be applied to the explanation and improvement of individual and social/organizational decision-making and reasoning or to focus on single simulative programs (or microtheories/\"middle-range\" theories) modelling specific cognitive faculties (e.g. vision, language, categorization etc.).\nNeurobiological methods.\nResearch methods borrowed directly from neuroscience and neuropsychology can also help us to understand aspects of intelligence. These methods allow us to understand how intelligent behavior is implemented in a physical system.\nKey findings.\nCognitive science has given rise to models of human cognitive bias and risk perception, and has been influential in the development of behavioral finance, part of economics. It has also given rise to a new theory of the philosophy of mathematics (related to denotational mathematics), and many theories of artificial intelligence, persuasion and coercion. It has made its presence known in the philosophy of language and epistemology as well as constituting a substantial wing of modern linguistics. Fields of cognitive science have been influential in understanding the brain's particular functional systems (and functional deficits) ranging from speech production to auditory processing and visual perception. It has made progress in understanding how damage to particular areas of the brain affect cognition, and it has helped to uncover the root causes and results of specific dysfunction, such as dyslexia, anopsia, and hemispatial neglect.\nNotable researchers.\nSome of the more recognized names in cognitive science are usually either the most controversial or the most cited. Within philosophy, some familiar names include Daniel Dennett, who writes from a computational systems perspective, John Searle, known for his controversial Chinese room argument, and Jerry Fodor, who advocates functionalism.\nOthers include David Chalmers, who advocates Dualism and is also known for articulating the hard problem of consciousness, and Douglas Hofstadter, famous for writing \"G\u00f6del, Escher, Bach\", which questions the nature of words and thought.\nIn the realm of linguistics, Noam Chomsky and George Lakoff have been influential (both have also become notable as political commentators). In artificial intelligence, Marvin Minsky, Herbert A. Simon, and Allen Newell are prominent.\nPopular names in the discipline of psychology include George A. Miller, James McClelland, Philip Johnson-Laird, Lawrence Barsalou, Vittorio Guidano, Howard Gardner and Steven Pinker. Anthropologists Dan Sperber, Edwin Hutchins, Bradd Shore, James Wertsch and Scott Atran, have been involved in collaborative projects with cognitive and social psychologists, political scientists and evolutionary biologists in attempts to develop general theories of culture formation, religion, and political association.\nComputational theories (with models and simulations) have also been developed, by David Rumelhart, James McClelland and Philip Johnson-Laird.\nEpistemics.\nEpistemics is a term coined in 1969 by the University of Edinburgh with the foundation of its School of Epistemics. Epistemics is to be distinguished from epistemology in that epistemology is the philosophical theory of knowledge, whereas epistemics signifies the scientific study of knowledge.\nChristopher Longuet-Higgins has defined it as \"the construction of formal models of the processes (perceptual, intellectual, and linguistic) by which knowledge and understanding are achieved and communicated.\"\nIn his 1978 essay \"Epistemics: The Regulative Theory of Cognition\", Alvin I. Goldman claims to have coined the term \"epistemics\" to describe a reorientation of epistemology. Goldman maintains that his epistemics is continuous with traditional epistemology and the new term is only to avoid opposition. Epistemics, in Goldman's version, differs only slightly from traditional epistemology in its alliance with the psychology of cognition; epistemics stresses the detailed study of mental processes and information-processing mechanisms that lead to knowledge or beliefs.\nIn the mid-1980s, the School of Epistemics was renamed as The Centre for Cognitive Science (CCS). In 1998, CCS was incorporated into the University of Edinburgh's School of Informatics.\nBinding problem in cognitive science.\nOne of the core aims of cognitive science is to achieve an integrated theory of cognition. This requires integrative mechanisms explaining how the information processing that occurs simultaneously in spatially segregated (sub-)cortical areas in the brain is coordinated and bound together to give rise to coherent perceptual and symbolic representations. One approach is to solve this \"Binding problem\" (that is, the problem of dynamically representing conjunctions of informational elements, from the most basic perceptual representations (\"feature binding\") to the most complex cognitive representations, like symbol structures (\"variable binding\")), by means of integrative synchronization mechanisms. In other words, one of the coordinating mechanisms appears to be the temporal (phase) synchronization of neural activity based on dynamical self-organizing processes in neural networks, described by the Binding-by-synchrony (BBS) Hypothesis from neurophysiology. Connectionist cognitive neuroarchitectures have been developed that use integrative synchronization mechanisms to solve this binding problem in perceptual cognition and in language cognition. In perceptual cognition the problem is to explain how elementary object properties and object relations, like the object color or the object form, can be dynamically bound together or can be integrated to a representation of this perceptual object by means of a synchronization mechanism (\"feature binding\", \"feature linking\"). In language cognition the problem is to explain how semantic concepts and syntactic roles can be dynamically bound together or can be integrated to complex cognitive representations like systematic and compositional symbol structures and propositions by means of a synchronization mechanism (\"variable binding\") (see also the \"Symbolism vs. connectionism debate\" in connectionism).\nHowever, despite significant advances in understanding the integrated theory of cognition (specifically the Binding problem), the debate on this issue of beginning cognition is still in progress. From the different perspectives noted above, this problem can be reduced to the issue of how organisms at the simple reflexes stage of development overcome the threshold of the environmental chaos of sensory stimuli: electromagnetic waves, chemical interactions, and pressure fluctuations. The so-called Primary Data Entry (PDE) thesis poses doubts about the ability of such an organism to overcome this cue threshold on its own. In terms of mathematical tools, the PDE thesis underlines the insuperable high threshold of the cacophony of environmental stimuli (the stimuli noise) for young organisms at the onset of life. It argues that the temporal (phase) synchronization of neural activity based on dynamical self-organizing processes in neural networks, any dynamical bound together or integration to a representation of the perceptual object by means of a synchronization mechanism can not help organisms in distinguishing relevant cue (informative stimulus) for overcome this noise threshold.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5628", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5628", "title": "Compilers", "text": ""}
{"id": "5630", "revid": "50811205", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5630", "title": "Copula (linguistics)", "text": "Functional part of speech in most languages\nIn linguistics, a copula (; pl.: copulas or copulae; abbreviated cop) is a word or phrase that links the subject of a sentence to a subject complement, such as the word \"is\" in the sentence \"The sky is blue\" or the phrase \"was not being\" in the sentence \"It was not being cooperative.\" The word \"copula\" derives from the Latin noun for a \"link\" or \"tie\" that connects two different things.\nA copula is often a verb or a verb-like word, though this is not universally the case. A verb that is a copula is sometimes called a copulative or copular verb. In English primary education grammar courses, a copula is often called a linking verb. In other languages, copulas show more resemblances to pronouns, as in Classical Chinese and Guarani, or may take the form of suffixes attached to a noun, as in Korean, Beja, and Inuit languages.\nMost languages have one main copula (in English, the verb \"to be\"), although some (such as Spanish, Portuguese and Thai) have more than one, while others have none. While the term \"copula\" is generally used to refer to such principal verbs, it may also be used for a wider group of verbs with similar potential functions (such as \"become\", \"get\", \"feel\" and \"seem\" in English); alternatively, these might be distinguished as \"semi-copulas\" or \"pseudo-copulas\".\nGrammatical function.\nThe principal use of a copula is to link the subject of a clause to a subject complement. A copular verb is often considered to be part of the predicate, the remainder being called a predicative expression. A simple clause containing a copula is illustrated below:\nThe book is on the table.\nIn that sentence, the noun phrase \"the book\" is the subject, the verb \"is\" serves as the copula, and the prepositional phrase \"on the table\" is the predicative expression. In some theories of grammar, the whole expression \"is on the table\" may be called a predicate or a verb phrase.\nThe predicative expression accompanying the copula, also known as the complement of the copula, may take any of several possible forms: it may be a noun or noun phrase, an adjective or adjective phrase, a prepositional phrase (as above), or an adverb or another adverbial phrase expressing time or location. Examples are given below, with the copula in bold and the predicative expression in italics:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe three components (subject, copula and predicative expression) do not necessarily appear in that order: their positioning depends on the rules for word order applicable to the language in question. In English (an SVO language), the ordering given above is the normal one, but certain variation is possible:\nIt is also possible, in certain circumstances, for one (or even two) of the three components to be absent:\nInverse copular constructions, in which the positions of the predicative expression and the subject are reversed, are found in various languages. They have been the subject of much theoretical analysis, particularly in regard to the difficulty of maintaining, in the case of such sentences, the usual division into a subject noun phrase and a predicate verb phrase.\nAnother issue is verb agreement when both subject and predicative expression are noun phrases (and differ in number or person): in English, the copula typically agrees with the syntactical subject even if it is not logically (i.e. semantically) the subject, as in \"the cause of the riot is\" (not \"are\") \"these pictures of the wall\". Compare Italian ; notice the use of the plural to agree with plural 'these photos' rather than with singular 'the cause'. In instances where an English syntactical subject comprises a prepositional object that is pluralized, however, the prepositional object agrees with the predicative expression, e.g. \"What kind \"of birds are\" those?\"\nThe definition and scope of the concept of a copula is not necessarily precise in any language. As noted above, though the concept of the copula in English is most strongly associated with the verb \"to be\", there are many other verbs that can be used in a copular sense as well.\nAnd more tenuously\nOther functions.\nA copular verb may also have other uses supplementary to or distinct from its uses as a copula. Some co-occurrences are common.\nAuxiliary verb.\nThe English verb \"to be\" is also used as an auxiliary verb, especially for expressing passive voice (together with the past participle) or expressing progressive aspect (together with the present participle):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther languages' copulas have additional uses as auxiliaries. For example, French can be used to express passive voice similarly to English \"be\"; both French and German are used to express the perfect forms of certain verbs:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the same way, usage of English \"be\" in the present perfect, though archaic, is still commonly seen in old texts/translations:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe auxiliary functions of these verbs derived from their copular function, and could be interpreted as special cases of the copular function (with the verbal forms it precedes being considered adjectival).\nAnother auxiliary usage in English is to denote an obligatory action or expected occurrence: \"I am to serve you\". \"The manager is to resign\". This can be put also into past tense: \"We were to leave at 9\". For forms such as \"if I was/were to come\", see English conditional sentences. (By certain criteria, the English copula \"be\" may always be considered an auxiliary verb; see Diagnostics for identifying auxiliary verbs in English.)\nExistential verb.\nThe English \"to be\" and its equivalents in certain other languages also have a non-copular use as an existential verb, meaning \"to exist\". This use is illustrated in the following sentences: \"I want only to be, and that is enough\"; \"I think therefore I am; To be or not to be, that is the question.\" In these cases, the verb itself expresses a predicate (that of existence), rather than linking to a predicative expression as it does when used as a copula. In ontology it is sometimes suggested that the \"is\" of existence is reducible to the \"is\" of property attribution or class membership; to be, Aristotle held, is to be \"something\". However, Abelard in his \"Dialectica\" made a \"reductio ad absurdum\" argument against the idea that the copula can express existence.\nSimilar examples can be found in many other languages; for example, the French and Latin equivalents of \"I think therefore I am\" are and , where and are the equivalents of English \"am\", normally used as copulas. However, other languages prefer a different verb for existential use, as in the Spanish version (where the verb 'to exist' is used rather than the copula or 'to be').\nAnother type of existential usage is in clauses of the \"there is...\" or \"there are...\" type. Languages differ in the way they express such meanings; some of them use the copular verb, possibly with an expletive pronoun such as the English \"there\", while other languages use different verbs and constructions, such as the French (which uses parts of the verb 'to have', not the copula) or the Swedish (the passive voice of the verb for \"to find\"). For details, see existential clause.\nRelying on a unified theory of copular sentences, it has been proposed that the English \"there\"-sentences are subtypes of inverse copular constructions.\nMeanings.\nPredicates formed using a copula may express identity: asserting that two noun phrases (subject and complement) have the same referent or express an identical concept:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThey may also express membership of a class or a subset relationship:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSimilarly they may express some property, relation or position, permanent or temporary:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe use of copulas, especially in some of their functions, can evoke opposition. E-Prime eschews excessive copula-usage in the interests of (for example) clarity.\nDeleuze and Guattari object to some implications of the verb \"to be\":\nThe tree imposes the verb 'to be,' but the fabric of the rhizome is the conjunction, 'and... and... and...' This conjunction carries enough force to shake and uproot the verb 'to be.' Where are you going? Where are you coming from? What are you heading for? These are totally useless questions. Making a clean slate, starting or beginning again from ground zero, seeking a beginning or a foundation \u2014 all imply a false conception of voyage and movement (a conception that is methodical, pedagogical, initiatory, symbolic...).\nEssence versus state.\nSome languages use different copulas, or different syntax, to denote a permanent, essential characteristic of something versus a temporary state. For examples, see the sections on the Romance languages, Slavic languages and Irish.\nForms.\nIn many languages the principal copula is a verb, such as English \"(to) be\", German , Mixtec , Touareg , etc. It may inflect for grammatical categories such as tense, aspect and mood, like other verbs in the language. Being a very commonly used verb, it is likely that the copula has irregular inflected forms; in English, the verb \"be\" has a number of highly irregular (suppletive) forms and has more different inflected forms than any other English verb (\"am\", \"is\", \"are\", \"was\", \"were\", etc.; see English verbs for details).\nOther copulas show more resemblances to pronouns. That is the case for Classical Chinese and Guarani, for instance. In highly synthetic languages, copulas are often suffixes, attached to a noun, but they may still behave otherwise like ordinary verbs: in Inuit languages.\nIn some other languages, such as Beja and Ket, the copula takes the form of suffixes that attach to a noun but are distinct from the person agreement markers used on predicative verbs. This phenomenon is known as \"nonverbal person agreement\" (or \"nonverbal subject agreement\"), and the relevant markers are always established as deriving from cliticized independent pronouns.\nZero copula.\nIn some languages, copula omission occurs within a particular grammatical context. For example, speakers of Bengali, Russian, Indonesian, Turkish, Hungarian, Arabic, Hebrew, Ge\u02bdez and Quechuan languages consistently drop the copula in present tense: Bengali: , Aami manush, 'I (am a) human'; Russian: , 'I (am a) human'; Indonesian: 'I (am) a human'; Turkish: 's/he (is a) human'; Hungarian: 's/he (is) a human'; Arabic: , 'I (am a) human'; Hebrew: , 'I (am a) human'; Ge\u02bdez: , / 'I (am a) man' / '(a) man I (am)'; Southern Quechua: 's/he (is) a human'. The usage is known generically as the zero copula. In other tenses (sometimes in forms other than third person singular), the copula usually reappears.\nSome languages drop the copula in poetic or aphoristic contexts. Examples in English include\nSuch poetic copula dropping is more pronounced in some languages other than English, such as the Romance languages.\nIn informal speech of English, the copula may also be dropped in general sentences, as in \"She a nurse\" or \"They not like us.\" It is a feature of African-American Vernacular English, but is also used by a variety of other English speakers. An example is the sentence \"I saw twelve men, each a soldier.\"\nExamples in specific languages.\nIn Ancient Greek, when an adjective precedes a noun with an article, the copula is understood: , \"the house is large\", can be written , \"large the house (is).\"\nIn Quechua (Southern Quechua used for the examples), zero copula is restricted to present tense in third person singular (): '(s)he is a human'; but: '(they) are human'.\nIn M\u0101ori, the zero copula can be used in predicative expressions and with continuous verbs (many of which take a copulative verb in many Indo-European languages)\u00a0\u2014 , literally 'a big the house', 'the house (is) big'; , literally 'at (past locative particle) the table the book', 'the book (was) on the table'; , literally 'from England (s)he', '(s)he (is) from England', , literally 'at the (act of) eating I', 'I (am) eating'.\nAlternatively, in many cases, the particle can be used as a copulative (though not all instances of are used as thus, like all other M\u0101ori particles, has multiple purposes): 'The house is big'; 'It is the book (that is) on the table'; 'It is me eating'.\nHowever, when expressing identity or class membership, must be used: 'This is my book'; 'Christchurch is a city in the South Island (of New Zealand)'; 'You are my friend'.\nWhen expressing identity, can be placed on either object in the clause without changing the meaning ( is the same as ) but not on both ( would be equivalent to saying \"it is this, it is my book\" in English).\nIn Hungarian, zero copula is restricted to present tense in third person singular and plural: /\u00a0\u2014 's/he is a human' / 'they are humans'; but: 'I am a human', 'you are a human', 'we are humans', 'you (all) are humans'. The copula also reappears for stating locations: 'the people are in the house', and for stating time: 'it is six o'clock'. However, the copula may be omitted in colloquial language: 'it is six o'clock'.\nHungarian uses copula for expressing location: 'Bob is here', but it is omitted in the third person present tense for attribution or identity statements: 'Bob is old'; 'they are hungry'; 'Cathy is a linguist' (but 'Bob was old', 'they were hungry', 'Cathy was a linguist').\nIn Turkish, both the third person singular and the third person plural copulas are omittable. and both mean 'Ali is here', and and both mean 'They are hungry'. Both of the sentences are acceptable and grammatically correct, but sentences with the copula are more formal.\nThe Turkish first person singular copula suffix is omitted when introducing oneself. 'I am Bora' is grammatically correct, but (same sentence with the copula) is not for an introduction (but is grammatically correct in other cases).\nFurther restrictions may apply before omission is permitted. For example, in the Irish language, , the present tense of the copula, may be omitted when the predicate is a noun. , the past/conditional, cannot be deleted. If the present copula is omitted, the pronoun (e.g., , , ) preceding the noun is omitted as well.\nCopula-like words.\nSometimes, the term \"copula\" is taken to include not only a language's equivalent(s) to the verb \"be\" but also other verbs or forms that serve to link a subject to a predicative expression (while adding semantic content of their own). For example, English verbs such as \"become\", \"get\", \"feel\", \"look\", \"taste\", \"smell\", and \"seem\" can have this function, as in the following sentences (the predicative expression, the complement of the verb, is in italics):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSome verbs have rarer, secondary uses as copular verbs, such as the verb \"fall\" in sentences such as \"The zebra fell victim to the lion.\"\nThese extra copulas are sometimes called \"semi-copulas\" or \"pseudo-copulas.\" For a list of common verbs of this type in English, see List of English copulae.\nIn particular languages.\nIndo-European.\nIn Indo-European languages, the words meaning \"to be\" are sometimes similar to each other. Due to the high frequency of their use, their inflection retains a considerable degree of similarity in some cases. Thus, for example, the English form \"is\" is a cognate of German , Latin , Persian and Russian , even though the Germanic, Italic, Iranian and Slavic language groups split at least 3000 years ago. The origins of the copulas of most Indo-European languages can be traced back to four Proto-Indo-European stems: (), (), and ().\nEnglish.\nThe English copular verb \"be\" has eight basic forms (\"be\", \"am\", \"is\", \"are\", \"being\", \"was\", \"were\", \"been\") and five negative forms (\"ain't\" in some dialects, \"isn't\", \"aren't\", \"wasn't\", \"weren't\"). No other English verb has more than five forms. Additional archaic forms include \"art\", \"wast\", \"wert\", and occasionally \"beest\" (as a subjunctive). The possibility of copula omission is mentioned under .\nA particular construction found in English (particularly in speech) is the use of two successive copulas when only one appears necessary, as in \"My point is, is that...\". The acceptability of this construction is a disputed matter in English prescriptive grammar.\nThe simple English copula \"be\" may on occasion be substituted by other verbs with near identical meanings.\nPashto.\nIn Pashto, the verb \u0648\u0644 (wal) functions as the copula like the verb \" To Be \" in English, linking the subject of a sentence to a predicate, such as a noun or adjective. The copula is inflected for person and number, and in the third person also for gender; in the first and second person, it does not change for gender.\nIn the past tense, the copula systematically changes the consonant \"Y\" to \"W\", e.g., present yam \u2192 past wam. The future tense is formed by placing the particle \"Ba\" after the subject and before the present form of the copula. In the third person, \"Ba\" precedes \"Yi\" rather than the usual present forms de/da/di.\nThe past habitual tense in Pashto also uses the particle \"Ba\" with the copula. Unlike the future tense, in which \"Ba\" follows the present form of the copula, in the past habitual tense \"Ba\" is followed by the past form of the copula corresponding to the subject e.g., Za Ba Wam ( I used to be ), indicating repeated or customary actions in the past. \n As shown in the examples below\nNote:\nThese examples follow the Peshawari dialect of Pashto, which is commonly spoken in the Peshawar region. Variations may exist in other dialects\nPRESENT TENSE\nFirst Person:\n\u2022 Za Yam \u2013 I am \n\u2022 Mang Yu \u2013 We are \nSecond Person:\n\u2022 Ta Ye \u2013 You are \n\u2022 Taso Yae \u2013 You are (plural)\nThird Person:\n\u2022 Hagha/Da De \u2013 He is \n\u2022 Hagha/Da Da \u2013 She is\n\u2022 Haghwi/Dwi Di \u2013 They are \nPAST TENSE\nFirst Person:\n\u2022 Za Wam \u2013 I was\n\u2022 Mang Wu \u2013 We were\nSecond Person:\n\u2022 Ta We \u2013 You were \n\u2022 Taso Wae \u2013 You were (plural)\nThird Person:\n\u2022 Hagha/Da W\u0259 \u2013 He was \n\u2022 Hagha/Da Wa \u2013 She was \n\u2022 Haghwi/Dwi Wu \u2013 They were\nFUTURE TENSE \nFirst Person:\n\u2022 Za Ba Yam \u2013 I will be \n\u2022 Mang Ba Yu \u2013 We will be \nSecond Person:\n\u2022 Ta Ba Ye \u2013 You will be \n\u2022 Taso Ba Yae \u2013 You will be (Plural)\nThird Person:\n\u2022 Hagha/Da Ba Yi \u2013 He will be \n\u2022 Hagha/Da Ba Yi \u2013 She will be \n\u2022 Haghwi/Dwi Ba Yi \u2013 They will be\nPAST HABITUAL TENSE (Describing past actions that used to happen regularly)\nFirst Person:\n\u2022 Za Ba Wam \u2013 I used to be \n\u2022 Mang Ba Wu \u2013 We used to be \nSecond Person:\n\u2022 Ta Ba We \u2013 You used to be \n\u2022 Taso Ba Wae \u2013 You used to be (plural)\nThird Person:\n\u2022 Hagha/Da Ba W\u0259 \u2013 He used to be \n\u2022 Hagha/Da Ba Wa \u2013 She used to be \n\u2022 Haghwi/Dwi Ba Wu \u2013 They used to be\nPersian.\nIn Persian, the verb \"to be\" can take the form of either (cognate to English \"is\") or (cognate to \"be\").\nHindustani.\nIn Hindustani (Hindi and Urdu), the copula can be put into four grammatical aspects (simple, habitual, perfective, and progressive) and each of those four aspects can be put into five grammatical moods (indicative, presumptive, subjunctive, contrafactual, and imperative). Some example sentences using the simple aspect are shown below:\nBesides the verb 'to be', there are three other verbs which can also be used as the copula: 'to stay', 'to go', and 'to come'. The following table shows the conjugations of the copula in the five grammatical moods in the simple aspect. The transliteration scheme used is ISO 15919.\nRomance.\nCopulas in the Romance languages usually consist of two different verbs that can be translated as \"to be\", the main one from the Latin (via Vulgar Latin ; deriving from \"*es-\"), often referenced as (another of the Latin verb's principal parts) and a secondary one from (from \"*sta-\"), often referenced as . The resulting distinction in the modern forms is found in all the Iberian Romance languages, and to a lesser extent Italian, but not in French or Romanian. The difference is that the first usually refers to essential characteristics, while the second refers to states and situations, e.g., \"Bob is old\" versus \"Bob is well.\" A similar division is found in the non-Romance Basque language (viz. and ). (The English words just used, \"essential\" and \"state\", are also cognate with the Latin infinitives and . The word \"stay\" also comes from Latin , through Middle French , stem of Old French .) In Spanish and Portuguese, the high degree of verbal inflection, plus the existence of two copulas ( and ), means that there are 105 (Spanish) and 110 (Portuguese) separate forms to express the copula, compared to eight in English and one in Chinese.\nIn some cases, the verb itself changes the meaning of the adjective/sentence. The following examples are from Portuguese:\nSlavic.\nSome Slavic languages make a distinction between essence and state (similar to that discussed in the above section on the Romance languages), by putting a predicative expression denoting a state into the instrumental case, and essential characteristics are in the nominative. This can apply with other copula verbs as well: the verbs for \"become\" are normally used with the instrumental case.\nAs noted above under , Russian and other North Slavic languages generally or often omit the copula in the present tense.\nIrish.\nIn Irish and Scottish Gaelic, there are two copulas, and the syntax is also changed when one is distinguishing between states or situations and essential characteristics.\nDescribing the subject's state or situation typically uses the normal VSO ordering with the verb . The copula is used to state essential characteristics or equivalences.\nThe word is the copula (rhymes with the English word \"miss\").\nThe pronoun used with the copula is different from the normal pronoun. For a masculine singular noun, is used (for \"he\" or \"it\"), as opposed to the normal pronoun ; for a feminine singular noun, is used (for \"she\" or \"it\"), as opposed to normal pronoun ; for plural nouns, is used (for \"they\" or \"those\"), as opposed to the normal pronoun .\nTo describe being in a state, condition, place, or act, the verb \"to be\" is used: 'I am running.'\nArabic dialects.\nNorth Levantine Arabic.\nThe North Levantine Arabic dialect, spoken in Syria and Lebanon, has a negative copula formed by and a suffixed pronoun.\nBantu languages.\nChichewa.\nIn Chichewa, a Bantu language spoken mainly in Malawi, a very similar distinction exists between permanent and temporary states as in Spanish and Portuguese, but only in the present tense. For a permanent state, in the 3rd person, the copula used in the present tense is (negative ):\n 'he is a teacher'\n 'he is not a teacher'\nFor the 1st and 2nd persons the particle is combined with pronouns, e.g., 'I':\n 'I am a teacher'\n 'you (sg.) are a teacher'\n 'I am not a teacher'\nFor temporary states and location, the copula is the appropriate form of the defective verb :\n 'he is well'\n 'he is not well'\n 'he is in the house'\nFor the 1st and 2nd persons the person is shown, as normally with Chichewa verbs, by the appropriate pronominal prefix:\n 'I am well'\n 'you (sg.) are well'\n 'at home (everything) is fine'\nIn the past tenses, is used for both types of copula:\n 'he was well (this morning)'\n 'he was a teacher (at that time)'\nIn the future, subjunctive, or conditional tenses, a form of the verb 'sit/dwell' is used as a copula:\n 'he'll be fine tomorrow'\nMuylaq' Aymaran.\nUniquely, the existence of the copulative verbalizer suffix in the Southern Peruvian Aymaran language variety, Muylaq' Aymara, is evident only in the surfacing of a vowel that would otherwise have been deleted because of the presence of a following suffix, lexically prespecified to suppress it. As the copulative verbalizer has no independent phonetic structure, it is represented by the Greek letter \u028b in the examples used in this entry.\nAccordingly, unlike in most other Aymaran variants, whose copulative verbalizer is expressed with a vowel-lengthening component, -\":\", the presence of the copulative verbalizer in Muylaq' Aymara is often not apparent on the surface at all and is analyzed as existing only meta-linguistically. However, in a verb phrase such as \"It is old\", the noun 'old' does not require the copulative verbalizer: 'It is old'.\nIt is now pertinent to make some observations about the distribution of the copulative verbalizer. The best place to start is with words in which its presence or absence is obvious. When the vowel-suppressing first person simple tense suffix attaches to a verb, the vowel of the immediately preceding suffix is suppressed (in the examples in this subsection, the subscript \"c\" appears prior to vowel-suppressing suffixes in the interlinear gloss to better distinguish instances of deletion that arise from the presence of a lexically pre-specified suffix from those that arise from other (e.g. phonotactic) motivations). Consider the verb , which is inflected for the first person simple tense and so, predictably, loses its final root vowel: 'I go'.\nHowever, prior to the suffixation of the first person simple suffix to the same root nominalized with the agentive nominalizer , the word must be verbalized. The fact that the final vowel of below is not suppressed indicates the presence of an intervening segment, the copulative verbalizer: 'I usually go'.\nIt is worthwhile to compare of the copulative verbalizer in Muylaq' Aymara as compared to La Paz Aymara, a variant which represents this suffix with vowel lengthening. Consider the near-identical sentences below, both translations of \"I have a small house\" in which the nominal root 'house-attributive' is verbalized with the copulative verbalizer, but the correspondence between the copulative verbalizer in these two variants is not always a strict one-to-one relation.\nGeorgian.\nAs in English, the verb \"to be\" () is irregular in Georgian (a Kartvelian language); different verb roots are employed in different tenses. The roots , , , and (past participle) are used in the present tense, future tense, past tense and the perfective tenses respectively. Examples:\nIn the last two examples (perfective and pluperfect), two roots are used in one verb compound. In the perfective tense, the root (which is the expected root for the perfective tense) is followed by the root , which is the root for the present tense. In the pluperfective tense, again, the root is followed by the past tense root . This formation is very similar to German (an Indo-European language), where the perfect and the pluperfect are expressed in the following way:\nHere, is the past participle of 'to be' in German. In both examples, as in Georgian, this participle is used together with the present and the past forms of the verb in order to conjugate for the perfect and the pluperfect aspects.\nHaitian Creole.\nHaitian Creole, a French-based creole language, has three forms of the copula: , , and the zero copula, no word at all (the position of which will be indicated with \"\u00d8\", just for purposes of illustration).\nAlthough no textual record exists of Haitian-Creole at its earliest stages of development from French, is derived from French (written ), which is the normal French contraction of (that, written ) and the copula (is, written ) (a form of the verb ).\nThe derivation of is less obvious; but we can assume that the French source was (\"he/it is\", written ), which, in rapidly spoken French, is very commonly pronounced as (typically written ).\nThe use of a zero copula is unknown in French, and it is thought to be an innovation from the early days when Haitian-Creole was first developing as a Romance-based pidgin. Latin also sometimes used a zero copula.\nWhich of //\u00d8 is used in any given copula clause depends on complex syntactic factors that we can superficially summarize in the following four rules:\n1. Use \"\u00d8\" (i.e., no word at all) in declarative sentences where the complement is an adjective phrase, prepositional phrase, or adverb phrase:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n2. Use when the complement is a noun phrase. But, whereas other verbs come after any tense/mood/aspect particles (such as to mark negation, or to explicitly mark past tense, or to mark progressive aspect), comes before any such particles:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n3. Use where French and English have a dummy \"it\" subject:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n4. Finally, use the other copula form in situations where the sentence's syntax leaves the copula at the end of a phrase:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe above is, however, only a simplified analysis.\nJapanese.\nThe Japanese copula (most often translated into English as an inflected form of \"to be\") is unique among verbs in Japanese. It is highly irregular, and in several ways behaves in ways other verbs do not; such as requiring a separate relativised form in some circumstances, and acting simply as a marker of formality/politeness with no predication force in some circumstances. In the most basic case, it behaves like a normal verb with irregular forms, which (like most copulas crosslinguistically) takes a non-case-marked complement instead of an object.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs with all verbs in Japanese, it is necessary to mark the speaker's implied social relationship to the addressee by the choice of verb form. The following two sentences differ only in the fact that the first is appropriate only between decently close friends or family, or said by someone of significantly higher social status than the listener, and the second is only appropriate outside of such circumstances.\nJapanese has two classes of words which correspond to adjectives in English, one of which requires a copula to become a predicate and one of which does not.\nHowever, the polite copula is used as a means to mark the self-predicating class of adjectives as grammatically formal, and thus the formal equivalent of is . In these situations, the copula is not serving as an actual predication device; it is only a means to supply formality marking.\nThe non-self-predicating class of adjectives is the one place in modern Japanese where a separate relativiser form appears; these require the form in order to modify nouns.\nEtymologically the copula is a reduced form of , which effectively means 'exists as'; in formal situations or its formal form can appear in place of or , and in certain situations other forms of may be appropriate (such as /). Nonstandard forms such as in Kansai and in much of the rest of western Japan (see map above) are due to various dialects reducing differently than the Kant\u014d-based standard form did.\nThe negative form of the copula is generally or its reduced form (or in formal situations, substitute for ). This includes the topic marker , due to negative copula sentences typically implying some kind of contrastive topic-like force on the complement. can occur in relative clauses, where information structure marking might be odd, but is also a general negative copula and would be sensible still in any situation might be used.\nMany sentences in Japanese are structurally a headless relative clause nominalised by (or its reduced form ) and then predicated with a copula; the structure is analogous to something like English \"it's that...\". This structure is used to indicate that the statement is intended to answer a question or explain confusion a listener may have had (though the question it answers may not have ever been overtly spoken). This has largely been incorporated into Japanese's sentence-final particle system, and is far more common than the equivalent English structure.\nSimilarly, has also been recruited into the sentence-final particle system, and is used to mark a sentence that the speaker should have been decently obvious to the listener, or to indicate that the speaker is surprised to find that the sentence is true. In this role it can cooccur with an actual predicative , but not with the positive ; is omitted in such sentences.\nKorean.\nFor sentences with predicate nominatives, the copula () is added to the predicate nominative (with no space in between).\nSome adjectives (usually colour adjectives) are nominalized and used with the copula ().\n1. Without the copula ():\n2. With the copula ():\nSome Korean adjectives are derived using the copula. Separating these articles and nominalizing the former part will often result in a sentence with a related, but different meaning. Using the separated sentence in a situation where the un-separated sentence is appropriate is usually acceptable as the listener can decide what the speaker is trying to say using the context.\nChinese.\nIn Chinese, both states and qualities are, in general, expressed with stative verbs (SV) with no need for a copula, e.g., in Chinese, \"to be tired\" ( ), \"to be hungry\" ( ), \"to be located at\" ( ), \"to be stupid\" ( ) and so forth. A sentence can consist simply of a pronoun and such a verb: for example, ('I am hungry'). Usually, however, verbs expressing qualities are qualified by an adverb (meaning \"very\", \"not\", \"quite\", etc.); when not otherwise qualified, they are often preceded by , which in other contexts means \"very\", but in this use often has no particular meaning.\nOnly sentences with a noun as the complement (e.g., \"This is my sister\") use the copular verb \"to be\": . This is used frequently; for example, instead of having a verb meaning \"to be Chinese\", the usual expression is \"to be a Chinese person\" (; literally 'I am a Chinese person'; 'I am Chinese'). This is sometimes called an equative verb. Another possibility is for the complement to be just a noun modifier (ending in ), the noun being omitted: \nBefore the Han dynasty, the character served as a demonstrative pronoun meaning \"this\" (this usage survives in some idioms and .) Some linguists believe that developed into a copula because it often appeared, as a repetitive subject, after the subject of a sentence (in classical Chinese we can say, for example: \"George W. Bush, \"this\" president of the United States\" meaning \"George W. Bush \"is\" the president of the United States). The character appears to be formed as a compound of characters with the meanings of \"early\" and \"straight.\"\nAnother use of in modern Chinese is in combination with the modifier to mean \"yes\" or to show agreement. For example:\nQuestion: 'Is your car red or not?'Response: 'Is', meaning \"Yes\", or 'Not is', meaning \"No.\" \nYet another use of is in the construction, which is used to emphasize a particular element of the sentence; see .\nIn Hokkien acts as the copula, and is the equivalent in Wu Chinese. Cantonese uses () instead of ; similarly, Hakka uses .\nSiouan languages.\nIn Siouan languages such as Lakota, in principle almost all words\u2014according to their structure\u2014are verbs. So not only (transitive, intransitive and so-called \"stative\") verbs but even nouns often behave like verbs and do not need to have copulas.\nFor example, the word refers to a man, and the verb 'to be a man' is expressed as 'I am/you are/he is a man'. Yet there also is a copula 'to be a ...' that in most cases is used: 'I am/you are/he is a man'.\nIn order to express the statement 'I am a doctor of profession', one has to say . But, in order to express that that person is THE doctor (say, that had been phoned to help), one must use another copula 'to be the one':\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn order to refer to space (e.g., Robert is in the house), various verbs are used, e.g., (lit., 'to sit') for humans, or 'to stand upright' for inanimate objects of a certain shape. \"Robert is in the house\" could be translated as , whereas \"There's one restaurant next to the gas station\" translates as \nConstructed languages.\nThe constructed language Lojban has two words that act similar to a copula in natural languages. The clause turns whatever follows it into a predicate that means to be (among) what it follows. For example, means \"to be Bob\", and means \"to be one of the three sisters\". Another one is , which is itself a predicate that means all its arguments are the same thing (equal). One word which is often confused for a copula in Lojban, but is not one, is . It merely indicates that the word which follows is the main predicate of the sentence. For example, means \"my friend is a musician\", but the word does not correspond to English \"is\"; instead, the word , which is a predicate, corresponds to the entire phrase \"is a musician\". The word is used to prevent , which would mean \"the friend-of-me type of musician\".\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5631", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5631", "title": "Cheese/Gruyere", "text": ""}
{"id": "5632", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5632", "title": "Venezuelan Beaver cheese", "text": ""}
{"id": "5634", "revid": "548440", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5634", "title": "List of centuries and millennia", "text": "Redirect"}
{"id": "5635", "revid": "36729223", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5635", "title": "Christopher Columbus", "text": "Italian navigator and explorer (1451\u20131506)\nChristopher Columbus (; between 25 August and 31 October 1451 \u2013 20 May 1506) was an Italian explorer and navigator from the Republic of Genoa who completed four Spanish-based voyages across the Atlantic Ocean sponsored by the Catholic Monarchs, opening the way for the widespread European exploration and colonization of the Americas. His expeditions were the first known European contact with the Caribbean and Central and South America.\nThe name \"Christopher Columbus\" is the anglicization of the Latin . Growing up on the coast of Liguria, he went to sea at a young age and traveled widely, as far north as the British Isles and as far south as what is now Ghana. He married Portuguese noblewoman Filipa Moniz Perestrelo, who bore a son, Diego, and was based in Lisbon for several years. He later took a Castilian mistress, Beatriz Enr\u00edquez de Arana, who bore a son, Ferdinand.\nLargely self-educated, Columbus was knowledgeable in geography, astronomy, and history. He developed a plan to seek a western sea passage to the East Indies, hoping to profit from the lucrative spice trade. After the Granada War, and Columbus's persistent lobbying in multiple kingdoms, the Catholic Monarchs, Queen Isabella I and King Ferdinand II, agreed to sponsor a journey west. Columbus left Castile in August 1492 with three ships and made landfall in the Americas on 12 October, ending the period of human habitation in the Americas now referred to as the pre-Columbian era. His landing place was an island in the Bahamas, known by its native inhabitants as Guanahani. He then visited the islands now known as Cuba and Hispaniola, establishing a colony in what is now Haiti. Columbus returned to Castile in early 1493, with captured natives. Word of his voyage soon spread throughout Europe.\nColumbus made three further voyages to the Americas, exploring the Lesser Antilles in 1493, Trinidad and the northern coast of South America in 1498, and the east coast of Central America in 1502. Many of the names given to geographical features by Columbus, particularly the names of islands, are still in use. He gave the name ('Indians') to the indigenous peoples he encountered. The extent to which he was aware that the Americas were a wholly separate landmass is uncertain; he never clearly renounced his belief he had reached the Far East. As a colonial governor, Columbus was accused by some of his contemporaries of significant brutality and removed from the post. Columbus's strained relationship with the Crown of Castile and its colonial administrators in America led to his arrest and removal from Hispaniola in 1500, and later to protracted litigation over the privileges he and his heirs claimed were owed to them by the Crown.\nColumbus's expeditions inaugurated a period of exploration, conquest, and colonization that lasted for centuries, thus bringing the Americas into the European sphere of influence. The transfer of plants, animals, precious metals, culture, human populations, technology, diseases, and ideas between the Old World and New World that followed his first voyage are known as the Columbian exchange, named after him. These events and the effects which persist to the present are often cited as the beginning of the modern era. Diseases introduced from the Old World contributed to the genocide of Hispaniola's indigenous Ta\u00edno people, who were also subject to enslavement and other mistreatments by Columbus's government. Increased public awareness of these interactions has led to Columbus being less celebrated in Western culture, which has historically idealized him as a heroic discoverer. Numerous places have been named for him.\nEarly life.\nColumbus's early life is obscure, but scholars believe he was born in the Republic of Genoa between 25 August and 31 October 1451. His father was Domenico Colombo, a wool weaver who worked in Genoa and Savona, and owned a cheese stand at which young Christopher worked. His mother was Susanna Fontanarossa. He had three brothers\u2014Bartholomew, Giovanni Pellegrino, and Giacomo (also called Diego)\u2014as well as a sister, Bianchinetta. Bartholomew ran a cartography workshop in Lisbon for at least part of his adulthood.\nColumbus is presumed to have spoken a Genoese dialect (Ligurian) as his native language, though he probably never wrote in it. His name in 15th-century Genoese was \"Cristoffa Corombo\", in Italian, , and in Spanish .\nIn one of his writings, Columbus says he went to sea at 14. In 1470, the family moved to Savona, where Domenico took over a tavern. Some modern authors have argued that he was not from Genoa, but from the Aragon region of Spain or from Portugal. These competing hypotheses have been discounted by most scholars.\nIn 1473, Columbus began his apprenticeship as business agent for the wealthy Spinola, Centurione, and Di Negro families of Genoa. Later, he made a trip to the Greek island Chios in the Aegean Sea, then ruled by Genoa. In May 1476, he took part in an armed convoy sent by Genoa to carry valuable cargo to northern Europe. He probably visited Bristol, England, and Galway, Ireland, where he may have visited St. Nicholas' Collegiate Church. It has been speculated he went to Iceland in 1477, though many scholars doubt this. It is known that in the autumn of 1477, he sailed on a Portuguese ship from Galway to Lisbon, where he found his brother Bartholomew, and they continued trading for the Centurione family. Columbus based himself in Lisbon from 1477 to 1485. In 1478, the Centuriones sent Columbus on a sugar-buying trip to Madeira. He married Felipa Perestrello e Moniz, daughter of Bartolomeu Perestrello, a Portuguese nobleman of Lombard origin, who had been the donatary captain of Porto Santo.\nIn 1479 or 1480, Columbus's son Diego was born. Between 1482 and 1485, Columbus traded along the coasts of West Africa, reaching the Portuguese trading post of Elmina at the Guinea coast in present-day Ghana. Before 1484, Columbus returned to Porto Santo to find that his wife had died. He returned to Portugal to settle her estate and take Diego with him. He left Portugal for Castile in 1485, where he took a mistress in 1487, a 20-year-old orphan named Beatriz Enr\u00edquez de Arana. It is likely that Beatriz met Columbus when he was in C\u00f3rdoba, a gathering place for Genoese merchants and where the court of the Catholic Monarchs was located at intervals. Beatriz, unmarried at the time, gave birth to Columbus's second son, Fernando Columbus, in July 1488, named for the monarch of Aragon. Columbus recognized the boy as his offspring. Columbus entrusted his older, legitimate son Diego to take care of Beatriz and pay the pension set aside for her following his death, but Diego was negligent in his duties.\nColumbus learned Latin, Portuguese, and Castilian. He read widely about astronomy, geography, and history, including the works of Ptolemy, Pierre d'Ailly's ', the travels of Marco Polo and Sir John Mandeville, Pliny's \"Natural History\", and Pope Pius II's '. According to historian Edmund Morgan,\nColumbus was not a scholarly man. Yet he studied these books, made hundreds of marginal notations in them and came out with ideas about the world that were characteristically simple and strong and sometimes wrong\u00a0...\nQuest for Asia.\nBackground.\nUnder the Mongol Empire's hegemony over Asia and the \"Pax Mongolica\", Europeans had long enjoyed a safe land passage on the Silk Road to India, parts of East Asia, including China and Maritime Southeast Asia, which were sources of valuable goods. With the fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Empire in 1453, the Silk Road was closed to Christian traders.\nIn 1474, the Florentine astronomer Paolo dal Pozzo Toscanelli suggested to King Afonso V of Portugal that sailing west across the Atlantic would be a quicker way to reach Asia than the route around Africa, but Afonso rejected his proposal. In the 1480s, Columbus and his brother proposed a plan to reach the East Indies by sailing west. Columbus supposedly wrote to Toscanelli in 1481 and received encouragement, along with a copy of a map the astronomer had sent Afonso implying that a westward route to Asia was possible. Columbus's plans were complicated by Bartolomeu Dias's rounding of the Cape of Good Hope in 1488, which suggested the Cape Route around Africa to Asia.\nColumbus had to wait until 1492 for King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella of Spain to support his voyage across the Atlantic to find gold, spices, a safer route to the East, and converts to Christianity.\nCarol Delaney and other commentators have argued that Columbus was a Christian millennialist and apocalypticist and that these beliefs motivated his quest for Asia in a variety of ways. Columbus often wrote about seeking gold in the log books of his voyages and writes about acquiring it \"in such quantity that the sovereigns... will undertake and prepare to go conquer the Holy Sepulcher\" in a fulfillment of Biblical prophecy. Columbus often wrote about converting all races to Christianity. Abbas Hamandi argues that Columbus was motivated by the hope of \"[delivering] Jerusalem from Muslim hands\" by \"using the resources of newly discovered lands\".\nGeographical considerations.\nDespite a popular misconception to the contrary, nearly all educated Westerners of Columbus's time knew that the Earth is spherical, a concept that had been understood since antiquity. The techniques of celestial navigation, which uses the position of the Sun and the stars in the sky, had long been in use by astronomers and were beginning to be implemented by mariners.\nHowever, Columbus made several errors in calculating the size of the Earth, the distance the continent extended to the east, and therefore the distance to the west to reach his goal.\nFirst, as far back as the 3rd century\u00a0BC, Eratosthenes had correctly computed the circumference of the Earth by using simple geometry and studying the shadows cast by objects at two remote locations. In the 1st century\u00a0BC, Posidonius confirmed Eratosthenes's results by comparing stellar observations at two separate locations. These measurements were widely known among scholars, but Ptolemy's use of the smaller, old-fashioned units of distance led Columbus to underestimate the size of the Earth by about a third.\nSecond, three cosmographical parameters determined the bounds of Columbus's enterprise: the distance across the ocean between Europe and Asia, which depended on the extent of the oikumene, i.e., the Eurasian land-mass stretching east\u2013west between Spain and China; the circumference of the Earth; and the number of miles or leagues in a degree of longitude, which was possible to deduce from the theory of the relationship between the size of the surfaces of water and the land as held by the followers of Aristotle in medieval times.\nFrom Pierre d'Ailly's \"\" (1410), Columbus learned of Alfraganus's estimate that a degree of latitude (equal to approximately a degree of longitude along the equator) spanned 56.67\u00a0Arabic miles (equivalent to or 76.2\u00a0mi), but he did not realize that this was expressed in the Arabic mile (about ) rather than the shorter Roman mile (about 1,480\u00a0m) with which he was familiar. Columbus therefore estimated the size of the Earth to be about 75% of Eratosthenes's calculation.\nThird, most scholars of the time accepted Ptolemy's estimate that Eurasia spanned 180\u00b0 longitude, rather than the actual 130\u00b0 (to the Chinese mainland) or 150\u00b0 (to Japan at the latitude of Spain). Columbus believed an even higher estimate, leaving a smaller percentage for water. In d'Ailly's \"\", Columbus read Marinus of Tyre's estimate that the longitudinal span of Eurasia was 225\u00b0 at the latitude of Rhodes. Some historians, such as Samuel Eliot Morison, have suggested that he followed the statement in the apocryphal book 2 Esdras () that \"six parts [of the globe] are habitable and the seventh is covered with water.\" He was also aware of Marco Polo's claim that Japan (which he called \"Cipangu\") was some to the east of China (\"Cathay\"), and closer to the equator than it is. He was influenced by Toscanelli's idea that there were inhabited islands even farther to the east than Japan, including the mythical Antillia, which he thought might lie not much farther to the west than the Azores, and the distance westward from the Canary Islands to the Indies as only 68 degrees, equivalent to (a 58% error).\nBased on his sources, Columbus estimated a distance of from the Canary Islands west to Japan; the actual distance is . No ship in the 15th century could have carried enough food and fresh water for such a long voyage, and the dangers involved in navigating through the uncharted ocean would have been formidable. Most European navigators reasonably concluded that a westward voyage from Europe to Asia was unfeasible. The Catholic Monarchs, however, having completed the , an expensive war against the Moors in the Iberian Peninsula, were eager to obtain a competitive edge over other European countries in the quest for trade with the Indies. Columbus's project, though far-fetched, held the promise of such an advantage.\nNautical considerations.\nThough Columbus was wrong about the number of degrees of longitude that separated Europe from the Far East and about the distance that each degree represented, he did take advantage of the trade winds, which would prove to be the key to his successful navigation of the Atlantic Ocean. He planned to first sail to the Canary Islands before continuing west with the northeast trade wind. Part of the return to Spain would require traveling against the wind using an arduous sailing technique called beating, during which progress is made very slowly. To effectively make the return voyage, Columbus would need to follow the curving trade winds northeastward to the middle latitudes of the North Atlantic, where he would be able to catch the westerlies that blow eastward to the coast of Western Europe.\nThe navigational technique for travel in the Atlantic appears to have been exploited first by the Portuguese, who referred to it as the ('turn of the sea'). Through his marriage to his first wife, Felipa Perestrello, Columbus had access to the nautical charts and logs that had belonged to her deceased father, Bartolomeu Perestrello, who had served as a captain in the Portuguese navy under Prince Henry the Navigator. In the mapmaking shop where he worked with his brother Bartholomew, Columbus also had ample opportunity to hear the stories of old seamen about their voyages to the western seas, but his knowledge of the Atlantic wind patterns was still imperfect at the time of his first voyage. By sailing due west from the Canary Islands during hurricane season, skirting the so-called horse latitudes of the mid-Atlantic, he risked being becalmed and running into a tropical cyclone, both of which he avoided by chance.\nQuest for financial support for a voyage.\nBy about 1484, Columbus proposed his planned voyage to King John II of Portugal. The king submitted Columbus's proposal to his advisors, who rejected it, correctly, on the grounds that Columbus's estimate for a voyage of 2,400\u00a0nmi was only a quarter of what it should have been. In 1488, Columbus again appealed to the court of Portugal, and John II again granted him an audience. That meeting also proved unsuccessful, in part because not long afterwards Bartolomeu Dias returned to Portugal with news of his successful rounding of the southern tip of Africa (near the Cape of Good Hope).\nColumbus sought an audience with the monarchs Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile, who had united several kingdoms in the Iberian Peninsula by marrying and now ruled together. On 1 May 1486, permission having been granted, Columbus presented his plans to Queen Isabella, who in turn referred it to a committee. The learned men of Spain, like their counterparts in Portugal, replied that Columbus had grossly underestimated the distance to Asia. They pronounced the idea impractical and advised the Catholic Monarchs to pass on the proposed venture. To keep Columbus from taking his ideas elsewhere, and perhaps to keep their options open, the sovereigns gave him an allowance, totaling about 14,000 for the year, or about the annual salary of a sailor. In May 1489, the queen sent him another 10,000 , and the same year the monarchs furnished him with a letter ordering all cities and towns under their dominion to provide him food and lodging at no cost.\nColumbus also dispatched his brother Bartholomew to the court of Henry VII of England to inquire whether the English Crown might sponsor his expedition, but he was captured by pirates en route, and only arrived in early 1491. By that time, Columbus had retreated to La R\u00e1bida Friary, where the Spanish Crown sent him 20,000 \"maravedis\" to buy new clothes and instructions to return to the Spanish court for renewed discussions.\nAgreement with the Spanish Crown.\nColumbus waited at King Ferdinand's camp until Ferdinand and Isabella conquered Granada, the last Muslim stronghold on the Iberian Peninsula, in January 1492. A council led by Isabella's confessor, Hernando de Talavera, found Columbus's proposal to reach the Indies implausible. Columbus had left for France when Ferdinand intervened, first sending Talavera and Bishop Diego Deza to appeal to the queen. Isabella was finally convinced by the king's clerk Luis de Sant\u00e1ngel, who argued that Columbus would take his ideas elsewhere, and offered to help arrange the funding. Isabella then sent a royal guard to fetch Columbus, who had traveled two leagues (over 10\u00a0km) toward C\u00f3rdoba.\nIn the April 1492 \"Capitulations of Santa Fe\", King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella promised Columbus that if he succeeded he would be given the rank of \"Admiral of the Ocean Sea\" and appointed Viceroy and Governor of all the new lands he might claim for Spain. He had the right to nominate three persons, from whom the sovereigns would choose one, for any office in the new lands. He would be entitled to one-tenth () of all the revenues from the new lands in perpetuity. He also would have the option of buying one-eighth interest in any commercial venture in the new lands, and receive one-eighth () of the profits.\nIn 1500, during his third voyage to the Americas, Columbus was arrested and dismissed from his posts. He and his sons, Diego and Fernando, then conducted a lengthy series of court cases against the Castilian Crown, known as the , alleging that the Crown had illegally reneged on its contractual obligations to Columbus and his heirs. The Columbus family had some success in their first litigation, as a judgment of 1511 confirmed Diego's position as viceroy but reduced his powers. Diego resumed litigation in 1512, which lasted until 1536, and further disputes initiated by heirs continued until 1790.\nVoyages.\nBetween 1492 and 1504, Columbus completed four round-trip voyages between Spain and the Americas, each voyage being sponsored by the Crown of Castile. On his first voyage he reached the Americas, initiating the European exploration and colonization of the continent, as well as the Columbian exchange. His role in history is thus important to the Age of Discovery, Western history, and human history writ large.\nIn Columbus's letter on the first voyage, published following his first return to Spain, he claimed that he had reached Asia, as previously described by Marco Polo and other Europeans. Over his subsequent voyages, Columbus refused to acknowledge that the lands he visited and claimed for Spain were not part of Asia, in the face of mounting evidence to the contrary. This might explain, in part, why the American continent was named after the Florentine explorer Amerigo Vespucci\u2014who received credit for recognizing it as a \"New World\"\u2014and not after Columbus.\nFirst voyage (1492\u20131493).\nOn the evening of 3 August 1492, Columbus departed from Palos de la Frontera with three ships. The largest was a carrack, the \"Santa Mar\u00eda\", owned and captained by Juan de la Cosa, and under Columbus's direct command. The other two were smaller caravels, the \"Pinta\" and the \"Ni\u00f1a\", piloted by the Pinz\u00f3n brothers. Columbus first sailed to the Canary Islands. There he restocked provisions and made repairs then departed from San Sebasti\u00e1n de La Gomera on 6 September, for what turned out to be a five-week voyage across the ocean.\nOn 7 October, the crew spotted \"[i]mmense flocks of birds\". On 11 October, Columbus changed the fleet's course to due west, and sailed through the night, believing land was soon to be found. At around 02:00 the following morning, a lookout on the \"Pinta\", Rodrigo de Triana, spotted land. The captain of the \"Pinta\", Mart\u00edn Alonso Pinz\u00f3n, verified the sight of land and alerted Columbus. Columbus later maintained that he had already seen a light on the land a few hours earlier, thereby claiming for himself the lifetime pension promised by Ferdinand and Isabella to the first person to sight land. Columbus called this island (in what is now the Bahamas) ('Holy Savior'); the Natives called it Guanahani. Christopher Columbus's journal entry of 12 October 1492 states:I saw some who had marks of wounds on their bodies and I made signs to them asking what they were; and they showed me how people from other islands nearby came there and tried to take them, and how they defended themselves; and I believed and believe that they come here from to take them captive. They should be good and intelligent servants, for I see that they say very quickly everything that is said to them; and I believe they would become Christians very easily, for it seemed to me that they had no religion. Our Lord pleasing, at the time of my departure I will take six of them from here to Your Highnesses in order that they may learn to speak.\nColumbus called the inhabitants of the lands that he visited ('Indians'). He initially encountered the Lucayan, Ta\u00edno, and Arawak peoples. Noting their gold ear ornaments, Columbus took some of the Arawaks prisoner and insisted that they guide him to the source of the gold. Columbus did not believe he needed to create a fortified outpost, writing, \"the people here are simple in war-like matters ... I could conquer the whole of them with fifty men, and govern them as I pleased.\" The Ta\u00ednos told Columbus that another indigenous tribe, the Caribs, were fierce warriors and cannibals, who made frequent raids on the Ta\u00ednos, often capturing their women, although this may have been a belief perpetuated by the Spaniards to justify enslaving them.\nColumbus also explored the northeast coast of Cuba, where he landed on 28 October. On the night of 26 November, Mart\u00edn Alonso Pinz\u00f3n took the \"Pinta\" on an unauthorized expedition in search of an island called \"Babeque\" or \"Baneque\", which the natives had told him was rich in gold. Columbus, for his part, continued to the northern coast of Hispaniola, where he landed on 6 December. There, the \"Santa Mar\u00eda\" ran aground on 25 December 1492 and had to be abandoned. The wreck was used as a target for cannon fire to impress the native peoples. Columbus was received by the native \"cacique\" Guacanagari, who gave him permission to leave some of his men behind. Columbus left 39 men, including the interpreter Luis de Torres, and founded the settlement of La Navidad, in present-day Haiti. Columbus took more natives prisoner and continued his exploration. He kept sailing along the northern coast of Hispaniola with a single ship until he encountered Pinz\u00f3n and the \"Pinta\" on 6 January.\nOn 13 January 1493, Columbus made his last stop of this voyage in the Americas, in the Bay of Rinc\u00f3n in northeast Hispaniola. There he encountered the Ciguayos, the only natives who offered violent resistance during this voyage. The Ciguayos refused to trade the amount of bows and arrows that Columbus desired; in the ensuing clash one Ciguayo was stabbed in the buttocks and another wounded with an arrow in his chest. Because of these events, Columbus called the inlet the ('Bay of Arrows').\nColumbus headed for Spain on the \"Ni\u00f1a\", but a storm separated him from the \"Pinta\", and forced the \"Ni\u00f1a\" to stop at the island of Santa Maria in the Azores. Half of his crew went ashore to say prayers of thanksgiving in a chapel for having survived the storm. But while praying, they were imprisoned by the governor of the island, ostensibly on suspicion of being pirates. After a two-day stand-off, the prisoners were released, and Columbus again set sail for Spain.\nAnother storm forced Columbus into the port at Lisbon. From there he went to north of Lisbon to meet King John II of Portugal, who told Columbus that he believed the voyage to be in violation of the 1479 Treaty of Alc\u00e1\u00e7ovas. After spending more than a week in Portugal, Columbus set sail for Spain. Returning to Palos on 15 March 1493, he was given a hero's welcome and soon afterward received by Isabella and Ferdinand in Barcelona. To them he presented kidnapped Ta\u00ednos and various plants and items he had collected.\nOne of the ten Natives taken on the return trip was a Lucayan Ta\u00edno from Guanahani thought to be 13\u201315 years of age, who Columbus adopted as his son upon their arrival in Spain; the boy, whose Lucayan name is unknown, received the name \"Diego\" at baptism. Initially, Diego had been recognized for his intelligence and rapid acquisition of Spanish customs, and would serve as a guide and interpreter on each of Columbus's subsequent voyages. By the second voyage's departure later in 1493, Diego was the only Native out of the ten taken to Europe who had not died or become seriously ill as the result of disease; while on this voyage, he played a vital role in the discovery of La Navidad. He subsequently married and had a son, also named Diego, who died of illness in 1506. Following Columbus's death, Diego spent the rest of his life confined to Santo Domingo, and does not reappear in the historical record following a smallpox epidemic that swept Hispaniola in 1519.\nColumbus's letter on the first voyage, probably dispatched to the Spanish court upon arrival in Lisbon, was instrumental in spreading the news throughout Europe about his voyage. Almost immediately after his arrival in Spain, printed versions began to appear, and word of his voyage spread rapidly. Most people initially believed that he had reached Asia. The Bulls of Donation, three papal bulls of Pope Alexander VI delivered in 1493, purported to grant overseas territories to Portugal and the Catholic Monarchs of Spain. They were replaced by the Treaty of Tordesillas of 1494.\nThe two earliest published copies of Columbus's letter on the first voyage aboard the \"Ni\u00f1a\" were donated in 2017 by the Jay I. Kislak Foundation to the University of Miami library in Coral Gables, Florida, where they are housed.\nSecond voyage (1493\u20131496).\nOn 24 September 1493, Columbus sailed from C\u00e1diz with 17 ships, and supplies to establish permanent colonies in the Americas. He sailed with nearly 1,500 men, including sailors, soldiers, priests, carpenters, stonemasons, metalworkers, and farmers. Among the expedition members were Alvarez Chanca, a physician who wrote a detailed account of the second voyage; Juan Ponce de Le\u00f3n, the first governor of Puerto Rico and Florida; the father of Bartolom\u00e9 de las Casas; Juan de la Cosa, a cartographer who is credited with making the first world map depicting the New World; and Columbus's youngest brother Diego. The fleet stopped at the Canary Islands to take on more supplies, and set sail again on 7 October, deliberately taking a more southerly course than on the first voyage.\nOn 3 November, they arrived in the Windward Islands; the first island they encountered was named Dominica by Columbus, but not finding a good harbor there, they anchored off a nearby smaller island, which he named , now a part of Guadeloupe and called Marie-Galante. Other islands named by Columbus on this voyage were Montserrat, Antigua, Saint Martin, and the Virgin Islands, as well as many others.\nOn 17 November, Columbus first sighted the eastern coast of the island of Puerto Rico, known to its native Taino people as . His fleet sailed along the island's southern coast for a whole day, before making landfall on its northwestern coast at the Bay of A\u00f1asco, early on 19 November. Upon landing, Columbus christened the island \"San Juan Bautista\" after John the Baptist, and remained anchored there for two days from 20 to 21 November, filling the water casks of the ships in his fleet.\nOn 22 November, Columbus returned to Hispaniola to visit \"La Navidad\" in modern-day Haiti, where 39 Spaniards had been left during the first voyage. Columbus found the fort in ruins. He learned from Guacanagar\u00edx, the local tribe leader, that his men had quarreled over gold and taken women from the tribe, and that after some left for the territory of Caonabo, Caonabo came and burned the fort and killed the rest of the men there.\nColumbus then established a poorly located and short-lived settlement to the east, La Isabela, in the present-day Dominican Republic. By the end of 1494, disease and famine had killed two-thirds of the Spanish settlers there.\nFrom April to August 1494, Columbus explored Cuba and Jamaica, then returned to Hispaniola. Before leaving on this exploration to Cuba, Columbus had ordered a large number of men, under Pedro Margarit, to \"journey the length and breadth of the island, enforcing Spanish control and bringing all the people under the Spanish yoke.\" These men, in his absence, raped women, took men captive to be servants, and stole from the indigenous people. A number of Spanish were killed in retaliation. By the time Columbus returned from exploring Cuba, the four primary leaders of the Arawak people in Hispaniola were gathering for war to try to drive the Spanish from the Island. Columbus assembled a large number of troops, and joined with his one native ally, chief Guacanagar\u00edx, met for battle. The Spanish, even though they were largely outnumbered, won this battle, and over the next 9 months Columbus continued to wage war on the native Ta\u00edno on Hispaniola until they surrendered and agreed to pay tribute.\nColumbus implemented , a Spanish labor system that rewarded conquerors with the labor of conquered non-Christian people. It is also recorded that punishments to both Spaniards and natives included whippings and mutilation (cutting noses and ears).\nColumbus and the colonists enslaved many of the indigenous people, including children. Natives were beaten, raped, and tortured for the location of imagined gold. Thousands committed suicide rather than face the oppression.\nIn February 1495, Columbus rounded up about 1,500 Arawaks, some of whom had rebelled, in a great slave raid. About 500 of the strongest were shipped to Spain as slaves, with about two hundred of those dying en route.\nIn June 1495, the Spanish Crown sent ships and supplies to Hispaniola. In October, Florentine merchant Gianotto Berardi, who had won the contract to provision the fleet of Columbus's second voyage and to supply the colony on Hispaniola, received almost 40,000 worth of enslaved Indians. He renewed his effort to get supplies to Columbus, and was working to organize a fleet when he suddenly died in December. On 10 March 1496, having been away about 30 months, the fleet departed La Isabela. On 8 June the crew sighted land somewhere between Lisbon and Cape St. Vincent, and disembarked in C\u00e1diz on 11 June.\nThird voyage (1498\u20131500).\nOn 30 May 1498, Columbus left with six ships from Sanl\u00facar, Spain. The fleet called at Madeira and the Canary Islands, where it divided in two, with three ships heading for Hispaniola and the other three vessels, commanded by Columbus, sailing south to the Cape Verde Islands and then westward across the Atlantic. It is probable that this expedition was intended at least partly to confirm rumors of a large continent south of the Caribbean Sea, that is, South America.\nOn 31 July they sighted Trinidad, the most southerly of the Caribbean islands. On 5 August, Columbus sent several small boats ashore on the southern side of the Paria Peninsula in what is now Venezuela, near the mouth of the Orinoco river. This was the first recorded landing of Europeans on the mainland of South America, which Columbus realized must be a continent. The fleet then sailed to the islands of Chacachacare and Margarita, reaching the latter on 14 August, and sighted Tobago and Grenada from afar, according to some scholars.\nOn 19 August, Columbus returned to Hispaniola. There he found settlers in rebellion against his rule, and his unfulfilled promises of riches. Columbus had some of the Europeans tried for their disobedience; at least one rebel leader was hanged.\nIn October 1499, Columbus sent two ships to Spain, asking the Court of Spain to appoint a royal commissioner to help him govern. By this time, accusations of tyranny and incompetence on the part of Columbus had also reached the Court. The sovereigns sent Francisco de Bobadilla, a relative of Marquesa Beatriz de Bobadilla, a patron of Columbus and a close friend of Queen Isabella, to investigate the accusations of brutality made against the Admiral. Arriving in Santo Domingo while Columbus was away, Bobadilla was immediately met with complaints about all three Columbus brothers. He moved into Columbus's house and seized his property, took depositions from the Admiral's enemies, and declared himself governor.\nBobadilla reported to Spain that Columbus once punished a man found guilty of stealing corn by having his ears and nose cut off and then selling him into slavery. He claimed that Columbus regularly used torture and mutilation to govern Hispaniola. Testimony recorded in the report stated that Columbus congratulated his brother Bartholomew on \"defending the family\" when the latter ordered for a woman to be paraded naked through the streets and then had her tongue cut because she had \"spoken ill of the admiral and his brothers\". The document also describes how Columbus put down native unrest and revolt: he first ordered a brutal suppression of the uprising in which many natives were killed, and then paraded their dismembered bodies through the streets in an attempt to discourage further rebellion. Columbus vehemently denied the charges. The neutrality and accuracy of the accusations and investigations of Bobadilla toward Columbus and his brothers have been disputed by historians, given the anti-Italian sentiment of the Spaniards and Bobadilla's desire to take over Columbus's position.\nIn early October 1500, Columbus and Diego presented themselves to Bobadilla, and were put in chains aboard \"La Gorda\", the caravel on which Bobadilla had arrived at Santo Domingo. They were returned to Spain, and languished in jail for six weeks before King Ferdinand ordered their release. Not long after, the king and queen summoned the Columbus brothers to the Alhambra palace in Granada. The sovereigns expressed indignation at the actions of Bobadilla, who was then recalled and ordered to make restitutions of the property he had confiscated from Columbus. The royal couple heard the brothers' pleas; restored their freedom and wealth; and, after much persuasion, agreed to fund Columbus's fourth voyage. However, Nicol\u00e1s de Ovando was to replace Bobadilla and be the new governor of the West Indies.\nNew light was shed on the seizure of Columbus and his brother Bartholomew, the Adelantado, with the discovery by archivist Isabel Aguirre of an incomplete copy of the testimonies against them gathered by Francisco de Bobadilla at Santo Domingo in 1500. She found a manuscript copy of this (inquiry) \u200cin the Archive of Simancas, Spain, uncatalogued until she and Consuelo Varela published their book, \"\" (\"The fall of Christopher Col\u00f3n: the judgement of Bobadilla\") in 2006.\nFourth voyage (1502\u20131504).\nOn 9 May 1502, Columbus left C\u00e1diz with his flagship \"Santa Mar\u00eda\" and three other vessels. The ships were crewed by 140 men, including his brother Bartholomew as second in command and his son Fernando. He sailed to Asilah on the Moroccan coast to rescue Portuguese soldiers said to be besieged by the Moors. The siege had been lifted by the time they arrived, so the Spaniards stayed only a day and continued on to the Canary Islands.\nOn 15 June, the fleet arrived at Martinique, where it lingered for several days. A hurricane was forming, so Columbus continued westward, hoping to find shelter on Hispaniola. He arrived at Santo Domingo on 29 June, but was denied port, and the new governor Francisco de Bobadilla refused to listen to his warning that a hurricane was approaching. Instead, while Columbus's ships sheltered at the mouth of the Rio Jaina, the first Spanish treasure fleet sailed into the hurricane. Columbus's ships survived with only minor damage, while 20 of the 30 ships in the governor's fleet were lost along with 500 lives (including that of Francisco de Bobadilla). Although a few surviving ships managed to straggle back to Santo Domingo, \"\", the fragile ship carrying Columbus's personal belongings and his 4,000 pesos in gold was the sole vessel to reach Spain. The gold was his \"tenth\" () of the profits from Hispaniola, equal to 240,000 maravedis, guaranteed by the Catholic Monarchs in 1492.\nAfter a brief stop at Jamaica, Columbus sailed to Central America, arriving at the coast of Honduras on 30 July. Here Bartholomew found native merchants and a large canoe. On 14 August, Columbus landed on the continental mainland at Punta Caxinas, now Puerto Castilla, Honduras. He spent two months exploring the coasts of Honduras, Nicaragua, and Costa Rica, seeking a strait in the western Caribbean through which he could sail to the Indian Ocean. Sailing south along the Nicaraguan coast, he found a channel that led into Almirante Bay in Panama on 5 October.\nAs soon as his ships anchored in Almirante Bay, Columbus encountered Ng\u00e4be people in canoes who were wearing gold ornaments. In January 1503, he established a garrison at the mouth of the Bel\u00e9n River. Columbus left for Hispaniola on 16 April. On 10 May he sighted the Cayman Islands, naming them after the numerous sea turtles there. His ships sustained damage in a storm off the coast of Cuba. Unable to travel farther, on 25 June 1503 they were beached in Saint Ann Parish, Jamaica.\nFor six months Columbus and 230 of his men remained stranded on Jamaica. Diego M\u00e9ndez de Segura, who had shipped out as a personal secretary to Columbus, and a Spanish shipmate called Bartolom\u00e9 Flisco, along with six natives, paddled a canoe to get help from Hispaniola. The governor, Nicol\u00e1s de Ovando y C\u00e1ceres, detested Columbus and obstructed all efforts to rescue him and his men. In the meantime Columbus, in a desperate effort to induce the natives to continue provisioning him and his hungry men, won their favor by predicting a lunar eclipse for 29 February 1504, using Abraham Zacuto's astronomical charts. Despite the governor's obstruction, Christopher Columbus and his men were rescued on 28 June 1504, and arrived in Sanl\u00facar, Spain, on 7 November.\nLater life, illness, and death.\nColumbus had always claimed that the conversion of non-believers was one reason for his explorations, and he grew increasingly religious in his later years. Probably with the assistance of his son Diego and his friend the Carthusian monk Gaspar Gorricio, Columbus produced two books during his later years: a \"Book of Privileges\" (1502), detailing and documenting the rewards from the Spanish Crown to which he believed he and his heirs were entitled, and a \"Book of Prophecies\" (1505), in which passages from the Bible were used to place his achievements as an explorer in the context of Christian eschatology.\nIn his later years, Columbus demanded that the Crown of Castile give him his tenth of all the riches and trade goods yielded by the new lands, as stipulated in the Capitulations of Santa Fe. Because he had been relieved of his duties as governor, the Crown did not feel bound by that contract and his demands were rejected. After his death, his heirs sued the Crown for a part of the profits from trade with America, as well as other rewards. This led to a protracted series of legal disputes known as the ('Columbian lawsuits').\nDuring a violent storm on his first return voyage, Columbus, then 41, had suffered an attack of what was believed at the time to be gout. In subsequent years, he was plagued with what was thought to be influenza and other fevers, bleeding from the eyes, temporary blindness and prolonged attacks of gout. The attacks increased in duration and severity, sometimes leaving Columbus bedridden for months at a time, and culminated in his death 14 years later.\nBased on Columbus's lifestyle and the described symptoms, some modern commentators suspect that he suffered from reactive arthritis, rather than gout. Reactive arthritis is a joint inflammation caused by intestinal bacterial infections or after acquiring certain sexually transmitted diseases (primarily chlamydia or gonorrhea). In 2006, Frank C. Arnett, a medical doctor, and historian Charles Merrill, published their paper in \"The American Journal of the Medical Sciences\" proposing that Columbus had a form of reactive arthritis; Merrill made the case in that same paper that Columbus was the son of Catalans and his mother possibly a member of a prominent (converted Jew) family. \"It seems likely that [Columbus] acquired reactive arthritis from food poisoning on one of his ocean voyages because of poor sanitation and improper food preparation\", says Arnett, a rheumatologist and professor of internal medicine, pathology and laboratory medicine at the University of Texas Medical School at Houston.\nSome historians such as H. Micheal Tarver and Emily Slape, as well as medical doctors such as Arnett and Antonio Rodr\u00edguez Cuartero, believe that Columbus had such a form of reactive arthritis, but according to other authorities, this is \"speculative\", or \"very speculative\".\nAfter his arrival to Sanl\u00facar from his fourth voyage (and Queen Isabella's death), an ill Columbus settled in Seville in April 1505. He stubbornly continued to make pleas to the Crown to defend his own personal privileges and his family's. He moved to Segovia (where the court was at the time) on a mule by early 1506, and, on the occasion of the wedding of King Ferdinand with Germaine of Foix in Valladolid, Spain, in March 1506, Columbus moved to that city to persist with his demands. On 20 May 1506, aged 54, Columbus died in Valladolid.\nLocation of remains.\nColumbus's remains were first buried at the Chapel of Wonders at the Convent of St. Francis, Valladolid, but were then moved to the monastery of La Cartuja in Seville (southern Spain) by the will of his son Diego. They may have been exhumed in 1513 and interred at the Seville Cathedral. In about 1536, the remains of both Columbus and his son Diego were moved to a cathedral in Colonial Santo Domingo, in the present-day Dominican Republic; Columbus had requested to be buried on the island. By some accounts, in 1793, when France took over the entire island of Hispaniola, Columbus's remains were moved to Havana, Cuba. After Cuba became independent following the Spanish\u2013American War in 1898, at least some of these remains were moved back to the Seville Cathedral, where they were placed on an elaborate catafalque.\nIn June 2003, DNA samples were taken from the remains in Seville, as well as those of Columbus's brother Diego and younger son Fernando. Initial observations suggested that the bones did not appear to match Columbus's physique or age at death. DNA extraction proved difficult; only short fragments of mitochondrial DNA could be isolated. These matched corresponding DNA from Columbus's brother, supporting that the two men had the same mother. Such evidence, together with anthropologic and historic analyses, led the researchers to conclude that the remains belonged to Christopher Columbus.\nIn 1877, a priest discovered a lead box at Santo Domingo inscribed: \"Discoverer of America, First Admiral\". Inscriptions found the next year read \"Last of the remains of the first admiral, Sire Christopher Columbus, discoverer.\" The box contained bones of an arm and a leg, as well as a bullet. These remains were considered legitimate by physician and U.S. Assistant Secretary of State John Eugene Osborne, who suggested in 1913 that they travel through the Panama Canal as a part of its opening ceremony. These remains were kept at the Basilica Cathedral of Santa Mar\u00eda la Menor (in the Colonial City of Santo Domingo) before being moved to the Columbus Lighthouse (Santo Domingo Este, inaugurated in 1992). The authorities in Santo Domingo have never allowed these remains to be DNA-tested, so it is unconfirmed whether they are from Columbus's body as well.\nCommemoration.\nThe figure of Columbus was not ignored in the British colonies during the colonial era: Columbus became a unifying symbol early in the history of the colonies that became the United States when Puritan preachers began to use his life story as a model for a \"developing American spirit\". In the spring of 1692, Puritan preacher Cotton Mather described Columbus's voyage as one of three shaping events of the modern age, connecting Columbus's voyage and the Puritans' migration to North America, seeing them together as the key to a grand design.\nThe use of Columbus as a founding figure of New World nations spread rapidly after the American Revolution. This was out of a desire to develop a national history and founding myth with fewer ties to Britain. His name was the basis for the female national personification of the United States, Columbia, in use since the 1730s with reference to the original Thirteen Colonies, and also a historical name applied to the Americas and to the New World. Columbia, South Carolina, and \"Columbia Rediviva\", the ship for which the Columbia River was named, are named for Columbus.\nColumbus's name was given to the newly born Republic of Colombia in the early 19th century, inspired by the political project of \"Colombeia\" developed by revolutionary Francisco de Miranda, which was put at the service of the emancipation of continental Hispanic America.\nTo commemorate the 400th anniversary of the landing of Columbus, the 1893 World's Fair in Chicago was named the World's Columbian Exposition. The U.S. Postal Service issued the first U.S. commemorative stamps, the Columbian Issue, depicting Columbus, Queen Isabella and others in various stages of his several voyages. A commemorative silver half dollar was also struck, which remains the only U.S. currency issued having a foreigner as its subject. The policies related to the celebration of the Spanish colonial empire as the vehicle of a nationalist project undertaken in Spain during the Restoration in the late 19th century took form with the commemoration of the 4th centenary on 12 October 1892 (in which the figure of Columbus was extolled by the Conservative government), eventually becoming the very same national day. Several monuments commemorating the \"discovery\" were erected in cities such as Palos, Barcelona, Granada, Madrid, Salamanca, Valladolid and Seville in the years around the 400th anniversary.\nFor the Columbus Quincentenary in 1992, a second Columbian issue was released jointly with Italy, Portugal, and Spain. Columbus was celebrated at Seville Expo '92, and Genoa Expo '92.\nThe Boal Mansion Museum, founded in 1951, contains a collection of materials concerning later descendants of Columbus and collateral branches of the family. It features a 16th-century chapel from a Spanish castle reputedly owned by Diego Col\u00f3n which became the residence of Columbus's descendants. The chapel interior was dismantled and moved from Spain in 1909 and re-erected on the Boal estate at Boalsburg, Pennsylvania. Inside it are numerous religious paintings and other objects including a reliquary with fragments of wood supposedly from the True Cross. The museum also holds a collection of documents mostly relating to Columbus descendants of the late 18th and early 19th centuries.\nIn many countries of the Americas, as well as Spain and Italy, Columbus Day celebrates the anniversary of Columbus's arrival in the Americas on 12 October 1492.\nLegacy.\nThe voyages of Columbus are considered a turning point in human history, marking the beginning of globalization and accompanying demographic, commercial, economic, social, and political changes.\nHis explorations resulted in permanent contact between the two hemispheres, and the term \"pre-Columbian\" is used to refer to the cultures of the Americas before the arrival of Columbus and his European successors. The ensuing Columbian exchange saw the massive exchange of animals, plants, fungi, diseases, technologies, mineral wealth and ideas.\nIn the first century after his endeavors, Columbus's figure largely languished in the backwaters of history, and his reputation was beset by his failures as a colonial administrator. His legacy was somewhat rescued from oblivion when he began to appear as a character in Italian and Spanish plays and poems from the late 16th century onward.\nColumbus was subsumed into the Western narrative of colonization and empire building, which invoked notions of \"translatio imperii\" and \"translatio studii\" to underline who was considered \"civilized\" and who was not.\nThe Americanization of the figure of Columbus began in the latter decades of the 18th century, after the revolutionary period of the United States, elevating the status of his reputation to a national myth, \"homo americanus\". His landing became a powerful icon as an \"image of American genesis\". \"The Discovery of America\" sculpture, depicting Columbus and a cowering Native maiden, was commissioned on 3 April 1837, when U.S. President Martin Van Buren sanctioned the engineering of Luigi Persico's design. This representation of Columbus's triumph and the Native's recoil is a demonstration of supposed white superiority over savage, naive Natives. As recorded during its unveiling in 1844, the sculpture extends to \"represent the meeting of the two races\", as Persico captures their first interaction, highlighting the \"moral and intellectual inferiority\" of Natives. Placed outside the U.S. Capitol building where it remained until its removal in the mid-20th century, the sculpture reflected the contemporary view of whites in the U.S. toward the Natives; they are labeled \"merciless Indian savages\" in the United States Declaration of Independence. In 1836, Pennsylvania senator and future U.S. President James Buchanan, who proposed the sculpture, described it as representing \"the great discoverer when he first bounded with ecstasy upon the shore, ail his toils past, presenting a hemisphere to the astonished world, with the name America inscribed upon it. Whilst he is thus standing upon the shore, a female savage, with awe and wonder depicted in her countenance, is gazing upon him.\"\nThe American Columbus myth was reconfigured later in the century when he was enlisted as an ethnic hero by immigrants to the United States who were not of Anglo-Saxon stock, such as Jewish, Italian, and Irish people, who claimed Columbus as a sort of ethnic founding father. Catholics unsuccessfully tried to promote him for canonization in the 19th century.\nFrom the 1990s onward, a narrative of Columbus being responsible for the genocide of indigenous peoples and environmental destruction began to compete with the then predominant discourse of Columbus as Christ-bearer, scientist, or father of America. This narrative features the negative effects of Columbus' conquests on native populations. Exposed to Old World diseases, the indigenous populations of the New World collapsed, and were largely replaced by Europeans and Africans, who brought with them new methods of farming, business, governance, and religious worship.\nOriginality of discovery of America.\nThough Christopher Columbus came to be considered the European discoverer of America in Western popular culture, his historical legacy is more nuanced. After settling Iceland, the Norse settled the uninhabited southern part of Greenland beginning in the 10th century. Norsemen are believed to have then set sail from Greenland and Iceland to become the first known Europeans to reach the North American mainland, nearly 500 years before Columbus reached the Caribbean. The 1960s discovery of a Norse settlement dating c.\u00a01000 at L'Anse aux Meadows, Newfoundland, partially corroborates accounts within the Icelandic sagas of Erik the Red's colonization of Greenland and his son Leif Erikson's subsequent exploration of a place he called Vinland.\nIn the 19th century, amid a revival of interest in Norse culture, Carl Christian Rafn and Benjamin Franklin DeCosta wrote works establishing that the Norse had preceded Columbus in colonizing the Americas. Following this, in 1874 Rasmus Bj\u00f8rn Anderson argued that Columbus must have known of the North American continent before he started his voyage of discovery. Most modern scholars doubt Columbus had knowledge of the Norse settlements in America, with his arrival to the continent being most likely an independent discovery.\nEuropeans devised explanations for the origins of the Native Americans and their geographical distribution with narratives that often served to reinforce their own preconceptions built on ancient intellectual foundations. In modern Latin America, the non-Native populations of some countries often demonstrate an ambiguous attitude toward the perspectives of indigenous peoples regarding the so-called \"discovery\" by Columbus and the era of colonialism that followed.\nIn his 1960 monograph, Mexican philosopher and historian Edmundo O'Gorman explicitly rejects the Columbus discovery myth, arguing that the idea that Columbus discovered America was a misleading legend fixed in the public mind through the works of American author Washington Irving during the 19th century. O'Gorman argues that to assert Columbus \"discovered America\" is to shape the facts concerning the events of 1492 to make them conform to an interpretation that arose many years later. For him, the Eurocentric view of the discovery of America sustains systems of domination in ways that favor Europeans. In a 1992 article for \"The UNESCO Courier\", F\u00e9lix Fern\u00e1ndez-Shaw argues that the word \"discovery\" prioritizes European explorers as the \"heroes\" of the contact between the Old and New World. He suggests that the word \"encounter\" is more appropriate, being a more universal term which includes Native Americans in the narrative.\nAmerica as a distinct land.\nHistorians have traditionally argued that Columbus remained convinced until his death that his journeys had been along the east coast of Asia as he originally intended (excluding arguments such as Anderson's). On his third voyage he briefly referred to South America as a \"hitherto unknown\" continent, while also rationalizing that it was the Earthly Paradise (Eden) located \"at the end of the Orient\". Columbus continued to claim in his later writings that he had reached Asia; in a 1502 letter to Pope Alexander VI, he asserts that Cuba is the east coast of Asia. On the other hand, in a document in the \"Book of Privileges\" (1502), Columbus refers to the New World as the \"Indias Occidentales\" ('West Indies'), which he says \"were unknown to all the world\".\nShape of the Earth.\nWashington Irving's 1828 biography of Columbus popularized the idea that Columbus had difficulty obtaining support for his plan because many Catholic theologians insisted that the Earth was flat, but this is a popular misconception which can be traced back to 17th-century Protestants campaigning against Catholicism. In fact, the spherical shape of the Earth had been known to scholars since antiquity, and was common knowledge among sailors, including Columbus. Coincidentally, the oldest surviving globe of the Earth, the Erdapfel, was made in 1492, just before Columbus's return to Europe from his first voyage. As such it contains no sign of the Americas and yet demonstrates the common belief in a spherical Earth.\nIn 1492, Columbus correctly measured Polaris's diurnal motion around true north as having a diameter of almost 7\u00b0. In 1498, while sailing west through the doldrums 8\u00b0 north in July and again in August sailing the trade winds 13\u00b0 north, Columbus reported seeing Polaris with a diurnal motion of 10\u00b0 in diameter. He accounted for the shift by concluding that Earth's figure is pear-shaped, with the 'stalk' portion (comparing this to a woman's breast) being nearest Heaven and upon which was centered the Earthly Paradise. Although Columbus's later readings were incorrect, 20th-century satellite data happens to indicate that the Earth has a slight pear shape.\nCriticism and defense.\nColumbus has been criticized both for his brutality and for initiating the depopulation of the indigenous peoples of the Caribbean, whether by imported diseases or intentional violence. According to scholars of Native American history, George Tinker and Mark Freedman, Columbus was responsible for creating a cycle of \"murder, violence, and slavery\" to maximize exploitation of the Caribbean islands' resources, and that Native deaths on the scale at which they occurred would not have been caused by new diseases alone. Further, they describe the proposition that disease and not genocide caused these deaths as \"American holocaust denial\". Historian Kris Lane disputes whether it is appropriate to use the term \"genocide\" when the atrocities were not Columbus's intent, but resulted from his decrees, family business goals, and negligence. Other scholars defend Columbus's actions or allege that the worst accusations against him are not based in fact while others claim that \"he has been blamed for events far beyond his own reach or knowledge\".\nAs a result of the protests and riots that followed the murder of George Floyd in 2020, many public monuments of Christopher Columbus have been removed.\nBrutality.\nSome historians have criticized Columbus for initiating the widespread colonization of the Americas and for abusing its native population. On St. Croix, Columbus's friend Michele da Cuneo\u2014according to his own account\u2014kept an indigenous woman he captured, whom Columbus \"gave to [him]\", then brutally raped her.\nAccording to some historians, the punishment for an indigenous person, aged 14 and older, failing to pay a hawk's bell, or \"cascabela\", worth of gold dust every six months (based on Bartolom\u00e9 de las Casas's account) was cutting off the hands of those without tokens, often leaving them to bleed to death. Other historians dispute such accounts. For example, a study of Spanish archival sources showed that the \"cascabela\" quotas were imposed by Guarionex, not Columbus, and that there is no mention, in the primary sources, of punishment by cutting off hands for failing to pay. Columbus had an economic interest in the enslavement of the Hispaniola natives and for that reason was not eager to baptize them, which attracted criticism from some churchmen. Consuelo Varela, a Spanish historian, stated that \"Columbus's government was characterized by a form of tyranny. Even those who loved him had to admit the atrocities that had taken place.\" Other historians have argued that some of the accounts of the brutality of Columbus and his brothers have been exaggerated as part of the Black Legend, a historical tendency towards anti-Spanish and anti-Catholic sentiment in historical sources dating as far back as the 16th century, which they speculate may continue to taint scholarship into the present day.\nAccording to historian Emily Berquist Soule, the immense Portuguese profits from the maritime trade in African slaves along the West African coast served as an inspiration for Columbus to create a counterpart of this apparatus in the New World using indigenous American slaves. Historian William J. Connell has argued that while Columbus \"brought the entrepreneurial form of slavery to the New World\", this \"was a phenomenon of the times\", further arguing that \"we have to be very careful about applying 20th-century understandings of morality to the morality of the 15th century.\" In a less popular defense of colonization, Spanish ambassador Mar\u00eda Jes\u00fas Figa has argued, \"Normally we melded with the cultures in America, we stayed there, we spread our language and culture and religion.\"\nBritish historian Basil Davidson has dubbed Columbus the \"father of the slave trade\", citing the fact that the first license to ship enslaved Africans to the Caribbean was issued by the Catholic Monarchs in 1501 to the first royal governor of Hispaniola, Nicol\u00e1s de Ovando.\nGenocide and depopulation.\nAround the turn of the 21st century, estimates for the pre-Columbian population of Hispaniola ranged between 250,000 and two million, but genetic analysis published in late 2020 suggests that smaller figures are more likely, perhaps as low as 10,000\u201350,000 for Hispaniola and Puerto Rico combined. Based on the previous figures of a few hundred thousand, some have estimated that a third or more of the natives in Haiti were dead within the first two years of Columbus's governorship. Contributors to depopulation included disease, warfare, and harsh enslavement. Indirect evidence suggests that some serious illness may have arrived with the 1,500 colonists who accompanied Columbus' second expedition in 1493. Charles C. Mann writes that \"It was as if the suffering these diseases had caused in Eurasia over the past millennia were concentrated into the span of decades.\" A third of the natives forced to work in gold and silver mines died every six months. Within three to six decades, the surviving Arawak population numbered only in the hundreds. The indigenous population of the Americas overall is thought to have been reduced by about 90% in the century after Columbus's arrival. Among indigenous peoples, Columbus is often viewed as a key agent of genocide. Samuel Eliot Morison, a Harvard University historian and author of a multivolume biography on Columbus, writes, \"The cruel policy initiated by Columbus and pursued by his successors resulted in complete genocide.\"\nAccording to Noble David Cook, \"There were too few Spaniards to have killed the millions who were reported to have died in the first century after Old and New World contact.\" He instead estimates that the death toll was caused by smallpox, which may have caused a pandemic only after the arrival of Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s in 1519. According to some estimates, smallpox had an 80\u201390% fatality rate in Native American populations. The natives had no acquired immunity to these new diseases and suffered high fatalities. There is also evidence that they had poor diets and were overworked. Historian Andr\u00e9s Res\u00e9ndez of University of California, Davis, says the available evidence suggests \"slavery has emerged as major killer\" of the indigenous populations of the Caribbean between 1492 and 1550 more so than diseases such as smallpox, influenza and malaria. He says that indigenous populations did not experience a rebound like European populations did following the Black Death because unlike the latter, a large portion of the former were subjected to deadly forced labor in the mines.\nThe diseases that devastated the Native Americans came in multiple waves at different times, sometimes as much as centuries apart, which would mean that survivors of one disease may have been killed by others, preventing the population from recovering. Historian David Stannard describes the depopulation of the indigenous Americans as \"neither inadvertent nor inevitable\", saying it was the result of both disease and intentional genocide.\nNavigational expertise.\nBiographers and historians have a wide range of opinions about Columbus's expertise and experience navigating and captaining ships. One scholar lists some European works ranging from the 1890s to 1980s that support Columbus's experience and skill as among the best in Genoa, while listing some American works over a similar timeframe that portray the explorer as an untrained entrepreneur, having only minor crew or passenger experience prior to his noted journeys. According to Morison, Columbus's success in utilizing the trade winds might owe significantly to luck.\nPhysical appearance.\nContemporary descriptions of Columbus, including those by his son Fernando and Bartolom\u00e9 de las Casas, describe him as taller than average, with light skin (often sunburnt), blue or hazel eyes, high cheekbones and freckled face, an aquiline nose, and blond to reddish hair and beard (until about the age of 30, when it began to whiten). One Spanish commentator described his eyes using the word \"garzos\", now usually translated as \"light blue\", but it seems to have indicated light grey-green or hazel eyes to Columbus's contemporaries. The word \"rubios\" can mean \"blond\", \"fair\", or \"ruddy\". Although an abundance of artwork depicts Columbus, no authentic contemporary portrait is known.\nA well-known image of Columbus is by Sebastiano del Piombo, which has been reproduced in many textbooks. It agrees with descriptions of Columbus in that it shows a large man with auburn hair, but the painting dates from 1519 so cannot have been painted from life. Furthermore, the inscription identifying the subject as Columbus was probably added later, and the face shown differs from that of other images.\nSometime between 1531 and 1536, Alejo Fern\u00e1ndez painted an altarpiece, \"The Virgin of the Navigators\", that includes a depiction of Columbus. The painting was commissioned for a chapel in Seville's Casa de Contrataci\u00f3n (House of Trade) in the Alc\u00e1zar of Seville and remains there.\nAt the World's Columbian Exposition in 1893, 71 alleged portraits of Columbus were displayed; most of them did not match contemporary descriptions.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5636", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5636", "title": "Chemist", "text": "Scientist trained in the study of chemistry\nA chemist (from Greek \"ch\u0113m(\u00eda)\" alchemy; replacing \"chymist\" from Medieval Latin \"alchemist\") is a graduated scientist trained in the study of chemistry, or an officially enrolled student in the field. Chemists study the composition of matter and its properties. Chemists carefully describe the properties they study in terms of quantities, with detail on the level of molecules and their component atoms. Chemists carefully measure substance proportions, chemical reaction rates, and other chemical properties. In Commonwealth English, pharmacists are often called chemists.\nChemists use their knowledge to learn the composition and properties of unfamiliar substances, as well as to reproduce and synthesize large quantities of useful naturally occurring substances and create new artificial substances and useful processes. Chemists may specialize in any number of subdisciplines of chemistry. Materials scientists and metallurgists share much of the same education and skills with chemists. The work of chemists is often related to the work of chemical engineers, who are primarily concerned with the proper design, construction and evaluation of the most cost-effective large-scale chemical plants and work closely with industrial chemists on the development of new processes and methods for the commercial-scale manufacture of chemicals and related products.\nHistory of chemistry.\nThe roots of chemistry can be traced to the phenomenon of burning. Fire was a mystical force that transformed one substance into another and thus was of primary interest to mankind. It was fire that led to the discovery of iron and glasses. After gold was discovered and became a precious metal, many people were interested to find a method that could convert other substances into gold. This led to the protoscience called alchemy. The word \"chemist\" is derived from the Neo-Latin noun \"chimista\", an abbreviation of \"alchimista\" (alchemist). Alchemists discovered many chemical processes that led to the development of modern chemistry. \nChemistry as we know it today, was invented by Antoine Lavoisier with his law of conservation of mass in 1783. The discoveries of the chemical elements has a long history culminating in the creation of the periodic table by Dmitri Mendeleev. The Nobel Prize in Chemistry created in 1901 gives an excellent overview of chemical discovery since the start of the 20th century.\nAt the Washington Academy of Sciences during World War I, it was said that the side with the best chemists would win the war.\nEducation.\nFormal education.\nJobs for chemists generally require at least a bachelor's degree in chemistry, which takes four years.16 However, many positions, especially those in research, require a Master of Science or a Doctor of Philosophy (PhD.). Most undergraduate programs emphasize mathematics and physics as well as chemistry, partly because chemistry is also known as \"the central science\", thus chemists ought to have a well-rounded knowledge about science. At the Master's level and higher, students tend to specialize in a particular field. Fields of specialization include biochemistry, nuclear chemistry, organic chemistry, inorganic chemistry, polymer chemistry, analytical chemistry, physical chemistry, theoretical chemistry, quantum chemistry, environmental chemistry, and thermochemistry. Postdoctoral experience may be required for certain positions.\nWorkers whose work involves chemistry, but not at a complexity requiring an education with a chemistry degree, are commonly referred to as \"chemical technicians\". Such technicians commonly do such work as simpler, routine analyses for quality control or in clinical laboratories, having an associate degree. A chemical technologist has more education or experience than a chemical technician but less than a chemist, often having a bachelor's degree in a different field of science with also an associate degree in chemistry (or many credits related to chemistry) or having the same education as a chemical technician but more experience. There are also degrees specific to become a chemical technologist, which are somewhat distinct from those required when a student is interested in becoming a professional chemist. A Chemical technologist is more involved in the management and operation of the equipment and instrumentation necessary to perform chemical analyzes than a chemical technician. They are part of the team of a chemical laboratory in which the quality of the raw material, intermediate products and finished products is analyzed. They also perform functions in the areas of environmental quality control and the operational phase of a chemical plant.\nTraining.\nIn addition to all the training usually given to chemical technologists in their respective degree (or one given via an associate degree), a chemist is also trained to understand more details related to chemical phenomena so that the chemist can be capable of more planning on the steps to achieve a distinct goal via a chemistry-related endeavor. The higher the competency level achieved in the field of chemistry (as assessed via a combination of education, experience and personal achievements), the higher the responsibility given to that chemist and the more complicated the task might be. Chemistry, as a field, has so many applications that different tasks and objectives can be given to workers or scientists with these different levels of education or experience. The specific title of each job varies from position to position, depending on factors such as the kind of industry, the routine level of the task, the current needs of a particular enterprise, the size of the enterprise or hiring firm, the philosophy and management principles of the hiring firm, the visibility of the competency and individual achievements of the one seeking employment, economic factors such as recession or economic depression, among other factors, so this makes it difficult to categorize the exact roles of these chemistry-related workers as standard for that given level of education. Because of these factors affecting exact job titles with distinct responsibilities, some chemists might begin doing technician tasks while other chemists might begin doing more complicated tasks than those of a technician, such as tasks that also involve formal applied research, management, or supervision included within the responsibilities of that same job title. The level of supervision given to that chemist also varies in a similar manner, with factors similar to those that affect the tasks demanded for a particular chemist.\nIt is important that those interested in a Chemistry degree understand the variety of roles available to them (on average), which vary depending on education and job experience. Those Chemists who hold a bachelor's degree are most commonly involved in positions related to either research assistance (working under the guidance of senior chemists in a research-oriented activity), or, alternatively, they may work on distinct (chemistry-related) aspects of a business, organization or enterprise including aspects that involve quality control, quality assurance, manufacturing, production, formulation, inspection, method validation, visitation for troubleshooting of chemistry-related instruments, regulatory affairs, \"on-demand\" technical services, chemical analysis for non-research purposes (e.g., as a legal request, for testing purposes, or for government or non-profit agencies); chemists may also work in environmental evaluation and assessment. Other jobs or roles may include sales and marketing of chemical products and chemistry-related instruments or technical writing. The more experience obtained, the more independence and leadership or management roles these chemists may perform in those organizations. Some chemists with relatively higher experience might change jobs or job position to become a manager of a chemistry-related enterprise, a supervisor, an entrepreneur or a chemistry consultant. Other chemists choose to combine their education and experience as a chemist with a distinct credential to provide different services (e.g., forensic chemists, chemistry-related software development, patent law specialists, environmental law firm staff, scientific news reporting staff, engineering design staff, etc.).\nIn comparison, chemists who have obtained a Master of Science (M.S.) in chemistry or in a very related discipline may find chemist roles that allow them to enjoy more independence, leadership and responsibility earlier in their careers with less years of experience than those with a bachelor's degree as highest degree. Sometimes, M.S. chemists receive more complex tasks duties in comparison with the roles and positions found by chemists with a bachelor's degree as their highest academic degree and with the same or close-to-same years of job experience. There are positions that are open only to those that at least have a degree related to chemistry at the master's level. Although good chemists without a Ph.D. degree but with relatively many years of experience may be allowed some applied research positions, the general rule is that Ph.D. chemists are preferred for research positions and are typically the preferred choice for the highest administrative positions on big enterprises involved in chemistry-related duties. Some positions, especially research oriented, will only allow those chemists who are Ph.D. holders. Jobs that involve intensive research and actively seek to lead the discovery of completely new chemical compounds under specifically assigned monetary funds and resources or jobs that seek to develop new scientific theories require a Ph.D. more often than not. Chemists with a Ph.D. as the highest academic degree are found typically on the research-and-development department of an enterprise and can also hold university positions as professors. Professors for research universities or for big universities usually have a Ph.D., and some research-oriented institutions might require post-doctoral training. Some smaller colleges (including some smaller four-year colleges or smaller non-research universities for undergraduates) as well as community colleges usually hire chemists with a M.S. as professors too (and rarely, some big universities who need part-time or temporary instructors, or temporary staff), but when the positions are scarce and the applicants are many, they might prefer Ph.D. holders instead.\nSkills.\nSkills that a chemist may need on the job include:\nEmployment.\nMost chemists begin their lives in research laboratories.18 Many chemists continue working at universities. Other chemists may start companies, teach at high schools or colleges,19 take samples outside (as environmental chemists),19 or work in medical examiner offices or police departments (as forensic chemists).18\nSome software that chemists may find themselves using include:\nIncreasingly, chemists may also find themselves using artificial intelligence, such as for drug discovery.\nSubdisciplines.\nChemistry typically is divided into several major sub-disciplines. There are also several main cross-disciplinary and more specialized fields of chemistry. There is a great deal of overlap between different branches of chemistry, as well as with other scientific fields such as biology, medicine, physics, radiology, and several engineering disciplines.\nAll the above major areas of chemistry employ chemists. Other fields where chemical degrees are useful include astrochemistry (and cosmochemistry), atmospheric chemistry, chemical engineering, chemo-informatics, electrochemistry, environmental science, forensic science, geochemistry, green chemistry, history of chemistry, materials science, medical science, molecular biology, molecular genetics, nanotechnology, nuclear chemistry, oenology, organometallic chemistry, petrochemistry, pharmacology, photochemistry, phytochemistry, polymer chemistry, supramolecular chemistry and surface chemistry.\nProfessional societies.\nChemists may belong to professional societies specifically for professionals and researchers within the field of chemistry, such as the Royal Society of Chemistry in the United Kingdom, the American Chemical Society (ACS) in the United States, or the Institution of Chemists in India.\nEthics.\nThe \"Global Chemists' Code of Ethics\" suggests several ethical principles that all chemists should follow:\nThis code of ethics was codified in a 2016 conference held in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, run by the American Chemical Society. The points listed are inspired by the 2015 Hague Ethical Guidelines.\nHonors and awards.\nThe highest honor awarded to chemists is the Nobel Prize in Chemistry, awarded since 1901, by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5637", "revid": "4967956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5637", "title": "Cypress Hill", "text": "American hip hop group\nCypress Hill is an American hip hop group formed in South Gate, California in 1988. One of the first Latin American groups to gain mainstream recognition in hip hop, they have sold over 20 million albums worldwide, and have obtained multi-platinum and platinum certifications. The group has been critically acclaimed for their first five albums. They are considered to be among the main progenitors of West Coast hip hop and 1990s hip hop. All of the group members advocate for medical and recreational use of cannabis in the United States. In 2019, Cypress Hill became the first hip hop group to have a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.\nHistory.\nFormation (1988).\nSenen Reyes (also known as Sen Dog) and Ulpiano Sergio Reyes (also known as Mellow Man Ace) are brothers born in Pinar del R\u00edo, Cuba. In 1971, their family immigrated to the United States and initially lived in South Gate, California. In 1988, the two brothers teamed up with New York City native Lawrence Muggerud (also known as DJ Muggs, previously in a rap group named 7A3) and Louis Freese (also known as B-Real) to form a hip-hop group named DVX (Devastating Vocal Excellence). The band soon lost Mellow Man Ace to a solo career, and changed their name to Cypress Hill, after a street in South Gate.\nMainstream success with \"Cypress Hill\" and \"Black Sunday\", addition of Eric Bobo, and \"III: Temples of Boom\" (1989\u20131996).\nAfter recording a demo in 1989, Cypress Hill signed a record deal with Ruffhouse Records. Their self-titled first album was released in August 1991. The lead single was the double A-side \"The Phuncky Feel One\"/\"How I Could Just Kill a Man\" which received heavy airplay on urban and college radio, most notably peaking at No. 1 on \"Billboard\"'s Hot Rap Tracks chart and at No. 77 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. The other two singles released from the album were \"Hand on the Pump\" and \"Latin Lingo\", the latter of which combined English and Spanish lyrics, a trait that was continued throughout their career. The success of these singles led \"Cypress Hill\" to sell two million copies in the U.S. alone, and it peaked at No. 31 on the \"Billboard\" 200 and was certified double platinum by the RIAA. In 1992, Cypress Hill's first contribution to a soundtrack was the song \"Shoot 'Em Up\" for the film \"Juice\". Cypress Hill's songs started to appear more frequently in major Hollywood films, such as \"Lethal Weapon 3\" (\"Latin Lingo\") and \"White Men Can't Jump\" (\"A to the K\") also from 1992. The group made their first appearance at Lollapalooza on the side stage in 1992. It was the festival's second year of touring, and featured a diverse lineup of acts such as Red Hot Chili Peppers, Ice Cube, Lush, Tool, Stone Temple Pilots, among others. The trio also supported the \"Cypress Hill\" album by touring with the Beastie Boys, who were touring behind their third album \"Check Your Head\".\n\"Black Sunday\", the group's second album, debuted at No. 1 on the \"Billboard\" 200 in 1993, recording the highest Soundscan for a rap group up until that time. \"Insane in the Brain\" became a crossover hit, peaking at No. 19 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, at No. 16 on the Dance Club Songs chart, and at No. 1 on the Hot Rap Tracks chart. \"Insane in the Brain\" also garnered the group their first Grammy nomination. \"Black Sunday\" went triple platinum in the U.S. and sold about 3.26\u00a0million copies. Cypress Hill headlined the Soul Assassins tour with House of Pain, Funkdoobiest, and The Whooliganz as support, then performed on a college tour with Rage Against the Machine and Seven Year Bitch. Also in 1993, Cypress Hill had two tracks on the \"Judgment Night\" soundtrack, teaming up with Pearl Jam (without vocalist Eddie Vedder) on the track \"Real Thing\" and Sonic Youth on \"I Love You Mary Jane\". The soundtrack was notable for intentionally creating collaborations between the rap/hip-hop and rock/metal genres, and as a result the soundtrack peaked at No. 17 on the \"Billboard\" 200 and was certified gold by the RIAA. \nThe group later played at Woodstock 94, officially making percussionist Eric Bobo a member of the group during the performance. Eric Bobo was known as the son of Willie Bobo and as a touring member of the Beastie Boys, who Cypress Hill previously toured with in 1992. That same year, \"Rolling Stone\" named the group as the Best Rap Group in their music awards voted by critics and readers. Cypress Hill then played at Lollapalooza for two successive years, topping the bill in 1995. They also appeared on the \"Homerpalooza\" episode of \"The Simpsons\". The group received their second Grammy nomination in 1995 for \"I Ain't Goin' Out Like That\".\nCypress Hill's third album \"\" was released in 1995, peaking at No. 3 on the \"Billboard\" 200 and at No. 3 on the Canadian Albums Chart. The album was certified platinum by the RIAA. \"Throw Your Set in the Air\" was the most successful single off the album, peaking at No. 45 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and No. 11 on the Hot Rap Tracks chart. The single also earned Cypress Hill's third Grammy nomination. Shortly after the release of \"III: Temples of Boom\", Sen Dog became frustrated due to the rigorous touring schedule. Just prior to an overseas tour, he departed from the group unexpectedly. Cypress Hill continued their tours throughout 1995 and 1996, with Eric Bobo and also various guest vocalists covering Sen Dog's verses. Sen Dog later formed the rock band SX-10 to explore other musical genres. Later on in 1996, Cypress Hill appeared on the first Smokin' Grooves tour, featuring Ziggy Marley, the Fugees, Busta Rhymes, and A Tribe Called Quest. The group also released a nine track EP, \"Unreleased and Revamped\" with rare mixes.\nFocus on solo projects, \"IV\", crossover appeal with \"Skull &amp; Bones\", and \"Stoned Raiders\" (1997\u20132002).\nIn 1997, the members focused on their solo careers. DJ Muggs released \"Soul Assassins: Chapter 1\", with features from Dr. Dre, KRS-One, Wyclef Jean, and Mobb Deep. B-Real appeared with Busta Rhymes, Coolio, LL Cool J, and Method Man on \"Hit 'Em High\" from the multi-platinum \"Space Jam Soundtrack\". He also appeared with RBX, Nas, and KRS-One on \"East Coast Killer, West Coast Killer\" from Dr. Dre's \"Dr. Dre Presents the Aftermath\" album, and contributed to an album entitled \"The Psycho Realm\" with the group of the same name. Sen Dog also released the \"Get Wood\" sampler as part of SX-10 on the label Flip Records. In addition, Eric Bobo contributed drums to various rock bands on their albums, such as 311 and Soulfly.\nIn early 1998, Sen Dog returned to Cypress Hill. He cited his therapist and also his creative collaborations with the band SX-10 as catalysts for his rejoining. The quartet then embarked on the third annual Smokin' Grooves tour with Public Enemy, Wyclef Jean, Busta Rhymes, and Gang Starr. Cypress Hill released \"IV\" in October 1998 which went gold in the U.S. and peaked at No. 11 on the Billboard 200. The lead single off the album was \"Dr. Greenthumb\", as it peaked at No. 11 on the Hot Rap Tracks chart. It also peaked at No. 70 on the Billboard Hot 100, their last appearance on the chart to date. \nIn 1999, Cypress Hill composed the soundtrack for the PC first-person shooter video game \"\", three of the band's songs from the 1998 \"IV\" album were in the game; \"16 Men Till There's No Men Left\", \"Checkmate\", and \"Lightning Strikes\". The group also did voice work for some of the game's characters. Also in 1999, the band released a greatest hits album in Spanish, \"Los Grandes \u00c9xitos en Espa\u00f1ol\".\nIn 2000, Cypress Hill fused genres with their fifth album, \"Skull &amp; Bones\", which consisted of two discs. The first disc \"Skull\" was composed of rap tracks while \"Bones\" explored further the group's forays into rock. The album peaked at No. 5 on the Billboard 200 and at No. 3 on the Canadian Albums Chart, and the album was eventually certified platinum by the RIAA. The first two singles were \"(Rock) Superstar\" for rock radio and \"(Rap) Superstar\" for urban radio. Both singles received heavy airplay on both rock and urban radio, enabling Cypress Hill to crossover again. \"(Rock) Superstar\" peaked at No. 18 on the Modern Rock Tracks chart and \"(Rap) Superstar\" peaked at No. 43 on the Hot Rap Tracks chart.\nDue to the rock genre's prominent appearance on \"Skull &amp; Bones\", Cypress Hill employed the members of Sen Dog's band SX-10 as backing musicians for the live shows. Cypress Hill supported \"Skull &amp; Bones\" by initially playing a summer tour with Limp Bizkit and Cold called the Back 2 Basics Tour. The tour was controversial as it was sponsored by the file sharing service Napster. In addition, Napster enabled each show of the tour to be free to the fans, and no security guards were employed during the performances. After the tour's conclusion, the acts had not reported any disturbances. Towards the end of 2000, Cypress Hill and MxPx landed a slot opening for The Offspring on the Conspiracy of One Tour. The group also released \"Live at the Fillmore\", a concert disc recorded at San Francisco's The Fillmore in 2000. Cypress Hill continued their experimentation with rock on the \"Stoned Raiders\" album in 2001; however, its sales were a disappointment. The album peaked at No. 64 on the Billboard 200, the group's lowest position to that point. Also in 2001, the group made a cameo appearance as themselves in the film \"How High\". Cypress Hill then recorded the track \"Just Another Victim\" for WWF as a theme song for Tazz, borrowing elements from the 2000 single \"(Rock) Superstar\". The song would later be featured on the compilation \"WWF Forceable Entry\" in March 2002, which peaked at No. 3 on the Billboard 200 and was certified gold by the RIAA.\n\"Till Death Do Us Part\", DJ Muggs' hiatus, and extensive collaborations on \"Rise Up\" (2003\u20132012).\nCypress Hill released \"Till Death Do Us Part\" in March 2004 as it peaked at No. 21 on the Billboard 200. It featured appearances by Bob Marley's son Damian Marley, Prodigy of Mobb Deep, and producers The Alchemist and Fredwreck. The album represented a further departure from the group's signature sound. Reggae was a strong influence on its sound, especially on the lead single \"What's Your Number?\". The track featured Tim Armstrong of Rancid on guitar and backup vocals. It was based on the classic song \"The Guns of Brixton\" from The Clash's album \"London Calling\". \"What's Your Number?\" saw Cypress Hill crossover into the rock charts again, as the single peaked at No. 23 on the Modern Rock Tracks chart.\nAfterwards, DJ Muggs took a hiatus from the group to focus on other projects, such as Soul Assassins and his \"DJ Muggs vs.\" collaboration albums. In December 2005 another compilation album titled \"Greatest Hits From the Bong\" was released. It included nine hits from previous albums and two new tracks. In the summer of 2006, B-Real appeared on Snoop Dogg's single \"Vato\", which was produced by Pharrell Williams. The group's next album was tentatively scheduled for an early 2007 release, but it was pushed back numerous times. In 2007 Cypress Hill toured as a part of the Rock the Bells tour. They headlined with Public Enemy, Wu-Tang Clan, Nas, and a reunited Rage Against the Machine.\nOn July 25, 2008, Cypress Hill performed at a benefit concert at the House of Blues Chicago, where a majority of the proceeds went to the Chicago Alliance to End Homelessness. In August 2009, a new song by Cypress Hill titled \"Get 'Em Up\" was made available on iTunes. The song was also featured in the \"Madden NFL 2010\" video game. It was the first sampling of the group's then-upcoming album.\nCypress Hill's eighth studio album \"Rise Up\" featured contributions from Everlast, Tom Morello, Daron Malakian, Pitbull, Marc Anthony, and Mike Shinoda. Previously, the vast majority of the group's albums were produced by DJ Muggs; however, \"Rise Up\" instead featured a large array of guest features and producers, with DJ Muggs only appearing on two tracks. The album was released on Priority Records/EMI Entertainment, as the group was signed to the label by new creative chairman Snoop Dogg. \"Rise Up\" was released on April 20, 2010, and it peaked at No. 19 on the Billboard 200. The single \"Rise Up\" was featured at WWE's pay-per-view \"Elimination Chamber\" as the official theme song for the event. It also appeared in the trailer for the movie \"The Green Hornet\". \"Rise Up\" managed to peak at No. 20 on both the Modern Rock Tracks and Mainstream Rock Tracks charts. \"Armada Latina\", which featured Pitbull and Marc Anthony, was Cypress Hill's last song to chart in the U.S. to date, peaking at No. 25 on the Hot Rap Tracks chart.\nCypress Hill commenced its Rise Up tour in Philadelphia on April 10, 2010. In one particular instance, the group was supposed to stop in Tucson, Arizona but canceled the show in protest of the recent immigration legislation. At the Rock en Seine festival in Paris on August 27, 2010, they had said in an interview that they would anticipate the outcome of the legislation before returning. Also in 2010, Cypress Hill performed at the Reading and Leeds Festivals on August 28 at Leeds and August 29 at Reading. On June 5, 2012, Cypress Hill and dubstep artist Rusko released a collaborative EP entitled \"Cypress X Rusko\". DJ Muggs, who was still on a hiatus, and Eric Bobo were absent on the release. Also in 2012, Cypress Hill collaborated with Deadmau5 on his sixth studio album \"Album Title Goes Here\", lending vocals on \"Failbait\".\n\"Elephants on Acid\", Hollywood Walk of Fame, and \"Back in Black\" (2013\u20132022).\nDuring the interval between Cypress Hill albums, the four members commenced work on various projects. B-Real formed the band Prophets of Rage alongside three members of Rage Against the Machine and two members of Public Enemy. He also released \"The Prescription\" EP under his Dr. Greenthumb persona. Sen Dog formed the band Powerflo alongside members of Fear Factory, downset., and Biohazard. DJ Muggs revived his Soul Assassins project as its main producer. Eric Bobo formed a duo named Ritmo Machine. He also contributed to an unreleased album by his father Willie Bobo.\nOn September 28, 2018, Cypress Hill released the album \"Elephants on Acid\", which saw the return of DJ Muggs as main composer and producer (DJ Muggs subsequently stayed in the group but very rarely played any live shows). It peaked at No. 120 on the Billboard 200 and at No. 6 on the Top Independent Albums chart. Overall, four different singles were released to promote the album. In April 2019 Cypress Hill received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Although various solo hip hop artists had received stars, Cypress Hill became the first collective hip hop group to receive a star. The entire lineup of B-Real, Sen Dog, Eric Bobo, and DJ Muggs had all attended the ceremony.\nIn January 2022, the group announced their 10th studio album entitled \"Back in Black\". In addition, Cypress Hill planned to support the album by joining Slipknot alongside Ho99o9 for the second half of the 2022 Knotfest Roadshow. They had previously invited Slipknot to join their Great Smoke-Out festival back in 2009. \"Back in Black\" was released on March 18, 2022. It was the group's first album to not feature DJ Muggs on any of the tracks, as producing duties were handled by Black Milk. \"Back in Black\" was the lowest charting album of the group's career, and the first to not reach the Billboard 200 chart; however, it peaked at No. 69 on the Top Current Album Sales chart.\nA documentary about the group, entitled \"Cypress Hill: Insane in the Brain\", was released on the Showtime service in April 2022. Estevan Oriol, Cypress Hill's former tour manager and close associate, directed the film. It had mainly chronicled the group's formation and their first decade of existence. In relation to the \"Cypress Hill: Insane in the Brain\" documentary, Cypress Hill digitally released the single \"Crossroads\" in September 2022. The single featured the return of DJ Muggs on production.\nFuture plans and tentative final album (2023\u2013present).\nIn an interview, Sen Dog claimed that the group will fully reunite with DJ Muggs for an 11th album; however, he stated that it will be the group's final album of their career.\nThe group performed at various festivals in 2023 such as the Festival d'\u00e9t\u00e9 de Qu\u00e9bec, and in celebrating the 30th anniversary of their second studio album \"Black Sunday\", they also announced several standalone concerts in North America and Europe. They also performed alongside The Pharcyde and Souls of Mischief in May 2024. They also played in Italy, Austria, and Germany throughout July. In a callback to Cypress Hill's appearance in the 1996 \"Homerpalooza\" episode of \"The Simpsons\" (which contained a skit of the group realizing they must have ordered the London Symphony Orchestra while high to perform with), it was announced that the group would actually perform with the London Symphony Orchestra at London's Royal Albert Hall in July 2024. The band was joined by long-time collaborator Christian Olde Wolbers on double bass.\nStyle.\nRapping.\nOne of the band's most striking aspects is B-Real's exaggeratedly high-pitched nasal vocals. In the book \"Check the Technique\", B-Real described his nasal style, saying his rapping voice is \"high and annoying... the nasal style I have was just something that I developed... my more natural style wasn't so pleasing to DJ Muggs and Sen Dog's ears\" and talking about the nasal style in the book \"How to Rap\", B-Real said \"you want to stand out from the others and just be distinct... when you got something that can separate you from everybody else, you gotta use it to your advantage.\" In the film \"Art of Rap\", B-Real credited the Beastie Boys as an influence when developing his rapping style. Sen Dog's voice is deeper, more violent, and often shouted alongside the rapping; his vocals are often emphasized by adding another background/choir voice to say them. Sen Dog's style is in contrast to B-Real's, who said \"Sen's voice is so strong\" and \"it all blends together\" when they are both on the same track.\nBoth B-Real and Sen Dog started writing lyrics in both Spanish and English. Initially, B-Real was inspired to start writing raps from watching Sen Dog and Mellow Man Ace writing their lyrics, and originally B-Real was going to just be the writer for the group rather than a rapper. Their lyrics are noted for bringing a \"cartoonish\" approach to violence by Peter Shapiro and Allmusic.\nProduction.\nThe sound and groove of their music, mostly produced by DJ Muggs, has spooky sounds and a stoned aesthetic; with its bass-heavy rhythms and odd sample loops (\"Insane in the Brain\" has a blues guitar pitched looped in its chorus), it carries a psychedelic value, which is lessened in their rock-oriented albums. The double album \"Skull &amp; Bones\" consists of a pure rap disc (\"Skull\") and a separate rock disc (\"Bones\"). In the live album \"Live at The Fillmore\", some of the old classics were played in a rock/metal version, with Eric Bobo playing the drums and Sen Dog's band SX-10 as the other instrumentalists. 2010's \"Rise Up\" was the most radically different album in regards to production. DJ Muggs had produced the majority of each prior Cypress Hill album, but he only appeared on \"Rise Up\" twice. The remaining songs were handled by various other guests. 2018's \"Elephants on Acid\" marked the return of DJ Muggs, and the album featured a more psychedelic and hip-hop approach.\nLegacy.\nCypress Hill are often credited for being one of the few Latin American hip hop groups to break through with their own stylistic impact on rap music, in addition to finding a crossover audience among the rock community. Cypress Hill have been cited as an influence by artists such as Eminem, Baby Bash, Paul Wall, Post Malone, Luniz, and Fat Joe. Cypress Hill have also been cited as a strong influence on nu metal bands such as Deftones, Limp Bizkit, System of a Down, Linkin Park, Rage Against the Machine and Korn. Famously, the bassline during the outro of Korn's 1994 single \"Blind\" was a direct tribute to Cypress Hill's 1993 track \"Lick a Shot\".\nMembers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAwards and nominations.\nBillboard Music Awards\nGrammy Awards\nMTV Video Music Awards\nHollywood Walk of Fame\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5638", "revid": "1712722", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5638", "title": "Combustion", "text": "Chemical reaction between a fuel and oxygen\nCombustion, or burning, is a high-temperature exothermic redox chemical reaction between a fuel (the reductant) and an oxidant, usually atmospheric oxygen, that produces oxidized, often gaseous products, in a mixture termed as smoke. Combustion does not always result in fire, because a flame is only visible when substances undergoing combustion vaporize, but when it does, a flame is a characteristic indicator of the reaction. While activation energy must be supplied to initiate combustion (e.g., using a lit match to light a fire), the heat from a flame may provide enough energy to make the reaction self-sustaining. The study of combustion is known as combustion science.\nCombustion is often a complicated sequence of elementary radical reactions. Solid fuels, such as wood and coal, first undergo endothermic pyrolysis to produce gaseous fuels whose combustion then supplies the heat required to produce more of them. Combustion is often hot enough that incandescent light in the form of either glowing or a flame is produced. A simple example can be seen in the combustion of hydrogen and oxygen into water vapor, a reaction which is commonly used to fuel rocket engines. This reaction releases 242kJ/mol of heat and reduces the enthalpy accordingly (at constant temperature and pressure):\n &lt;chem&gt;2H_2(g){+}O_2(g)\\rightarrow 2H_2O\\uparrow&lt;/chem&gt;\nUncatalyzed combustion in air requires relatively high temperatures. Complete combustion is stoichiometric concerning the fuel, where there is no remaining fuel, and ideally, no residual oxidant. Thermodynamically, the chemical equilibrium of combustion in air is overwhelmingly on the side of the products. However, complete combustion is almost impossible to achieve, since the chemical equilibrium is not necessarily reached, or may contain unburnt products such as carbon monoxide, hydrogen and even carbon (soot or ash). Thus, the produced smoke is usually toxic and contains unburned or partially oxidized products. Any combustion at high temperatures in atmospheric air, which is 78 percent nitrogen, will also create small amounts of several nitrogen oxides, commonly referred to as NOx, since the combustion of nitrogen is thermodynamically favored at high, but not low temperatures. Since burning is rarely clean, fuel gas cleaning or catalytic converters may be required by law.\nFires occur naturally, ignited by lightning strikes or by volcanic products. Combustion (fire) was the first controlled chemical reaction discovered by humans, in the form of campfires and bonfires, and continues to be the main method to produce energy for humanity. Usually, the fuel is hydrogen, hydrocarbons(A compound with a mixture of hydrogen and carbon), or more complicated mixtures such as wood that contain partially oxidized hydrocarbons. The thermal energy produced from the combustion of either fossil fuels such as coal or oil, or from renewable fuels such as firewood, is harvested for diverse uses such as cooking, production of electricity or industrial or domestic heating. Combustion is also currently the only reaction used to power rockets. Combustion is also used to destroy (incinerate) waste, both nonhazardous and hazardous.\nOxidants for combustion have high oxidation potential and include atmospheric or pure oxygen, chlorine, fluorine, chlorine trifluoride, nitrous oxide and nitric acid. For instance, hydrogen burns in chlorine to form hydrogen chloride with the liberation of heat and light characteristic of combustion. Although usually not catalyzed, combustion can be catalyzed by platinum or vanadium, as in the contact process.\nTypes.\nComplete and incomplete.\nComplete.\nIn complete combustion, the reactant burns in oxygen and produces a limited number of products. When a hydrocarbon burns in oxygen, the reaction will primarily yield carbon dioxide and water. When elements are burned, the products are primarily the most common oxides. Carbon will yield carbon dioxide, sulfur will yield sulfur dioxide, and iron will yield iron(III) oxide. Nitrogen is not considered to be a combustible substance when oxygen is the oxidant. Still, small amounts of various nitrogen oxides (commonly designated NO\"x\" species) form when the air is the oxidative. \nCombustion is not necessarily favorable to the maximum degree of oxidation, and it can be temperature-dependent. For example, sulfur trioxide is not produced quantitatively by the combustion of sulfur. species appear in significant amounts above about , and more is produced at higher temperatures. The amount of is also a function of oxygen excess.\nIn most industrial applications and in fires, air is the source of oxygen (O2). In the air, each mole of oxygen is mixed with approximately of nitrogen. Nitrogen does not take part in combustion, but at high temperatures, some nitrogen will be converted to NO\"x\" (mostly NO, with much smaller amounts of NO2). On the other hand, when there is insufficient oxygen to combust the fuel completely, some fuel carbon is converted to carbon monoxide, and some of the hydrogens remain unreacted. A complete set of equations for the combustion of a hydrocarbon in the air, therefore, requires an additional calculation for the distribution of oxygen between the carbon and hydrogen in the fuel.\nThe amount of air required for complete combustion is known as the \"theoretical air\" or \"stoichiometric air\". The amount of air above this value actually needed for optimal combustion is known as the \"excess air\", and can vary from 5% for a natural gas boiler, to 40% for anthracite coal, to 300% for a gas turbine.\nIncomplete.\nIncomplete combustion will occur when there is not enough oxygen to allow the fuel to react completely to produce carbon dioxide and water. It also happens when the combustion is quenched by a heat sink, such as a solid surface or flame trap. As is the case with complete combustion, water is produced by incomplete combustion; however, carbon and carbon monoxide are produced instead of carbon dioxide.\nFor most fuels, such as diesel oil, coal, or wood, pyrolysis occurs before combustion. In incomplete combustion, products of pyrolysis remain unburnt and contaminate the smoke with noxious particulate matter and gases. Partially oxidized compounds are also a concern; partial oxidation of ethanol can produce harmful acetaldehyde, and carbon can produce toxic carbon monoxide.\nThe designs of combustion devices can improve the quality of combustion, such as burners and internal combustion engines. Further improvements are achievable by catalytic after-burning devices (such as catalytic converters) or by the simple partial return of the exhaust gases into the combustion process. Such devices are required by environmental legislation for cars in most countries. They may be necessary to enable large combustion devices, such as thermal power stations, to reach legal emission standards.\nThe degree of combustion can be measured and analyzed with test equipment. HVAC contractors, firefighters and engineers use combustion analyzers to test the efficiency of a burner during the combustion process. Also, the efficiency of an internal combustion engine can be measured in this way, and some U.S. states and local municipalities use combustion analysis to define and rate the efficiency of vehicles on the road today.\nCarbon monoxide is one of the products from incomplete combustion. The formation of carbon monoxide produces less heat than formation of carbon dioxide so complete combustion is greatly preferred especially as carbon monoxide is a poisonous gas. When breathed, carbon monoxide takes the place of oxygen and combines with some of the hemoglobin in the blood, rendering it unable to transport oxygen.\nProblems associated with incomplete combustion.\nEnvironmental problems.\nThese oxides combine with water and oxygen in the atmosphere, creating nitric acid and sulfuric acids, which return to Earth's surface as acid deposition, or \"acid rain.\" Acid deposition harms aquatic organisms and kills trees. Due to its formation of certain nutrients that are less available to plants such as calcium and phosphorus, it reduces the productivity of the ecosystem and farms. An additional problem associated with nitrogen oxides is that they, along with hydrocarbon pollutants, contribute to the formation of ground level ozone, a major component of smog.\nHuman health problems.\nBreathing carbon monoxide causes headache, dizziness, vomiting, and nausea. If carbon monoxide levels are high enough, humans become unconscious or die. Exposure to moderate and high levels of carbon monoxide over long periods is positively correlated with the risk of heart disease. People who survive severe carbon monoxide poisoning may suffer long-term health problems. Carbon monoxide from the air is absorbed in the lungs which then binds with hemoglobin in human's red blood cells. This reduces the capacity of red blood cells that carry oxygen throughout the body.\nSmoldering.\nSmoldering is the slow, low-temperature, flameless form of combustion, sustained by the heat evolved when oxygen directly attacks the surface of a condensed-phase fuel. It is a typically incomplete combustion reaction. Solid materials that can sustain a smoldering reaction include coal, cellulose, wood, cotton, tobacco, peat, duff, humus, synthetic foams, charring polymers (including polyurethane foam) and dust. Common examples of smoldering phenomena are the initiation of residential fires on upholstered furniture by weak heat sources (e.g., a cigarette, a short-circuited wire) and the persistent combustion of biomass behind the flaming fronts of wildfires.\nSpontaneous.\nSpontaneous combustion is a type of combustion that occurs by self-heating (increase in temperature due to exothermic internal reactions), followed by thermal runaway (self-heating which rapidly accelerates to high temperatures) and finally, ignition.\nFor example, phosphorus self-ignites at room temperature without the application of heat. Organic materials undergoing bacterial composting can generate enough heat to reach the point of combustion.\nTurbulent.\nCombustion resulting in a turbulent flame is the most used for industrial applications (e.g. gas turbines, gasoline engines, etc.) because the turbulence helps the mixing process between the fuel and oxidizer.\nMicro-gravity.\nThe term 'micro' gravity refers to a gravitational state that is 'low' (i.e., 'micro' in the sense of 'small' and not necessarily a millionth of Earth's normal gravity) such that the influence of buoyancy on physical processes may be considered small relative to other flow processes that would be present at normal gravity. In such an environment, the thermal and flow transport dynamics can behave quite differently than in normal gravity conditions (e.g., a candle's flame takes the shape of a sphere.). Microgravity combustion research contributes to the understanding of a wide variety of aspects that are relevant to both the environment of a spacecraft (e.g., fire dynamics relevant to crew safety on the International Space Station) and terrestrial (Earth-based) conditions (e.g., droplet combustion dynamics to assist developing new fuel blends for improved combustion, materials fabrication processes, thermal management of electronic systems, multiphase flow boiling dynamics, and many others).\nMicro-combustion.\nCombustion processes that happen in very small volumes are considered micro-combustion. The high surface-to-volume ratio increases specific heat loss. Quenching distance plays a vital role in stabilizing the flame in such combustion chambers.\nChemical equations.\nStoichiometric combustion of a hydrocarbon in oxygen.\nGenerally, the chemical equation for stoichiometric combustion of a hydrocarbon in oxygen is:\nformula_1\nFor example, the stoichiometric combustion of methane in oxygen is:\n&lt;chem&gt;\\underset{methane}{CH4} + 2O2 -&gt; CO2 + 2H2O&lt;/chem&gt;\nStoichiometric combustion of a hydrocarbon in air.\nIf the stoichiometric combustion takes place using air as the oxygen source, the nitrogen present in the air (Atmosphere of Earth) can be added to the equation (although it does not react) to show the stoichiometric composition of the fuel in air and the composition of the resultant flue gas. Treating all non-oxygen components in air as nitrogen gives a \"nitrogen\" to oxygen ratio of 3.77, i.e. (100% \u2212 O2%) / O2% where O2% is 20.95% vol:\nformula_2\nwhere formula_3.\nFor example, the stoichiometric combustion of methane in air is:\nformula_4\nThe stoichiometric composition of methane in air is 1 / (1 + 2 + 7.54) = 9.49% vol.\nThe stoichiometric combustion reaction for C\u03b1H\u03b2O\u03b3 in air:\nformula_5\nThe stoichiometric combustion reaction for C\u03b1H\u03b2O\u03b3S\u03b4:\nformula_6\nThe stoichiometric combustion reaction for C\u03b1H\u03b2O\u03b3N\u03b4S\u03b5:\nformula_7\nThe stoichiometric combustion reaction for C\u03b1H\u03b2O\u03b3F\u03b4:\nformula_8\nTrace combustion products.\nVarious other substances begin to appear in significant amounts in combustion products when the flame temperature is above about . When excess air is used, nitrogen may oxidize to NO and, to a much lesser extent, to NO2. CO forms by disproportionation of CO2, and H2 and OH form by disproportionation of .\nFor example, when of propane is burned with of air (120% of the stoichiometric amount), the combustion products contain 3.3% O2. At , the equilibrium combustion products contain 0.03% NO and 0.002% OH. At , the combustion products contain 0.17% NO, 0.05% OH, 0.01% CO, and 0.004% H2.\nDiesel engines are run with an excess of oxygen to combust small particles that tend to form with only a stoichiometric amount of oxygen, necessarily producing nitrogen oxide emissions. Both the United States and European Union enforce limits to vehicle nitrogen oxide emissions, which necessitate the use of special catalytic converters or treatment of the exhaust with urea (see Diesel exhaust fluid).\nIncomplete combustion of a hydrocarbon in oxygen.\nThe incomplete (partial) combustion of a hydrocarbon with oxygen produces a gas mixture containing mainly CO2, CO, , and H2. Such gas mixtures are commonly prepared for use as protective atmospheres for the heat-treatment of metals and for gas carburizing. The general reaction equation for incomplete combustion of one mole of a hydrocarbon in oxygen is:\n &lt;chem&gt;\\underset{fuel}{C_\\mathit{x} H_\\mathit{y}} + \\underset{oxygen}{\\mathit{z} O2} -&gt; \\underset{carbon \\ dioxide}{\\mathit{a}CO2} + \\underset{carbon\\ monoxide}{\\mathit{b}CO} + \\underset{water}{\\mathit{c}H2O} + \\underset{hydrogen}{\\mathit{d}H2}&lt;/chem&gt;\nWhen \"z\" falls below roughly 50% of the stoichiometric value, CH4 can become an important combustion product; when \"z\" falls below roughly 35% of the stoichiometric value, elemental carbon may become stable.\nThe products of incomplete combustion can be calculated with the aid of a material balance, together with the assumption that the combustion products reach equilibrium. For example, in the combustion of one mole of propane (C3H8) with four moles of O2, seven moles of combustion gas are formed, and \"z\" is 80% of the stoichiometric value. The three elemental balance equations are:\nThese three equations are insufficient in themselves to calculate the combustion gas composition.\nHowever, at the equilibrium position, the water-gas shift reaction gives another equation:\n &lt;chem&gt;CO + H2O -&gt; CO2 + H2&lt;/chem&gt;; formula_12\nFor example, at the value of \"Keq\" is 0.728. Solving, the combustion gas consists of 42.4% , 29.0% CO2, 14.7% H2, and 13.9% CO. Carbon becomes a stable phase at and pressure when z is less than 30% of the stoichiometric value, at which point the combustion products contain more than 98% H2 and CO and about 0.5% CH4.\nSubstances or materials which undergo combustion are called fuels. The most common examples are natural gas, propane, kerosene, diesel, petrol, charcoal, coal, wood, etc.\nLiquid fuels.\nCombustion of a liquid fuel in an oxidizing atmosphere actually happens in the gas phase. It is the vapor that burns, not the liquid. Therefore, a liquid will normally catch fire only above a certain temperature: its flash point. The flash point of liquid fuel is the lowest temperature at which it can form an ignitable mix with air. It is the minimum temperature at which there is enough evaporated fuel in the air to start combustion.\nGaseous fuels.\nCombustion of gaseous fuels may occur through one of four distinctive types of burning: diffusion flame, premixed flame, autoignitive reaction front, or as a detonation. The type of burning that actually occurs depends on the degree to which the fuel and oxidizer are mixed prior to heating: for example, a diffusion flame is formed if the fuel and oxidizer are separated initially, whereas a premixed flame is formed otherwise. Similarly, the type of burning also depends on the pressure: a detonation, for example, is an autoignitive reaction front coupled to a strong shock wave giving it its characteristic high-pressure peak and high detonation velocity.\nSolid fuels.\nThe act of combustion consists of three relatively distinct but overlapping phases:\nCombustion management.\nEfficient process heating requires recovery of the largest possible part of a fuel's heat of combustion into the material being processed. There are many avenues of loss in the operation of a heating process. Typically, the dominant loss is sensible heat leaving with the offgas (i.e., the flue gas). The temperature and quantity of offgas indicates its heat content (enthalpy), so keeping its quantity low minimizes heat loss.\nIn a perfect furnace, the combustion air flow would be matched to the fuel flow to give each fuel molecule the exact amount of oxygen needed to cause complete combustion. However, in the real world, combustion does not proceed in a perfect manner. Unburned fuel (usually CO and H2) discharged from the system represents a heating value loss (as well as a safety hazard). Since combustibles are undesirable in the offgas, while the presence of unreacted oxygen there presents minimal safety and environmental concerns, the first principle of combustion management is to provide more oxygen than is theoretically needed to ensure that all the fuel burns. For methane (CH4) combustion, for example, slightly more than two molecules of oxygen are required.\nThe second principle of combustion management, however, is to not use too much oxygen. The correct amount of oxygen requires three types of measurement: first, active control of air and fuel flow; second, offgas oxygen measurement; and third, measurement of offgas combustibles. For each heating process, there exists an optimum condition of minimal offgas heat loss with acceptable levels of combustibles concentration. Minimizing excess oxygen pays an additional benefit: for a given offgas temperature, the NOx level is lowest when excess oxygen is kept lowest.\nAdherence to these two principles is furthered by making material and heat balances on the combustion process. The material balance directly relates the air/fuel ratio to the percentage of O2 in the combustion gas. The heat balance relates the heat available for the charge to the overall net heat produced by fuel combustion. Additional material and heat balances can be made to quantify the thermal advantage from preheating the combustion air, or enriching it in oxygen.\nReaction mechanism.\nCombustion in oxygen is a chain reaction in which many distinct radical intermediates participate. The high energy required for initiation is explained by the unusual structure of the dioxygen molecule. The lowest-energy configuration of the dioxygen molecule is a stable, relatively unreactive diradical in a triplet spin state. Bonding can be described with three bonding electron pairs and two antibonding electrons, with spins aligned, such that the molecule has nonzero total angular momentum. Most fuels, on the other hand, are in a singlet state, with paired spins and zero total angular momentum. Interaction between the two is quantum mechanically a \"forbidden transition\", i.e. possible with a very low probability. To initiate combustion, energy is required to force dioxygen into a spin-paired state, or singlet oxygen. This intermediate is extremely reactive. The energy is supplied as heat, and the reaction then produces additional heat, which allows it to continue.\nCombustion of hydrocarbons is thought to be initiated by hydrogen atom abstraction (not proton abstraction) from the fuel to oxygen, to give a hydroperoxide radical (HOO). This reacts further to give hydroperoxides, which break up to give hydroxyl radicals. There are a great variety of these processes that produce fuel radicals and oxidizing radicals. Oxidizing species include singlet oxygen, hydroxyl, monatomic oxygen, and hydroperoxyl. Such intermediates are short-lived and cannot be isolated. However, non-radical intermediates are stable and are produced in incomplete combustion. An example is acetaldehyde produced in the combustion of ethanol. An intermediate in the combustion of carbon and hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide, is of special importance because it is a poisonous gas, but also economically useful for the production of syngas.\nSolid and heavy liquid fuels also undergo a great number of pyrolysis reactions that give more easily oxidized, gaseous fuels. These reactions are endothermic and require constant energy input from the ongoing combustion reactions. A lack of oxygen or other improperly designed conditions result in these noxious and carcinogenic pyrolysis products being emitted as thick, black smoke.\nThe rate of combustion is the amount of a material that undergoes combustion over a period of time. It can be expressed in grams per second (g/s) or kilograms per second (kg/s).\nDetailed descriptions of combustion processes, from the chemical kinetics perspective, require the formulation of large and intricate webs of elementary reactions. For instance, combustion of hydrocarbon fuels typically involve hundreds of chemical species reacting according to thousands of reactions.\nThe inclusion of such mechanisms within computational flow solvers still represents a pretty challenging task mainly in two aspects. First, the number of degrees of freedom (proportional to the number of chemical species) can be dramatically large; second, the source term due to reactions introduces a disparate number of time scales which makes the whole dynamical system stiff. As a result, the direct numerical simulation of turbulent reactive flows with heavy fuels soon becomes intractable even for modern supercomputers.\nTherefore, a plethora of methodologies have been devised for reducing the complexity of combustion mechanisms without resorting to high detail levels. Examples are provided by:\nKinetic modelling.\nThe kinetic modelling may be explored for insight into the reaction mechanisms of thermal decomposition in the combustion of different materials by using for instance Thermogravimetric analysis.\nTemperature.\nAssuming perfect combustion conditions, such as complete combustion under adiabatic conditions (i.e., no heat loss or gain), the adiabatic combustion temperature can be determined. The formula that yields this temperature is based on the first law of thermodynamics and takes note of the fact that the heat of combustion is used entirely for heating the fuel, the combustion air or oxygen, and the combustion product gases (commonly referred to as the \"flue gas\").\nIn the case of fossil fuels burnt in air, the combustion temperature depends on all of the following:\nThe adiabatic combustion temperature (also known as the \"adiabatic flame temperature\") increases for higher heating values and inlet air and fuel temperatures and for stoichiometric air ratios approaching one.\nMost commonly, the adiabatic combustion temperatures for coals are around (for inlet air and fuel at ambient temperatures and for formula_14), around for oil and for natural gas.\nIn industrial fired heaters, power station steam generators, and large gas-fired turbines, the more common way of expressing the usage of more than the stoichiometric combustion air is \"percent excess combustion air\". For example, excess combustion air of 15 percent means that 15 percent more than the required stoichiometric air is being used.\nInstabilities.\nCombustion instabilities are typically violent pressure oscillations in a combustion chamber. These pressure oscillations can be as high as 180dB, and long-term exposure to these cyclic pressure and thermal loads reduces the life of engine components. In rockets, such as the F1 used in the Saturn V program, instabilities led to massive damage to the combustion chamber and surrounding components. This problem was solved by re-designing the fuel injector. In liquid jet engines, the droplet size and distribution can be used to attenuate the instabilities. Combustion instabilities are a major concern in ground-based gas turbine engines because of emissions. The tendency is to run lean, an equivalence ratio less than 1, to reduce the combustion temperature and thus reduce the emissions; however, running the combustion lean makes it very susceptible to combustion instability.\nThe Rayleigh Criterion is the basis for analysis of thermoacoustic combustion instability and is evaluated using the Rayleigh Index over one cycle of instability\nformula_15\nwhere q' is the heat release rate perturbation and p' is the pressure fluctuation.\nWhen the heat release oscillations are in phase with the pressure oscillations, the Rayleigh Index is positive and the magnitude of the thermoacoustic instability is maximised. On the other hand, if the Rayleigh Index is negative, then thermoacoustic damping occurs. The Rayleigh Criterion implies that thermoacoustic instability can be optimally controlled by having heat release oscillations 180 degrees out of phase with pressure oscillations at the same frequency. This minimizes the Rayleigh Index.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5639", "revid": "50628443", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5639", "title": "Cyrillic script", "text": "Writing system\nThe Cyrillic script ( ) is a writing system used for various languages across Eurasia. It is the designated national script in various Slavic, Turkic, Mongolic, Uralic, Caucasian and Iranic-speaking countries in Southeastern Europe, Eastern Europe, the Caucasus, Central Asia, North Asia, and East Asia, and used by many other minority languages.\nAs of 2019[ [update]], around 250\u00a0million people in Eurasia use Cyrillic as the official script for their national languages, with Russia accounting for about half of them. With the accession of Bulgaria to the European Union in 2007, Cyrillic became the third official script of the European Union, following the Latin and Greek alphabets.\nThe Early Cyrillic alphabet was developed during the 9th century AD at the Preslav Literary School in the First Bulgarian Empire during the reign of Tsar Simeon I the Great, probably by the disciples of the two Byzantine brothers Cyril and Methodius, who had previously created the Glagolitic script. Among them were Clement of Ohrid, Naum of Preslav, Constantine of Preslav, Joan Ekzarh, Chernorizets Hrabar, Angelar, Sava and other scholars. The script is named in honor of Saint Cyril.\nEtymology.\nSince the script was conceived and popularised by the followers of Cyril and Methodius in Bulgaria, rather than by Cyril and Methodius themselves, its name denotes homage rather than authorship.\nHistory.\nThe Cyrillic script was created during the First Bulgarian Empire. Modern scholars believe that the Early Cyrillic alphabet was created at the Preslav Literary School, the most important early literary and cultural center of the First Bulgarian Empire and of all Slavs:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Unlike the Churchmen in Ohrid, Preslav scholars were much more dependent upon Greek models and quickly abandoned the Glagolitic scripts in favor of an adaptation of the Greek uncial to the needs of Slavic, which is now known as the Cyrillic alphabet.\nA number of prominent Bulgarian writers and scholars worked at the school, including Naum of Preslav until 893; Constantine of Preslav; Joan Ekzarh (also transcr. John the Exarch); and Chernorizets Hrabar, among others. The school was also a center of translation, mostly of Byzantine authors. The Cyrillic script is derived from the Greek uncial script letters, augmented by ligatures and consonants from the older Glagolitic alphabet for sounds not found in Greek. Glagolitic and Cyrillic were formalized by the Byzantine Saints Cyril and Methodius and their Bulgarian disciples, such as Saints Naum, Clement, Angelar, and Sava. They spread and taught Christianity in the whole of Bulgaria. Paul Cubberley posits that although Cyril may have codified and expanded Glagolitic, it was his students in the First Bulgarian Empire under Tsar Simeon the Great that developed Cyrillic from the Greek letters in the 890s as a more suitable script for church books.\nCyrillic spread among other Slavic peoples, as well as among non-Slavic Romanians. The earliest datable Cyrillic inscriptions have been found in the area of Preslav, in the medieval city itself and at nearby Patleina Monastery, both in present-day Shumen Province, as well as in the Ravna Monastery and in the Varna Monastery. The new script became the basis of alphabets used in various languages in Orthodox Church-dominated Eastern Europe, both Slavic and non-Slavic languages (such as Romanian, until the 1860s). For centuries, Cyrillic was also used by Catholic and Muslim Slavs.\nCyrillic and Glagolitic were used for the Church Slavonic language, especially the Old Church Slavonic variant. Hence expressions such as \"\u0418 is the tenth Cyrillic letter\" typically refer to the order of the Church Slavonic alphabet; not every Cyrillic alphabet uses every letter available in the script. The Cyrillic script came to dominate Glagolitic in the 12th century.\nThe literature produced in Old Church Slavonic soon spread north from Bulgaria and became the lingua franca of the Balkans and Eastern Europe.\nCyrillic in modern-day Bosnia is an extinct and disputed variant of the Cyrillic alphabet that originated in medieval period. Paleographers consider the earliest features of script had likely begun to appear between the 10th or 11th century, with the Humac tablet to be the first such document using this type of script and is believed to date from this period. It was used continuously until the 18th century, with sporadic usage extending into the 20th century.\nWith the orthographic reform of Saint Evtimiy of Tarnovo and other prominent representatives of the Tarnovo Literary School of the 14th and 15th centuries, such as Gregory Tsamblak and Constantine of Kostenets, the school influenced Russian, Serbian, Wallachian and Moldavian medieval culture. This is known in Russia as the second South-Slavic influence.\nIn 1708\u201310, the Cyrillic script used in Russia was heavily reformed by Peter the Great, who had recently returned from his Grand Embassy in Western Europe. The new letterforms, called the Civil script, became closer to those of the Latin alphabet; several archaic letters were abolished and several new letters were introduced designed by Peter himself. Letters became distinguished between upper and lower case. West European typography culture was also adopted. The pre-reform letterforms, called \"poluustav\" (), were notably retained in Church Slavonic and are sometimes used in Russian even today, especially if one wants to give a text a 'Slavic' or 'archaic' feel.\nThe alphabet used for the modern Church Slavonic language in Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Catholic rites still resembles early Cyrillic. However, over the course of the following millennium, Cyrillic adapted to changes in spoken language, developed regional variations to suit the features of national languages, and was subjected to academic reform and political decrees. A notable example of such linguistic reform can be attributed to Vuk Stefanovi\u0107 Karad\u017ei\u0107, who updated the Serbian Cyrillic alphabet by removing certain graphemes no longer represented in the vernacular and introducing graphemes specific to Serbian (i.e., \u0409 \u040a \u0402 \u040b \u040f \u0408), distancing it from the Church Slavonic alphabet in use prior to the reform. Today, many languages in the Balkans, Eastern Europe, and northern Eurasia are written in Cyrillic alphabets.\nLetters.\nCyrillic script spread throughout the East Slavic and some South Slavic territories, being adopted for writing local languages, such as Old East Slavic. Its adaptation to local languages produced a number of Cyrillic alphabets, discussed below.\nMajuscule and minuscule.\nCapital and lowercase letters were not distinguished in old manuscripts.\nYeri (\u042b) was originally a ligature of Yer and I (\u042a + \u0406 = \u042b). Iotation was indicated by ligatures formed with the letter \u0406: \ua656 (not an ancestor of modern Ya, \u042f, which is derived from \u0466), \u0464, \u042e (ligature of \u0406 and \u041e\u0423), \u0468, \u046c. Sometimes different letters were used interchangeably, for example \u0418 = \u0406 = \u0407, as were typographical variants like \u041e = \u047a. There were also commonly used ligatures like \u0460\u0422 = \u047e.\nNumbers.\nThe letters also had numeric values, based not on Cyrillic alphabetical order, but inherited from the letters' Greek ancestors.\nComputer support.\nComputer fonts for early Cyrillic alphabets are not routinely provided. Many of the letterforms differ from those of modern Cyrillic, varied a great deal between manuscripts, and changed over time. In accordance with Unicode policy, the standard does not include letterform variations or ligatures found in manuscript sources unless they can be shown to conform to the Unicode definition of a character: this aspect is the responsibility of the typeface designer.\nThe Unicode 5.1 standard, released on 4 April 2008, greatly improved computer support for the early Cyrillic and the modern Church Slavonic language. In Microsoft Windows, the Segoe UI user interface font is notable for having complete support for the archaic Cyrillic letters since Windows 8.\nCurrency signs.\nSome currency signs have derived from Cyrillic letters:\nLetterforms and type design.\nThe development of Cyrillic letter forms passed directly from the medieval stage to the late Baroque, without a Renaissance phase as in Western Europe. Late Medieval Cyrillic letters (categorized as vyaz' and still found on many icon inscriptions today) show a marked tendency to be very tall and narrow, with strokes often shared between adjacent letters.\nPeter the Great, Tsar of Russia, mandated the use of westernized letter forms () in the early 18th century. Over time, these were largely adopted in the other languages that use the script. Thus, unlike the majority of modern Greek typefaces that retained their own set of design principles for lower-case letters (such as the placement of serifs, the shapes of stroke ends, and stroke-thickness rules, although Greek capital letters do use Latin design principles), modern Cyrillic types are much the same as modern Latin types of the same typeface family. The development of some Cyrillic computer fonts from Latin ones has also contributed to a visual Latinization of Cyrillic type.\nLowercase forms.\nCyrillic uppercase and lowercase letter forms are not as differentiated as in Latin typography. Though both Latin and Cyrillic types feature letters whose upper- and lowercase forms differ more in size and proportion than in shape (such as Latin \u27e8C c\u27e9, \u27e8V v\u27e9, \u27e8Z z\u27e9), these form a minority of the Latin alphabet but a majority of Cyrillic (particularly in upright rather than italic forms). Still, a good-quality Cyrillic typeface will include separate small-caps glyphs.\nCyrillic typefaces, as well as Latin ones, have roman and italic forms (practically all popular modern computer fonts include parallel sets of Latin and Cyrillic letters, where many glyphs, uppercase as well as lowercase, are shared by both). However, the native typeface terminology in most Slavic languages (for example, in Russian) does not use the words \"roman\" and \"italic\" in this sense. Instead, the nomenclature follows German naming patterns:\nItalic and cursive forms.\nSimilarly to Latin typefaces, italic and cursive forms of many Cyrillic letters (typically lowercase; uppercase only for handwritten or stylish types) are very different from their upright roman types. In certain cases, the correspondence between uppercase and lowercase glyphs does not coincide in Latin and Cyrillic types: for example, italic Cyrillic \u27e8\"\u0442\"\u27e9 is the lowercase counterpart of \u27e8\"\u0422\"\u27e9 not of \u27e8\"\u041c\"\u27e9.\nNote: in some typefaces or styles, \u27e8\"\u0434\"\u27e9, i.e. the lowercase italic Cyrillic \u27e8\u0434\u27e9, may look like Latin \u27e8\"g\"\u27e9, and \u27e8\"\u0442\"\u27e9, i.e. lowercase italic Cyrillic \u27e8\u0442\u27e9, may look like small-capital italic \u27e8T\u27e9.\nIn Standard Serbian, as well as in Macedonian, some italic and cursive letters are allowed to be different, to more closely resemble the handwritten letters. The regular (upright) shapes are generally standardized in small caps form.\nNotes: Depending on fonts available, the Serbian row may appear identical to the Russian row. Unicode approximations are used in the \"faux\" row to ensure it can be rendered properly across all systems.\nIn the Bulgarian alphabet, many lowercase letterforms may more closely resemble the cursive forms on the one hand and Latin glyphs on the other hand, e.g. by having an ascender or descender or by using rounded arcs instead of sharp corners. Sometimes, uppercase letters may have a different shape as well, e.g. more triangular, \u0414 and \u041b, like Greek delta \u0394 and lambda \u039b.\nNotes: Depending on fonts available, the Bulgarian row may appear identical to the Russian row. Unicode approximations are used in the \"faux\" row to ensure it can be rendered properly across all systems; in some cases, such as \u0436 with \"k\"-like ascender, no such approximation exists.\nAccessing variant forms.\nComputer fonts typically default to the Central/Eastern, Russian letterforms, and require the use of OpenType Layout (OTL) features to display the Western, Bulgarian or Southern, Serbian/Macedonian forms. Depending on the choices made by the (computer) font designer, they may either be automatically activated by the \"local variant\" codice_1 feature for text tagged with an appropriate language code, or the author needs to opt-in by activating a \"stylistic set\" codice_2 or \"character variant\" codice_3 feature. These solutions only enjoy partial support and may render with default glyphs in certain software configurations, and the reader may not see the same result as the author intended.\nCyrillic alphabets.\nAmong others, Cyrillic is the standard script for writing the following languages:\nSlavic languages:\nNon-Slavic languages of Russia:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNon-Slavic languages in other countries: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Cyrillic script has also been used for languages of Alaska, Slavic Europe (except for Western Slavic and Slovenian), the Caucasus, the languages of Idel-Ural, Siberia, and the Russian Far East.\nThe first alphabet derived from Cyrillic was Abur, used for the Komi language. Other Cyrillic alphabets include the Molodtsov alphabet for the Komi language and various alphabets for Caucasian languages.\nUsage of Cyrillic versus other scripts.\nLatin script.\nA number of languages written in a Cyrillic alphabet have also been written in a Latin alphabet, such as Azerbaijani, Uzbek, Serbian, and Romanian (in the Moldavian SSR until 1989 and in the Danubian Principalities until the early 19th century). After the disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1991, some of the former republics officially shifted from Cyrillic to Latin. The transition is complete in most of Moldova (except the breakaway region of Transnistria, where Moldovan Cyrillic is official), Turkmenistan, and Azerbaijan. Uzbekistan still uses both systems, and Kazakhstan has officially begun a transition from Cyrillic to Latin (scheduled to be complete by 2025). The Russian government has mandated that Cyrillic must be used for all public communications in all federal subjects of Russia, to promote closer ties across the federation. This act was controversial for speakers of many Slavic languages; for others, such as Chechen and Ingush speakers, the law had political ramifications. For example, the separatist Chechen government mandated a Latin script which is still used by many Chechens.\nCountries with widespread use of the Cyrillic script:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Sole official script\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Co-official with another script (either because the official language is biscriptal, or the state is bilingual)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Being replaced with Latin, but is still in official use\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Legacy script for the official language, or large minority use\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Cyrillic is not widely used\nStandard Serbian uses both the Cyrillic and Latin scripts. Cyrillic is nominally the official script of Serbia's administration according to the Serbian constitution; however, the law does not regulate scripts in standard language, or standard language itself by any means. In practice the scripts are equal, with Latin being used more often in a less official capacity.\nThe Zhuang alphabet, used between the 1950s and 1980s in portions of the People's Republic of China, used a mixture of Latin, phonetic, numeral-based, and Cyrillic letters. The non-Latin letters, including Cyrillic, were removed from the alphabet in 1982 and replaced with Latin letters that closely resembled the letters they replaced.\nRomanization.\nThere are various systems for romanization of Cyrillic text, including transliteration to convey Cyrillic spelling in Latin letters, and transcription to convey pronunciation.\nStandard Cyrillic-to-Latin transliteration systems include:\nSee also Romanization of Belarusian, Bulgarian, Kyrgyz, Russian, Macedonian and Ukrainian.\nCyrillization.\nRepresenting other writing systems with Cyrillic letters is called Cyrillization.\nComputer encoding.\nUnicode.\nAs of Unicode version 17.0, Cyrillic letters, including national and historical alphabets, are encoded across several blocks:\nThe characters in the range U+0400 to U+045F are essentially the characters from ISO 8859-5 moved upward by 864 positions. The characters in the range U+0460 to U+0489 are historic letters, no longer used. The characters in the range U+048A to U+052F are additional letters for various languages that are written with Cyrillic script.\nUnicode as a general rule does not include accented Cyrillic letters. A few exceptions include:\nTo indicate stressed or long vowels, combining diacritical marks can be used after the respective letter (for example, : \u0435\u0301 \u0443\u0301 \u044d\u0301 etc.).\nSome languages, including Church Slavonic, are still not fully supported.\nUnicode 5.1, released on 4 April 2008, introduces major changes to the Cyrillic blocks. Revisions to the existing Cyrillic blocks, and the addition of Cyrillic Extended A (2DE0 ... 2DFF) and Cyrillic Extended B (A640 ... A69F), significantly improve support for the early Cyrillic alphabet, Abkhaz, Aleut, Chuvash, Kurdish, and Moksha.\nOther.\nOther character encoding systems for Cyrillic:\nKeyboard layouts.\nEach language has its own standard keyboard layout, adopted from traditional national typewriters. With the flexibility of computer input methods, there are also transliterating or phonetic/homophonic keyboard layouts made for typists who are more familiar with other layouts, like the common English QWERTY keyboard. When practical Cyrillic keyboard layouts are unavailable, computer users sometimes use transliteration (translit) or look-alike (volapuk encoding) to type in languages that are normally written with the Cyrillic alphabet. Potentially, these proxy versions could be transformed programmatically into Cyrillic at a later date.\nSee also.\nInternet top-level domains in Cyrillic.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5641", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5641", "title": "Consonant", "text": "Speech sound articulated by closing the vocal tract fully or partially\nIn articulatory phonetics, a consonant is a speech sound that is articulated with complete or partial closure of the vocal tract, except for [h], which is pronounced without any stricture in the vocal tract. Examples are and [b], pronounced with the lips; and [d], pronounced with the front of the tongue; and [g], pronounced with the back of the tongue; , pronounced throughout the vocal tract; , [v], , and [z] pronounced by forcing air through a narrow channel (fricatives); and and , which have air flowing through the nose (nasals). Most consonants are pulmonic, using air pressure from the lungs to generate a sound. Very few natural languages are non-pulmonic, making use of ejectives, implosives, and clicks. Contrasting with consonants are vowels.\nSince the number of speech sounds in the world's languages is much greater than the number of letters in any one alphabet, linguists have devised systems such as the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) to assign a unique and unambiguous symbol to each attested consonant. The English alphabet has fewer consonant letters than the English language has consonant sounds, so digraphs like \u27e8ch\u27e9, \u27e8sh\u27e9, \u27e8th\u27e9, and \u27e8ng\u27e9 are used to extend the alphabet, though some letters and digraphs represent more than one consonant. For example, the sound spelled \u27e8th\u27e9 in \"this\" is a different consonant from the \u27e8th\u27e9 sound in \"thin\". (In the IPA, these are and , respectively.)\nEtymology.\nThe word \"consonant\" comes from Latin oblique stem , from 'sounding-together', a calque of Greek (plural , ).\nDionysius Thrax, a Classical Greek grammarian, called consonants ( 'sounded with') because in Greek, they can only be pronounced with a vowel. He divides them into two subcategories: ( 'half-sounded'), which are the continuants, and ( 'unsounded'), which correspond to plosives.\nThis description does not apply to some languages, such as the Salishan languages, in which plosives may occur without vowels (see Nuxalk), and the modern concept of \"consonant\" does not require co-occurrence with a vowel.\nConsonant \"sounds\" and consonant \"letters\".\nThe word \"consonant\" may be used ambiguously for both speech sounds and the letters of the alphabet used to write them. In English, these letters are B, C, D, F, G, J, K, L, M, N, P, Q, S, T, V, X, Z and often H, R, W, Y.\nIn English orthography, the letters H, R, W, Y and the digraph GH are used for both consonants and vowels. For instance, the letter Y stands for the consonant/semi-vowel in yoke\", the vowel in \"myth\", the vowel in \"funny, the diphthong in \"sky, and forms several digraphs for other diphthongs, such as \"say, \"boy\". Similarly, R commonly indicates or modifies a vowel in non-rhotic accents.\nThis article is concerned with consonant \"sounds\", however they are written.\nConsonants versus vowels.\nConsonants and vowels correspond to distinct parts of a syllable: The most sonorous part of the syllable (that is, the part that is easiest to sing), called the \"syllabic peak\" or \"nucleus,\" is typically a vowel, while the less sonorous margins (called the \"onset\" and \"coda\") are typically consonants. Such syllables may be abbreviated CV, V, and CVC, where C stands for consonant and V stands for vowel. This can be argued to be the only pattern found in most of the world's languages, and perhaps the primary pattern in all of them. However, the distinction between consonant and vowel is not always clear cut: there are syllabic consonants and non-syllabic vowels in many of the world's languages.\nOne blurry area is in segments variously called \"semivowels\", \"semiconsonants\", or \"glides\". On one side, there are vowel-like segments that are not in themselves syllabic, but form diphthongs as part of the syllable nucleus, as the \"i\" in English \"boil\" . On the other, there are approximants that behave like consonants in forming onsets, but are articulated very much like vowels, as the \"y\" in English \"yes\" . Some phonologists model these as both being the underlying vowel , so that the English word \"bit\" would phonemically be , \"beet\" would be , and \"yield\" would be phonemically . Likewise, \"foot\" would be , \"food\" would be , \"wood\" would be , and \"wooed\" would be . However, there is a (perhaps allophonic) difference in articulation between these segments, with the in \"yes\" and \"yield\" and the of \"wooed\" having more constriction and a more definite place of articulation than the in \"boil\" or \"bit\" or the of \"foot\".\nThe other problematic area is that of syllabic consonants, segments articulated as consonants but occupying the nucleus of a syllable. This may be the case for words such as \"church\" in rhotic dialects of English, although phoneticians differ in whether they consider this to be a syllabic consonant, , or a rhotic vowel, : Some distinguish an approximant that corresponds to a vowel , for \"rural\" as or ; others see these as a single phoneme, .\nOther languages use fricative and often trilled segments as syllabic nuclei, as in Czech and several languages in Democratic Republic of the Congo, and China, including Mandarin. In Mandarin, they are historically allophones of , and spelled that way in Pinyin. Ladefoged and Maddieson call these \"fricative vowels\" and say that \"they can usually be thought of as syllabic fricatives that are allophones of vowels\". That is, phonetically they are consonants, but phonemically they behave as vowels.\nMany Slavic languages allow the trill and the lateral as syllabic nuclei (see Words without vowels). In languages like Nuxalk, it is difficult to know what the nucleus of a syllable is, or if all syllables even have nuclei. If the concept of 'syllable' applies in Nuxalk, there are syllabic consonants in words like (?) 'seal fat'. Miyako in Japan is similar, with 'to build' and 'to pull'.\nEach spoken consonant can be distinguished by several phonetic \"features\":\nAll English consonants can be classified by a combination of these features, such as \"voiceless alveolar stop\" . In this case, the airstream mechanism is omitted.\nSome pairs of consonants like \"p::b\", \"t::d\" are sometimes called fortis and lenis, but this is a phonological rather than phonetic distinction.\nConsonants are scheduled by their features in a number of IPA charts:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA common/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA common/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA common/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExamples.\nThe recently extinct Ubykh language had only 2 or 3 vowels but 84 consonants; the Taa language has 87 consonants under one analysis, 164 under another, plus some 30 vowels and tone. The types of consonants used in various languages are by no means universal. For instance, nearly all Australian languages lack fricatives; a large percentage of the world's languages lack voiced stops such as , , as phonemes, though they may appear phonetically. Most languages, however, do include one or more fricatives, with being the most common, and a liquid consonant or two, with the most common. The approximant is also widespread, and virtually all languages have one or more nasals, though a very few, such as the Central dialect of Rotokas, lack even these. This last language has the smallest number of consonants in the world, with just six.\nMost common.\nIn rhotic American English, the consonants spoken most frequently are . ( is less common in non-rhotic accents.)\nThe most frequent consonant in many other languages is .\nThe most universal consonants around the world (that is, the ones appearing in nearly all languages) are the three voiceless stops , , , and the two nasals , . However, even these common five are not completely universal. Several languages in the vicinity of the Sahara Desert, including Arabic, lack . Several languages of North America, such as Mohawk, lack both of the labials and . The Wichita language of Oklahoma and some West African languages, such as Ijo, lack the consonant on a phonemic level, but do use it phonetically, as an allophone of another consonant (of in the case of Ijo, and of in Wichita). A few languages on Bougainville Island and around Puget Sound, such as Makah, lack both of the nasals and altogether, except in special speech registers such as baby-talk. The 'click language' N\u01c1ng lacks , and colloquial Samoan lacks both alveolars, and . Despite the 80-odd consonants of Ubykh, it lacks the plain velar in native words, as do the related Adyghe and Kabardian languages. But with a few striking exceptions, such as Xavante and Tahitian\u2014which have no dorsal consonants whatsoever\u2014nearly all other languages have at least one velar consonant: most of the few languages that do not have a simple (that is, a sound that is generally pronounced ) have a consonant that is very similar. For instance, an areal feature of the Pacific Northwest coast is that historical *k has become palatalized in many languages, so that Saanich for example has and but no plain ; similarly, historical *k in the Northwest Caucasian languages became palatalized to in extinct Ubykh and to in most Circassian dialects.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA common/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA pulmonic consonants/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA co-articulated consonants/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA vowels/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5642", "revid": "44412179", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5642", "title": "Costume jewelry", "text": "Jewelry used to complement a particular costume\nCostume or fashion jewelry includes a range of decorative items worn for personal adornment that are manufactured as less expensive ornamentation to complement a particular fashionable outfit or garment as opposed to \"real\" (fine) jewelry, which is more costly and which may be regarded primarily as collectibles, keepsakes, or investments. From the outset, costume jewelry \u2014 also known as fashion jewelry \u2014 paralleled the styles of its more precious fine counterparts.\nTerminology.\nIt is also known as artificial jewellery, imitation jewellery, imitated jewelry, trinkets, fashion jewelry, junk jewelry, fake jewelry, or fallalery.\nEtymology.\nThe term costume jewelry dates back to the early 20th century. It reflects the use of the word \"costume\" to refer to what is now called an \"outfit\".\nComponents.\nOriginally, costume or fashion jewelry was made of inexpensive simulated gemstones, such as rhinestones or lucite, set in pewter, silver, nickel, or brass. During the depression years, some manufacturers even downgraded rhinestones to meet the cost of production.\nDuring the World War II era, sterling silver was often incorporated into costume jewelry designs primarily because:\nThis resulted in some years during which sterling silver costume jewelry was produced and some can still be found in today's vintage jewelry marketplace.\nModern costume jewelry incorporates a wide range of materials. High-end crystals, cubic zirconia simulated diamonds, and some semi-precious stones are used in place of precious stones. Metals include gold- or silver-plated brass, and sometimes vermeil or sterling silver. Lower-priced jewelry may still use gold plating over pewter, nickel, or other metals; some pieces incorporate plastic, acrylic, leather, or wood.\nSome low-cost jewelry has been found to contain toxic metals such as lead.\nHistorical expression.\nCostume jewelry can be characterized by the period in history in which it was made.\nArt Deco period (1920\u20131930s).\nThe Art Deco movement attempted to combine the harshness of mass production with the sensitivity of art and design. The movement died with the onset of the Great Depression and the outbreak of World War II.\nAccording to Schiffer, some of the characteristics of the costume jewelry in the Art Deco period were:\nRetro period (1935 to 1950).\nIn the Retro period, designers struggled with the art versus mass production dilemma. Natural materials merged with plastics. The retro period primarily included American-made jewelry with a distinctly American look. With the war in Europe, many European jewelry firms were forced to shut down. Many European designers emigrated to the U.S. since the economy was recovering.\nAccording to Schiffer, some of the characteristics of costume jewelry in the Retro period were:\nArt Modern period (1945 to 1960).\nIn the Art Modern period following World War II, jewelry designs became more traditional and understated. The big, bold styles of the Retro period went out of style and were replaced by the more tailored styles of the 1950s and 1960s.\nAccording to Schiffer, some of the characteristics of costume jewelry in the Art Modern period were:\nWith the advent of the Mod period came \"Body Jewelry\". Carl Schimel of Kim Craftsmen Jewelry was at the forefront of this style. While Kim Craftsmen closed in the early 1990s, many collectors still forage for their items at antique shows and flea markets.\nGeneral history.\nCostume jewelry has been part of the culture for almost 300 years. During the 18th century, jewelers began making pieces with inexpensive glass. In the 19th century, costume jewelry made of semi-precious material came into the market. Jewels made of semi-precious material were more affordable, allowing common people to own costume jewelry.\nHowever, the real golden era for costume jewelry began in the middle of the 20th century. The new middle class wanted beautiful, but affordable jewelry. The demand for jewelry of this type coincided with the machine age and the Industrial Revolution. The revolution made the production of carefully executed replicas of admired heirloom pieces possible.\nAs the class structure in America changed, so did measures of real wealth. Women in all social stations, even working-class women, could own a small piece of costume jewelry. The average town and countrywoman could acquire and wear a considerable amount of this mass-produced jewelry that was both affordable and stylish.\nCostume jewelry was also made popular by various designers in the mid-20th century. Some of the most remembered names in costume jewelry include both the high and low priced brands: Crown Trifari, Dior, Chanel, Miriam Haskell, Sherman, Monet, Napier, Corocraft, Coventry, and Kim Craftsmen.\nA significant factor in the popularization of costume jewelry was Hollywood movies. The leading female stars of the 1940s and 1950s often wore and endorsed the pieces produced by various designers. If you admired a necklace worn by Bette Davis in \"The Private Lives of Elizabeth and Essex\", you could buy a copy from Joseff of Hollywood, who made the original. Stars such as Vivien Leigh, Elizabeth Taylor, and Jane Russell appeared in adverts for the pieces and the availability of the collections in shops such as Woolworth made it possible for ordinary women to own and wear such jewelry.\nCoco Chanel greatly popularized the use of faux jewelry in her years as a fashion designer, bringing costume jewelry to life with gold and faux pearls. Chanel's designs drew from various historical styles, including Byzantine and Renaissance influences, often featuring crosses and intricate metalwork. Her collaboration with glassmakers, such as the Gripoix family, introduced richly colored glass beads and simulated gemstones, which added depth to her creations without the high cost of traditional precious stones. \nKenneth Jay Lane has since the 1960s been known for creating unique pieces for Jackie Onassis, Elizabeth Taylor, Diana Vreeland, and Audrey Hepburn. He is probably best known for his three-strand faux pearl necklace worn by Barbara Bush to her husband's inaugural ball. Celebrated names who wore Lane's creations include Jackie Kennedy, Babe Paley, the Duchess of Windsor, and Nancy Reagan. \nElsa Schiaparelli brought surrealist influences into costume jewelry design, collaborating with artists such as Salvador Dal\u00ed.\nIn many instances, high-end fashion jewelry has achieved a \"collectible\" status and increased value over time. Today, there is a substantial secondary market for vintage fashion jewelry. The main collecting market is for 'signed pieces', which have the maker's mark, usually stamped on the reverse. Amongst the most sought after are Miriam Haskell, Sherman, Coro, Butler and Wilson, Crown Trifari, and Sphinx. However, there is also demand for good quality 'unsigned' pieces, especially if they are of an unusual design.\nBusiness and industry.\nCostume jewelry is considered a discrete category of fashion accessory and displays many characteristics of a self-contained industry. Costume jewelry manufacturers are located throughout the world, with a particular concentration in parts of China and India, where the trade of these goods dominates entire citywide and region-wide economies. There has been considerable controversy in the United States and elsewhere about the lack of regulations in the manufacture of such jewelry\u2014these range from human rights issues surrounding the treatment of labor, to the use of manufacturing processes in which small, but potentially harmful, amounts of toxic metals are added during production. In 2010, the Associated Press released the story that toxic levels of the metal cadmium were found in children's jewelry. An Associated Press investigation found some pieces contained more than 80 percent of cadmium. The broader issues surrounding imports, exports, trade laws, and globalization also apply to the costume jewelry trade.\nAs part of the supply chain, wholesalers in the United States and other nations purchase costume jewelry from manufacturers. They typically import or export it to wholesale distributors and suppliers who deal directly with retailers. Wholesale costume jewelry merchants traditionally seek new suppliers at trade shows. The trade-show model has changed as the Internet has become increasingly important in global trade. Retailers can now select from many wholesalers with sites on the World Wide Web. The wholesalers purchase from international suppliers available on the Web from different parts of the world, like Chinese, Korean, Indonesian, Thai, and Indian jewelry companies, with their wide range of products in bulk quantities. Some sites also market directly to consumers who can purchase costume jewelry at significantly reduced prices. Some websites categorize fashion jewelry separately, while others use this term instead of costume jewelry. The trend of jewelry-making at home by hobbyists for personal enjoyment or sale on sites like Etsy has resulted in the common practice of buying wholesale costume jewelry in bulk and using it for parts.\nThere is a rise in demand for artificial or imitation jewelry by 85% due to the increase in gold prices, according to a 2011 report.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5643", "revid": "24902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5643", "title": "Channel Islands", "text": "Archipelago in the English Channel\nThe Channel Islands are an archipelago in the English Channel, off the French coast of Normandy. They are divided into two Crown Dependencies: the Bailiwick of Jersey, which is the largest of the islands; and the Bailiwick of Guernsey, consisting of Guernsey, Alderney, Sark, Herm and some smaller islands. Historically, they are the remnants of the Duchy of Normandy.\nAlthough they are not part of the United Kingdom, the UK is responsible for the defence and international relations of the islands as it is for the other Crown Dependency, the Isle of Man, and the British Overseas Territories. The Crown Dependencies are neither members of the Commonwealth of Nations, nor part of the European Union. They have a total population of about , and the bailiwicks' capitals, Saint Helier and Saint Peter Port, have populations of 33,500 and 18,207 respectively.\n\"Channel Islands\" is a geographical term, not a political unit. The two bailiwicks have been administered separately since the late 13th century. Each has its own independent laws, elections, and representative bodies (although in modern times, politicians from the islands' legislatures are in regular contact). Any institution common to both is the exception rather than the rule.\nThe Bailiwick of Guernsey is divided into three jurisdictions \u2013 Guernsey, Alderney and Sark \u2013 each with its own legislature. Although there are a few pan-island institutions (such as the Channel Islands Brussels Office, the Director of Civil Aviation and the Channel Islands Financial Ombudsman, which are actually joint ventures between the bailiwicks), these tend to be established structurally as equal projects between Guernsey and Jersey. Otherwise, entities whose names imply membership of both Guernsey and Jersey might in fact be from one bailiwick only. For instance, The International Stock Exchange is in Saint Peter Port and therefore is in Guernsey.\nThe term \"Channel Islands\" began to be used around 1830, possibly first by the Royal Navy as a collective name for the islands. The term refers only to the archipelago to the west of the Cotentin Peninsula. Other populated islands located in the English Channel, and close to the coast of Britain, such as the Isle of Wight, Hayling Island and Portsea Island, are not regarded as \"Channel Islands\".\nGeography.\nThe two major islands are Jersey and Guernsey. They make up 99% of the population and 92% of the area.\nNames.\nThe names of the larger islands in the archipelago in general have the \"-ey\" suffix, whilst those of the smaller ones have the \"-hou\" suffix. These are believed to be from the Old Norse \"ey\" (island) and \"holmr\" (islet).\nThe Chausey Islands.\nThe Chausey Islands south of Jersey are not generally included in the geographical definition of the Channel Islands but are occasionally described in English as 'French Channel Islands' in view of their French jurisdiction. They were historically linked to the Duchy of Normandy, but they are part of the French territory along with continental Normandy, and not part of the British Isles or of the Channel Islands in a political sense. They are an incorporated part of the commune of Granville (Manche). While they are popular with visitors from France, Channel Islanders can only visit them by private or charter boats as there are no direct transport links from the other islands.\nIn official Jersey Standard French, the Channel Islands are called '\u00celes de la Manche', while in France, the term '\u00celes Anglo-normandes' (Anglo-Norman Isles) is used to refer to the British 'Channel Islands' in contrast to other islands in the Channel. Chausey is referred to as an '\u00cele normande' (as opposed to \"Anglo-normande\"). '\u00celes Normandes' and 'Archipel Normand' have also, historically, been used in Channel Island French to refer to the islands as a whole.\nWaters.\nThe very large tidal variation provides an environmentally rich inter-tidal zone around the islands, and some islands such as Burhou, the \u00c9cr\u00e9hous, and the Minquiers have been designated Ramsar sites.\nThe waters around the islands include the following:\nHighest point.\nThe highest point in the islands is Les Platons in Jersey at 143 metres (469\u00a0ft) above sea level. The lowest point is the English Channel (sea level).\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe earliest evidence of human occupation of the Channel Islands has been dated to 250,000 years ago when they were attached to the landmass of continental Europe. The islands became detached by rising sea levels in the Mesolithic period. The numerous dolmens and other archaeological sites extant and recorded in history demonstrate the existence of a population large enough and organised enough to undertake constructions of considerable size and sophistication, such as the burial mound at La Hougue Bie in Jersey or the statue menhirs of Guernsey.\nFrom the Iron Age.\nHoards of Armorican coins have been excavated, providing evidence of trade and contact in the Iron Age period. Evidence for Roman settlement is sparse, although evidently the islands were visited by Roman officials and traders. The Roman name for the Channel Islands was \"I. Lenuri\" (Lenur Islands) and is included in the Peutinger Table. The traditional Latin names used for the islands (Caesarea for Jersey, Sarnia for Guernsey, Riduna for Alderney) derive (possibly mistakenly) from the Antonine Itinerary. Gallo-Roman culture was adopted to an unknown extent in the islands.\nIn the sixth century, Christian missionaries visited the islands. Samson of Dol, Helier, Marculf and Magloire are among saints associated with the islands. In the sixth century, they were already included in the diocese of Coutances where they remained until the Reformation.\nThere were probably some Celtic Britons who settled on the Islands in the 5th and 6th centuries AD (the indigenous Celts of Great Britain, and the ancestors of the modern Welsh, Cornish, and Bretons) who had emigrated from Great Britain in the face of invading Anglo-Saxons. But there were not enough of them to leave any trace, and the islands continued to be ruled by the king of the Franks and its church remained part of the diocese of Coutances.\nFrom the beginning of the ninth century, Norse raiders appeared on the coasts. Norse settlement eventually succeeded initial attacks, and it is from this period that many place names of Norse origin appear, including the modern names of the islands.\nFrom the Duchy of Normandy.\nIn 933, the islands were granted to William I Longsword by Raoul, the King of Western Francia, and annexed to the Duchy of Normandy. In 1066, William II of Normandy invaded and conquered England, becoming William I of England, also known as William the Conqueror. In the period 1204\u20131214, King John lost the Angevin lands in northern France, including mainland Normandy, to King Philip II of France, but managed to retain control of the Channel Islands. In 1259, his successor, Henry III of England, by the Treaty of Paris, officially surrendered his claim and title to the Duchy of Normandy, while retaining the Channel Islands, as peer of France and feudal vassal of the King of France. Since around 1290, Otto de Grandson split the Channel Islands into two separate bailiwicks which were never absorbed into the Kingdom of England nor its successor kingdoms of Great Britain or the United Kingdom. During the Hundred Years' War, the Channel Islands were part of the French territory recognizing the claims of the English kings to the French throne.\nThe islands were invaded by the French in 1338, who held some territory until 1345. Edward III of England granted a Charter in July 1341 to Jersey, Guernsey, Sark and Alderney, confirming their customs and laws to secure allegiance to the English Crown. Owain Lawgoch, a mercenary leader of a Free Company in the service of the French Crown, attacked Jersey and Guernsey in 1372, and in 1373 Bertrand du Guesclin besieged Mont Orgueil. The young King Richard II of England reconfirmed in 1378 the Charter rights granted by his grandfather, followed in 1394 with a second Charter granting, because of great loyalty shown to the Crown, exemption forever, from English tolls, customs and duties. Jersey was occupied by the French in 1461 as part of an exchange for helping the Lancastrians fight against the Yorkists during The War of the Roses. It was retaken by the Yorkists in 1468. In 1483 a Papal bull decreed that the islands would be neutral during time of war. This privilege of neutrality enabled islanders to trade with both France and England and was respected until 1689 when it was abolished by Order in Council following the Glorious Revolution in Great Britain.\nVarious attempts to transfer the islands from the diocese of Coutances (to Nantes (1400), Salisbury (1496), and Winchester (1499)) had little effect until an Order in Council of 1569 brought the islands formally into the diocese of Winchester. Control by the bishop of Winchester was ineffectual as the islands had turned overwhelmingly Calvinist and the episcopacy was not restored until 1620 in Jersey and 1663 in Guernsey.\nAfter the loss of Calais in 1558, the Channel Islands were the last remaining English holdings in France and the only French territory that was controlled by the English kings as Kings of France. This situation lasted until the English kings dropped their title and claims to the French throne in 1801, confirming the Channel Islands in a situation of a crown dependency under the sovereignty of neither Great Britain nor France but of the British crown directly.\nSark in the 16th century was uninhabited until colonised from Jersey in the 1560s. The grant of seigneurship from Elizabeth I of England in 1565 forms the basis of Sark's constitution today.\nFrom the 17th century.\nDuring the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, Jersey held out strongly for the Royalist cause, providing refuge for Charles, Prince of Wales in 1646 and 1649\u20131650, while the more strongly Presbyterian Guernsey more generally favoured the parliamentary cause (although Castle Cornet was held by Royalists and did not surrender until October 1651).\nThe islands acquired commercial and political interests in the North American colonies. Islanders became involved with the Newfoundland fisheries in the 17th century. In recognition for all the help given to him during his exile in Jersey in the 1640s, Charles II gave George Carteret, Bailiff and governor, a large grant of land in the American colonies, which he promptly named New Jersey, now part of the United States of America. Sir Edmund Andros, bailiff of Guernsey, was an early colonial governor in North America, and head of the short-lived Dominion of New England.\nIn the late 18th century, the islands were dubbed \"the French Isles\". Wealthy French \u00e9migr\u00e9s fleeing the French Revolution sought residency in the islands. Many of the town domiciles existing today were built in that time. In Saint Peter Port, a large part of the harbour had been built by 1865.\n20th century.\nWorld War II.\nThe islands were occupied by the German Army during World War II.\nThe British Government demilitarised the islands in June 1940, and the lieutenant-governors were withdrawn on 21 June, leaving the insular administrations to continue government as best they could under impending military occupation.\nBefore German troops landed, between 30 June and 4 July 1940, evacuation took place. Many young men had already left to join the Allied armed forces, as volunteers. 6,600 out of 50,000 left Jersey while 17,000 out of 42,000 left Guernsey. Thousands of children were evacuated with their schools to England and Scotland.\nThe population of Sark largely remained where they were; but in Alderney, all but six people left. In Alderney, the occupying Germans built four prison camps which housed approximately 6,000 people, of whom over 700 died. Due to the destruction of documents, it is impossible to state how many forced workers died in the other islands. Some have claimed that Alderney had the only Nazi concentration camps on British soil. Others have pointed out that, technically, Alderney was not British soil.\nThe Royal Navy blockaded the islands from time to time, particularly following the Invasion of Normandy in June 1944. There was considerable hunger and privation during the five years of German occupation, particularly in the final months when the population was close to starvation. Intense negotiations resulted in some humanitarian aid being sent via the Red Cross, leading to the arrival of Red Cross parcels in the supply ship SS \"Vega\" in December 1944.\nThe German occupation of 1940\u201345 was harsh: over 2,000 islanders were deported by the Germans, and some Jews were sent to concentration camps; partisan resistance and retribution, accusations of collaboration, and slave labour also occurred. Many Spaniards, initially refugees from the Spanish Civil War, were brought to the islands to build fortifications. Later, Russians and Central Europeans continued the work. Many land mines were laid, with 65,718 land mines laid in Jersey alone.\nThere was no resistance movement in the Channel Islands on the scale of that in mainland France. This has been ascribed to a range of factors including the physical separation of the islands, the density of troops (up to one German for every two Islanders), the small size of the islands precluding any hiding places for resistance groups, and the absence of the Gestapo from the occupying forces. Moreover, much of the population of military age had already joined the British Army.\nThe end of the occupation came after VE-Day on 8 May 1945, with Jersey and Guernsey being liberated on 9 May. The German garrison in Alderney was left until 16 May, and it was one of the last of the Nazi German remnants to surrender. The first evacuees returned on the first sailing from Great Britain on 23 June, but the people of Alderney were unable to start returning until December 1945. Many of the evacuees who returned home had difficulty reconnecting with their families after five years of separation.\nAfter 1945.\nFollowing the liberation of 1945, reconstruction led to a transformation of the economies of the islands, attracting immigration and developing tourism. The legislatures were reformed and non-party governments embarked on social programmes, aided by the incomes from offshore finance, which grew rapidly from the 1960s. The islands decided not to join the European Economic Community when the UK joined. Since the 1990s, declining profitability of agriculture and tourism has challenged the governments of the islands.\nGovernance.\nThe Channel Islands fall into two separate self-governing bailiwicks, the Bailiwick of Guernsey and the Bailiwick of Jersey. Each of these is a British Crown Dependency, and neither is a part of the United Kingdom. They have been parts of the Duchy of Normandy since the 10th century, and Queen Elizabeth II was often referred to by her traditional and conventional title of Duke of Normandy. However, pursuant to the Treaty of Paris (1259), she governed in her right as The Queen (the \"Crown in right of Jersey\", and the \"Crown in right of the \"r\u00e9publique\" of the Bailiwick of Guernsey\"), and not as the Duke. This notwithstanding, it is a matter of local pride for monarchists to treat the situation otherwise: the Loyal toast at formal dinners was to 'The Queen, our Duke', rather than to 'Her Majesty, The Queen' as in the UK. The Queen died in 2022 and her son Charles III became the King.\nA bailiwick is a territory administered by a bailiff. Although the words derive from a common root ('bail' = 'to give charge of') there is a vast difference between the meanings of the word 'bailiff' in Great Britain and in the Channel Islands; a bailiff in Britain is a court-appointed private debt-collector authorised to collect judgment debts, in the Channel Islands, the Bailiff in each bailiwick is the civil head, presiding officer of the States, and also head of the judiciary, and thus the most important citizen in the bailiwick.\nIn the early 21st century, the existence of governmental offices such as the bailiffs' with multiple roles straddling the different branches of government came under increased scrutiny for their apparent contravention of the doctrine of separation of powers\u2014most notably in the Guernsey case of \"McGonnell -v- United Kingdom\" (2000) 30 EHRR 289. That case, following final judgement at the European Court of Human Rights, became part of the impetus for much recent constitutional change, particularly the Constitutional Reform Act 2005 (2005 c.4) in the UK, including the separation of the roles of the Lord Chancellor, the abolition of the House of Lords' judicial role, and its replacement by the UK Supreme Court. The islands' bailiffs, however, still retain their historic roles.\nThe systems of government in the islands date from Norman times, which accounts for the names of the legislatures, the States, derived from the Norman '\u00c9tats' or 'estates' (i.e. the Crown, the Church, and the people). The States have evolved over the centuries into democratic parliaments.\nThe UK Parliament has power to legislate for the islands, but Acts of Parliament do not extend to the islands automatically. Usually, an Act gives power to extend its application to the islands by an Order in Council, after consultation. For the most part the islands legislate for themselves. Each island has its own primary legislature, known as the States of Guernsey and the States of Jersey, with Chief Pleas in Sark and the States of Alderney. The Channel Islands are not represented in the UK Parliament. Laws passed by the States are given royal assent by the King-in-Council, to whom the islands' governments are responsible.\nThe islands have never been part of the European Union, and thus were not a party to the 2016 referendum on the EU membership, but were part of the Customs Territory of the European Community by virtue of Protocol Three to the Treaty on European Union. In September 2010, a Channel Islands Brussels Office was set up jointly by the two Bailiwicks to develop the Channel Islands' influence with the EU, to advise the Channel Islands' governments on European matters, and to promote economic links with the EU.\nBoth bailiwicks are members of the British\u2013Irish Council, and J\u00e8rriais and Guern\u00e9siais are recognised regional languages of the islands.\nThe legal courts are separate; separate courts of appeal have been in place since 1961. Among the legal heritage from Norman law is the Clameur de haro. The basis of the legal systems of both Bailiwicks is Norman customary law (Coutume) rather than the English Common Law, although elements of the latter have become established over time.\nIslanders are full British citizens, but were not classed as European citizens unless by descent from a UK national. Any British citizen who applies for a passport in Jersey or Guernsey receives a passport bearing the words \"British Islands, Bailiwick of Jersey\" or \"British Islands, Bailiwick of Guernsey\". Under the provisions of Protocol Three, Channel Islanders who do not have a close connection with the UK (no parent or grandparent from the UK, and have never been resident in the UK for a five-year period) did not automatically benefit from the EU provisions on free movement within the EU, and their passports received an endorsement to that effect. This affected only a minority of islanders.\nUnder the UK Interpretation Act 1978, the Channel Islands are deemed to be part of the British Islands, not to be confused with the British Isles. For the purposes of the British Nationality Act 1981, the \"British Islands\" include the United Kingdom (Great Britain and Northern Ireland), the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, taken together, unless the context otherwise requires.\nEconomy.\nTourism is still important. However, Jersey and Guernsey have, since the 1960s, become major offshore financial centres. Historically Guernsey's horticultural and greenhouse activities have been more significant than in Jersey, and Guernsey has maintained light industry as a higher proportion of its economy than Jersey. In Jersey, potatoes are an important export crop, shipped mostly to the UK.\nJersey is heavily reliant on financial services, with 39.4% of Gross Value Added (GVA) in 2018 contributed by the sector. Rental income comes second at 15.1% with other business activities at 11.2%. Tourism 4.5% with agriculture contributing just 1.2% and manufacturing even lower at 1.1%. GVA has fluctuated between \u00a34.5 and \u00a35 billion for 20 years.\nDespite having only 250,000 residents, the Channel islands combined with the Isle of Man are the second-biggest source of foreign direct investment in the United Kingdom.\nJersey has had a steadily rising population, increasing from below 90,000 in 2000 to over 105,000 in 2018 which combined with a flat GVA has resulted in GVA per head of population falling from \u00a357,000 to \u00a344,000 per person.\nIn 2018, Guernsey had a GDP of \u00a33.2 billion and with a stable population of around 66,000 has had a steadily rising GDP, and a GVA per head of population which in 2018 surpassed \u00a352,000.\nBoth bailiwicks issue their own banknotes and coins, which circulate freely in all the islands alongside UK coinage and Bank of England and Scottish banknotes.\nTransport and communications.\nPost.\nSince 1969, Jersey and Guernsey have operated postal administrations independently of the UK's Royal Mail, with their own postage stamps, which can be used for postage only in their respective bailiwicks. UK stamps are no longer valid, but mail to the islands, and to the Isle of Man, is charged at UK inland rates. It was not until the early 1990s that the islands joined the UK's postcode system, Jersey postcodes using the initials JE and Guernsey GY.\nTransport.\nRoad.\nEach of the three largest islands has a distinct vehicle registration scheme:\nIn Sark, where most motor traffic is prohibited, the few vehicles \u2013\u00a0nearly all tractors\u00a0\u2013 do not display plates. Bicycles display tax discs.\nSea.\nIn the 1960s, names used for the cross-Channel ferries plying the mail route between the islands and Weymouth, Dorset, were taken from the popular Latin names for the islands: (Jersey), (Guernsey) and (Alderney). Fifty years later, the ferry route between the Channel Islands and the UK is operated by Condor Ferries from both St Helier, Jersey and St Peter Port, Guernsey, using high-speed catamaran fast craft to Poole in the UK. A regular passenger ferry service on the Commodore Clipper goes from both Channel Island ports to Portsmouth daily, and carries both passengers and freight.\nFerry services to Normandy are operated by , and services between Jersey and Saint-Malo are operated by and Condor Ferries. The Isle of Sark Shipping Company operates small ferries to Sark. Normandy Trader operates an ex military tank landing craft for transporting freight between the islands and France.\nOn 20 August 2013, , which had operated a \"lift-on lift-off\" container service for 80 years between the Port of Southampton and the Port of Jersey, ceased trading. Senator Alan Maclean, a Jersey politician, had previously tried to save the 90-odd jobs furnished by the company to no avail. On 20 September, it was announced that Channel Island Lines would continue this service, and would purchase the MV \"Huelin Dispatch\" from Associated British Ports who in turn had purchased them from the receiver in the bankruptcy. The new operator was to be funded by Rockayne Limited, a closely held association of Jersey businesspeople.\nAir.\nThere are three airports in the Channel Islands: Alderney Airport, Guernsey Airport and Jersey Airport. They are directly connected to each other by services operated by Blue Islands and Aurigny.\nRail.\nHistorically, there have been railway networks on Jersey, Guernsey, and Alderney, but all of the lines on Jersey and Guernsey have been closed and dismantled. Today there are three working railways in the Channel Islands, of which the Alderney Railway is the only one providing a regular timetabled passenger service. The other two are a gauge miniature railway, also on Alderney, and the heritage steam railway operated on Jersey as part of the Pallot Heritage Steam Museum.\nMedia.\nThe Channel Islands are served by a number of local radio services \u2013 BBC Radio Jersey and BBC Radio Guernsey, Channel 103 and Island FM \u2013 as well as regional television news opt-outs from BBC Channel Islands and ITV Channel Television.\nOn 1 August 2021, DAB+ digital radio became available for the first time, introducing new stations like the local Bailiwick Radio and Soleil Radio, and UK-wide services like Capital, Heart, and Times Radio.\nThere are two broadcast transmitters serving Jersey \u2013 at Fremont Point and Les Platons \u2013 as well as one at Les Touillets in Guernsey and a relay in Alderney.\nThere are several local newspapers including the Guernsey Press and the Jersey Evening Post and magazines.\nTelephone.\nJersey always operated its own telephone services independently of Britain's national system, Guernsey established its own telephone service in 1968. Both islands still form part of the British telephone numbering plan, but Ofcom on the mainlines does not have responsibility for telecommunications regulatory and licensing issues on the islands. It is responsible for wireless telegraphy licensing throughout the islands, and by agreement, for broadcasting regulation in the two large islands only. Submarine cables connect the various islands and provide connectivity with England and France.\nInternet.\nModern broadband speeds are available on all of the islands, including full-fibre (FTTH) in Jersey (offering speeds of up to 1\u00a0Gbit/s on all broadband connections) and VDSL and some business and homes with fibre connectivity in Guernsey. Providers include Sure and JT.\nThe two Bailiwicks each have their own internet domain, .GG (Guernsey, Alderney, Sark) and .JE (Jersey), which are managed by channelisles.net.\nCulture.\nThe Norman language predominated in the islands until the nineteenth century, when increasing influence from English-speaking settlers and easier transport links led to Anglicisation. There are four main dialects/languages of Norman in the islands, Auregnais (Alderney, extinct in late twentieth century), Dg\u00e8rn\u00e9siais (Guernsey), J\u00e8rriais (Jersey) and Sercquiais (Sark, an offshoot of J\u00e8rriais).\nVictor Hugo spent many years in exile, first in Jersey and then in Guernsey, where he finished \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\". Guernsey is the setting of Hugo's later novel \"Les Travailleurs de la Mer\" (\"Toilers of the Sea\"). A \"Guernsey-man\" also makes an appearance in chapter 91 of Herman Melville's \"Moby-Dick\".\nThe annual \"Muratti\", the inter-island football match, is considered the sporting event of the year, although, due to broadcast coverage, it no longer attracts the crowds of spectators, travelling between the islands, that it did during the twentieth century.\nCricket is popular in the Channel Islands. The Jersey cricket team and the Guernsey cricket team are both associate members of the International Cricket Council. The teams have played each other in the inter-insular match since 1957. In 2001 and 2002, the Channel Islands entered a team into the MCCA Knockout Trophy, the one-day tournament of the minor counties of English and Welsh cricket.\nChannel Island sportsmen and women compete in the Commonwealth Games for their respective islands and the islands have also been enthusiastic supporters of the Island Games. Shooting is a popular sport, in which islanders have won Commonwealth medals.\nGuernsey's traditional colour for sporting and other purposes is green and Jersey's is red.\nThe main islanders have traditional animal nicknames:\nReligion.\nChristianity was brought to the islands around the sixth century; according to tradition, Jersey was evangelised by St Helier, Guernsey by St Samson of Dol, and the smaller islands were occupied at various times by monastic communities representing strands of Celtic Christianity. At the Reformation, the previously Catholic islands converted to Calvinism under the influence of an influx of French-language pamphlets published in Geneva. Anglicanism was imposed in the seventeenth century, but the Nonconformist local tendency returned with a strong adoption of Methodism. In the late twentieth century, a strong Catholic presence re-emerged with the arrival of numerous Portuguese workers (both from mainland Portugal and the island of Madeira). Their numbers have been reinforced by recent migrants from Poland and elsewhere in Eastern Europe. Today, Evangelical churches have been established. Services are held in a number of languages.\nAccording to 2015 statistics, 39% of the population was non-religious.\nOther islands in the English Channel.\nA number of islands in the English Channel are part of France. Among these are Br\u00e9hat, \u00cele de Batz, Chausey, Tatihou and the \u00celes Saint-Marcouf.\nThe Isle of Wight, which is part of England, lies just off the coast of Great Britain, between the Channel and the Solent.\nHayling and Portsea islands, both being near or part of Portsmouth, are also part of England (and thus part of the United Kingdom).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5644", "revid": "11308236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5644", "title": "Comedy film", "text": "Genre of film that emphasizes humour\nThe comedy film is a film genre that emphasizes humor. These films are designed to amuse audiences and make them laugh. Films in this genre typically have a happy ending, with dark comedy being an exception to this rule. Comedy is one of the oldest genres in film, and it is derived from classical comedy in theatre. Some of the earliest silent films were slapstick comedies, which often relied on visual depictions, such as sight gags and pratfalls, so they could be enjoyed without requiring sound. To provide drama and excitement to silent movies, live music was played in sync with the action on the screen, on pianos, organs, and other instruments. When sound films became more prevalent during the 1920s, comedy films grew in popularity, as laughter could result from both burlesque situations but also from humorous dialogue.\nComedy, compared with other film genres, places more focus on individual star actors, with many former stand-up comics transitioning to the film industry due to their popularity.\nIn \"The Screenwriters Taxonomy\" (2017), Eric R. Williams contends that film genres are fundamentally based upon a film's atmosphere, character, and story, and therefore, the labels \"drama\" and \"comedy\" are too broad to be considered a genre. Instead, his taxonomy argues that comedy is a type of film that contains at least a dozen different sub-types. A number of hybrid genres have emerged, such as action comedy and romantic comedy.\nHistory.\nSilent film era.\nThe first comedy film was \"L'Arroseur Arros\u00e9\" (1895), directed and produced by film pioneer Louis Lumi\u00e8re. Less than a minute long, it shows a boy playing a prank on a gardener. The most notable comedy actors of the silent film era (1895\u20131927) were Charlie Chaplin, Harold Lloyd, and Buster Keaton, though they were able to make the transition into \"talkies\" after the 1920s.\nSocial commentary in comedy.\nFilm-makers in the 1960s skillfully employed the use of comedy film to make social statements by building their narratives around sensitive cultural, political or social issues. Such films include Dr Strangelove, or How I Learned to Love the Bomb, Guess Who's Coming to Dinner? and The Graduate. \nCamp and bawdy comedy.\nIn America, the sexual revolution drove an appetite for comedies that celebrated and parodied changing social morals, including Bob &amp; Carol &amp; Ted &amp; Alice and Fanny Hill. In Britain, a camp sensibility lay behind the successful Carry On films, while in America subversive independent film-maker John Waters made camp films for college audiences with his drag queen friends that eventually found a mainstream audience. The success of the American television show Saturday Night Live drove decades of cinema with racier content allowed on television drawing on the program's stars and characters, with bigger successes including Wayne's World, Mean Girls, Ghostbusters and Animal House.\nPresent era.\nParody and joke-based films continue to find audiences.\nReception.\nWhile comedic films are among the most popular with audiences at the box office, there is an 'historical bias against a close and serious consideration of comedy' when it comes to critical reception and conferring of awards, such as at the Academy Awards. Film writer Cailian Savage observes \"Comedies have won Oscars, although they\u2019ve usually been comedy-dramas, involved very depressing scenes, or appealed to stone-hearted drama lovers in some other way, such as \"Shakespeare in Love\".\"\nHybrid sub-genres.\nAccording to Williams' taxonomy, all film descriptions should contain their type (comedy or drama) combined with one (or more) sub-genres. This combination does not create a separate genre, but rather, provides a better understanding of the film.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5645", "revid": "30361015", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5645", "title": "Cult film", "text": "Films with a devoted fanbase\n \nA cult film, also commonly referred to as a cult classic, is a film that has acquired a cult following. Cult films are known for their dedicated, passionate fanbase, which forms an elaborate subculture, members of which engage in repeated viewings, dialogue-quoting, and audience participation. Inclusive definitions allow for major studio productions, especially box-office bombs, while exclusive definitions focus more on obscure, transgressive films shunned by the mainstream. The difficulty in defining the term and subjectivity of what qualifies as a cult film mirror classificatory disputes about art. The term \"cult film\" itself was first used in the 1970s to describe the culture that surrounded underground films and midnight movies, though \"cult\" was in common use in film analysis for decades prior to that.\nCult films trace their origin back to controversial and suppressed films kept alive by dedicated fans. In some cases, reclaimed or rediscovered films have acquired cult followings decades after their original release, occasionally for their camp value. Other cult films have since become well-respected or reassessed as classics; there is debate as to whether these popular and accepted films are still cult films. After failing at the cinema, some cult films have become regular fixtures on cable television or profitable sellers on home video. Others have inspired their own film festivals. Cult films can both appeal to specific subcultures and form their own subcultures. Other media that reference cult films can easily identify which demographics they desire to attract and offer savvy fans an opportunity to demonstrate their knowledge.\nCult films frequently break cultural taboos, and many feature excessive displays of violence, gore, sexuality, profanity, or combinations thereof. This can lead to controversy, censorship, and outright bans; less transgressive films may attract similar amounts of controversy when critics call them frivolous or incompetent. Films that fail to attract requisite amounts of controversy may face resistance when labeled as cult films. Mainstream films and big budget blockbusters have attracted cult followings similar to more underground and lesser known films; fans of these films often emphasize the films' niche appeal and reject the more popular aspects. Fans who like the films for the wrong reasons, such as perceived elements that represent mainstream appeal and marketing, will often be ostracized or ridiculed. Likewise, fans who stray from accepted subcultural scripts may experience similar rejection.\nSince the late 1970s, cult films have become increasingly popular. Films that once would have been limited to obscure cult followings are now capable of breaking into the mainstream, and showings of cult films have proved to be a profitable business venture. Overly broad usage of the term has resulted in controversy, as purists state it has become a meaningless descriptor applied to any film that is the slightest bit weird or unconventional; others accuse Hollywood studios of trying to artificially create cult films or use the term as a marketing tactic. Modern films are frequently stated to be an \"instant cult classic\", occasionally before they are released. Some films have acquired massive, quick cult followings, owing to advertisements and posts made by fans spreading virally through social media. Easy access to cult films via video on demand and peer-to-peer file sharing has led some critics to pronounce the death of cult films.\nDefinition.\nA cult film is any film that has a cult following, although the term is not easily defined and can be applied to a wide variety of films. Some definitions exclude films that have been released by major studios or have big budgets, that try specifically to become cult films, or become accepted by mainstream audiences and critics. Cult films are defined by audience reaction as much as by their content. This may take the form of elaborate and ritualized audience participation, film festivals, or cosplay. Over time, the definition has become more vague and inclusive as it drifts away from earlier, stricter views. Increasing use of the term by mainstream publications has resulted in controversy, as cinephiles argue that the term has become meaningless or \"elastic, a catchall for anything slightly maverick or strange\". Academic Mark Shiel has criticized the term itself as being a weak concept, reliant on subjectivity; different groups can interpret films in their own terms. According to feminist scholar Joanne Hollows, this subjectivity causes films with large female cult followings to be perceived as too mainstream and not transgressive enough to qualify as a cult film. Academic Mike Chopra\u2011Gant says that cult films become decontextualized when studied as a group, and Shiel criticizes this recontextualization as cultural commodification.\nIn 2008, \"Cineaste\" asked a range of academics for their definition of a cult film. Several defined cult films primarily in terms of their opposition to mainstream films and conformism, explicitly requiring a transgressive element, though others disputed the transgressive potential, given the demographic appeal to conventional moviegoers and mainstreaming of cult films. Jeffrey Andrew Weinstock instead called them mainstream films with transgressive elements. Most definitions also required a strong community aspect, such as obsessed fans or ritualistic behavior. Citing misuse of the term, Mikel J. Koven took a self-described hard-line stance that rejected definitions that use any other criteria. Matt Hills instead stressed the need for an open-ended definition rooted in structuration, where the film and the audience reaction are interrelated and neither is prioritized. Ernest Mathijs focused on the accidental nature of cult followings, arguing that cult film fans consider themselves too savvy to be marketed to, while Jonathan Rosenbaum rejected the continued existence of cult films and called the term a marketing buzzword. Mathijs suggests that cult films help to understand ambiguity and incompleteness in life given the difficulty in even defining the term. That cult films can have opposing qualities\u00a0\u2013 such as good and bad, failure and success, innovative and retro\u00a0\u2013 helps to illustrate that art is subjective and never self-evident. This ambiguity leads critics of postmodernism to accuse cult films of being beyond criticism, as the emphasis is now on personal interpretation rather than critical analysis or metanarratives. These inherent dichotomies can lead audiences to be split between ironic and earnest fans.\nWriting in \"Defining Cult Movies\", Jancovich et al. quote academic Jeffrey Sconce, who defines cult films in terms of paracinema, marginal films that exist outside critical and cultural acceptance in such varied genres as exploitation, beach party musicals, and softcore pornography. However, they reject cult films as having a single unifying feature; instead, they state that cult films are united in their \"subcultural ideology\" and opposition to mainstream tastes, itself a vague and undefinable term. Cult followings themselves can range from adoration to contempt, and they have little in common except for their celebration of nonconformity\u00a0\u2013 even the bad films ridiculed by fans are artistically nonconformist, albeit unintentionally. At the same time, they state that bourgeois, masculine tastes are frequently reinforced, which makes cult films more of an internal conflict within the bourgeoisie, rather than a rebellion against it. This results in an anti-academic bias despite the use of formal methodologies, such as defamiliarization. This contradiction exists in many subcultures, especially those dependent on defining themselves in terms of opposition to the mainstream. This nonconformity is eventually co-opted by the dominant forces, such as Hollywood, and marketed to the mainstream. Academic Xavier Mendik proposes that films can become cult by virtue of their genre or content, especially if it is transgressive. Due to their rejection of mainstream appeal, Mendik says cult films can be more creative and political; times of relative political instability produce more interesting films.\nGeneral overview.\nCult films have existed since the early days of cinema. Film critic Harry Alan Potamkin traces them back to 1910s France and the reception of Pearl White, William S. Hart, and Charlie Chaplin, which he described as \"a dissent from the popular ritual\". \"Nosferatu\" (1922) was an unauthorized adaptation of Bram Stoker's \"Dracula\". Stoker's widow sued the production company, and all known copies in Germany were destroyed. Now illegal to distribute in many countries, \"Nosferatu\" became an early cult film. Academic Chuck Kleinhans identifies the Marx Brothers as making other early cult films. On their original release, some highly regarded classics from the Golden Age of Hollywood were panned by critics and audiences, relegated to cult status. \"The Night of the Hunter\" (1955) was a cult film for years, quoted often and championed by fans, before it was reassessed as an important and influential classic. During this time, American exploitation films and imported European art films were marketed similarly. Although critics Pauline Kael and Arthur Knight argued against arbitrary divisions into high and low culture, American films settled into rigid genres; European art films continued to push the boundaries of simple definitions, and these exploitative art films and artistic exploitation films influenced American cult films. Much like later cult films, these early exploitation films encouraged audience participation, influenced by live theater and vaudeville.\nModern cult films grew from 1960s counterculture and underground films, popular among those who rejected mainstream Hollywood films. These underground film festivals led to the creation of midnight movies, which attracted cult followings. The term \"cult film\" itself was an outgrowth of this movement and was first used in the 1970s, though \"cult\" had been in use for decades in film analysis with both positive and negative connotations. These films were more concerned with cultural significance than the social justice sought by earlier avant-garde films. Midnight movies became more popular and mainstream by the 1970s, peaking with the release of \"The Rocky Horror Picture Show\" (1975), which finally found its audience several years after its release. Eventually, the rise of home video marginalized midnight movies once again, after which many directors joined the burgeoning independent film scene or went back underground. Home video gave a second life to box-office flops, as positive word-of-mouth or excessive replay on cable television led these films to develop an appreciative audience, as well as obsessive replay and study. For example, \"The Beastmaster\" (1982), despite its failure at the box office, became one of the most played films on American cable television and developed into a cult film. Home video and television broadcasts of cult films were initially greeted with hostility. Joanne Hollows states that they were seen as turning cult films mainstream\u00a0\u2013 in effect, feminizing them by opening them to distracted, passive audiences.\nReleases from major studios, such as \"The Big Lebowski\" (1998), which was distributed by Universal Studios, can become cult films when they fail at the box office and develop a cult following through reissues, such as midnight movies, festivals, and home video. Hollywood films, due to their nature, are more likely to attract this kind of attention, which leads to a mainstreaming effect of cult culture. With major studios behind them, even financially unsuccessful films can be re-released multiple times to seek an audience. The constant use of profanity and drugs in otherwise mainstream, Hollywood films, such as \"The Big Lebowski\", can alienate critics and audiences yet lead to a large cult following among more open-minded demographics not often associated with cult films, such as Wall Street bankers and professional soldiers. Thus, even comparatively mainstream films can satisfy the traditional demands of a cult film, perceived by fans as transgressive, niche, and uncommercial. Discussing his reputation for making cult films, Bollywood director Anurag Kashyap said, \"I didn't set out to make cult films. I wanted to make box-office hits.\" Academics Ernest Mathijs and Jamie Sexton state that this acceptance of mainstream culture and commercialism is not out of character, as cult audiences have a more complex relationship to these concepts: their opposition is to mainstream values and excessive commercialism.\nIn a global context, popularity can vary widely by territory, especially with regard to limited releases. \"Mad Max\" (1979) was an international hit, except in America where it became an obscure cult favorite, ignored by critics and available for years only in a dubbed version though it earned over $100M internationally. Foreign cinema can put a different spin on popular genres, such as Japanese horror, which was initially a cult favorite in America. Asian imports to the West are often marketed as exotic cult films and of interchangeable national identity. Foreign influence can affect fan response, especially on genres tied to a national identity; when they become more global in scope, questions of authenticity may arise. Filmmakers and films ignored in their own country can become the objects of cult adoration in another, producing perplexed reactions in their native country. Cult films can also establish an early viability for more mainstream films, both for filmmakers and national cinema. The early cult horror films of Peter Jackson were so strongly associated with his homeland that they affected the international reputation of New Zealand and its cinema. As more artistic films emerged, New Zealand was perceived as a legitimate competitor to Hollywood, which mirrored Jackson's career trajectory. \"Heavenly Creatures\" (1994) acquired its own cult following, became a part of New Zealand's national identity, and paved the way for big-budget, Hollywood-style epics, such as Jackson's \"The Lord of the Rings\" trilogy.\nCult film fans often watch films obsessively or in idiosyncratic ways, such as speeding them up or slowing them down. Fans may watch marathons of horror films on Halloween, sentimental melodrama on Christmas, and romantic films on Valentine's Day. Christmas films in particular have a nostalgic factor. These films, ritually watched every season, give a sense of community and shared nostalgia. New films often have trouble making inroads against the institutions of \"It's a Wonderful Life\" (1946) and \"Miracle on 34th Street\" (1947). These films provide mild criticism of consumerism while encouraging family values. Halloween, on the other hand, allows for flaunting society's taboos and testing one's fears via horror films. Mathijs criticizes the commercialized nature of Halloween and horror films, which he states feels lacks community. Mathijs states that Halloween horror conventions can provide the missing community aspect.\nDespite their oppositional nature, cult films can produce celebrities. Like cult films themselves, authenticity is an important aspect of their popularity. Actors can become typecast as they become strongly associated with such iconic roles. Tim Curry, despite his acknowledged range as an actor, found casting difficult after he achieved fame in \"The Rocky Horror Picture Show\". Even when discussing unrelated projects, interviewers frequently bring up the role, which causes him to tire of discussing it. Mary Woronov, known for her transgressive roles in cult films, eventually transitioned to mainstream films. She was expected to recreate the transgressive elements of her cult films within the confines of mainstream cinema. Instead of the complex gender deconstructions of her Andy Warhol films, she became typecast as a lesbian or domineering woman. Sylvia Kristel, after starring in \"Emmanuelle\" (1974), found herself highly associated with the film and the sexual liberation of the 1970s. Caught between the transgressive elements of her cult film and the mainstream appeal of soft-core pornography, she was unable to work in anything but exploitation films and \"Emmanuelle\" sequels. Despite her immense popularity and cult following, she rated only a footnote in most histories of European cinema if she was even mentioned. Similarly, Chlo\u00eb Sevigny has struggled with her reputation as a cult independent film star famous for her daring roles in transgressive films. Cult films can also trap directors. Leonard Kastle, who directed \"The Honeymoon Killers\" (1969), never directed another film again. Despite his cult following, which included Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut, he was unable to find financing for any of his other screenplays. Qualities that bring cult films to prominence\u00a0\u2013 such as an uncompromising, unorthodox vision\u00a0\u2013 caused Alejandro Jodorowsky to languish in obscurity for years.\nTransgression and censorship.\nTransgressive films as a distinct artistic movement began in the 1970s. Unconcerned with genre distinctions, they drew inspiration equally from the nonconformity of European art cinema and experimental film, the gritty subject matter of Italian neorealism, and the shocking images of 1960s exploitation. Some used hardcore pornography and horror, occasionally at the same time. In the 1980s, filmmaker Nick Zedd identified this movement as the Cinema of Transgression and wrote a manifesto. Popular in midnight showings, they were mainly limited to large urban areas, which led academic Joan Hawkins to label them as \"downtown culture\". These films acquired a legendary reputation as they were discussed and debated in alternative weeklies, such as \"The Village Voice\". Home video finally allowed general audiences to see them, which gave many people their first taste of underground film. Mathijs says that cult films often disrupt viewer expectations, such as giving characters transgressive motivations or focusing attention on elements outside the film. Cult films can also transgress national stereotypes and genre conventions, such as \"Battle Royale\" (2000), which broke many rules of teenage slasher films. The reverse\u00a0\u2013 when films based on cult properties lose their transgressive edge\u00a0\u2013 can result in derision and rejection by fans. Audience participation itself can be transgressive, such as breaking long-standing taboos against talking during films and throwing things at the screen.\nAccording to Mathijs, critical reception is important to a film's perception as cult, through topicality and controversy. Topicality, which can be regional (such as objection to government funding of the film) or critical (such as philosophical objections to the themes), enables attention and a contextual response. Cultural topics make the film relevant and can lead to controversy, such as a moral panic, which provides opposition. Cultural values transgressed in the film, such as sexual promiscuity, can be attacked by proxy through attacks on the film. These concerns can vary from culture to culture, and they need not be at all similar. However, Mathijs says the film must invoke metacommentary for it to be more than simply culturally important. While referencing previous arguments, critics may attack its choice of genre or its very right to exist. By taking stances on these varied issues, critics assure their own relevance while helping to elevate the film to cult status. Perceived racist and reductive remarks by critics can rally fans and raise the profile of cult films, such as Rex Reed's comments about Korean culture in his review of \"Oldboy\" (2003). Critics can also polarize audiences and lead debates, such as how Joe Bob Briggs and Roger Ebert dueled over \"I Spit On Your Grave\" (1978). Briggs later contributed a commentary track to the DVD release in which he describes it as a feminist film. Films which do not attract enough controversy may be ridiculed and rejected when suggested as cult films.\nAcademic Peter Hutchings, noting the many definitions of a cult film that require transgressive elements, states that cult films are known in part for their excesses. Both subject matter and its depiction are portrayed in extreme ways that break taboos of good taste and aesthetic norms. Violence, gore, sexual perversity, and even the music can be pushed to stylistic excess far beyond that allowed by mainstream cinema. Film censorship can make these films obscure and make it difficult to find common criteria used to define cult films. Despite this, these films remain well-known and prized among collectors. Fans will occasionally express frustration with dismissive critics and conventional analysis, which they believe marginalizes and misinterprets paracinema. In marketing these films, young men are predominantly targeted. Horror films in particular can draw fans who seek the most extreme films. Audiences can also ironically latch on to offensive themes, such as misogyny, using these films as catharsis for the things that they hate most in life. Exploitative, transgressive elements can be pushed to excessive extremes for both humor and satire. Frank Henenlotter faced censorship and ridicule, but he found acceptance among audiences receptive to themes that Hollywood was reluctant to touch, such as violence, drug addiction, and misogyny. Lloyd Kaufman sees his films' political statements as more populist and authentic than the hypocrisy of mainstream films and celebrities. Despite featuring an abundance of fake blood, vomit, and diarrhea, Kaufman's films have attracted positive attention from critics and academics. Excess can also exist in films that highlight the excesses of 1980s fashion and commercialism.\nFilms that are influenced by unpopular styles or genres can become cult films. Director Jean Rollin worked within \"cin\u00e9ma fantastique\", an unpopular genre in modern France. Influenced by American films and early French fantasists, he drifted between art, exploitation, and pornography. His films were reviled by critics, but he retained a cult following drawn by the nudity and eroticism. Similarly, Jess Franco chafed under fascist censorship in Spain but became influential in Spain's horror boom of the 1960s. These transgressive films that straddle the line between art and horror may have overlapping cult followings, each with their own interpretation and reasons for appreciating it. The films that followed Jess Franco were unique in their rejection of mainstream art. Popular among fans of European horror for their subversiveness and obscurity, these later Spanish films allowed political dissidents to criticize the fascist regime within the cloak of exploitation and horror. Unlike most exploitation directors, they were not trying to establish a reputation. They were already established in the art-house world and intentionally chose to work within paracinema as a reaction against the New Spanish Cinema, an artistic revival supported by the fascists. As late as the 1980s, critics still cited Pedro Almod\u00f3var's anti-macho iconoclasm as a rebellion against fascist mores, as he grew from countercultural rebel to mainstream respectability. Transgressive elements that limit a director's appeal in one country can be celebrated or highlighted in another. Takashi Miike has been marketed in the West as a shocking and avant-garde filmmaker despite his many family-friendly comedies, which have not been imported.\nThe transgressive nature of cult films can lead to their censorship. During the 1970s and early 1980s, a wave of explicit, graphic exploitation films caused controversy. Called \"video nasties\" within the UK, they ignited calls for censorship and stricter laws on home video releases, which were largely unregulated. Consequently, the British Board of Film Classification banned many popular cult films due to issues of sex, violence, and incitement to crime. Released during the cannibal boom, \"Cannibal Holocaust\" (1980) was banned in dozens of countries and caused the director to be briefly jailed over fears that it was a real snuff film. Although opposed to censorship, director Ruggero Deodato later agreed with cuts made by the BBFC that removed unsimulated animal killings, which limited the film's distribution. Frequently banned films may introduce questions of authenticity as fans question whether they have seen a truly uncensored cut. Cult films have been falsely claimed to have been banned to increase their transgressive reputation and explain their lack of mainstream penetration. Marketing campaigns have also used such claims to raise interest among curious audiences. Home video has allowed cult film fans to import rare or banned films, finally giving them a chance to complete their collection with imports and bootlegs. Cult films previously banned are sometimes released with much fanfare, and the fans assumed to be already familiar with the controversy. Personal responsibility is often highlighted, and a strong anti-censorship message may be present. Previously lost scenes cut by studios can be re-added and restore a director's original vision, which draws similar fanfare and acclaim from fans. Imports are sometimes censored to remove elements that would be controversial, such as references to Islamic spirituality in Indonesian cult films.\nAcademics have written of how transgressive themes in cult films can be regressive. David Church and Chuck Kleinhans describe an uncritical celebration of transgressive themes in cult films, including misogyny and racism. Church has also criticized gendered descriptions of transgressive content that celebrate masculinity. Joanne Hollows further identifies a gendered component to the celebration of transgressive themes in cult films, where male terms are used to describe films outside the mainstream while female terms are used to describe mainstream, conformist cinema. Jacinda Read's expansion states that cult films, despite their potential for empowerment of the marginalized, are more often used by politically incorrect males. Knowledgeable about feminism and multiculturalism, they seek a refuge from the academic acceptance of these progressive ideals. Their playful and ironic acceptance of regressive lad culture invites, and even dares, condemnation from academics and the uncool. Thus, cult films become a tool to reinforce mainstream values through transgressive content; Rebecca Feasy states that cultural hierarchies can also be reaffirmed through mockery of films perceived to be lacking masculinity. However, the sexploitation films of Doris Wishman took a feminist approach which avoids and subverts the male gaze and traditional goal-oriented methods. Wishman's subject matter, though exploitative and transgressive, was always framed in terms of female empowerment and the feminine spectator. Her use of common cult film motifs\u00a0\u2013 female nudity and ambiguous gender\u00a0\u2013 were repurposed to comment on feminist topics. Similarly, the films of Russ Meyer were a complicated combination of transgressive, mainstream, progressive, and regressive elements. They attracted both acclaim and denouncement from critics and progressives. Transgressive films imported from cultures that are recognizably different yet still relatable can be used to progressively examine issues in another culture.\nSubcultural appeal and fandom.\nCult films can be used to help define or create groups as a form of subcultural capital; knowledge of cult films proves that one is \"authentic\" or \"non-mainstream\". They can be used to provoke an outraged response from the mainstream, which further defines the subculture, as only members could possibly tolerate such deviant entertainment. More accessible films have less subcultural capital; among extremists, banned films will have the most. By referencing cult films, media can identify desired demographics, strengthen bonds with specific subcultures, and stand out among those who understand the intertextuality. Popular films from previous eras may be reclaimed by genre fans long after they have been forgotten by the original audiences. This can be done for authenticity, such as horror fans who seek out now-obscure titles from the 1950s instead of the modern, well-known remakes. Authenticity may also drive fans to deny genre categorization to films perceived as too mainstream or accessible. Authenticity in performance and expertise can drive fan acclaim. Authenticity can also drive fans to decry the mainstream in the form of hostile critics and censors. Especially when promoted by enthusiastic and knowledgeable programmers, choice of venue can be an important part of expressing individuality. Besides creating new communities, cult films can link formerly disparate groups, such as fans and critics. As these groups intermix, they can influence each other, though this may be resisted by older fans, unfamiliar with these new references. In extreme cases, cult films can lead to the creation of religions, such as Dudeism. For their avoidance of mainstream culture and audiences, enjoyment of irony, and celebration of obscure subcultures, academic Martin Roberts compares cult film fans to hipsters.\nA film can become the object of a cult following within a particular region or culture if it has unusual significance. For example, Norman Wisdom's films, friendly to Marxist interpretation, amassed a cult following in Albania, as they were among the few Western films allowed by the country's Communist rulers. \"The Wizard of Oz\" (1939) and its star, Judy Garland, hold special significance to American and British gay culture, although it is a widely viewed and historically important film in greater American culture. Similarly, James Dean and his brief film career have become icons of alienated youth. Cult films can have such niche appeal that they are only popular within certain subcultures, such as \"Reefer Madness\" (1936) and \"Hemp for Victory\" (1942) among the stoner subculture. Beach party musicals, popular among American surfers, failed to find an equivalent audience when imported to the United Kingdom. When films target subcultures like this, they may seem unintelligible without the proper cultural capital. Films which appeal to teenagers may offer subcultural identities that are easily recognized and differentiate various subcultural groups. Films which appeal to stereotypical male activities, such as sports, can easily gain strong male cult followings. Sports metaphors are often used in the marketing of cult films to males, such as emphasizing the \"extreme\" nature of the film, which increases the appeal to youth subcultures fond of extreme sports.\nMatt Hills' concept of the \"cult blockbuster\" involves cult followings inside larger, mainstream films. Although these are big budget, mainstream films, they still attract cult followings. The cult fans differentiate themselves from ordinary fans in several ways: longstanding devotion to the film, distinctive interpretations, and fan works. Hills identifies three different cult followings for \"The Lord of the Rings\", each with their own fandom separate from the mainstream. Academic Emma Pett identifies \"Back to the Future\" (1985) as another example of a cult blockbuster. Although the film was an instant hit when released, it has also developed a nostalgic cult following over the years. The hammy acting by Christopher Lloyd and quotable dialogue have drawn a cult following, as they mimic traditional cult films. Blockbuster science fiction films that include philosophical subtexts, such as \"The Matrix\", allow cult film fans to enjoy them on a higher level than the mainstream. \"Star Wars\", with its large cult following in geek subculture, has been cited as both a cult blockbuster and a cult film. Although a mainstream epic, \"Star Wars\" has provided its fans with a spirituality and culture outside of the mainstream.\nFans, in response to the popularity of these blockbusters, will claim elements for themselves while rejecting others. For example, in the \"Star Wars\" film series, mainstream criticism of Jar Jar Binks focused on racial stereotyping. Although cult film fans will use that to bolster their arguments, he is rejected because he represents mainstream appeal and marketing. Also, instead of valuing textual rarity, fans of cult blockbusters will value repeat viewings. They may also engage in behaviors more traditional for fans of cult television and other serial media, as cult blockbusters are often franchised, preconceived as a film series, or both. To reduce mainstream accessibility, a film series can be self-reflexive and full of in-jokes that only longtime fans can understand. Mainstream critics may ridicule commercially successful directors of cult blockbusters, such as James Cameron, Paul Verhoeven, Michael Bay, and Luc Besson, whose films have been called simplistic. This critical backlash may serve to embellish the filmmakers' reception as cult auteurs. In the same way, critics may ridicule fans of cult blockbusters as immature or shallow.\nCult films can create their own subculture. \"Rocky Horror\", originally made to exploit the popularity of glam subculture, became what academic Gina Marchetti called a \"sub-subculture\", a variant that outlived its parent subculture. Although often described as primarily composed of obsessed fans, cult film fandom can include many newer, less experienced members. Familiar with the film's reputation and having watched clips on online video platforms, these fans may take the next step and enter the film's fandom. If they are the majority, they may alter or ignore long-standing traditions, such as audience participation rituals; rituals which lack perceived authenticity may be criticized, but accepted rituals bring subcultural capital to veteran fans who introduce them to the newer members. Newer fans may cite the film itself as their reason for attending a showing, but longtime fans often cite the community. Organized fandoms may spread and become popular as a way of introducing new people to the film. Fans of cult films, as in media fandom, are frequently producers and not simple consumers. Unconcerned with traditional views on intellectual property, these fan works are often unsanctioned, transformative, and ignore fictional canon.\nLike cult films themselves, magazines and websites dedicated to cult films revel in their self-conscious offensiveness. They maintain a sense of exclusivity by offending mainstream audiences with misogyny, gore, and racism. Obsessive trivia can be used to bore mainstream audiences while building up subcultural capital. Specialist stores on the fringes of society (or websites which prominently partner with hardcore pornographic sites) can be used to reinforce the outsider nature of cult film fandom, especially when they use erotic or gory imagery. By assuming a preexisting knowledge of trivia, non-fans can be excluded. Previous articles and controversies can also be alluded to without explanation. Casual readers and non-fans will thus be left out of discussions and debates, as they lack enough information to meaningfully contribute. When fans like a cult film for the wrong reasons, such as casting or characters aimed at mainstream appeal, they may be ridiculed. Thus, fandom can keep the mainstream at bay while defining themselves in terms of the \"Other\", a philosophical construct divergent from social norms. Commercial aspects of fandom (such as magazines or books) can also be defined in terms of \"otherness\" and thus valid to consume: consumers purchasing independent or niche publications are discerning consumers, but the mainstream is denigrated. Irony or self-deprecating humor can also be used. In online communities, different subcultures attracted to transgressive films can clash over values and criteria for subcultural capital. Even within subcultures, fans who break subcultural scripts, such as denying the affectivity of a disturbing film, will be ridiculed for their lack of authenticity.\nTypes.\n\"So bad it's good\".\nThe critic Michael Medved characterized examples of the \"so bad it's good\" class of low-budget cult film through books such as \"The Golden Turkey Awards\". These films include financially fruitless and critically scorned films that have become inadvertent comedies to film buffs, such as \"Plan 9 from Outer Space\" (1957), \"Mommie Dearest\" (1981), \"The Room\" (2003), and the Ugandan action comedy film \"Who Killed Captain Alex?\" (2010). Similarly, Paul Verhoeven's \"Showgirls\" (1995) bombed in theaters but developed a cult following on video. Catching on, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer capitalized on the film's ironic appeal and marketed it as a cult film. Sometimes, fans will impose their own interpretation of films which have attracted derision, such as reinterpreting an earnest melodrama as a comedy. Jacob deNobel of the \"Carroll County Times\" states that films can be perceived as nonsensical or inept when audiences misunderstand avant-garde filmmaking or misinterpret parody. Films such as \"Rocky Horror\" can be misinterpreted as \"weird for weirdness' sake\" by people unfamiliar with the cult films that they parody. deNobel ultimately rejects the use of the label \"so bad it's good\" as mean-spirited and often misapplied. Alamo Drafthouse programmer Zack Carlson has further said that any film which succeeds in entertaining an audience is good regardless of irony. In francophone culture, \"so bad it's good\" films are known as nanars. The rise of the Internet and on-demand films has led critics to question whether \"so bad it's good\" films have a future now that people have such diverse options in both availability and catalog, though fans eager to experience the worst films ever made can lead to lucrative showings for local theaters and merchandisers.\nCamp and guilty pleasures.\nChuck Kleinhans states that the difference between a guilty pleasure and a cult film can be as simple as the number of fans; David Church raises the question of how many people it takes to form a cult following, especially now that home video makes fans difficult to count. As these cult films become more popular, they can bring varied responses from fans that depend on different interpretations, such as camp, irony, genuine affection, or combinations thereof. Earnest fans, who recognize and accept the film's faults, can make minor celebrities of the film's cast, though the benefits are not always clear. Cult film stars known for their camp can inject subtle parody or signal when films should not be taken seriously. Campy actors can also provide comic book supervillains for serious, artistic-minded films. This can draw fan acclaim and obsession more readily than subtle, method-inspired acting. Mark Chalon Smith of the \"Los Angeles Times\" says technical faults may be forgiven if a film makes up for them in other areas, such as camp or transgressive content. Smith states that the early films of John Waters are amateurish and less influential than claimed, but Waters' outrageous vision cements his place in cult cinema. Films such as \"Myra Breckinridge\" (1970) and \"Beyond the Valley of the Dolls\" (1970) can experience critical reappraisal later, once their camp excess and avant-garde filmmaking are better accepted, and films that are initially dismissed as frivolous are often reassessed as campy. Films that intentionally try to appeal to fans of camp may end up alienating them, as the films become perceived as trying too hard or not authentic.\nNostalgia.\nAccording to academic Brigid Cherry, nostalgia \"is a strong element of certain kinds of cult appeal.\" When Veoh added many cult films to their site, they cited nostalgia as a factor for their popularity. Academic I.\u00a0Q. Hunter describes cult films as \"New Hollywood \"in extremis\"\" and a form of nostalgia for that period. Ernest Mathijs instead states that cult films use nostalgia as a form of resistance against progress and capitalistic ideas of a time-based economy. By virtue of the time travel plot, \"Back to the Future\" permits nostalgia for both the 1950s and 1980s. Many members of its nostalgic cult following are too young to have been alive during those periods, which Emma Pett interprets as fondness for retro aesthetics, nostalgia for when they saw the film rather than when it was released, and looking to the past to find a better time period. Similarly, films directed by John Hughes have taken hold in midnight movie venues, trading off of nostalgia for the 1980s and an ironic appreciation for their optimism. Mathijs and Sexton describe \"Grease\" (1978) as a film nostalgic about an imagined past that has acquired a nostalgic cult following. Other cult films, such as \"Streets of Fire\" (1984), create a new fictional world based on nostalgic views of the past. Cult films may also subvert nostalgia, such as \"The Big Lebowski\", which introduces many nostalgic elements and then reveals them as fake and hollow. \"Scott Pilgrim vs. the World\" (2010) is another example, containing extensive nostalgia for the music and video gaming culture of the 2000s. Author China Mi\u00e9ville praises the use of satire in \"Donnie Darko\" for its avoidance of falling into facile and comforting nostalgia, but Nathan Lee of the \"New York Sun\" identifies the retro aesthetic and nostalgic pastiche as factors in its popularity among midnight movie crowds.\nMidnight movies.\nAuthor Tomas Crowder-Taraborrelli describes midnight movies as a reaction against the political and cultural conservatism in America, and Joan Hawkins identifies the movement as running the gamut from anarchist to libertarian, united in their anti-establishment attitude and punk aesthetic. These films are resistant to simple categorization and are defined by the fanaticism and ritualistic behaviors of their audiences. Midnight movies require a night life and an audience willing to invest themselves actively. Hawkins states that these films took a rather bleak point of view due to the living conditions of the artists and the economic prospects of the 1970s. Like the surrealists and dadaists, they not only satirically attacked society but also the very structure of film\u00a0\u2013 a counter-cinema that deconstructs narrative and traditional processes. In the late 1980s and 1990s, midnight movies transitioned from underground showings to home video viewings; eventually, a desire for community brought a resurgence, and \"The Big Lebowski\" kick-started a new generation. Demographics shifted, and more hip and mainstream audiences were drawn to them. Although studios expressed skepticism, large audiences were drawn to box-office flops, such as \"The Warriors\" (1979) gang movie from Walter Hill, \"Office Space\" (1999) and \"Donnie Darko\" (2001). Modern midnight movies retain their popularity and have been strongly diverging from mainstream films shown at midnight. Mainstream cinemas, eager to disassociate themselves from negative associations and increase profits, have begun abandoning midnight screenings. Although classic midnight movies have dropped off in popularity, they still bring reliable crowds.\nArt and exploitation.\nAlthough seemingly at odds with each other, art and exploitation films are frequently treated as equal and interchangeable in cult fandom, listed alongside each other and described in similar terms: their ability to provoke a response. The most exploitative aspects of art films are thus played up and their academic recognition ignored. This flattening of culture follows the popularity of post-structuralism, which rejects a hierarchy of artistic merit and equates exploitation and art. Mathijs and Sexton state that although cult films are not synonymous with exploitation, as is occasionally assumed, this is a key component; they write that exploitation, which exists on the fringes of the mainstream and deals with taboo subjects, is well-suited for cult followings. Academic David Andrews writes that cult softcore films are \"the most masculinized, youth-oriented, populist, and openly pornographic softcore area.\" The sexploitation films of Russ Meyer were among the first to abandon all hypocritical pretenses of morality and were technically proficient enough to gain a cult following. His persistent vision saw him received as an auteur worthy of academic study; director John Waters attributes this to Meyer's ability to create complicated, sexually charged films without resorting to explicit sex. Myrna Oliver described Doris Wishman's exploitation films as \"crass, coarse, and camp\u00a0... perfect fodder for a cult following.\" \"Sick films\", the most disturbing and graphically transgressive films, have their own distinct cult following; these films transcend their roots in exploitation, horror, and art films. In 1960s and 1970s America, exploitation and art films shared audiences and marketing, especially in New York City's grindhouse cinemas.\nB and genre films.\nMathijs and Sexton state that genre is an important part of cult films; cult films will often mix, mock, or exaggerate the tropes associated with traditional genres. Science fiction, fantasy, and horror are known for their large and dedicated cult followings; as science fiction films become more popular, fans emphasize non-mainstream and less commercial aspects of it. B films, which are often conflated with exploitation, are as important to cult films as exploitation. Teodor Reljic of \"Malta Today\" states that cult B films are a realistic goal for Malta's burgeoning film industry. Genre films, B films that strictly adhere to genre limitations, can appeal to cult film fans: given their transgressive excesses, horror films are likely to become to cult films; films like \"Galaxy Quest\" (1999) highlight the importance of cult followings and fandom to science fiction; and authentic martial arts skills in Hong Kong action films can drive them to become cult favorites. Cult musicals can range from the traditional, such as \"Singin' in the Rain\" (1952), which appeal to cult audiences through nostalgia, camp, and spectacle, to the more non-traditional, such as \"Cry-Baby\" (1990), which parodies musicals, and \"Rocky Horror\", which uses a rock soundtrack. Romantic fairy tale \"The Princess Bride\" (1987) failed to attract audiences in its original release, as the studio did not know how to market it. The freedom and excitement associated with cars can be an important part of drawing cult film fans to genre films, and they can signify action and danger with more ambiguity than a gun. \"Ad Week\" writes that cult B films, when released on home video, market themselves and need only enough advertising to raise curiosity or nostalgia.\nAnimation.\nAnimation can provide wide open vistas for stories. The French film \"Fantastic Planet\" (1973) explored ideas beyond the limits of traditional, live-action science fiction films. Ralph Bakshi's career has been marked with controversy: \"Fritz the Cat\" (1972), the first animated film to be rated \"X\" by the MPAA, provoked outrage for its racial caricatures and graphic depictions of sex, and \"Coonskin\" (1975) was decried as racist. Bakshi recalls that older animators had tired of \"kid stuff\" and desired edgier work, whereas younger animators hated his work for \"destroying the Disney images\". Eventually, his work was reassessed and cult followings, which include Quentin Tarantino and Robert Rodriguez, developed around several of his films. \"Heavy Metal\" (1981) faced similar denunciations from critics. Donald Liebenson of the \"Los Angeles Times\" cites the violence and sexual imagery as alienating critics, who did not know what to make of the film. It became a popular midnight movie and was frequently bootlegged by fans, as licensing issues kept it from being released on video for many years.\nPhil Hoad of \"The Guardian\" identifies \"Akira\" (1988) as introducing violent, adult Japanese animation (known as anime) to the West and paving the way for later works. Anime, according to academic Brian Ruh, is not a cult genre, but the lack of individual fandoms inside anime fandom itself lends itself to a bleeding over of cult attention and can help spread works internationally. Anime, which is frequently presented as a series (with movies either rising from existing series, or spinning off series based on the film), provides its fans with alternative fictional canons and points of view that can drive fan activity. The \"Ghost in the Shell\" films, for example, provided Japanese fans with enough bonus material and spinoffs that it encouraged cult tendencies. Markets that did not support the sale of these materials saw less cult activity. \nNonfiction.\nSensationalistic documentaries called mondo films replicate the most shocking and transgressive elements of exploitation films. They are usually modeled after \"sick films\" and cover similar subject matter. In \"The Cult Film Reader\", academics Mathijs and Mendik write that these documentaries often present non-Western societies as \"stereotypically mysterious, seductive, immoral, deceptive, barbaric or savage\". Though they can be interpreted as racist, Mathijs and Mendik state that they also \"exhibit a liberal attitude towards the breaking of cultural taboos\". Mondo films like \"Faces of Death\" mix real and fake footage freely, and they gain their cult following through the outrage and debate over authenticity that results. Like \"so bad it's good\" cult films, old propaganda and government hygiene films may be enjoyed ironically by more modern audiences for the camp value of the outdated themes and outlandish claims made about perceived social threats, such as drug use. Academic Barry K. Grant states that Frank Capra's \"Why We Fight\" World War II propaganda films are explicitly not cult, because they are \"slickly made and have proven their ability to persuade an audience.\" The sponsored film \"Mr. B Natural\" became a cult hit when it was broadcast on the satirical television show \"Mystery Science Theater 3000\"; cast member Trace Beaulieu cited these educational shorts as his favorite to mock on the show. Mark Jancovich states that cult audiences are drawn to these films because of their \"very banality or incoherence of their political positions\", unlike traditional cult films, which achieve popularity through auteurist radicalism.\nMainstream popularity.\nMark Shiel explains the rising popularity of cult films as an attempt by cinephiles and scholars to escape the oppressive conformity and mainstream appeal of even independent film, as well as a lack of condescension in both critics and the films; Academic Donna de Ville says it is a chance to subvert the dominance of academics and cinephiles. According to Xavier Mendik, \"academics have been really interested in cult movies for quite a while now.\" Mendik has sought to bring together academic interest and fandom through Cine-Excess, a film festival. I. Q. Hunter states that \"it's much easier to be a cultist now, but it is also rather more inconsequential.\" Citing the mainstream availability of \"Cannibal Holocaust\", Jeffrey Sconce rejects definitions of cult films based on controversy and excess, as they've now become meaningless. Cult films have influenced such diverse industries as cosmetics, music videos, and fashion. Cult films have shown up in less expected places; as a sign of his popularity, a bronze statue of Ed Wood has been proposed in his hometown, and \"L'Osservatore Romano\", the official newspaper of the Holy See, has courted controversy for its endorsement of cult films and pop culture. When cities attempt to renovate neighborhoods, fans have called attempts to demolish iconic settings from cult films \"cultural vandalism\". Cult films can also drive tourism, even when it is unwanted. From Latin America, Alejandro Jodorowsky's film \"El Topo\" (1970) has attracted attention of rock musicians such as John Lennon, Mick Jagger, and Bob Dylan.\nAs far back as the 1970s, \"Attack of the Killer Tomatoes\" (1978) was designed specifically to be a cult film, and \"The Rocky Horror Picture Show\" was produced by 20th Century Fox, a major Hollywood studio. Over its decades-long release, \"Rocky Horror\" became the seventh highest grossing R-rated film when adjusted for inflation; journalist Matt Singer has questioned whether \"Rocky Horror\"'s popularity invalidates its cult status. Founded in 1974, Troma Entertainment, an independent studio, became known for both its cult following and cult films. In the 1980s, Danny Peary's \"Cult Movies\" (1981) influenced director Edgar Wright and film critic Scott Tobias of \"The A.V. Club\". The rise of home video had a mainstreaming effect on cult films and cultish behavior, though some collectors would be unlikely to self-identify as cult film fans. Film critic Joe Bob Briggs began reviewing drive-in theater and cult films, though he faced much criticism as an early advocate of exploitation and cult films. Briggs highlights the mainstreaming of cult films by pointing out the respectful obituaries that cult directors have received from formerly hostile publications and acceptance of politically incorrect films at mainstream film festivals. This acceptance is not universal, though, and some critics have resisted this mainstreaming of paracinema. Beginning in the 1990s, director Quentin Tarantino had the greatest success in turning cult films mainstream. Tarantino later used his fame to champion obscure cult films that had influenced him and set up the short-lived Rolling Thunder Pictures, which distributed several of his favorite cult films. Tarantino's clout led Phil Hoad of \"The Guardian\" to call Tarantino the world's most influential director.\nAs major Hollywood studios and audiences both become savvy to cult films, productions once limited to cult appeal have instead become popular hits, and cult directors have become hot properties known for more mainstream and accessible films. Remarking on the popular trend of remaking cult films, Claude Brodesser-Akner of \"New York\" magazine states that Hollywood studios have been superstitiously hoping to recreate past successes rather than trading on nostalgia. Their popularity brought some critics to proclaim the death of cult films now that they have finally become successful and mainstream, are too slick to attract a proper cult following, lack context, or are too easily found online. In response, David Church says that cult film fans have retreated to more obscure and difficult to find films, often using illegal distribution methods, which preserves the outlaw status of cult films. Virtual spaces, such as online forums and fan sites, replace the traditional fanzines and newsletters. Cult film fans consider themselves collectors, rather than consumers, as they associate consumers with mainstream, Hollywood audiences. This collecting can take the place of fetishization of a single film. Addressing concerns that DVDs have revoked the cult status of films like \"Rocky Horror\", academic Mikel J. Koven states that small scale screenings with friends and family can replace midnight showings. Koven also identifies television shows, such as \"Twin Peaks\", as retaining more traditional cult activities inside popular culture. Despite this, the Alamo Drafthouse has capitalized on cult films and the surrounding culture through inspiration drawn from \"Rocky Horror\" and retro promotional gimmickry. They sell out their shows regularly and have acquired a cult following of their own.\nAcademic Bob Batchelor, writing in \"Cult Pop Culture\", states that the internet has democratized cult culture and destroyed the line between cult and mainstream. Fans of even the most obscure films can communicate online with each other in vibrant communities. Although known for their big-budget blockbusters, Steven Spielberg and George Lucas have criticized the current Hollywood system of gambling everything on the opening weekend of these productions. Geoffrey Macnab of \"The Independent\" instead suggests that Hollywood look to capitalize on cult films, which have exploded in popularity on the internet. The rise of social media has been a boon to cult films. Sites such as Twitter have displaced traditional venues for fandom and courted controversy from cultural critics who are unamused by campy cult films. After a clip from one of his films went viral, director-producer Roger Corman made a distribution deal with YouTube. Found footage which had originally been distributed as cult VHS collections eventually went viral on YouTube, which opened them to new generations of fans. Films such as \"\" (2008) and \"The Room\" (2003) gained quick, massive popularity, as prominent members of social networking sites discussed them. Their rise as \"instant cult classics\" bypasses the years of obscurity that most cult films labor under. In response, critics have described the use of viral marketing as astroturfing and an attempt to manufacture cult films.\nI. Q. Hunter identifies a prefabricated cult film style which includes \"deliberately, insulting bad films\", \"slick exercises in dysfunction and alienation\", and mainstream films \"that sell themselves as worth obsessing over\". Writing for NPR, Scott Tobias states that Don Coscarelli, whose previous films effortlessly attracted cult followings, has drifted into this realm. Tobias criticizes Coscarelli as trying too hard to appeal to cult audiences and sacrificing internal consistency for calculated quirkiness. Influenced by the successful online hype of \"The Blair Witch Project\" (1999), other films have attempted to draw online cult fandom with the use of prefabricated cult appeal. \"Snakes on a Plane\" (2006) is an example that attracted massive attention from curious fans. Uniquely, its cult following preceded the film's release and included speculative parodies of what fans imagined the film might be. This reached the point of convergence culture when fan speculation began to impact on the film's production. Although it was proclaimed a cult film and major game-changer before it was released, it failed to win either mainstream audiences or maintain its cult following. In retrospect, critic Spencer Kornhaber called it a serendipitous novelty and a footnote to a \"more naive era of the Internet\". However, it became influential in both marketing and titling. This trend of \"instant cult classics\" which are hailed yet fail to attain a lasting following is described by Matt Singer, who states that the phrase is an oxymoron.\nCult films are often approached in terms of auteur theory, which states that the director's creative vision drives a film. This has fallen out of favor in academia, creating a disconnect between cult film fans and critics. Matt Hills states that auteur theory can help to create cult films; fans that see a film as continuing a director's creative vision are likely to accept it as cult. According to academic Greg Taylor, auteur theory also helped to popularize cult films when middlebrow audiences found an accessible way to approach avant-garde film criticism. Auteur theory provided an alternative culture for cult film fans while carrying the weight of scholarship. By requiring repeated viewings and extensive knowledge of details, auteur theory naturally appealed to cult film fans. Taylor further states that this was instrumental in allowing cult films to break through to the mainstream. Academic Joe Tompkins states that this auteurism is often highlighted when mainstream success occurs. This may take the place of\u00a0\u2013 and even ignore\u00a0\u2013 political readings of the director. Cult films and directors may be celebrated for their transgressive content, daring, and independence, but Tompkins argues that mainstream recognition requires they be palatable to corporate interests who stand to gain much from the mainstreaming of cult film culture. While critics may champion revolutionary aspects of filmmaking and political interpretation, Hollywood studios and other corporate interests will instead highlight only the aspects that they wish to legitimize in their own films, such as sensational exploitation. Someone like George A. Romero, whose films are both transgressive and subversive, will have the transgressive aspects highlighted while the subversive aspects are ignored.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5646", "revid": "15503141", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5646", "title": "Constantinople", "text": "Capital of the Eastern Roman and Ottoman empires\nConstantinople (see other names) was a historical city located on the Bosporus that served as the capital of the Roman (including its eastern continuation), Latin, and Ottoman empires between its consecration in 330 and the formal abolition of the Ottoman sultanate in 1922. Initially, as New Rome, Constantinople was founded in 324 during the reign of Constantine the Great on the site of the existing settlement of Byzantium and in 330 became the capital of the Roman Empire. Following the collapse of the Western Roman Empire in the late 5th century, Constantinople remained the capital of the Eastern Roman Empire (also known as the Byzantine Empire; 330\u20131204 and 1261\u20131453), the Latin Empire (1204\u20131261), and the Ottoman Empire (1453\u20131922). In the aftermath of the Turkish War of Independence, the Turkish capital moved to Ankara. The city was officially renamed Istanbul on 28 March 1930. As of October 2025, it is the most populous city in Europe, with a population of more than 16 million residents, straddling the Bosporus Strait and lying in both Europe and Asia, and is the financial center of Turkey.\nIn 324, following the reunification of the Eastern and Western Roman Empires, the ancient city of Byzantium was selected to serve as the new capital of the Roman Empire, and the city was renamed Nova Roma, or 'New Rome', by Emperor Constantine the Great. On 11 May 330, it was renamed Constantinople and dedicated to Constantine. Shortly afterward, in 474 AD, the Great Fire of Constantinople erupted and consequently devastated the region. Constantinople is generally considered to be the center and the \"cradle of Orthodox Christian civilization.\" From the mid-5th century to the early 13th century, Constantinople was the largest and wealthiest city in Europe. The city became famous for its architectural masterpieces, such as Hagia Sophia, the cathedral of the Eastern Orthodox Church, which served as the seat of the Ecumenical Patriarchate; the sacred Imperial Palace, where the emperors lived; the Hippodrome; the Golden Gate of the Land Walls; and opulent aristocratic palaces. The University of Constantinople was founded in the 5th century and contained artistic and literary treasures before it was sacked in 1204 and 1453, including its vast Imperial Library. which contained more than 100,000 volumes. The city was the home of the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople and guardian of Christendom's holiest relics, such as the Crown of Thorns and the True Cross.\nConstantinople was famous for its massive and complex fortifications, which ranked among the most sophisticated defensive architecture of antiquity. The Theodosian Walls consisted of a double wall lying about to the west of the first wall and a moat with palisades in front. Constantinople's location between the Golden Horn and the Sea of Marmara reduced the land area that required defensive walls. The city was constructed intentionally to rival Rome, and it was claimed that several elevations within its walls matched Rome's seven hills. The impenetrable defenses enclosed magnificent palaces, domes, and towers, the result of the prosperity Constantinople achieved as the gateway between two continents (Europe and Asia) and two seas (the Mediterranean and the Black Sea). Although besieged on numerous occasions by various armies, the defenses of Constantinople proved impenetrable for nearly nine hundred years.\nIn 1204, however, the armies of the Fourth Crusade took and devastated the city, and for six decades its inhabitants resided under Latin occupation in a dwindling and depopulated city. In 1261, the Byzantine Emperor Michael VIII Palaiologos liberated the city, and after the restoration under the Palaiologos dynasty, it enjoyed a partial recovery. With the advent of the Ottoman Empire in 1299, the Byzantine Empire began to lose territories, and the city began to lose population. By the early 15th century, the Byzantine Empire was reduced to just Constantinople and its environs, along with the territories of the despotate of Morea, in Peloponnese, Greece, making it an enclave inside the Ottoman Empire. The city was finally besieged and conquered by the Ottoman Empire in 1453, remaining under its control until the early 20th century, after which it was renamed Istanbul under the Empire's successor state, the Republic of Turkey.\nNames.\nBefore Constantinople.\nAccording to Pliny the Elder in his \"Natural History\", the first known name of a settlement on the site of Constantinople was \"Lygos\", a settlement likely of Thracian origin founded between the 13th and 11th centuries BC. The site, according to the founding myth of the city, was abandoned by the time Greek settlers from the city-state of Megara founded \"Byzantium\" (, \"Byz\u00e1ntion\") in around 657\u00a0BC, across from the town of Chalcedon on the Asiatic side of the Bosphorus.\nThe origins of the name \"Byzantion\", more commonly known by the later Latin \"Byzantium\", are not entirely clear, although some suggest it is of Thracian origin. According to the founding myth of the city, the settlement was named after the leader of the Megarian colonists, Byzas. The later Byzantines of Constantinople themselves would maintain that the city was named in honor of two men, Byzas and Antes, though this was more likely just a play on the word Byzantion.\nThe city was briefly renamed \"Augusta Antonina\" in the early 3rd century AD by the Emperor Septimius Severus (193\u2013211), who razed the city to the ground in 196 for supporting a rival contender in the civil war. He then had it rebuilt in honour of his son Marcus Aurelius Antoninus (who succeeded him as Emperor), popularly known as Caracalla. The name appears to have been quickly forgotten and abandoned, and the city reverted to Byzantium/Byzantion after either the assassination of Caracalla in 217 or, at the latest, the fall of the Severan dynasty in 235.\nNames of Constantinople.\nByzantium took on the name of Constantinople () after its refoundation under Roman emperor Constantine I, who transferred the capital of the Roman Empire to Byzantium in 330 and designated his new capital officially as () 'New Rome'. During this time, the city was also called 'Second Rome', 'Eastern Rome', and (Latin for 'Constantinopolitan Rome'). As the city became the sole remaining capital of the Roman Empire after the fall of the West, and its wealth, population, and influence grew, the city also came to have a multitude of nicknames.\nAs the largest and wealthiest city in Europe during the 4th\u201313th centuries and a center of culture and education of the Mediterranean basin, Constantinople came to be known by prestigious titles such as \"Basileuousa\" (Queen of Cities) and \"Megalopolis\" (the Great City) and was, in colloquial speech, commonly referred to as just \"Polis\" () 'the City' by Constantinopolitans and provincial Byzantines alike.\nIn the language of other peoples, Constantinople was referred to just as reverently. The medieval Vikings, who had contacts with the empire through their expansion in eastern Europe (Varangians), used the Old Norse name \"Miklagar\u00f0r\" (from \"mikill\" 'big' and \"gar\u00f0r\" 'city'), and later \"Miklagard\" and \"Miklagarth\". In Arabic, the city was sometimes called \"R\u016bmiyyat al-Kubra\" (the Great City of the Romans) and in Persian as \"Takht-e Rum\" (Throne of the Romans).\nIn East and South Slavic languages, including in Kievan Rus', Constantinople has been referred to as \"Tsargrad\" (\"\u0426\u0430\u0440\u044c\u0433\u0440\u0430\u0434\") or \"Carigrad\", 'City of the Caesar (Emperor)', from the Slavonic words \"tsar\" ('Caesar' or 'King') and \"grad\" ('city'). This was presumably a calque on a Greek phrase such as (\"Vasileos Polis\"), 'the city of the emperor [king]'.\nIn Persian, the city was also known as \"Asitane\" (the Threshold of the State), while in Armenian, it was called \"Gosdantnubolis\" (City of Constantine).\nModern names of the city.\nThe modern Turkish name for the city, \"\u0130stanbul\", derives from the Greek phrase \"eis tin Polin\" (), meaning '(in)to the city'. This name was used in colloquial speech in Turkish alongside \"Kostantiniyye\", the more formal adaptation of the original \"Constantinople\", during the period of Ottoman rule, while Western languages mostly continued to refer to the city as Constantinople until the early 20th century. In 1928, the Turkish alphabet was formally changed from Arabic script to Latin script. After that, as part of the Turkification movement, Turkey began to urge other countries to use Turkish names for Turkish cities instead of other transliterations to Latin script that had been used in Ottoman times, and the city came to be known as Istanbul and its variations in most world languages.\nHowever, adherents of the Eastern Orthodox Church continue to use the name Constantinople for the title of one of their most important leaders, the Orthodox patriarch based in the city, referred to as \"His Most Divine All-Holiness the Archbishop of Constantinople New Rome and Ecumenical Patriarch\". In Greece today, the city is still called \"Konstantino\u00fapoli(s)\" () or simply just \"the City\" ().\nHistory.\nFoundation of Byzantium.\nConstantinople was founded by the Roman emperor Constantine I (272\u2013337) in 324 on the site of an already-existing city, Byzantium, which was settled in the early days of Greek colonial expansion, around 657 BC, by colonists of the city-state of Megara. This is the first major settlement that would develop on the site of later Constantinople, but the first known settlement was that of \"Lygos\", referred to in Pliny's Natural Histories. Apart from this, little is known about this initial settlement. The site, according to the founding myth of the city, was abandoned by the time Greek settlers from the city-state of Megara founded Byzantium () in around 657 BC, across from the town of Chalcedon on the Asiatic side of the Bosphorus.\nHesychius of Miletus wrote that some \"claim that people from Megara, who derived their descent from Nisos, sailed to this place under their leader Byzas, and invented the fable that his name was attached to the city.\" Some versions of the founding myth say Byzas was the son of a local nymph, while others say he was conceived by one of Zeus' daughters and Poseidon. Hesychius also gives alternate versions of the city's founding legend, which he attributed to old poets and writers:\n&lt;poem&gt;It is said that the first Argives, after having received this prophecy from Pythia,\n Blessed are those who will inhabit that holy city,\n a narrow strip of the Thracian shore at the mouth of the Pontos,\n where two pups drink of the gray sea,\n where fish and stag graze on the same pasture,\nset up their dwellings at the place where the rivers Kydaros and Barbyses have their estuaries, one flowing from the north, the other from the west, and merging with the sea at the altar of the nymph called Semestre\"&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe city maintained independence as a city-state until it was annexed by Darius I in 512 BC into the Persian Empire, as he considered the site the optimal location to construct a pontoon bridge crossing into Europe, given that Byzantium was situated at the narrowest point in the Bosphorus strait. Persian rule lasted until 478 BC, when, as part of the Greek counterattack to the Second Persian invasion of Greece, a Greek army led by the Spartan general Pausanias captured the city, which remained an independent, yet subordinate, city under the Athenians, and later to the Spartans after 411 BC. A farsighted treaty with the emergent power of Rome in c.\u2009150 BC, which stipulated tribute in exchange for independent status allowed it to enter Roman rule unscathed. This treaty would pay dividends retrospectively as Byzantium would maintain this independent status, and prosper under peace and stability in the Pax Romana for nearly three centuries until the late 2nd century AD.\nByzantium was never a major influential city-state like Athens, Corinth, or Sparta; however, on the other hand, the city enjoyed relative peace and steady growth as a prosperous trading city due to its fortunate location. The site lay astride the land route from Europe to Asia and the seaway from the Black Sea to the Mediterranean, and had in the Golden Horn an excellent and spacious harbor. Already then, in Greek and early Roman times, Byzantium was famous for the strategic geographic position that made it difficult to besiege and capture, and its position at the crossroads of the Asiatic-European trade route over land and as the gateway between the Mediterranean and Black Seas made it too valuable a settlement to abandon, as Emperor Septimius Severus later realized when he razed the city to the ground for supporting Pescennius Niger's claimancy. It was a move greatly criticized by the contemporary consul and historian Cassius Dio, who stated that Severus had destroyed \"a strong Roman outpost and a base of operations against the barbarians from Pontus and Asia.\" He would later rebuild Byzantium towards the end of his reign, in which it would be briefly renamed \"Augusta Antonina\", fortifying it with a new city wall in his name, the Severan Wall.\n324\u2013337: The refoundation as Constantinople.\nConstantine had altogether more colorful plans. Having restored the unity of the Empire and, being in the course of major governmental reforms as well as of sponsoring the consolidation of the Christian church, he was well aware that Rome was an unsatisfactory capital. Rome was too far from the frontiers, and hence from the armies and the imperial courts, and it offered an undesirable playground for disaffected politicians. Yet it had been the capital of the state for over a thousand years, and it might have seemed unthinkable to suggest that the capital be moved to a different location. Nevertheless, Constantine identified the site of Byzantium as the right place: a place where an emperor could sit, readily defended, with easy access to the Danube or the Euphrates frontiers, his court supplied from the rich gardens and sophisticated workshops of Roman Asia, his treasuries filled by the wealthiest provinces of the Empire.\nConstantinople was built over six years and ceremonially consecrated on 11 May 330. Constantine divided the expanded city, like Rome, into 14 regions, and ornamented it with public works worthy of an imperial metropolis. Yet, at first, Constantine's new Rome did not have all the dignities of old Rome. It possessed a proconsul, rather than an urban prefect. It had no praetors, tribunes, or quaestors. Although it did have senators, they held the title \"clarus\", not \"clarissimus\", like those of Rome. It also lacked the panoply of other administrative offices regulating the food supply, police, statues, temples, sewers, aqueducts, or other public works. The new program of building was carried out in great haste: columns, marbles, doors, and tiles were taken wholesale from the temples of the empire and moved to the new city. In a similar fashion, many of the greatest works of Greek and Roman art were soon to be seen in its squares and streets. The emperor stimulated private building by promising householders gifts of land from the imperial estates in Asiana and Pontica and, on 18 May 332, he announced that, as in Rome, free distributions of food would be made to the citizens. At the time, the amount is said to have been 80,000 rations a day, doled out from 117 distribution points around the city.\nConstantine laid out a new square at the center of old Byzantium, naming it the Augustaion (Greek: Augustaeum). The new senate-house (or Curia) was housed in a basilica on the east side. On the south side of the great square was erected the Great Palace of the Emperor with its imposing entrance, the Chalke, and its ceremonial suite known as the Palace of Daphne. Nearby was the vast Hippodrome for chariot races, seating over 80,000 spectators, and the famed Baths of Zeuxippus. At the western entrance to the Augustaion was the Milion, a vaulted monument from which distances were measured across the Eastern Roman Empire.\nFrom the Augustaion led a great street, the Mese, lined with colonnades. As it descended the First Hill of the city and climbed the Second Hill, it passed on the left the Praetorium or law-court. Then it passed through the oval Forum of Constantine, where there was a second Senate-house and a high column with a statue of Constantine himself in the guise of Helios, crowned with a halo of seven rays and looking toward the rising sun. From there, the Mese passed on and through the Forum Tauri and then the Forum Bovis, and finally up the Seventh Hill (or Xerolophus) and through to the Golden Gate in the Constantinian Wall. After the construction of the Theodosian Walls in the early 5th century, it was extended to the new Golden Gate, reaching a total length of seven Roman miles. After the construction of the Theodosian Walls, Constantinople consisted of an area approximately the size of Old Rome within the Aurelian walls, or some 1,400 ha.\n337\u2013529: Constantinople during the Barbarian Invasions and the fall of the West.\nThe importance of Constantinople increased, but it was gradual. From the death of Constantine in 337 to the accession of Theodosius I, emperors had been resident only in the years 337\u2013338, 347\u2013351, 358\u2013361, 368\u2013369. Its status as a capital was recognized by the appointment of the first known Urban Prefect of the City Honoratus, who held office from 11 December 359 until 361. The urban prefects had concurrent jurisdiction over three provinces each in the adjacent dioceses of Thrace (in which the city was located), Pontus, and Asia, comparable to the 100-mile extraordinary jurisdiction of the prefect of Rome. The emperor Valens, who hated the city and spent only one year there, nevertheless built the Palace of Hebdomon on the shore of the Propontis near the Golden Gate, probably for use when reviewing troops. All the emperors up to Zeno and Basiliscus were crowned and acclaimed at the Hebdomon. Theodosius I founded the Church of John the Baptist to house the skull of the saint (today preserved at the Topkap\u0131 Palace), put up a memorial pillar to himself in the Forum of Taurus, and turned the ruined temple of Aphrodite into a coach house for the Praetorian Prefect; Arcadius constructed a new forum named after himself on the Mese, near the walls of Constantine.\nAfter the shock of the Battle of Adrianople in 378, in which Valens and the flower of the Roman armies were destroyed by the Visigoths within a few days' march, the city looked to its defences, and in 413\u2013414 Theodosius II built the 18-metre (60-foot)-tall triple-wall fortifications, which were not to be breached until the coming of gunpowder. Theodosius also founded a University near the Forum of Taurus on 27 February 425.\nUldin, a prince of the Huns, appeared on the Danube about this time and advanced into Thrace, but he was deserted by many of his followers, who joined with the Romans in driving their king back north of the river. Subsequently, several new walls were erected to defend the city, and the fleet on the Danube was improved.\nAfter the barbarians overran the Western Roman Empire, Constantinople became the indisputable capital city of the Roman Empire. Emperors were no longer peripatetic between various court capitals and palaces. They remained in their palace in the Great City and sent generals to command their armies. The wealth of the eastern Mediterranean and western Asia flowed into Constantinople.\n527\u2013565: Constantinople in the Age of Justinian.\nThe Emperor Justinian I (527\u2013565) was greatly respected for his successes in war, for his legal reforms and for his public works. It was from Constantinople that his expedition for the reconquest of the former Diocese of Africa set sail on or about 21 June 533. Before their departure, the ship of the commander Belisarius was anchored in front of the Imperial palace, and the Patriarch offered prayers for the success of the enterprise. After the victory, in 534, the Temple treasure of Jerusalem, looted by the Romans in AD\u00a070 and taken to Carthage by the Vandals after their sack of Rome in 455, was brought to Constantinople and deposited for a time, perhaps in the Church of St Polyeuctus, before being returned to Jerusalem in either the Church of the Resurrection or the New Church.\nChariot racing had had significant importance in Rome for many centuries. In Constantinople, the hippodrome became, over time, increasingly a place of political significance. It was where (as a shadow of the popular elections of old Rome) the people by acclamation showed their approval of a new emperor, and also where they openly criticized the government, or clamored for the removal of unpopular ministers. It played a crucial role during the riots and in times of political unrest. The Hippodrome provided a space for a crowd to be responded to positively or where the acclamations of a crowd were subverted, resorting to the riots that would ensue in the coming years. In the time of Justinian's reign, public order in Constantinople became a critical political issue.\nThroughout the late Roman and early Byzantine periods, Christianity was resolving fundamental questions of identity, and the dispute between the Chalcedonians and the non-Chalcedonians became the cause of serious disorder, expressed through allegiance to the chariot-racing parties of the Blues and the Greens. The partisans of the Blues and the Greens were said to affect untrimmed facial hair, head hair shaved at the front and grown long at the back, and wide-sleeved tunics tight at the wrist; and to form gangs to engage in night-time muggings and street violence. At last, these disorders took the form of a major rebellion of 532, known as the \"Nika\" riots (from the battle-cry of \"Conquer!\" of those involved). The Nika Riots began in the Hippodrome and finished there with the onslaught of over 30,000 people, according to Procopius, those in the blue and green factions, innocent and guilty. This came full circle in the relationship within the Hippodrome between the power and the people during the time of Justinian.\nFires that were set in the city by the mobs involved in the Nika Riots consumed the Theodosian basilica of Hagia Sophia (Holy Wisdom), the city's cathedral, which lay to the north of the Augustaeum and had itself replaced the Constantinian basilica founded by Constantius II to replace the first Byzantine cathedral, Hagia Irene (Holy Peace). Justinian commissioned Anthemius of Tralles and Isidore of Miletus to replace it with a new and incomparable Hagia Sophia. This was the great cathedral of the city, whose dome was said to be held aloft by God alone, and which was directly connected to the palace so that the imperial family could attend services without passing through the streets. \"The architectural form of the building was meant to reflect Justinian's programmatic harmony: the circular dome (a symbol of secular authority in classical Roman architecture) would be harmoniously combined with the rectangular form (typical for Christian and pre-Christian temples).\" The dedication took place on 26 December 537 in the presence of the emperor, who was later reported to have exclaimed, \"O Solomon, I have outdone thee!\" Hagia Sophia was served by 600 people, including 80 priests, and cost 20,000 pounds of gold to build.\nJustinian also had Anthemius and Isidore demolish and replace the original Church of the Holy Apostles and Hagia Irene, built by Constantine, with new churches under the same dedication. The Justinianic Church of the Holy Apostles was designed in the form of an equal-armed cross with five domes and ornamented with beautiful mosaics. This church was to remain the burial place of the emperors from Constantine himself until the 11th century. When the city fell to the Turks in 1453, the church was demolished to make room for the tomb of Sultan Mehmed II the Conqueror. Justinian was also concerned with other aspects of the city's built environment, legislating against the abuse of laws prohibiting building within of the sea front, in order to protect the view.\nDuring Justinian I's reign, the city's population reached approximately 500,000 people. However, the social fabric of Constantinople was also damaged by the onset of the Plague of Justinian between 541 and 542 AD. It resulted in the death of approximately 40% of the city's inhabitants. Lasting two months, the plague is noted to have caused widespread civil disruption, including the inability of the population to bury the dead and attend relatives' funerals.\nSurvival, 565\u2013717: Constantinople during the Byzantine Dark Ages.\nIn the early 7th century, the Avars and later the Bulgars overwhelmed much of the Balkans, threatening Constantinople with attack from the west. Simultaneously, the Persian Sassanids overwhelmed the Prefecture of the East, penetrating deep into Anatolia. Heraclius, son of the exarch of Africa, set sail for the city and assumed the throne. He found the military situation so dire that he is said to have contemplated withdrawing the imperial capital to Carthage, but relented after the people of Constantinople begged him to stay. The citizens lost their right to free grain in 618 when Heraclius realized that the city could no longer be supplied from Egypt as a result of the Persian wars: the population fell substantially as a result.\nWhile the city withstood a siege by the Sassanids and Avars in 626, Heraclius campaigned deep into Persian territory. Eventually, he managed to briefly restore the status quo in 628, when the Persians surrendered all their conquests. However, the Byzantine Empire was soon threatened by a new adversary, as it became one of the primary targets of Arab invaders, who expanded their empire across the vast majority of the Middle East and North Africa, through a series of conquest campaigns, historically known as the Early Muslim conquests. Constantinople was besieged by the invading armies of the Arab Umayyad Caliphate firstly from 674 to 678, and secondly from 717 to 718. The Theodosian Walls kept the city impenetrable from the land, while a newly discovered incendiary substance known as Greek fire allowed the Byzantine navy to destroy the Arab fleets and keep the city supplied. In the second siege, the second ruler of Bulgaria, Khan Tervel, rendered decisive help. He was called the \"Saviour of Europe\".\n717\u20131025: Constantinople during the Macedonian Renaissance.\nIn the 730s Leo III carried out extensive repairs of the Theodosian walls, which had been damaged by frequent and violent attacks; this work was financed by a special tax on all the subjects of the Empire.\nTheodora, widow of the Emperor Theophilus (died 842), acted as regent during the minority of her son Michael III, who was said to have been introduced to dissolute habits by her brother Bardas. When Michael assumed power in 856, he became known for excessive drunkenness, appeared in the hippodrome as a charioteer and burlesqued the religious processions of the clergy. He removed Theodora from the Great Palace to the Carian Palace and later to the monastery of Gastria, but, after the death of Bardas, she was released to live in the palace of St Mamas; she also had a rural residence at the Anthemian Palace, where Michael was assassinated in 867.\nIn 860, an attack was made on the city by a new principality set up a few years earlier at Kiev by Askold and Dir, two Varangian chiefs: Two hundred small vessels passed through the Bosporus and plundered the monasteries and other properties on the suburban Princes' Islands. Oryphas, the admiral of the Byzantine fleet, alerted the emperor Michael, who promptly put the invaders to flight; but the suddenness and savagery of the onslaught made a deep impression on the citizens.\nIn 980, the emperor Basil II received an unusual gift from Prince Vladimir of Kiev: 6,000 Varangian warriors, which Basil formed into a new bodyguard known as the Varangian Guard. They were known for their ferocity, honour, and loyalty. It is said that, in 1038, they were dispersed in winter quarters in the Thracesian Theme when one of their number attempted to violate a countrywoman, but in the struggle she seized his sword and killed him; instead of taking revenge, however, his comrades applauded her conduct, compensated her with all his possessions, and exposed his body without burial as if he had committed suicide. However, following the death of an Emperor, they became known also for plunder in the Imperial palaces. Later in the 11th century the Varangian Guard became dominated by Anglo-Saxons who preferred this way of life to subjugation by the new Norman kings of England.\nThe \"Book of the Eparch\", which dates to the 10th century, gives a detailed picture of the city's commercial life and its organization at that time. The corporations in which the tradesmen of Constantinople were organised were supervised by the Eparch, who regulated such matters as production, prices, import, and export. Each guild had its own monopoly, and tradesmen might not belong to more than one. It is an impressive testament to the strength of tradition how little these arrangements had changed since the office, then known by the Latin version of its title, had been set up in 330 to mirror the urban prefecture of Rome.\nIn the 9th and 10th centuries, Constantinople had a population of between 500,000 and 800,000.\nIconoclast controversy in Constantinople.\nIn the 8th and 9th centuries, the iconoclast movement caused serious political unrest throughout the Empire. The emperor Leo III issued a decree in 726 against images, and ordered the destruction of a statue of Christ over one of the doors of the Chalke, an act that was fiercely resisted by the citizens. Constantine V convoked a church council in 754, which condemned the worship of images, after which many treasures were broken, burned, or painted over with depictions of trees, birds or animals: One source refers to the church of the Holy Virgin at Blachernae as having been transformed into a \"fruit store and aviary\". Following the death of her husband Leo IV in 780, the empress Irene restored the veneration of images through the agency of the Second Council of Nicaea in 787.\nThe iconoclast controversy returned in the early 9th century, only to be resolved once more in 843 during the regency of Empress Theodora, who restored the icons. These controversies contributed to the deterioration of relations between the Western and the Eastern Churches.\n1025\u20131081: Constantinople after Basil II.\nIn the late 11th century catastrophe struck with the unexpected and calamitous defeat of the imperial armies at the Battle of Manzikert in Armenia in 1071. The Emperor Romanus Diogenes was captured. The peace terms demanded by Alp Arslan, sultan of the Seljuk Turks, were not excessive, and Romanus accepted them. On his release, however, Romanus found that enemies had placed their own candidate on the throne in his absence; he surrendered to them and suffered death by torture, and the new ruler, Michael VII Ducas, refused to honour the treaty. In response, the Turks began to move into Anatolia in 1073. The collapse of the old defensive system meant that they met no opposition, and the empire's resources were distracted and squandered in a series of civil wars. Thousands of Turkoman tribesmen crossed the unguarded frontier and moved into Anatolia. By 1080, a huge area had been lost to the Empire, and the Turks were within striking distance of Constantinople.\n1081\u20131185: Constantinople under the Komneni.\nUnder the Komnenian dynasty (1081\u20131185), Byzantium staged a remarkable recovery. In 1090\u201391, the nomadic Pechenegs reached the walls of Constantinople, where Emperor Alexius I with the aid of the Kipchaks annihilated their army. In response to a call for aid from Alexius, the First Crusade assembled at Constantinople in 1096, but declining to put itself under Byzantine command set out for Jerusalem on its own account. John II built the monastery of the Pantocrator (Almighty) with a hospital for the poor of 50 beds.\nWith the restoration of firm central government, the empire became fabulously wealthy. The population was rising (estimates for Constantinople in the 12th century vary from some 100,000 to 500,000), and towns and cities across the realm flourished. Meanwhile, the volume of money in circulation dramatically increased. This was reflected in Constantinople by the construction of the Blachernae palace, the creation of brilliant new works of art, and general prosperity at this time: an increase in trade, made possible by the growth of the Italian city-states, may have helped the growth of the economy. It is certain that the Venetians and others were active traders in Constantinople, making a living out of shipping goods between the Crusader Kingdoms of Outremer and the West, while also trading extensively with Byzantium and Egypt. The Venetians had factories on the north side of the Golden Horn, and large numbers of westerners were present in the city throughout the 12th century. Toward the end of Manuel I Komnenos's reign, the number of foreigners in the city reached about 60,000\u201380,000 people out of a total population of about 400,000 people. In 1171, Constantinople also contained a small community of 2,500 Jews. In 1182, most Latin (Western European) inhabitants of Constantinople were massacred.\nIn artistic terms, the 12th century was a very productive period. There was a revival in the mosaic art, for example: Mosaics became more realistic and vivid, with an increased emphasis on depicting three-dimensional forms. There was an increased demand for art, with more people having access to the necessary wealth to commission and pay for such work.\n1185\u20131261: Constantinople during the Imperial Exile.\nOn 25 July 1197, Constantinople was struck by a severe fire which burned the Latin Quarter and the area around the Gate of the Droungarios () on the Golden Horn. Nevertheless, the destruction wrought by the 1197 fire paled in comparison with that brought by the Crusaders. In the course of a plot between Philip of Swabia, Boniface of Montferrat and the Doge of Venice, the Fourth Crusade was, despite papal excommunication, diverted in 1203 against Constantinople, ostensibly promoting the claims of Alexios IV Angelos brother-in-law of Philip, son of the deposed emperor Isaac II Angelos. The reigning emperor Alexios III Angelos had made no preparation. The Crusaders occupied Galata, broke the defensive chain protecting the Golden Horn, and entered the harbour, where on 27 July they breached the sea walls: Alexios III fled. But the new Alexios IV Angelos found the Treasury inadequate, and was unable to make good the rewards he had promised to his western allies. Tension between the citizens and the Latin soldiers increased. In January 1204, the \"protovestiarius\" Alexios Murzuphlos provoked a riot, it is presumed, to intimidate Alexios IV, but whose only result was the destruction of the great statue of Athena Promachos, the work of Phidias, which stood in the principal forum facing west.\nIn February 1204, the people rose again: Alexios IV was imprisoned and executed, and Murzuphlos took the purple as Alexios V Doukas. He made some attempt to repair the walls and organise the citizenry, but there had been no opportunity to bring in troops from the provinces and the guards were demoralised by the revolution. An attack by the Crusaders on 6 April failed, but a second from the Golden Horn on 12 April succeeded, and the invaders poured in. Alexios V fled. The Senate met in Hagia Sophia and offered the crown to Theodore Lascaris, who had married into the Angelos dynasty, but it was too late. He came out with the Patriarch to the Golden Milestone before the Great Palace and addressed the Varangian Guard. Then the two of them slipped away with many of the nobility and embarked for Asia. By the next day the Doge and the leading Franks were installed in the Great Palace, and the city was given over to pillage for three days.\nSir Steven Runciman, historian of the Crusades, wrote that the sack of Constantinople is \"unparalleled in history\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For nine centuries, [...] the great city had been the capital of Christian civilization. It was filled with works of art that had survived from ancient Greece and with the masterpieces of its own exquisite craftsmen. The Venetians [...] seized treasures and carried them off to adorn [...] their town. But the Frenchmen and Flemings were filled with a lust for destruction. They rushed in a howling mob down the streets and through the houses, snatching up everything that glittered and destroying whatever they could not carry, pausing only to murder or to rape, or to break open the wine-cellars [...] . Neither monasteries nor churches nor libraries were spared. In Hagia Sophia itself, drunken soldiers could be seen tearing down the silken hangings and pulling the great silver iconostasis to pieces, while sacred books and icons were trampled under foot. While they drank merrily from the altar-vessels a prostitute set herself on the Patriarch's throne and began to sing a ribald French song. Nuns were ravished in their convents. Palaces and hovels alike were entered and wrecked. Wounded women and children lay dying in the streets. For three days the ghastly scenes [...] continued, till the huge and beautiful city was a shambles. [...] When [...] order was restored, [...] citizens were tortured to make them reveal the goods that they had contrived to hide.\nFor the next half-century, Constantinople was the seat of the Latin Empire. Under the rulers of the Latin Empire, the city declined, both in population and the condition of its buildings. Alice-Mary Talbot cites an estimated population for Constantinople of 400,000 inhabitants; after the destruction wrought by the Crusaders on the city, about one third were homeless, and numerous courtiers, nobility, and higher clergy, followed various leading personages into exile. \"As a result Constantinople became seriously depopulated,\" Talbot concludes.\nThe Latins took over at least 20 churches and 13 monasteries, most prominently the Hagia Sophia, which became the cathedral of the Latin Patriarch of Constantinople. It is to these that E.H. Swift attributed the construction of a series of flying buttresses to shore up the walls of the church, which had been weakened over the centuries by earthquake tremors. However, this act of maintenance is an exception: for the most part, the Latin occupiers were too few to maintain all of the buildings, either secular and sacred, and many became targets for vandalism or dismantling. Bronze and lead were removed from the roofs of abandoned buildings and melted down and sold to provide money to the chronically under-funded Empire for defense and to support the court; Deno John Geanokoplos writes that \"it may well be that a division is suggested here: Latin laymen stripped secular buildings, ecclesiastics, the churches.\" Buildings were not the only targets of officials looking to raise funds for the impoverished Latin Empire: the monumental sculptures which adorned the Hippodrome and fora of the city were pulled down and melted for coinage. \"Among the masterpieces destroyed, writes Talbot, \"were a Herakles attributed to the fourth-century B.C. sculptor Lysippos, and monumental figures of Hera, Paris, and Helen.\"\nThe Nicaean emperor John III Vatatzes reportedly saved several churches from being dismantled for their valuable building materials; by sending money to the Latins \"to buy them off\" (\"exonesamenos\"), he prevented the destruction of several churches. According to Talbot, these included the churches of Blachernae, Rouphinianai, and St. Michael at Anaplous. He also granted funds for the restoration of the Church of the Holy Apostles, which had been seriously damaged in an earthquake.\nThe Byzantine nobility scattered, many going to Nicaea, where Theodore Lascaris set up an imperial court, or to Epirus, where Theodore Angelus did the same; others fled to Trebizond, where one of the Comneni had already with Georgian support established an independent seat of empire. Nicaea and Epirus both vied for the imperial title, and tried to recover Constantinople. In 1261, Constantinople was captured from its last Latin ruler, Baldwin II, by the forces of the Nicaean emperor Michael VIII Palaiologos under the command of Caesar Alexios Strategopoulos.\n1261\u20131453: Palaiologan Era and the Fall of Constantinople.\nAlthough Constantinople was retaken by Michael VIII Palaiologos, the Empire had lost many of its key economic resources, and struggled to survive. The palace of Blachernae in the north-west of the city became the main Imperial residence, with the old Great Palace on the shores of the Bosporus going into decline. When Michael VIII captured the city, its population was 35,000 people, but, by the end of his reign, he had succeeded in increasing the population to about 70,000 people. The Emperor achieved this by summoning former residents who had fled the city when the crusaders captured it, and by relocating Greeks from the recently reconquered Peloponnese to the capital. Military defeats, civil wars, earthquakes and natural disasters were joined by the Black Death, which in 1347 spread to Constantinople, exacerbated the people's sense that they were doomed by God.\nCastilian traveler and writer Ruy Gonz\u00e1lez de Clavijo, who saw Constantinople in 1403, wrote that the area within the city walls included small neighborhoods separated by orchards and fields. The ruins of palaces and churches could be seen everywhere. The aqueducts and the most densely inhabited neighborhoods were along the coast of the Marmara Sea and Golden Horn. Only the coastal areas, in particular the commercial areas facing the Golden Horn, had a dense population. Although the Genoese colony in Galata was small, it was overcrowded and had magnificent mansions.\nBy May 1453, the city no longer possessed the treasure troves of Aladdin that the Ottoman troops longingly imagined as they stared up at the walls. Gennadios Scholarios, Patriarch of Constantinople from 1454 to 1464, was saying that the capital of the Empire, that was once the \"city of wisdom\", became \"the city of ruins\".\nWhen the Ottoman Turks captured the city (1453) it contained approximately 50,000 people. Tedaldi of Florence estimated the population at 30,000 to 36,000, while in Chronica Vicentina, the Italian Andrei di Arnaldo estimated it at 50,000. The plague epidemic of 1435 must have caused the population to drop.\nThe population decline also had a huge impact upon the Constantinople's defense capabilities. At the end of March 1453, emperor Constantine XI ordered a census of districts to record how many able-bodied men were in the city and whatever weapons each possessed for defense. George Sphrantzes, the faithful chancellor of the last emperor, recorded that \"in spite of the great size of our city, our defenders amounted to 4,773 Greeks, as well as just 200 foreigners\". In addition there were volunteers from outside, the \"Genoese, Venetians and those who came secretly from Galata to help the defense\", who numbered \"hardly as many as three thousand\", amounting to something under 8,000 men in total to defend a perimeter wall of twelve miles.\nConstantinople was conquered by the Ottoman Empire on 29 May 1453. Mehmed II intended to complete his father's mission and conquer Constantinople for the Ottomans. In 1452 he reached peace treaties with Hungary and Venice. He also began the construction of the Bo\u011fazkesen (later called the Rumelihisar\u0131), a fortress at the narrowest point of the Bosphorus Strait, in order to restrict passage between the Black and Mediterranean seas. Mehmed then tasked the Hungarian gunsmith Urban with both arming Rumelihisar\u0131 and building a cannon powerful enough to bring down the walls of Constantinople. By March 1453 Urban's cannon had been transported from the Ottoman capital of Edirne to the outskirts of Constantinople. In April, having quickly seized Byzantine coastal settlements along the Black Sea and Sea of Marmara, Ottoman troops in Rumelia and Anatolia assembled outside the Byzantine capital. Their fleet moved from Gallipoli to nearby Diplokionion, and the sultan himself set out to meet his army.\nThe Ottomans were commanded by 21-year-old Ottoman Sultan Mehmed II. The conquest of Constantinople followed a seven-week siege which had begun on 6 April 1453. The Empire fell on 29 May 1453.\nThe number of people captured by the Ottomans after the fall of the city was around 33,000. The small number of people left in the city indicates that there could not have been many residents there. The primary concern of Mehmed II in the early years of his reign was the construction and settlement of the city. However, since an insufficient number of Muslims accepted his invitation, the settlement of 30 abandoned neighborhoods with the inhabitants of formerly conquered areas became necessary.\n1453\u20131930: Ottoman and Republican Kostantiniyye.\nThe Christian Orthodox city of Constantinople was now under Ottoman control. As tradition followed for the region, Ottoman soldiers had three days to pillage the city. When Mehmed II on the second day entered Constantinople through the Gate of Charisius (today known as Edirnekap\u0131 or Adrianople Gate), it is said that first thing he did was ride his horse to Hagia Sophia, which was not in good shape even though it was avoided in the pillage by strict orders. Displeased by the pillaging, Mehmed II ordered it to end, for it will be the capital of his empire. He then ordered that an imam meet him in Hagia Sophia in order to chant the adhan thus transforming the Orthodox cathedral into a Muslim mosque, solidifying Islamic rule in Constantinople.\nMehmed's main concern with Constantinople had to do with consolidating control over the city and rebuilding its defenses. After 45,000 captives were marched from the city, building projects were commenced immediately after the conquest, which included the repair of the walls, construction of the citadel, and building a new palace. Mehmed issued orders across his empire that Muslims, Christians, and Jews should resettle the city, with Christians and Jews required to pay \"jizya\" and Muslims pay Zakat; he demanded that five thousand households needed to be transferred to Constantinople by September. From all over the Islamic empire, prisoners of war and deported people were sent to the city: these people were called \"S\u00fcrg\u00fcn\" in Turkish (). Two centuries later, Ottoman traveler Evliya \u00c7elebi gave a list of groups introduced into the city with their respective origins. Even today, many quarters of Istanbul, such as Aksaray, \u00c7ar\u015famba, bear the names of the places of origin of their inhabitants. However, many people escaped again from the city, and there were several outbreaks of plague, so that in 1459 Mehmed allowed the deported Greeks to come back to the city.\nFrom the sixteenth century onward the city regained its pre-eminence in Ottoman and Mediterranean affairs. Imperial building campaigns under successive sultans, notably the great mosque complexes and charitable foundations of Suleyman the Magnificent, consolidated an urban landscape of palaces, mosques, bathhouses and markets that anchored Constantinople as the empire\u2019s symbolic capital and a hub of artisan production and long-distance trade. Later historians marked an urban growth in the sixteenth century as Constantinople attracted officials and merchants to its bazaars.\nThe Tanzimat reforms (1839-1876) and subsequent Ottoman modernization initiatives introduced new municipal institutions, secular legal codes, and European architectural fashions to the city. The imperial household itself signalled a stylistic shift when Sultan Abd\u00fclmecid I commissioned the European-style Dolmabah\u00e7e Palace (built 1843-1856) and shifted major ceremonial functions toward the Bosphorus waterfront. At the same time, the district of Pera/Beyo\u011flu and the Genoese quarter of Galata grew into a distinctively cosmopolitan zone of foreign embassies, banks, hotels and cafes, with a Turkish-Levantine urban culture.\nThe stresses of war and diplomatic crisis in the early twentieth century - culminating in the First World War, the empire\u2019s defeat, and the Allied occupation of the city after 1918 - brought dramatic political and demographic change. Allied forces entered Constantinople in November 1918 and maintained an occupation that formally lasted until 1923. The final collapse of the Ottoman constitutional order accelerated the city\u2019s transformation. The Turkish War of Independence (1919-1923) ended with the abolition of the sultanate in 1922 and the exile of Mehmed VI; the new Republic of Turkey was proclaimed in 1923 and the capital was moved to Ankara as part of a deliberate program to build a new, secular, and more centrally planned state. Constantinople, long known in Turkish speech as \u201cIstanbul\u201d or vernacularly as \u201cStamboul\u201d, remained the country\u2019s largest city and commercial hub. However, its political centrality was reduced as republican institutions, ministries and diplomatic missions were centered in Ankara.\nCulture.\nConstantinople was the largest and richest urban center in the Eastern Mediterranean Sea during the late Eastern Roman Empire, mostly as a result of its strategic position commanding the trade routes between the Aegean Sea and the Black Sea. It would remain the capital of the eastern, Greek-speaking empire for over a thousand years and in some ways is the nexus of Byzantine art production. At its peak, roughly corresponding to the Middle Ages, it was one of the richest and largest cities in Europe. It exerted a powerful cultural pull and dominated much of the economic life in the Mediterranean. Visitors and merchants were especially struck by the beautiful monasteries and churches of the city, in particular the Hagia Sophia, or the Church of Holy Wisdom. According to Russian 14th-century traveler Stephen of Novgorod: \"There is much that amazes one there, which the human mind cannot express\".\nIt was especially important for preserving in its libraries manuscripts of Greek and Latin authors throughout a period when instability and disorder caused their mass-destruction in western Europe and north Africa: On the city's fall, thousands of these were brought by refugees to Italy, and played a key part in stimulating the Renaissance, and the transition to the modern world. The cumulative influence of the city on the west, over the many centuries of its existence, is incalculable. In terms of technology, art and culture, as well as sheer size, Constantinople was without parallel anywhere in Europe for a thousand years. Many languages were spoken in Constantinople. A 16th century Chinese geographical treatise specifically recorded that there were translators living in the city, indicating it was multilingual, multicultural, and cosmopolitan. \nWomen in literature.\nConstantinople was home to the first known Western Armenian journal published and edited by a woman (Elpis Kesaratsian). Entering circulation in 1862, \"Kit'arr\" or \"Guitar\" stayed in print for only seven months. Female writers who openly expressed their desires were viewed as immodest, but this changed slowly as journals began to publish more \"women's sections\". In the 1880s, Matteos Mamurian invited Srpouhi Dussap to submit essays for \"Arevelian Mamal\". According to Zaruhi Galemkearian's autobiography, she was told to write about women's place in the family and home after she published two volumes of poetry in the 1890s. By 1900, several Armenian journals had started to include works by female contributors including the Constantinople-based \"Tsaghik\".\nMarkets.\nEven before Constantinople was founded, the markets of Byzantion were mentioned first by Xenophon and then by Theopompus who wrote that Byzantians \"spent their time at the market and the harbour\". In Justinian's age the \"Mese\" street running across the city from east to west was a daily market. Procopius claimed \"more than 500 prostitutes\" did business along the market street. Ibn Batutta who traveled to the city in 1325 wrote of the bazaars \"Astanbul\" in which the \"majority of the artisans and salespeople in them are women\".\nArchitecture and coinage.\nThe Byzantine Empire used Roman and Greek architectural models and styles to create its own unique type of architecture. The influence of Byzantine architecture and art can be seen in the copies taken from it throughout Europe. Particular examples include St Mark's Basilica in Venice, the basilicas of Ravenna, and many churches throughout the Slavic East. Also, alone in Europe until the 13th-century Italian florin, the Empire continued to produce sound gold coinage, the solidus of Diocletian becoming the bezant prized throughout the Middle Ages. Its city walls were much imitated (for example, see Caernarfon Castle) and its urban infrastructure was moreover a marvel throughout the Middle Ages, keeping alive the art, skill and technical expertise of the Roman Empire. In the Ottoman period Islamic architecture and symbolism were used. \nGreat bathhouses were built in Byzantine centers such as Constantinople and Antioch.\nReligion.\nConstantine's foundation gave prestige to the Bishop of Constantinople, who eventually came to be known as the Ecumenical Patriarch, and made it a prime center of Christianity alongside Rome. This contributed to cultural and theological differences between Eastern and Western Christianity eventually leading to the Great Schism that divided Western Catholicism from Eastern Orthodoxy from 1054 onwards. Constantinople is also of great religious importance to Islam, as the conquest of Constantinople is one of the signs of the end time in Islam.\nEducation.\nThere were many institutions in ancient Constantinople such as the Imperial University of Constantinople, sometimes known as the University of the Palace Hall of Magnaura (), an Eastern Roman educational institution that could trace its corporate origins to 425 AD, when the emperor Theodosius II founded the Pandidacterium ().\nMedia.\nFilm.\nThe first film shown in Constantinople (and the Ottoman Empire) was \"L'Arriv\u00e9e d'un train en gare de La Ciotat\", by the Lumi\u00e8re Brothers, in 1896.\nThe first film made in Constantinople (and the Ottoman Empire) was \"Ayastefanos'taki Rus Abidesinin Y\u0131k\u0131l\u0131\u015f\u0131\", by Fuat Uzk\u0131nay, in 1914.\nNewspaper.\nIn the past, the Bulgarian newspapers in the late Ottoman period were \"Makedoniya\", \"Napred\u016dk\", and \"Pravo\".\nBetween 1908 (after the Young Turk Revolution) and 1914 (start of World War I) the \"Kurdistan\" newspaper was published in Constantinople by Mikdad Midhat Bedir Khan; before that it was published in exile in Cairo, Egypt.\nInternational status.\nThe city acted as a defence for the eastern provinces of the old Roman Empire against the barbarian invasions of the 5th century. The walls built by Theodosius II were, in essence, impregnable to the barbarians coming from south of the Danube river, who found easier targets to the west rather than the richer provinces to the east in Asia. From the 5th century, the city was also protected by the Anastasian Wall, a chain of walls across the Thracian peninsula. Many scholars argue that these sophisticated fortifications allowed the east to develop relatively unbothered while Ancient Rome and the west collapsed.\nConstantinople's fame was such that it was described even in contemporary Chinese histories, the \"Old\" and \"New Book of Tang\", which mentioned its massive walls and gates as well as a purported clepsydra mounted with a golden statue of a man. The Chinese histories even related how the city had been besieged in the 7th century by Mu'awiya I and how he exacted tribute in a peace settlement.\nSee also.\nSecular buildings and monuments.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChurches, monasteries and mosques.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMiscellaneous.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5647", "revid": "15449111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5647", "title": "Columbus", "text": "Columbus is a Latinized version of the Italian surname \"Colombo\". It most commonly refers to:\nColumbus may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "5648", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5648", "title": "Cornwall", "text": "Ceremonial county in England\nCornwall (; or ) is a ceremonial county in South West England. It is one of the Celtic nations and the homeland of the Cornish people. The county is bordered by the Atlantic Ocean to the north and west, Devon to the east, and the English Channel to the south. The largest urban area is the Redruth and Camborne conurbation.\nThe county is predominantly rural, with an area of and an estimated population of 585,655 in 2024. The county's major settlements include the city of Truro and St Austell in the centre, Redruth and Cambourne adjacent to each other in the south, and Penzance and Falmouth on the southern coast. For local government purposes most of Cornwall is a unitary authority area, with the Isles of Scilly governed by a unique local authority. The Cornish nationalist movement disputes the constitutional status of Cornwall and seeks greater autonomy within the United Kingdom.\nCornwall is the westernmost part of the South West Peninsula, and the southernmost county within the United Kingdom. Its coastline is characterised by steep cliffs and, to the south, several rias, including those at the mouths of the rivers Fal and Fowey. It includes the southernmost point on Great Britain, Lizard Point, and forms a large part of the Cornwall National Landscape. The national landscape also includes Bodmin Moor, an upland outcrop of the Cornubian batholith granite formation. The county contains many short rivers; the longest is the Tamar, which forms the border with Devon.\nCornwall had a minor Roman presence, and later formed part of the Brittonic kingdom of Dumnonia. From the 7th century, the Britons in the South West increasingly came into conflict with the expanding Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Wessex, eventually being pushed west of the Tamar; by the Norman Conquest Cornwall was administered as part of England, though it retained its own culture. The remainder of the Middle Ages and Early Modern Period were relatively settled, with Cornwall developing its tin mining industry and becoming a duchy in 1337. During the Industrial Revolution, the tin and copper mines were expanded and then declined, with china clay extraction becoming a major industry. Railways were built, leading to a growth of tourism in the 20th century. The Cornish language became extinct as a living community language at the end of the 18th century, but is now being revived.\nName.\nThe modern English name \"Cornwall\" is a compound of two terms coming from two different language groups:\nIn the Cornish language, Cornwall is \"Kernow\" which stems from the same Proto-Celtic root.\nIn later times, Cornwall was known to the Anglo-Saxons as \"West Wales\" to distinguish it from \"North Wales\" (the modern nation of Wales). The name appears in the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" in 891 as \"On Corn walum\". In the Domesday Book it was referred to as \"Cornualia\" and in c. 1198 as \"Cornwal\". Other names for the county include a latinisation of the name as \"Cornubia\" (first appears in a mid-9th-century deed purporting to be a copy of one dating from c. 705), and as \"Cornugallia\" in 1086.\nHistory.\nPrehistory, Roman and post-Roman periods.\nHumans reoccupied Britain after the last Ice Age. The area now known as Cornwall was first inhabited in the Palaeolithic and Mesolithic periods. It continued to be occupied by Neolithic and then by Bronze Age people.\nCornwall in the Late Bronze Age formed part of a maritime trading-networked culture which researchers have dubbed the Atlantic Bronze Age system, and which extended over most of the areas of present-day Ireland, England, Wales, France, Spain, and Portugal.\nDuring the British Iron Age, Cornwall, like all of Britain (modern England, Scotland, Wales, and the Isle of Man), was inhabited by a Celtic-speaking people known as the Britons with distinctive cultural relations to neighbouring Brittany. The Common Brittonic spoken at this time eventually developed into several distinct tongues, including Cornish, Welsh, Breton, Cumbric and Pictish.\nThe first written account of Cornwall comes from the 1st-century BC Sicilian Greek historian Diodorus Siculus, supposedly quoting or paraphrasing the 4th-century BCE geographer Pytheas, who had sailed to Britain:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The inhabitants of that part of Britain called \"Belerion\" (or Land's End) from their intercourse with foreign merchants, are civilized in their manner of life. They prepare the tin, working very carefully the earth in which it is produced ... Here then the merchants buy the tin from the natives and carry it over to Gaul, and after traveling overland for about thirty days, they finally bring their loads on horses to the mouth of the Rh\u00f4ne.\nThe identity of these merchants is unknown. It has been theorized that they were Phoenicians, but there is no evidence for this. Professor Timothy Champion, discussing Diodorus Siculus's comments on the tin trade, states that \"Diodorus never actually says that the Phoenicians sailed to Cornwall. In fact, he says quite the opposite: the production of Cornish tin was in the hands of the natives of Cornwall, and its transport to the Mediterranean was organized by local merchants, by sea and then overland through France, passing through areas well outside Phoenician control.\" Isotopic evidence suggests that tin ingots found off the coast of Haifa, Israel, may have been from Cornwall. Tin, required for the production of bronze, was a relatively rare and precious commodity in the Bronze Age \u2013 hence the interest shown in Devon and Cornwall's tin resources. (For further discussion of tin mining see the section on the economy below.)\nIn the first four centuries AD, during the time of Roman dominance in Britain, Cornwall was rather remote from the main centres of Romanization \u2013 the nearest being Isca Dumnoniorum, modern-day Exeter. However, the Roman road system extended into Cornwall with four significant Roman sites based on forts: Tregear near Nanstallon was discovered in the early 1970s, two others were found at Restormel Castle, Lostwithiel in 2007, and a third fort near Calstock was also discovered early in 2007. In addition, a Roman-style villa was found at Magor Farm, Illogan in 1935. Ptolemy's \"Geographike Hyphegesis\" mentions four towns controlled by the Dumnonii, three of which may have been in Cornwall. However, after 410 AD, Cornwall appears to have reverted to rule by Romano-Celtic chieftains of the Cornovii tribe as part of the Brittonic kingdom of Dumnonia (which also included present-day Devonshire and the Scilly Isles), including the territory of one Marcus Cunomorus, with at least one significant power base at Tintagel in the early 6th century.\nKing Mark of Cornwall is a semi-historical figure known from Welsh literature, from the Matter of Britain, and, in particular, from the later Norman-Breton medieval romance of Tristan and Yseult, where he appears as a close relative of King Arthur, himself usually considered to be born of the Cornish people in folklore traditions derived from Geoffrey of Monmouth's 12th-century \"Historia Regum Britanniae\".\nArchaeology supports ecclesiastical, literary and legendary evidence for some relative economic stability and close cultural ties between the sub-Roman Westcountry, South Wales, Brittany, the Channel Islands, and Ireland through the fifth and sixth centuries. In Cornwall, the arrival of Celtic saints such as Nectan, Paul Aurelian, Petroc, Piran, Samson and numerous others reinforced the preexisting Roman Christianity.\nConflict with Wessex.\nThe Battle of Deorham in 577 saw the separation of Dumnonia (and therefore Cornwall) from Wales, following which the Dumnonii often came into conflict with the expanding English kingdom of Wessex. Centwine of Wessex \"drove the Britons as far as the sea\" in 682, and by 690 St Bonifice, then a Saxon boy, was attending an abbey in Exeter, which was in turn ruled by a Saxon abbot. The Carmen Rhythmicum written by Aldhelm contains the earliest literary reference to Cornwall as distinct from Devon. Religious tensions between the Dumnonians (who celebrated Celtic Christian traditions) and Wessex (who were Roman Catholic) are described in Aldhelm's letter to King Geraint. The \"Annales Cambriae\" report that in AD 722 the Britons of Cornwall won a battle at \"Hehil\". It seems likely that the enemy the Cornish fought was a West Saxon force, as evidenced by the naming of King Ine of Wessex and his kinsman Nonna in reference to an earlier Battle of Llongborth in 710.\nThe \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" stated in 815 (adjusted date) \"and in this year king Ecgbryht raided in Cornwall from east to west.\" this has been interpreted to mean a raid from the Tamar to Land's End, and the end of Cornish independence. However, the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" states that in 825 (adjusted date) a battle took place between the Wealas (Cornish) and the Defnas (men of Devon) at Gafulforda. The Cornish giving battle here, and the later battle at Hingston Down, casts doubt on any claims of control Wessex had at this stage.\nIn 838, the Cornish and their Danish allies were defeated by Egbert in the Battle of Hingston Down at Hengestesdune. In 875, the last recorded king of Cornwall, Dumgarth, is said to have drowned. Around the 880s, Anglo-Saxons from Wessex had established modest land holdings in the north eastern part of Cornwall; notably Alfred the Great who had acquired a few estates. William of Malmesbury, writing around 1120, says that King Athelstan of England (r. 924\u2013939) fixed the boundary between English and Cornish people at the east bank of the River Tamar. While elements of William's story, like the burning of Exeter, have been cast in doubt by recent writers Athelstan did re-establish a separate Cornish Bishop and relations between Wessex and the Cornish elite improved from the time of his rule.\nEventually King Edgar (r. 959\u2013975) was able to issue charters the width of Cornwall, and frequently sent emissaries or visited personally as seen by his appearances in the Bodmin Manumissions.\nBreton\u2013Norman period.\nOne interpretation of the Domesday Book is that by this time the native Cornish landowning class had been almost completely dispossessed and replaced by English landowners, particularly Harold Godwinson himself. However, the Bodmin manumissions show that two leading Cornish figures nominally had Saxon names, but these were both glossed with native Cornish names. In 1068, Brian of Brittany may have been created Earl of Cornwall, and naming evidence cited by medievalist Edith Ditmas suggests that many other post-Conquest landowners in Cornwall were Breton allies of the Normans, the Bretons being descended from Britons who had fled to what is today Brittany during the early years of the Anglo-Saxon conquest. She also proposed this period for the early composition of the Tristan and Iseult cycle by poets such as B\u00e9roul from a pre-existing shared Brittonic oral tradition.\nSoon after the Norman conquest most of the land was transferred to the new Breton\u2013Norman aristocracy, with the lion's share going to Robert, Count of Mortain, half-brother of King William and the largest landholder in England after the king with his stronghold at Trematon Castle near the mouth of the Tamar.\nLater medieval administration and society.\nSubsequently, however, Norman absentee landlords became replaced by a new Cornish-Norman ruling class including scholars such as Richard Rufus of Cornwall. These families eventually became the new rulers of Cornwall, typically speaking Norman French, Breton-Cornish, Latin, and eventually English, with many becoming involved in the operation of the Stannary Parliament system, the Earldom and eventually the Duchy of Cornwall. The Cornish language continued to be spoken and acquired a number of characteristics establishing its identity as a separate language from Breton.\nStannary parliaments.\nThe stannary parliaments and stannary courts were legislative and legal institutions in Cornwall and in Devon (in the Dartmoor area). The stannary courts administered equity for the region's tin-miners and tin mining interests, and they were also courts of record for the towns dependent on the mines. The separate and powerful government institutions available to the tin miners reflected the enormous importance of the tin industry to the English economy during the Middle Ages. Special laws for tin miners pre-date written legal codes in Britain, and ancient traditions exempted everyone connected with tin mining in Cornwall and Devon from any jurisdiction other than the stannary courts in all but the most exceptional circumstances.\nPiracy and smuggling.\nCornish piracy was active during the Elizabethan era on the west coast of Britain. Cornwall is well known for its wreckers who preyed on ships passing Cornwall's rocky coastline. During the 17th and 18th centuries Cornwall was a major smuggling area.\nToponymy.\nIn later times, Cornwall was known to the Anglo-Saxons as \"West Wales\" to distinguish it from \"North Wales\" (the modern nation of Wales). The name appears in the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" in 891 as \"On Corn walum\". In the Domesday Book it was referred to as \"Cornualia\" and in c. 1198 as \"Cornwal\". Other names for the county include a latinisation of the name as \"Cornubia\" (first appears in a mid-9th-century deed purporting to be a copy of one dating from c. 705), and as \"Cornugallia\" in 1086.\nChristianity in Cornwall.\nMany place names in Cornwall are associated with Christian missionaries described as coming from Ireland and Wales in the 5th century AD and usually called saints (\"See\" List of Cornish saints). The historicity of some of these missionaries is problematic. The patron saint of Wendron Parish Church, \"Saint Wendrona\" is an example. and it has been pointed out by Canon Doble that it was customary in the Middle Ages to ascribe such geographical origins to saints. Some of these saints are not included in the early lists of saints.\nIn modern times, Saint Piran, after whom Perranzabuloe and Perranuthnoe are named, is regarded as the patron saint of Cornwall. However, in early Norman times it is likely that Saint Michael the Archangel was recognised as the patron saint and is still recognised by the Anglican Church as the \"Protector of Cornwall\". The title has also been claimed for Saint Petroc who was patron of the Cornish diocese prior to the Normans.\nCeltic and Anglo-Saxon times.\nThe church in Cornwall until the time of Athelstan of Wessex observed more or less orthodox practices, being completely separate from the Anglo-Saxon church until then (and perhaps later). The See of Cornwall continued until much later: Bishop Conan was apparently in place previously, but he was re-consecrated in AD 931 by Athelstan. However, it is unclear whether he was the sole Bishop for Cornwall or the leading Bishop in the area. The situation in Cornwall may have been somewhat similar to Wales where each major religious house corresponded to a cantref (this has the same meaning as Cornish keverang) both being under the supervision of a Bishop. However, if this was so the status of keverangow before the time of King Athelstan is not recorded. However, it can be inferred from the districts included at this period that the minimum number would be three: Triggshire; Wivelshire; and the remaining area. Penwith, Kerrier, Pydar and Powder meet at a central point (Scorrier) which some have believed indicates a fourfold division imposed by Athelstan on a sub-kingdom.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe whole of Cornwall was in this period in the Archdeaconry of Cornwall within the Diocese of Exeter. From 1267 the archdeacons had a house at Glasney near Penryn. Their duties were to visit and inspect each parish annually and to execute the bishop's orders. Archdeacon Roland is recorded in the Domesday Book of 1086 as having land holdings in Cornwall but he was not Archdeacon of Cornwall, just an archdeacon in the Diocese of Exeter. In the episcopate of William Warelwast (1107\u201337) the first Archdeacon of Cornwall was appointed (possibly Hugo de Auco). Most of the parish churches in Cornwall in Norman times were not in the larger settlements, and the medieval towns which developed thereafter usually had only a chapel of ease with the right of burial remaining at the ancient parish church. Over a hundred holy wells exist in Cornwall, each associated with a particular saint, though not always the same one as the dedication of the church.\nVarious kinds of religious houses existed in mediaeval Cornwall though none of them were nunneries; the benefices of the parishes were in many cases appropriated to religious houses within Cornwall or elsewhere in England or France.\nFrom the Reformation to the Victorian period.\nIn the 16th century there was some violent resistance to the replacement of Catholicism with Protestantism in the Prayer Book Rebellion. In 1548 the college at Glasney, a centre of learning and study established by the Bishop of Exeter, had been closed and looted (many manuscripts and documents were destroyed) which aroused resentment among the Cornish. They, among other things, objected to the English language Book of Common Prayer, protesting that the English language was still unknown to many at the time. The Prayer Book Rebellion was a cultural and social disaster for Cornwall; the reprisals taken by the forces of the Crown have been estimated to account for 10\u201311% of the civilian population of Cornwall. Culturally speaking, it saw the beginning of the slow decline of the Cornish language.\nFrom that time Christianity in Cornwall was in the main within the Church of England and subject to the national events which affected it in the next century and a half. Roman Catholicism never became extinct, though openly practised by very few; there were some converts to Puritanism, Anabaptism and Quakerism in certain areas though they suffered intermittent persecution which more or less came to an end in the reign of William and Mary. During the 18th century Cornish Anglicanism was very much in the same state as Anglicanism in most of England. Wesleyan Methodist missions began during John Wesley's lifetime and had great success over a long period during which Methodism itself divided into a number of sects and established a definite separation from the Church of England.\nFrom the early 19th to the mid-20th century Methodism was the leading form of Christianity in Cornwall but it is now in decline. The Church of England was in the majority from the reign of Queen Elizabeth until the Methodist revival of the 19th century: before the Wesleyan missions dissenters were very few in Cornwall. The county remained within the Diocese of Exeter until 1876 when the Anglican Diocese of Truro was created (the first Bishop was appointed in 1877). Roman Catholicism was virtually extinct in Cornwall after the 17th century except for a few families such as the Arundells of Lanherne. From the mid-19th century the church reestablished episcopal sees in England, one of these being at Plymouth. Since then immigration to Cornwall has brought more Roman Catholics into the population.\nPhysical geography.\nCornwall forms the tip of the south-west peninsula of the island of Great Britain, and is therefore exposed to the full force of the prevailing winds that blow in from the Atlantic Ocean. The coastline is composed mainly of resistant rocks that give rise in many places to tall cliffs. Cornwall has a border with only one other county, Devon, which is formed almost entirely by the River Tamar, and the remainder (to the north) by the Marsland Valley.\nCoastal areas.\nThe north and south coasts have different characteristics. The north coast on the Celtic Sea, part of the Atlantic Ocean, is more exposed and therefore has a wilder nature. The \"High Cliff\", between Boscastle and St Gennys, is the highest sheer-drop cliff in Cornwall at . Beaches, which form an important part of the tourist industry, include Bude, Polzeath, Watergate Bay, Perranporth, Porthtowan, Fistral Beach, Newquay, St Agnes, St Ives, and on the south coast Gyllyngvase beach in Falmouth and the large beach at Praa Sands further to the south-west. There are two river estuaries on the north coast: Hayle Estuary and the estuary of the River Camel, which provides Padstow and Rock with a safe harbour. The seaside town of Newlyn is a popular holiday destination, as it is one of the last remaining traditional Cornish fishing ports, with views reaching over Mount's Bay.\nThe south coast, dubbed the \"Cornish Riviera\", is more sheltered and there are several broad estuaries offering safe anchorages, such as at Falmouth and Fowey. Beaches on the south coast usually consist of coarser sand and shingle, interspersed with rocky sections of wave-cut platform. Also on the south coast, the picturesque fishing village of Polperro, at the mouth of the Pol River, and the fishing port of Looe on the River Looe are both popular with tourists.\nInland areas.\nThe interior of the county consists of a roughly east\u2013west spine of infertile and exposed upland, with a series of granite intrusions, such as Bodmin Moor, which contains the highest land within Cornwall. From east to west, and with approximately descending altitude, these are Bodmin Moor, Hensbarrow north of St Austell, Carnmenellis to the south of Camborne, and the Penwith or Land's End peninsula. These intrusions are the central part of the granite outcrops that form the exposed parts of the Cornubian batholith of south-west Britain, which also includes Dartmoor to the east in Devon and the Isles of Scilly to the west, the latter now being partially submerged.\nThe intrusion of the granite into the surrounding sedimentary rocks gave rise to extensive metamorphism and mineralisation, and this led to Cornwall being one of the most important mining areas in Europe until the early 20th century. It is thought tin was mined here as early as the Bronze Age, and copper, lead, zinc and silver have all been mined in Cornwall. Alteration of the granite also gave rise to extensive deposits of China Clay, especially in the area to the north of St Austell, and the extraction of this remains an important industry.\nThe uplands are surrounded by more fertile, mainly pastoral farmland. Near the south coast, deep wooded valleys provide sheltered conditions for flora that like shade and a moist, mild climate. These areas lie mainly on Devonian sandstone and slate. The north east of Cornwall lies on Carboniferous rocks known as the Culm Measures. In places these have been subjected to severe folding, as can be seen on the north coast near Crackington Haven and in several other locations.\nLizard Peninsula.\nThe geology of the Lizard peninsula is unusual, in that it is mainland Britain's only example of an ophiolite, a section of oceanic crust now found on land. Much of the peninsula consists of the dark green and red Precambrian serpentinite, which forms spectacular cliffs, notably at Kynance Cove, and carved and polished serpentine ornaments are sold in local gift shops. This ultramafic rock also forms a very infertile soil which covers the flat and marshy heaths of the interior of the peninsula. This is home to rare plants, such as the Cornish Heath, which has been adopted as the county flower.\nSettlements and transport.\nCornwall's only city, and the home of the council headquarters, is Truro. Nearby Falmouth is notable as a port. St Just in Penwith is the westernmost town in England, though the same claim has been made for Penzance, which is larger. St Ives and Padstow are today small vessel ports with a major tourism and leisure sector in their economies. Newquay on the north coast is another major urban settlement which is known for its beaches and is a popular surfing destination, as is Bude further north, but Newquay is now also becoming important for its aviation-related industries. At the 2021 census, Newquay was county's most populous built up area as defined by the Office for National Statistics. Falmouth was the most populous parish. At the previous census in 2011, Camborne and Redruth were deemed a single built up area; both these towns were significant as centres of the global tin mining industry in the 19th century, and nearby copper mines were also very productive during that period. St Austell was the centre of the china clay industry in Cornwall.\nCornwall borders the county of Devon at the River Tamar. Major roads between Cornwall and the rest of Great Britain are the A38 which crosses the Tamar at Plymouth via the Tamar Bridge and the town of Saltash, the A39 road (Atlantic Highway) from Barnstaple, passing through North Cornwall to end in Falmouth, and the A30 which connects Cornwall to the M5 motorway at Exeter, crosses the border south of Launceston, crosses Bodmin Moor and connects Bodmin, Truro, Redruth, Camborne, Hayle and Penzance. Torpoint Ferry links Plymouth with Torpoint on the opposite side of the Hamoaze. A rail bridge, the Royal Albert Bridge built by Isambard Kingdom Brunel (1859), provides the other main land transport link. The city of Plymouth, a large urban centre in south west Devon, is an important location for services such as hospitals, department stores, road and rail transport, and cultural venues, particularly for people living in east Cornwall.\nCardiff and Swansea, across the Bristol Channel, have at some times in the past been connected to Cornwall by ferry, but these do not operate now.\nThe Isles of Scilly are served by ferry (from Penzance) and by aeroplane, having its own airport: St Mary's Airport. There are regular flights between St Mary's and Land's End Airport, near St Just, and Newquay Airport; during the summer season, a service is also provided between St Mary's and Exeter Airport, in Devon.\nEcology.\nFlora and fauna.\nCornwall has varied habitats including terrestrial and marine ecosystems. One noted species in decline locally is the Reindeer lichen, which species has been made a priority for protection under the national UK Biodiversity Action Plan.\nBotanists divide Cornwall and Scilly into two vice-counties: West (1) and East (2). The standard flora is by F. H. Davey \"Flora of Cornwall\" (1909). Davey was assisted by A. O. Hume and he thanks Hume, his companion on excursions in Cornwall and Devon, and for help in the compilation of that Flora, publication of which was financed by him.\nClimate.\nCornwall has a temperate oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Cfb\"), with mild winters and cool summers. Cornwall has the mildest and one of the sunniest climates of the United Kingdom, as a result of its oceanic setting and the influence of the Gulf Stream. The average annual temperature in Cornwall ranges from on the Isles of Scilly to in the central uplands. Winters are among the warmest in the country due to the moderating effects of the warm ocean currents, and frost and snow are very rare at the coast and are also rare in the central upland areas. Summers are, however, not as warm as in other parts of southern England. The surrounding sea and its southwesterly position mean that Cornwall's weather can be relatively changeable.\nCornwall is one of the sunniest areas in the UK. It has more than 1,541 hours of sunshine per year, with the highest average of 7.6 hours of sunshine per day in July. The moist, mild air coming from the southwest brings higher amounts of rainfall than in eastern Great Britain, at per year. However, this is not as much as in more northern areas of the west coast. The Isles of Scilly, for example, where there are on average fewer than two days of air frost per year, is the only area in the UK to be in the Hardiness zone 10. The islands have, on average, less than one day of air temperature exceeding 30\u00a0\u00b0C per year and are in the AHS Heat Zone 1. Extreme temperatures in Cornwall are particularly rare; however, extreme weather in the form of storms and floods is common. Due to climate change Cornwall faces more heatwaves and severe droughts, faster coastal erosion, stronger storms and higher wind speeds as well as the possibility of more high-impact flooding.\nCulture.\nLanguage.\nCornish language.\n \nCornish, a member of the Brythonic branch of the Celtic language family, died out as a first language in the late 18th century. In the 20th and 21st centuries, it has been revived by a small number of speakers. It is closely related to the other Brythonic languages (Breton and Welsh), and less so to the Goidelic languages (Scottish Gaelic, Irish and Manx). Unlike, Welsh, Scottish Gaelic and Irish, Cornish has no legal status in the UK.\nThere has been a revival of the language by academics and optimistic enthusiasts since the mid-19th century that gained momentum from the publication in 1904 of Henry Jenner's \"Handbook of the Cornish Language\". It is a social networking community language rather than a social community group language. Cornwall Council encourages and facilitates language classes within the county, in schools and within the wider community.\nIn 2002, Cornish was named as a UK regional language in the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. As a result, in 2005 its promoters received limited government funding. Several words originating in Cornish are used in the mining terminology of English, such as costean, gossan, gunnies, kibbal, kieve and vug.\nEnglish dialect.\nThe Cornish language and culture influenced the emergence of particular pronunciations and grammar not used elsewhere in England. The Cornish dialect is spoken to varying degrees; however, someone speaking in broad Cornish may be practically unintelligible to one not accustomed to it. Cornish dialect has generally declined, as in most places it is now little more than a regional accent and grammatical differences have been eroded over time. Marked differences in vocabulary and usage still exist between the eastern and western parts of Cornwall.\nFlag.\nSaint Piran's Flag is the national flag and ancient banner of Cornwall, and an emblem of the Cornish people. The banner of Saint Piran is a white cross on a black background (in terms of heraldry 'sable, a cross argent'). According to legend Saint Piran adopted these colours from seeing the white tin in the black coals and ashes during his discovery of tin. The Cornish flag is an exact reverse of the former Breton black cross national flag and is known by the same name \"Kroaz Du\".\nArts and media.\nSince the 19th century, Cornwall, with its unspoilt maritime scenery and strong light, has sustained a vibrant visual art scene of international renown. Artistic activity within Cornwall was initially centred on the art-colony of Newlyn, most active at the turn of the 20th century. This Newlyn School is associated with the names of Stanhope Forbes, Elizabeth Forbes, Norman Garstin and Lamorna Birch. Modernist writers such as D. H. Lawrence and Virginia Woolf lived in Cornwall between the wars, and Ben Nicholson, the painter, having visited in the 1920s came to live in St Ives with his then wife, the sculptor Barbara Hepworth, at the outbreak of the Second World War. They were later joined by the Russian emigrant Naum Gabo, and other artists. These included Peter Lanyon, Terry Frost, Patrick Heron, Bryan Wynter and Roger Hilton. St Ives also houses the Leach Pottery, where Bernard Leach, and his followers championed Japanese inspired studio pottery. Much of this modernist work can be seen in Tate St Ives. The Newlyn Society and Penwith Society of Arts continue to be active, and contemporary visual art is documented in a dedicated online journal.\nLocal television programmes are provided by BBC South West &amp; ITV West Country. Radio programmes are produced by BBC Radio Cornwall in Truro for the entire county, Heart West, Source FM for the Falmouth and Penryn areas, Coast FM for west Cornwall, Radio St Austell Bay for the St Austell area, NCB Radio for north Cornwall &amp; Pirate FM.\nMusic.\nCornwall has a folk music tradition that has survived into the present and is well known for its unusual folk survivals such as Mummers Plays, the Furry Dance in Helston played by the famous Helston Town Band, and Obby Oss in Padstow.\nNewlyn is home to a food and music festival that hosts live music, cooking demonstrations, and displays of locally caught fish.\nAs in other former mining districts of Britain, male voice choirs and brass bands, such as \"Brass on the Grass\" concerts during the summer at Constantine, are still very popular in Cornwall. Cornwall also has around 40 brass bands, including the six-times National Champions of Great Britain, Camborne Youth Band, and the bands of Lanner and St Dennis.\nCornish players are regular participants in inter-Celtic festivals, and Cornwall itself has several inter-Celtic festivals such as Perranporth's Lowender Peran folk festival.\nContemporary musician Richard D. James (also known as Aphex Twin) grew up in Cornwall, as did Luke Vibert and Alex Parks, winner of Fame Academy 2003. Roger Taylor, the drummer from the band Queen was also raised in the county, and currently lives not far from Falmouth. The American singer-songwriter Tori Amos now resides predominantly in North Cornwall not far from Bude with her family. The lutenist, composer and festival director Ben Salfield lives in Truro. Mick Fleetwood of Fleetwood Mac was born in Redruth.\nLiterature.\nCornwall's rich heritage and dramatic landscape have inspired numerous writers.\nFiction.\nSir Arthur Quiller-Couch, author of many novels and works of literary criticism, lived in Fowey: his novels are mainly set in Cornwall. Daphne du Maurier lived at Menabilly near Fowey and many of her novels had Cornish settings: \"The Loving Spirit\", \"Jamaica Inn\", \"Rebecca\", \"Frenchman's Creek\", \"The King's General\" (partially), \"My Cousin Rachel\", \"The House on the Strand\" and \"Rule Britannia\". She is also noted for writing \"Vanishing Cornwall\". Cornwall provided the inspiration for \"The Birds\", one of her terrifying series of short stories, made famous as a film by Alfred Hitchcock. \nConan Doyle's \"The Adventure of the Devil's Foot\" featuring Sherlock Holmes is set in Cornwall. Winston Graham's series \"Poldark\", Kate Tremayne's Adam Loveday series, Susan Cooper's novels \"Over Sea, Under Stone\" and \"Greenwitch\", and Mary Wesley's \"The Camomile Lawn\" are all set in Cornwall. Writing under the pseudonym of Alexander Kent, Douglas Reeman sets parts of his Richard Bolitho and Adam Bolitho series in the Cornwall of the late 18th and the early 19th centuries, particularly in Falmouth. Gilbert K. Chesterton placed the action of many of his stories there.\nMedieval Cornwall is the setting of the trilogy by Monica Furlong, \"Wise Child\", \"Juniper\" and \"Colman\", as well as part of Charles Kingsley's \"Hereward the Wake\".\nHammond Innes's novel, \"The Killer Mine\"; Charles de Lint's novel \"The Little Country\"; and Chapters 24\u201325 of J. K. Rowling's \"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows\" take place in Cornwall (Shell Cottage, on the beach outside the fictional village of Tinworth).\nDavid Cornwell, who wrote espionage novels under the name John le Carr\u00e9, lived and worked in Cornwall. Nobel Prize-winning novelist William Golding was born in St Columb Minor in 1911, and returned to live near Truro from 1985 until his death in 1993. D. H. Lawrence spent a short time living in Cornwall. Rosamunde Pilcher grew up in Cornwall, and several of her books take place there, including her 1987 best-selling novel, \"The Shell Seekers.\"\nSt. Michael's Mount in Cornwall (under the fictional name of Mount Polbearne) is the setting of the Little Beach Street Bakery series by Jenny Colgan, who spent holidays in Cornwall as a child. The book series includes \"Little Beach Street Bakery\" (2014), \"Summer at Little Beach Street Bakery\" (2015), \"Christmas at Little Beach Street Bakery\" (2016), and \"Sunrise by the Sea\" (2021).\nIn the \"Paddington Bear\" novels by Michael Bond the title character is said to have landed at an unspecified port in Cornwall having travelled in a lifeboat aboard a cargo ship from darkest Peru. From here he travels to London on a train and eventually arrives at Paddington Station.\nEnid Blyton's 1953 children's novel \"Five Go Down to the Sea\" (the twelfth book in \"The Famous Five\" series) is set in Cornwall, near the fictional coastal village of Tremannon.\nPoetry.\nThe late Poet Laureate Sir John Betjeman was famously fond of Cornwall and it featured prominently in his poetry. He is buried in the churchyard at St Enodoc's Church, Trebetherick.\nCharles Causley, the poet, was born in Launceston and is perhaps the best known of Cornish poets. Jack Clemo and the scholar A. L. Rowse were also notable Cornishmen known for their poetry; The Rev. R. S. Hawker of Morwenstow wrote some poetry which was very popular in the Victorian period. The Scottish poet W. S. Graham lived in West Cornwall from 1944 until his death in 1986.\nThe poet Laurence Binyon wrote \"For the Fallen\" (first published in 1914) while sitting on the cliffs between Pentire Point and The Rumps and a stone plaque was erected in 2001 to commemorate the fact. The plaque bears the inscription \"FOR THE FALLEN / Composed on these cliffs, 1914\". The plaque also bears below this the fourth stanza (sometimes referred to as \"The Ode\") of the poem:\nThey shall grow not old, as we that are left grow old\nAge shall not weary them, nor the years condemn\nAt the going down of the sun and in the morning\nWe will remember them\nOther literary works.\nCornwall produced a substantial number of passion plays such as the Ordinalia during the Middle Ages. Many are still extant, and provide valuable information about the Cornish language. See also Cornish literature\nColin Wilson, a prolific writer who is best known for his debut work \"The Outsider\" (1956) and for \"The Mind Parasites\" (1967), lived in Gorran Haven, a small village on the southern Cornish coast. The writer D. M. Thomas was born in Redruth but lived and worked in Australia and the United States before returning to his native Cornwall. He has written novels, poetry, and other works, including translations from Russian.\nThomas Hardy's drama \"The Queen of Cornwall\" (1923) is a version of the Tristan story; the second act of Richard Wagner's opera \"Tristan und Isolde\" takes place in Cornwall, as do Gilbert and Sullivan's operettas \"The Pirates of Penzance\" and \"Ruddigore\".\nClara Vyvyan was the author of various books about many aspects of Cornish life such as \"Our Cornwall\". She once wrote: \"The Loneliness of Cornwall is a loneliness unchanged by the presence of men, its freedoms a freedom inexpressible by description or epitaph. Your cannot say Cornwall is this or that. Your cannot describe it in a word or visualise it in a second. You may know the country from east to west and sea to sea, but if you close your eyes and think about it no clear-cut image rises before you. In this quality of changefulness have we possibly surprised the secret of Cornwall's wild spirit\u2014in this intimacy the essence of its charm? Cornwall!\".\nA level of \"\", a game dealing with Arthurian Legend, takes place in Cornwall at a museum above King Arthur's tomb. The adventure game \"The Lost Crown\" is set in the fictional town of Saxton, which uses the Cornish settlements of Polperro, Talland and Looe as its model.\nThe fairy tale Jack the Giant Killer takes place in Cornwall.\n\"The Mousehole Cat\", a children's book written by Antonia Barber and illustrated by Nicola Bayley, is set in the Cornish village Mousehole and based on the legend of Tom Bawcock and the continuing tradition of Tom Bawcock's Eve.\nSports.\nThe main sports played in Cornwall are rugby, football and cricket. Athletes from Truro have done well in Olympic and Commonwealth Games fencing, winning several medals. Surfing is popular, particularly with tourists, thousands of whom take to the water throughout the summer months. Some towns and villages have bowling clubs, and a wide variety of British sports are played throughout Cornwall. Cornwall is also one of the few places in England where shinty is played; the English Shinty Association is based in Penryn.\nThe Cornwall County Cricket Club plays as one of the National Counties of English and Welsh cricket.\nTruro, and all of the towns and some villages have football clubs belonging to the Cornwall County Football Association, and some clubs have teams competing higher within the English football league pyramid. Of these, the highest ranked is Truro City, who play in the National League in the 2025\u201326 season. Other notable Cornish teams include Mousehole A.F.C., Helston Athletic F.C., and Falmouth Town F.C.\nRugby football.\nViewed as an \"important identifier of ethnic affiliation\", rugby union has become a sport strongly tied to notions of Cornishness. and since the 20th century, rugby union has emerged as one of the most popular spectator and team sports in Cornwall (perhaps the most popular), with professional Cornish rugby footballers being described as a \"formidable force\", \"naturally independent, both in thought and deed, yet paradoxically staunch English patriots whose top players have represented England with pride and passion\".\nIn 1985, sports journalist Alan Gibson made a direct connection between the love of rugby in Cornwall and the ancient parish games of hurling and wrestling that existed for centuries before rugby officially began. Among Cornwall's native sports are a distinctive form of Celtic wrestling related to Breton wrestling, and Cornish hurling, a kind of mediaeval football played with a silver ball (distinct from Irish Hurling). Cornish wrestling is Cornwall's oldest sport and as Cornwall's native tradition it has travelled the world to places like Victoria, Australia and Grass Valley, California following the miners and gold rushes. Cornish hurling now takes place at St. Columb Major, St Ives, and less frequently at Bodmin.\nIn rugby league, Cornwall R.L.F.C., founded in 2021, will represent the county in the professional league system. The semi-pro club will start in the third tier RFL League 1. At an amateur level, the county is represented by Cornish Rebels.\nSurfing and watersports.\nDue to its long coastline, various maritime sports are popular in Cornwall, notably sailing and surfing. International events in both are held in Cornwall. Cornwall hosted the Inter-Celtic Watersports Festival in 2006. Surfing in particular is very popular, as locations such as Bude and Newquay offer some of the best surf in the UK. Pilot gig rowing has been popular for many years and the world championships take place annually on the Isles of Scilly. On 2 September 2007, 300 surfers at Polzeath beach set a new world record for the highest number of surfers riding the same wave as part of the Global Surf Challenge and part of a project called Earthwave to raise awareness about global warming.\nFencing.\nAs its population is comparatively small, and largely rural, Cornwall's contribution to British national sport has been limited; the county's greatest successes have come in fencing. In 2014, half of the men's GB team fenced for Truro Fencing Club, and three Truro fencers appeared at the 2012 Olympics.\nCuisine.\nCornwall has a strong culinary heritage. Surrounded on three sides by the sea amid fertile fishing grounds, Cornwall naturally has fresh seafood readily available; Newlyn is the largest fishing port in the UK by value of fish landed, and is known for its wide range of restaurants. Television chef Rick Stein has long operated a fish restaurant in Padstow for this reason, and Jamie Oliver chose to open his second restaurant, Fifteen, in Watergate Bay near Newquay. \"MasterChef\" host and founder of Smiths of Smithfield, John Torode, in 2007 purchased Seiners in Perranporth. One famous local fish dish is Stargazy pie, a fish-based pie in which the heads of the fish stick through the piecrust, as though \"star-gazing\". The pie is cooked as part of traditional celebrations for Tom Bawcock's Eve, but is not generally eaten at any other time.\nCornwall is perhaps best known though for its pasties, a savoury dish made with pastry. Today's pasties usually contain a filling of beef steak, onion, potato and swede with salt and white pepper, but historically pasties had a variety of different fillings. \"Turmut, 'tates and mate\" (i.e. \"Turnip, potatoes and meat\", turnip being the Cornish and Scottish term for swede, itself an abbreviation of 'Swedish Turnip', the British term for rutabaga) describes a filling once very common. For instance, the licky pasty contained mostly leeks, and the herb pasty contained watercress, parsley, and shallots. Pasties are often locally referred to as \"oggies\". Historically, pasties were also often made with sweet fillings such as jam, apple and blackberry, plums or cherries.\nThe wet climate and relatively poor soil of Cornwall make it unsuitable for growing many arable crops. However, it is ideal for growing the rich grass required for dairying, leading to the production of Cornwall's other famous export, clotted cream. This forms the basis for many local specialities including Cornish fudge and Cornish ice cream. Cornish clotted cream has Protected Geographical Status under EU law, and cannot be made anywhere else. Its principal manufacturer is A. E. Rodda &amp; Son of Scorrier.\nLocal cakes and desserts include Saffron cake, Cornish heavy (\"hevva\") cake, Cornish fairings biscuits, figgy 'obbin, Cream tea and whortleberry pie.\nThere are also many types of beers brewed in Cornwall\u2014those produced by Sharp's Brewery, Skinner's Brewery, Keltek Brewery and St Austell Brewery are the best known\u2014including stouts, ales and other beer types. There is some small scale production of wine, mead and cider.\nPolitics and administration.\nCornish national identity.\n Cornwall is recognised by Cornish and Celtic political groups as one of six Celtic nations, alongside Brittany, Ireland, the Isle of Man, Scotland and Wales. (The Isle of Man Government and the Welsh Government also recognise Asturias and Galicia.) Cornwall is represented, as one of the Celtic nations, at the \"Festival Interceltique de Lorient\", an annual celebration of Celtic culture held in Brittany.\nCornwall Council consider Cornwall's unique cultural heritage and distinctiveness to be one of the area's major assets. They see Cornwall's language, landscape, Celtic identity, political history, patterns of settlement, maritime tradition, industrial heritage, and non-conformist tradition, to be among the features making up its \"distinctive\" culture. In 2025, the council passed a motion calling for the recognition of Cornwall as the UK's fifth constituent country.\nIt is uncertain exactly how many of the people living in Cornwall consider themselves to be Cornish; results from different surveys (including the national census) have varied. In the 2001 census, 7 per cent of people in Cornwall identified themselves as Cornish, rather than British or English. However, activists have argued that this underestimated the true number as there was no explicit \"Cornish\" option included in the official census form. Subsequent surveys have suggested that as many as 44 per cent identify as Cornish. Many people in Cornwall say that this issue would be resolved if a Cornish option became available on the census. The question and content recommendations for the 2011 census provided an explanation of the process of selecting an ethnic identity which is relevant to the understanding of the often quoted figure of 37,000 who claimed Cornish identity. The 2021 census found that 17% of people in Cornwall identified as being Cornish (89,000), with 14% of people in Cornwall identifying as Cornish-only (80,000). Again there was no tick-box provided, and \"Cornish\" had to be written-in as \"Other\".\nOn 24 April 2014 it was announced that Cornish people have been granted minority status under the European Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities.\nLocal politics.\nThe ceremonial county of Cornwall is made up of two local government districts; mainland Cornwall, governed by Cornwall Council, and the Isles of Scilly. Cornwall Council, formerly \"Cornwall County Council\" until 2009, is a unitary authority based at Lys Kernow in Truro. The Isles of Scilly are governed by the \"sui generis\" Council of the Isles of Scilly based in Hugh Town, and have been administered by their own unitary authority since 1890. They are grouped with Cornwall for other administrative purposes, such as the National Health Service and Devon and Cornwall Police. The county's Crown Court is based at the Courts of Justice in Truro. Magistrates' Courts are found in Truro (but at a different location to the Crown Court) and at Bodmin.\nCornwall County Council was established in 1889 under the Local Government Act 1888, and the Local Government Act 1972 reorganised the county's second tier of administration with the formation of six district councils: Caradon, Carrick, Kerrier, North Cornwall, Penwith, and Restormel. In 2009, structural changes to local government in England resulted in the abolition of the six district councils and turned Cornwall Council into a unitary authority. While projected to streamline services, cut red tape and save around \u00a317\u00a0million a year, the reorganisation was met with wide opposition, with a poll in 2008 showing 89% disapproval from Cornish residents.\nThe first elections for the unitary authority were held on 4 June 2009. At the most recent council election in 2021, the Conservative Party won 47 of the 87 seats. Also elected were 16 independent councillors, 13 Liberal Democrats, five from the Labour Party, five from Mebyon Kernow and one Green Party representative. Before the creation of the unitary council, the former county council had 82 seats, the majority of which were held by the Liberal Democrats, elected at the 2005 county council elections. The six former districts had a total of 249 council seats, and the groups with greatest numbers of councillors were Liberal Democrats, Conservatives and Independents.\nParliament and national politics.\nUntil 1832, Cornwall was represented by 44 Members of Parliament (MPs) in the House of Commons\u2014more than any other county\u2014reflecting the importance of tin mining to the Crown. Most of the increase in numbers of MPs came between 1529 and 1584 after which there was no change until the Reform Act 1832, which enacted widespread changes to the country's electoral system and reduced Cornwall's number of MPs to 14. This was reduced further in subsequent boundary commission reviews to better reflect Cornwall's population. The county is currently divided into six county constituencies.\nThe Liberal Party and its successor, the Liberal Democrats, have traditionally been popular in Cornwall; the Liberals won every Cornish seat in 1906 and January 1910, and again in 1929 despite the party finishing third nationally. The Liberal Democrats won every seat in the county in 2005, but lost seats to the Conservatives in 2010 before being wiped out in 2015. The Conservatives won all six Cornish seats in 2015, 2017 and 2019. Following expectation of a Conservative defeat at the 2024 general election, Cornwall was considered a three-party battleground. The Conservatives lost all six seats and the county is currently represented by four Labour and two Liberal Democrat MPs.\nAlthough Cornwall does not have a designated government department, in 2007 while Leader of the Opposition David Cameron created a Shadow Secretary of State for Cornwall. The position was not made into a formal UK Cabinet position when Cameron entered government following the 2010 United Kingdom general election\nDevolution movement.\nCornish nationalists have organised into two political parties: Mebyon Kernow, formed in 1951, and the Cornish Nationalist Party. In addition to the political parties, there are various interest groups such as the Revived Cornish Stannary Parliament and the Celtic League. The Cornish Constitutional Convention was formed in 2000 as a cross-party organisation including representatives from the private, public and voluntary sectors to campaign for the creation of a Cornish Assembly, along the lines of the National Assembly for Wales, Northern Ireland Assembly and the Scottish Parliament. Between 5 March 2000 and December 2001, the campaign collected the signatures of 41,650 Cornish residents endorsing the call for a devolved assembly, along with 8,896 signatories from outside Cornwall. The resulting petition was presented to the Prime Minister, Tony Blair.\nEconomy.\nCornwall is one of the poorest parts of the United Kingdom in terms of per capita GDP and average household incomes. At the same time, parts of the county, especially on the coast, have high house prices, driven up by demand from relatively wealthy retired people and second-home owners. The GVA per head was 65% of the UK average for 2004. The GDP per head for Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly was 79.2% of the EU-27 average for 2004, the UK per head average was 123.0%. In 2011, the latest available figures, Cornwall's (including the Isles of Scilly) measure of wealth was 64% of the European average per capita.\nHistorically mining of tin (and later also of copper) was important in the Cornish economy. The first reference to this appears to be by Pytheas: \"see above\". Julius Caesar was the last classical writer to mention the tin trade, which appears to have declined during the Roman occupation. The tin trade revived in the Middle Ages and its importance to the Kings of England resulted in certain privileges being granted to the tinners; the Cornish rebellion of 1497 is attributed to grievances of the tin miners. In the mid-19th century, however, the tin trade again fell into decline. Other primary sector industries that have declined since the 1960s include china clay production, fishing and farming.\nToday, the Cornish economy depends heavily on its tourist industry, which makes up around a quarter of the economy. The official measures of deprivation and poverty at district and 'sub-ward' level show that there is great variation in poverty and prosperity in Cornwall with some areas among the poorest in England and others among the top half in prosperity. For example, the ranking of 32,482 sub-wards in England in the index of multiple deprivation (2006) ranged from 819th (part of Penzance East) to 30,899th (part of Saltash Burraton in Caradon), where the lower number represents the greater deprivation.\nCornwall was one of two UK areas designated as 'less developed regions' by the European Union, which, prior to Brexit, meant the area qualified for EU Cohesion Policy grants. It was granted Objective 1 status by the European Commission for 2000 to 2006, followed by further rounds of funding known as 'Convergence Funding' from 2007 to 2013 and 'Growth Programme' for 2014 to 2020.\nTourism.\nCornwall has a tourism-based seasonal economy which is estimated to contribute up to 24% of Cornwall's gross domestic product. In 2011 tourism brought \u00a31.85\u00a0billion into the Cornish economy. Cornwall's unique culture, spectacular landscape and mild climate make it a popular tourist destination, despite being somewhat distant from the United Kingdom's main centres of population. Surrounded on three sides by the English Channel and Celtic Sea, Cornwall has many miles of beaches and cliffs; the South West Coast Path follows a complete circuit of both coasts. Other tourist attractions include moorland, country gardens, museums, historic and prehistoric sites, and wooded valleys. Five million tourists visit Cornwall each year, mostly drawn from within the UK. Visitors to Cornwall are served by the airport at Newquay, whilst private jets, charters and helicopters are also served by Perranporth airfield; nightsleeper and daily rail services run between Cornwall, London and other regions of the UK.\nNewquay and Porthtowan are popular destinations for surfers. In recent years, the Eden Project near St Austell has been a major financial success, drawing one in eight of Cornwall's visitors in 2004.\nIn the summer of 2018, due to the recognition of its beaches and weather through social media and the marketing of travel companies, Cornwall received about 20 per cent more visitors than the usual 4.5\u00a0million figure. The sudden rise and demand of tourism in Cornwall caused multiple traffic and safety issues in coastal areas.\nIn October 2021, Cornwall was longlisted for the UK City of Culture 2025, but failed to make the March 2022 shortlist.\nFishing.\nOther industries include fishing, although this has been significantly re-structured by EU fishing policies (as of 2010[ [update]] the Southwest Handline Fishermen's Association has started to revive the fishing industry).\nAgriculture.\nAgriculture, once an important part of the Cornish economy, has declined significantly relative to other industries. However, there is still a strong dairy industry, with products such as Cornish clotted cream.\nMining.\nMining of tin and copper was also an industry, but today the derelict mine workings survive only as a World Heritage Site. However, the Camborne School of Mines, which was relocated to Penryn in 2004, is still a world centre of excellence in the field of mining and applied geology and the grant of World Heritage status has attracted funding for conservation and heritage tourism. China clay extraction has also been an important industry in the St Austell area, but this sector has been in decline, and this, coupled with increased mechanisation, has led to a decrease in employment in this sector, although the industry still employs around 2,133 people in Cornwall, and generates over \u00a380\u00a0million to the local economy.\nIn March 2016, a Canadian company, Strongbow Exploration, had acquired, from administration, a 100% interest in the South Crofty tin mine and the associated mineral rights in Cornwall with the aim of reopening the mine and bringing it back to full production. Work is currently ongoing to build a water filtration plant in order to dewater the mine.\nInternet.\nCornwall is the landing point for twenty-two of the world's fastest high-speed undersea and transatlantic fibre optic cables, making Cornwall an important hub within Europe's Internet infrastructure. The Superfast Cornwall project completed in 2015, and saw 95% of Cornish houses and businesses connected to a fibre-based broadband network, with over 90% of properties able to connect with speeds above 24\u00a0Mbit/s.\nAerospace.\nThe county's newest industry is aviation: Newquay Airport is the home of a growing business park with Enterprise Zone status, known as Aerohub. Also a space launch facility, Spaceport Cornwall, has been established at Newquay, in partnership with Goonhilly satellite tracking station near Helston in south Cornwall.\nDemographics.\nCornwall's population was 537,400 in the 2011 census, with a population density of 144 people per square kilometre, ranking it 40th and 41st, respectively, among the 47 counties of England. Cornwall's population was 95.7% White British and has a relatively high rate of population growth. At 11.2% in the 1980s and 5.3% in the 1990s, it had the fifth-highest population growth rate of the counties of England. The natural change has been a small population decline, and the population increase is due to inward migration into Cornwall. According to the 1991 census, the population was 469,800.\nCornwall has a relatively high retired population, with 22.9% of pensionable age, compared with 20.3% for the United Kingdom as a whole. This may be due partly to Cornwall's rural and coastal geography increasing its popularity as a retirement location, and partly to outward migration of younger residents to more economically diverse areas.\nEducation.\nOver 10,000 students attend Cornwall's two universities, Falmouth University and the University of Exeter (including Camborne School of Mines). Falmouth University is a specialist public university for the creative industries and arts, while the University Of Exeter has two campuses in Cornwall, Truro and Penryn, the latter shared with Falmouth. Penryn campus is home to educational departments such as the rapidly growing Centre for Ecology and Conservation (CEC), the Environment and Sustainability Institute (ESI), and the Institute of Cornish Studies.\nCornwall has a comprehensive education system, with 31 state and eight independent secondary schools. There are three further education colleges: Truro and Penwith College, Cornwall College and Callywith College which opened in September 2017. The Isles of Scilly only has one school, while the former Restormel district has the highest school population, and school year sizes are around 200, with none above 270. Before the introduction of comprehensive schools there were a number of grammar schools and secondary modern schools, e.g. the schools that later became Sir James Smith's School and Wadebridge School. There are also primary schools in many villages and towns: e.g. St Mabyn Church of England Primary School.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5649", "revid": "45266726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5649", "title": "Constitutional monarchy", "text": "Form of government\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"If mobile/styles.css\" /&gt;\nConstitutional monarchy, also known as limited monarchy, parliamentary monarchy or democratic monarchy, is a form of monarchy in which the monarch exercises their authority in accordance with a constitution and is not alone in making decisions. Constitutional monarchies differ from absolute monarchies (in which a monarch is the only decision-maker) in that they are bound to exercise powers and authorities within limits prescribed by an established legal framework. A constitutional monarch in a parliamentary democracy is a hereditary symbolic head of state (who may be an emperor, king or queen, prince or grand duke) who mainly performs representative and civic roles but does not exercise executive or policy-making power. \nConstitutional monarchies range from countries such as Liechtenstein, Monaco, Morocco, Jordan, Kuwait, Bahrain and Bhutan, where the constitution grants substantial discretionary powers to the sovereign, to countries such as the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth realms, the Netherlands, Spain, Belgium, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Lesotho, Malaysia, Thailand, Cambodia, and Japan, where the monarch retains significantly less, if any, personal discretion in the exercise of their authority. On the surface level, this distinction may be hard to establish, with numerous liberal democracies restraining monarchic power in practice rather than written law, e.g., the constitution of the United Kingdom, which affords the monarch substantial, if limited, legislative and executive powers.\n\"Constitutional monarchy\" may refer to a system in which the monarch acts as a non-party political ceremonial head of state under the constitution, whether codified or uncodified. While most monarchs retain formal authority and governments may legally operate in their name, in the typical European model, the monarch no longer personally sets public policy or selects political leaders. Political scientist Vernon Bogdanor, paraphrasing Thomas Macaulay, has defined a constitutional monarch as \"A sovereign who reigns but does not rule\".\nIn addition to acting as a visible symbol of national unity, a constitutional monarch may hold formal powers such as dissolving parliament or giving royal assent to legislation. However, such powers generally may only be exercised strictly in accordance with either written constitutional principles or unwritten constitutional conventions, rather than any personal political preferences of the sovereign. \nIn \"The English Constitution\", British political theorist Walter Bagehot identified three main political rights which a constitutional monarch may freely exercise: the right to be consulted, the right to encourage, and the right to warn. Many constitutional monarchies still retain significant authorities or political influence, however, such as through certain reserve powers, and may also play an important political role.\nThe Commonwealth realms share the same person as hereditary monarchy under the Westminster system of constitutional governance. Two constitutional monarchies\u00a0\u2013 Malaysia and Cambodia\u00a0\u2013 are elective monarchies, in which the ruler is periodically selected by a small electoral college.\nSome use the term semi-constitutional monarchy to identify constitutional monarchies where the monarch retains substantial powers, on a par with a president in a presidential or semi-presidential system. Strongly limited constitutional monarchies, such as those of the United Kingdom and Australia, have been referred to as crowned republics by writers H. G. Wells and Glenn Patmore.\nHistory.\nThe oldest constitutional monarchy dating back to ancient times was that of the Hittites. They were an ancient Anatolian people that lived during the Bronze Age whose king had to share his authority with an assembly, called the \"Panku\", which was the equivalent to a modern-day deliberative assembly or a legislature. Members of the \"Panku\" came from scattered noble families who worked as representatives of their subjects in an adjutant or subaltern federal-type landscape.\nAccording to Herodotus, Demonax created a constitutional monarchy for King Battus III the Lame, of Cyrene, when Cyrenaica had become an unstable state, in about 548 BC.\nConstitutional and absolute monarchy.\nEngland, Scotland and the United Kingdom.\nIn the Kingdom of England, the Glorious Revolution of 1688 furthered the constitutional monarchy, restricted by laws such as the Bill of Rights 1689 and the Act of Settlement 1701, although the first form of constitution was enacted with Magna Carta of 1215. At the same time, in Scotland, the Convention of Estates enacted the Claim of Right Act 1689, which placed similar limits on the Scottish monarchy.\nQueen Anne was the last monarch to veto an Act of Parliament when, on 11 March 1708, she blocked the Scottish Militia Bill. However Hanoverian monarchs continued to selectively dictate government policies. For instance King George III constantly blocked Catholic Emancipation, eventually precipitating the resignation of William Pitt the Younger as prime minister in 1801. The sovereign's influence on the choice of prime minister gradually declined over this period. King William IV was the last monarch to dismiss a prime minister, when in 1834 he removed Lord Melbourne as a result of Melbourne's choice of Lord John Russell as Leader of the House of Commons. Queen Victoria was the last monarch to exercise real personal power, but this diminished over the course of her reign. In 1839, she became the last sovereign to keep a prime minister in power against the will of Parliament when the Bedchamber crisis resulted in the retention of Lord Melbourne's administration. By the end of her reign, however, she could do nothing to block the unacceptable (to her) premierships of William Gladstone, although she still exercised power in appointments to the Cabinet. For example, in 1886 she vetoed Gladstone's choice of Hugh Childers as War Secretary in favour of Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman.\nToday, the role of the British monarch is by convention effectively ceremonial. The British Parliament and the Government \u2013 chiefly in the office of Prime Minister of the United Kingdom \u2013 exercise their powers under \"royal (or Crown) prerogative\": on behalf of the monarch and through powers still formally possessed by the monarch.\nNo person may accept significant public office without swearing an oath of allegiance to the King. With few exceptions, the monarch is bound by constitutional convention to act on the advice of the government.\nContinental Europe.\nPoland developed the first constitution for a monarchy in continental Europe, with the Constitution of 3 May 1791; it was the second single-document constitution in the world just after the first republican Constitution of the United States. Constitutional monarchy also occurred briefly in the early years of the French Revolution, but much more widely afterwards. Napoleon Bonaparte is considered the first monarch proclaiming himself as an embodiment of the nation, rather than as a divinely appointed ruler; this interpretation of monarchy is germane to continental constitutional monarchies. German philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, in his work \"Elements of the Philosophy of Right\" (1820), gave the concept a philosophical justification that concurred with evolving contemporary political theory and the Protestant Christian view of natural law. Hegel's forecast of a constitutional monarch with very limited powers whose function is to embody the national character and provide constitutional continuity in times of emergency was reflected in the development of constitutional monarchies in Europe and Japan.\nExecutive monarchy versus ceremonial monarchy.\nThere exist at least two different types of constitutional monarchies in the modern world \u2013 executive and ceremonial. In executive monarchies (also called \"semi-constitutional monarchies\"), the monarch wields significant (though not absolute) power. The monarchy under this system of government is a powerful political (and social) institution. \"Semi-monarchy\" is a distinct regime type characterized by a collegial executive, a hereditary monarch with substantive powers who appoints the cabinet, dual cabinet accountability to both the monarch and the legislature, and the monarch's authority to dissolve the assembly. By contrast, in ceremonial monarchies, the monarch holds little or no actual power or direct political influence, though they frequently still have a great deal of social and cultural influence.\nCeremonial and executive monarchy should not be confused with democratic and non-democratic monarchical systems. For example, in Liechtenstein and Monaco, the ruling monarchs wield significant executive power. However, while they are theoretically very powerful within their small states, they are \"not\" absolute monarchs and have very limited \"de facto\" power compared to the Islamic monarchs, which is why their countries are generally considered to be liberal democracies and not undemocratic. For instance, when Hereditary Prince Alois of Liechtenstein threatened to veto a possible approval of a referendum to legalize abortion in 2011, it came as a surprise because the prince had not vetoed any law for over 30 years (in the end, this was moot, as the proposal was not approved).\nModern constitutional monarchy.\nAs originally conceived, a constitutional monarch was head of the executive branch and quite a powerful figure even though their power was limited by the constitution and the elected parliament. Some of the framers of the U.S. Constitution may have envisioned the president as an elected constitutional monarch, as the term was then understood, following Montesquieu's account of the separation of powers.\nThe present-day concept of a constitutional monarchy developed in the United Kingdom, where a democratically elected parliament and its leader, the prime minister, exercise true power while a monarch remains as a titular position. To reflect a more egalitarian social order, a constitutional monarch may be given a title such as \"servant of the people.\" In the course of France's July Monarchy, Louis-Philippe I was styled \"King of the French\" rather than \"King of France\".\nFollowing the unification of Germany, Otto von Bismarck rejected the British model. In the constitutional monarchy established under the Constitution of the German Empire which Bismarck inspired, the Kaiser retained considerable actual executive power, while the Imperial Chancellor needed no parliamentary vote of confidence and ruled solely by the imperial mandate. However, this model of constitutional monarchy was discredited and abolished following Germany's defeat in the First World War. Later, Fascist Italy could also be considered a constitutional monarchy, in that there was a king as the titular head of state while actual power was held by Benito Mussolini under a constitution. This eventually discredited the Italian monarchy and led to its abolition in 1946. After the Second World War, surviving European monarchies almost invariably adopted some variant of the constitutional monarchy model originally developed in Britain.\nA parliamentary democracy may be a constitutional monarchy or a republic, differing only in terms of titles and rules of succession rather than in substantial exercise of power. In both cases, the titular head of state\u00a0\u2013 monarch or president\u00a0\u2013 serves the traditional role of embodying and representing the nation, while the government is carried on by a cabinet composed predominantly of elected Members of Parliament.\nHowever, three important factors distinguish monarchies such as the United Kingdom from systems where greater power might otherwise rest with Parliament. These are:\nOther privileges may be nominal or ceremonial (e.g., where the executive, judiciary, police or armed forces act on the authority of or owe allegiance to the Crown).\nToday slightly more than a quarter of constitutional monarchies are Western European countries, including the United Kingdom, Spain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Norway, Denmark, Luxembourg, Monaco, Liechtenstein and Sweden. However, the two most populous constitutional monarchies in the world are in Asia: Japan and Thailand. In these countries, the prime minister holds the day-to-day powers of governance, while the monarch retains residual (but not always insignificant) powers. The powers of the monarch differ between countries. In Denmark and in Belgium, for example, the monarch formally appoints a representative to preside over the creation of a coalition government following a parliamentary election, while in Norway the King chairs special meetings of the cabinet.\nIn nearly all cases, the monarch is still the nominal chief executive, but is bound by convention to act on the advice of the Cabinet. However, a few monarchies (most notably Japan and Sweden) have amended their constitutions so that the monarch is no longer the nominal chief executive.\nThere are fifteen constitutional monarchies under King Charles III, which are known as Commonwealth realms. Unlike some of their continental European counterparts, the Monarch and his Governors-General in the Commonwealth realms hold significant \"reserve\" or \"prerogative\" powers, to be wielded in times of extreme emergency or constitutional crises, usually to uphold parliamentary government. For example, during the 1975 Australian constitutional crisis, the Governor-General dismissed the Australian Prime Minister Gough Whitlam. The Australian Senate had threatened to block the Government's budget by refusing to pass the necessary appropriation bills. On 11 November 1975, Whitlam intended to call a half-Senate election to try to break the deadlock. When he sought the Governor-General's approval of the election, the Governor-General instead dismissed him as prime minister. Shortly after that, he installed leader of the opposition Malcolm Fraser in his place. Acting quickly before all parliamentarians became aware of the government change, Fraser and his allies secured passage of the appropriation bills, and the Governor-General dissolved Parliament for a double dissolution election. Fraser and his government were returned with a massive majority. This led to much speculation among Whitlam's supporters as to whether this use of the Governor-General's reserve powers was appropriate, and whether Australia should become a republic. Among supporters of constitutional monarchy, however, the event confirmed the monarchy's value as a source of checks and balances against elected politicians who might seek powers in excess of those conferred by the constitution, and ultimately as a safeguard against dictatorship.\nIn Thailand's constitutional monarchy, the monarch is recognized as the Head of State, Head of the Armed Forces, Upholder of the Buddhist Religion, and Defender of the Faith. The immediate former King, Bhumibol Adulyadej, was among the longest-reigning monarch in the world and the longest in all of Thailand's history, before dying on 13 October 2016. Bhumibol reigned through several political changes in the Thai government. He played an influential role in each incident, often acting as mediator between disputing political opponents. (See Bhumibol's role in Thai Politics.) Among the powers retained by the Thai monarch under the constitution, l\u00e8se majest\u00e9 protects the image of the monarch and enables him to play a role in politics. It carries strict criminal penalties for violators. Generally, the Thai people were reverent of Bhumibol. Much of his social influence arose from this reverence and from the socioeconomic improvement efforts undertaken by the royal family.\nIn the United Kingdom, a frequent debate centres on when it is appropriate for a British monarch to act. When a monarch does act, political controversy can often ensue, partially because the neutrality of the crown is seen to be compromised in favour of a partisan goal, while some political scientists champion the idea of an \"interventionist monarch\" as a check against possible illegal action by politicians. For instance, the monarch of the United Kingdom can theoretically exercise an absolute veto over legislation by withholding royal assent. However, no monarch has done so since 1708, and it is widely believed that this and many of the monarch's other political powers are lapsed powers.\nList of current constitutional monarchies.\nThere are currently 43 monarchies worldwide.\nCeremonial constitutional monarchies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExecutive constitutional monarchies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5650", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5650", "title": "Comets", "text": ""}
{"id": "5652", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5652", "title": "Computer networking", "text": ""}
{"id": "5653", "revid": "161900", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5653", "title": "Clarke's three laws", "text": "Axioms proposed by British science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke\nBritish science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke formulated three adages that are known as Clarke's three laws, of which the third law is the best known and most widely cited. They are part of his ideas in his extensive writings about the future.\nThe laws.\nThe laws are:\nOrigins.\nOne account stated that Clarke's laws were developed after the editor of his works in French started numbering the author's assertions. All three laws appear in Clarke's essay \"Hazards of Prophecy: The Failure of Imagination\", first published in \"Profiles of the Future\" (1962); however, they were not all published at the same time. Clarke's first law was proposed in the 1962 edition of the essay, as \"Clarke's Law\" in \"Profiles of the Future\".\nThe second law is offered as a simple observation in the same essay but its status as Clarke's second law was conferred by others. It was initially a derivative of the first law and formally became Clarke's second law where the author proposed the third law in the 1973 revision of \"Profiles of the Future\", which included an acknowledgement. It was also here that Clarke wrote about the third law in these words: \"As three laws were good enough for Newton, I have modestly decided to stop there\".\nThe third law is the best known and most widely cited. It was published in a 1968 letter to \"Science\" magazine and eventually added to the 1973 revision of the \"Hazards of Prophecy\" essay.\nVariants of the third law.\nThe third law has inspired many snowclones and other variations:\nCorollaries and follow-ups.\nIsaac Asimov's follow-up to Clarke's First Law: \"When, however, the lay public rallies round an idea that is denounced by distinguished but elderly scientists and supports that idea with great fervour and emotion \u2013 the distinguished but elderly scientists are then, after all, probably right.\"A contrapositive of the third law is \"Any technology distinguishable from magic is insufficiently advanced.\" (Gehm's corollary)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5654", "revid": "51063387", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5654", "title": "Caspar David Friedrich", "text": "German Romantic landscape painter (1774\u20131840)\nCaspar David Friedrich (; 5 September 1774 \u2013 7 May 1840) was a German Romantic landscape painter, generally considered the most important German artist of his generation, whose often symbolic, and anti-classical work, conveys a subjective, emotional response to the natural world. Friedrich's paintings often set contemplative human figures silhouetted against night skies, morning mists, barren trees or Gothic ruins. Art historian Christopher John Murray described their presence, in diminished perspective, amid expansive landscapes, as reducing the figures to a scale that directs \"the viewer's gaze towards their metaphysical dimension\".\nFriedrich was born in the town of Greifswald on the Baltic Sea in what was at the time Swedish Pomerania. He studied in Copenhagen 1794\u20131798, before settling in Dresden. He came of age during a period when, across Europe, a growing disillusionment with materialistic society was giving rise to a new appreciation of spirituality. This shift was often expressed through a reevaluation of the natural world, as artists such as Friedrich, J. M. W. Turner and John Constable sought to depict nature as a \"divine creation, to be set against the artifice of human civilization\".\nFriedrich's work brought him renown early in his career. Contemporaries such as the French sculptor David d'Angers spoke of him as having discovered \"the tragedy of landscape\". His work nevertheless fell from favour during his later years, and he died in obscurity. As Germany moved towards modernisation in the late 19th century, a new sense of urgency characterised its art, and Friedrich's contemplative depictions of stillness came to be seen as products of a bygone age.\nThe early 20th century brought a renewed appreciation of his art, beginning in 1906 with an exhibition of thirty-two of his paintings in Berlin. His work influenced Expressionist artists and later Surrealists and Existentialists. The rise of Nazism in the early 1930s saw a resurgence in Friedrich's popularity, but this was followed by a sharp decline as his paintings were, by association with the Nazi movement, seen as promoting German nationalism. Since the 1970s, Friedrich has experienced a major international revival and is regarded as one of the most important artists of German Romanticism and a national cultural icon.\nLife.\nEarly years and family.\nCaspar David Friedrich was born on 5 September 1774, in Greifswald, Swedish Pomerania, on the Baltic coast of Germany. The sixth of ten children, he was raised in the strict Lutheran creed of his father Adolf Gottlieb Friedrich, a candle-maker and soap boiler. Records of the family's financial circumstances are contradictory; while some sources indicate the children were privately tutored, others record that they were raised in relative poverty. He became familiar with death from an early age. His mother, Sophie, died in 1781 when he was seven. A year later, his sister Elisabeth died, and a second sister, Maria, succumbed to typhus in 1791. Arguably the greatest tragedy of his childhood happened in 1787 when his brother Johann Christoffer died: at the age of thirteen, Caspar David witnessed his younger brother fall through the ice of a frozen lake and drown. Some accounts suggest that Johann Christoffer perished while trying to rescue Caspar David, who was also in danger on the ice.\nFriedrich began his formal study of art in 1790 as a private student of artist Johann Gottfried Quistorp at the University of Greifswald in his home city, at which the art department is now named \"Caspar-David-Friedrich-Institut\" in his honour. Quistorp took his students on outdoor drawing excursions; as a result, Friedrich was encouraged to sketch from life at an early age. Through Quistorp, Friedrich met and was subsequently influenced by the theologian Ludwig Gotthard Kosegarten, who taught that nature was a revelation of God. Quistorp introduced Friedrich to the work of the German 17th-century artist Adam Elsheimer, whose works often included religious subjects dominated by landscape, and nocturnal subjects. During this period he also studied literature and aesthetics with Swedish professor Thomas Thorild. Friedrich entered the prestigious Academy of Copenhagen four years later, where he began by making copies of casts from antique sculptures before proceeding to drawing from life.\nLiving in Copenhagen afforded the young painter access to the Royal Picture Gallery's collection of 17th-century Dutch landscape painting. At the academy, he studied under teachers such as Christian August Lorentzen and the landscape painter Jens Juel. These artists were inspired by the \"Sturm und Drang\" movement and represented a midpoint between the dramatic intensity and expressive manner of the budding Romantic aesthetic and the waning neo-classical ideal. Mood was paramount, and influence was drawn from such sources as the Icelandic legend of Edda, the poems of Ossian and Norse mythology.\nMove to Dresden.\nFriedrich settled permanently in Dresden in 1798. During this early period, he experimented in printmaking with etchings and designs for woodcuts which his furniture-maker brother cut. By 1804 he had produced 18 etchings and four woodcuts; they were apparently made in small numbers and only distributed to friends. Despite these forays into other media, he gravitated toward working primarily with ink, watercolour and sepias. With the exception of a few early pieces, such as \"\" (1797), he did not work extensively with oils until his reputation was more established.\nLandscapes were his preferred subject, inspired by frequent trips, beginning in 1801, to the Baltic coast, Bohemia, the Krkono\u0161e and the Harz Mountains. Mostly based on the landscapes of northern Germany, his paintings depict woods, hills, harbours, morning mists and other light effects based on a close observation of nature. These works were modelled on sketches and studies of scenic spots, such as the cliffs on R\u00fcgen, the surroundings of Dresden and the river Elbe. He executed his studies almost exclusively in pencil, even providing topographical information, yet the subtle atmospheric effects characteristic of Friedrich's mid-period paintings were rendered from memory. These effects took their strength from the depiction of light, and of the illumination of sun and moon on clouds and water: optical phenomena peculiar to the Baltic coast that had never before been painted with such an emphasis.\nHis reputation as an artist was established when he won a prize in 1805 at the Weimar competition organised by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe. At the time, the Weimar competition tended to draw mediocre and now-forgotten artists presenting derivative mixtures of neo-classical and pseudo-Greek styles. The poor quality of the entries began to prove damaging to Goethe's reputation, so when Friedrich entered two sepia drawings\u2014\"Procession at Dawn\" and \"Fisher-Folk by the Sea\"\u2014the poet responded enthusiastically and wrote, \"We must praise the artist's resourcefulness in this picture fairly. The drawing is well done, the procession is ingenious and appropriate\u00a0... his treatment combines a great deal of firmness, diligence and neatness\u00a0... the ingenious watercolour\u00a0... is also worthy of praise.\"\nFriedrich completed the first of his major paintings in 1808, at the age of 34. \"Cross in the Mountains\", today known as the \"Tetschen Altar\", is an altarpiece panel said to have been commissioned for a family chapel in Tetschen, Bohemia. The panel depicts a cross in profile at the top of a mountain, alone, and surrounded by pine trees.\nAlthough the altarpiece was generally coldly received, it was Friedrich's first painting to receive wide publicity. The artist's friends publicly defended the work, while art critic Basilius von Ramdohr published a long article challenging Friedrich's use of landscape in a religious context. He rejected the idea that landscape painting could convey explicit meaning, writing that it would be \"a veritable presumption, if landscape painting were to sneak into the church and creep onto the altar\". Friedrich responded with a programme describing his intentions in 1809, comparing the rays of the evening sun to the light of the Holy Father. This statement marked the only time Friedrich recorded a detailed interpretation of his own work, and the painting was among the few commissions the artist ever received.\nFollowing the purchase of two of his paintings by the Prussian Crown Prince, Friedrich was elected a member of the Berlin Academy in 1810. Yet in 1816, he sought to distance himself from Prussian authority and applied that June for Saxon citizenship. The move was not expected; the Saxon government was pro-French, while Friedrich's paintings were seen as generally patriotic and distinctly anti-French. Nevertheless, with the aid of his Dresden-based friend Graf Vitzthum von Eckst\u00e4dt, Friedrich attained citizenship, and in 1818, membership in the Saxon Academy with a yearly dividend of 150 thalers. Although he had hoped to receive a full professorship, it was never awarded him as, according to the German Library of Information, \"it was felt that his painting was too personal, his point of view too individual to serve as a fruitful example to students.\" Politics may have played a role in stalling his career: Friedrich's decidedly Germanic subjects and costuming frequently clashed with the era's prevailing pro-French attitudes.\nMarriage.\nOn 21 January 1818, Friedrich married Caroline Bommer, the twenty-five-year-old daughter of a dyer from Dresden. The couple had three children, with their first, Emma, arriving in 1820. Gustav Adolf, their third child, was named after Swedish King Gustavus Adolphus, and became a notable painter in his own right.\nThe physiologist and painter Carl Gustav Carus notes in his biographical essays that marriage did not impact significantly on either Friedrich's life or personality, yet his canvasses from this period, including \"Chalk Cliffs on R\u00fcgen\"\u2014painted after his honeymoon\u2014display a new sense of levity, while his palette is brighter and less austere. Human figures appear with increasing frequency in the paintings of this period, which Siegel interprets as a reflection that \"the importance of human life, particularly his family, now occupies his thoughts more and more, and his friends, his wife, and his townspeople appear as frequent subjects in his art.\"\nAround this time, he found support from two sources in Russia. In 1820, the Grand Duke Nikolai Pavlovich, at the behest of his wife Alexandra Feodorovna, visited Friedrich's studio and returned to Saint Petersburg with a number of his paintings, an exchange that began a patronage that continued for many years. Not long thereafter, the poet Vasily Zhukovsky, tutor to the Grand Duke's son (later Tsar Alexander II), met Friedrich in 1821 and found in him a kindred spirit. Zhukovsky helped Friedrich for decades, both by purchasing his work himself and by recommending his art to the royal family; his assistance toward the end of Friedrich's career proved invaluable to the ailing and impoverished artist. Zhukovsky remarked that his friend's paintings \"please us by their precision, each of them awakening a memory in our mind.\"\nFriedrich was acquainted with Philipp Otto Runge, another leading German painter of the Romantic period. He was also a friend of Georg Friedrich Kersting, and painted him at work in his unadorned studio, and of the Norwegian painter Johan Christian Clausen Dahl (1788\u20131857). Dahl was close to Friedrich during the artist's final years and he expressed dismay that to the art-buying public, Friedrich's pictures were only \"curiosities\". While the poet Zhukovsky appreciated Friedrich's psychological themes, Dahl praised the descriptive quality of Friedrich's landscapes, commenting that \"artists and connoisseurs saw in Friedrich's art only a kind of mystic, because they themselves were only looking out for the mystic\u00a0... They did not see Friedrich's faithful and conscientious study of nature in everything he represented\".\nLater life.\nFriedrich's reputation steadily declined over the final fifteen years of his life. As the ideals of early Romanticism passed from fashion, he came to be viewed as an eccentric and melancholy character, out of touch with the times. Gradually his patrons fell away. By 1820, he was living as a recluse and was described by friends as the \"most solitary of the solitary\". Towards the end of his life he lived in relative poverty. He became isolated and spent long periods of the day and night walking alone through woods and fields, often beginning his strolls before sunrise.\nHe suffered his first stroke in June 1835, which left him with minor limb paralysis and greatly reduced his ability to paint. As a result, he was unable to work in oil and limited to watercolour, sepia and reworking older compositions. Although his vision remained strong, he had lost the full strength of his hand. Yet he was able to produce a final 'black painting', \"Seashore by Moonlight\" (1835\u20131836), described by Vaughan as the \"darkest of all his shorelines, in which richness of tonality compensates for the lack of his former finesse\". Symbols of death appeared in his work from this period. Soon after his stroke, the Russian royal family purchased a number of his earlier works, and the proceeds allowed him to travel to Teplitz\u2014in today's Czech Republic\u2014to recover.\nDuring the mid-1830s, Friedrich began a series of portraits and returned to observing himself in nature. As the art historian William Vaughan observed, however, \"He can see himself as a man greatly changed. He is no longer the upright, supportive figure that appeared in \"Two Men Contemplating the Moon\" in 1819. He is old and stiff\u00a0... he moves with a stoop\". By 1838, he was capable of working in a small format only. He and his family were living in poverty and grew increasingly dependent for support on the charity of friends.\nDeath.\nFriedrich died in Dresden on 7 May 1840 and was buried in Dresden's Trinitatis-Friedhof (Trinity Cemetery) east of the city centre (the entrance to which he had painted with his \"'Cemetery Entrance\" in 1825). His wife Caroline died in poverty in 1847.\nBy this time his reputation and fame had waned, and his death was little noticed within the artistic community. His artwork had certainly been acknowledged during his lifetime, but not widely. While the close study of landscape and an emphasis on the spiritual elements of nature were commonplace in contemporary art, his interpretations were highly original and personal.\nCarl Gustav Carus later wrote a series of articles which paid tribute to Friedrich's transformation of the conventions of landscape painting. However, Carus' articles placed Friedrich firmly in his time and did not place the artist within a continuing tradition. Only one of his paintings had been reproduced as a print, and that was produced in very few copies.\nThemes.\nLandscape and the sublime.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nThe visualisation and portrayal of landscape in an entirely new manner was Friedrich's key innovation. He sought not just to explore the enjoyment of a beautiful view as in the classic conception, but rather to examine an instant of sublimity through the contemplation of nature. Friedrich was instrumental in transforming landscape in art from a backdrop subordinated to human drama to a self-contained emotive subject. His paintings often employed the \"R\u00fcckenfigur\"\u2014a person seen from behind, contemplating the view. The vantage point encourages the viewer to identify with the \"R\u00fcckenfigur\", and share with the artist the sublime appreciation of nature.\nFriedrich created the idea of a landscape full of romantic feeling\u2014\"die romantische Stimmungslandschaft\". His art details a wide range of geographical features, such as rock coasts, forests and mountain scenes, and often used landscape to express religious themes. During his time, most of the best-known paintings were viewed as expressions of a religious mysticism. He wrote: \"The artist should paint not only what he sees before him, but also what he sees within him. If, however, he sees nothing within him, then he should also refrain from painting that which he sees before him. Otherwise, his pictures will be like those folding screens behind which one expects to find only the sick or the dead.\" Expansive skies, storms, mist, forests, ruins and crosses bearing witness to the presence of God are frequent elements in Friedrich's landscapes. Though death finds symbolic expression in boats moving away from a shore, it is referenced more directly in paintings like \"The Abbey in the Oakwood\" (1808\u20131810), in which monks carry a coffin past an open grave, toward a cross, and through the portal of a church in ruins.\nHe was one of the first artists to portray winter landscapes in which the land is rendered as stark and dead. Friedrich's winter scenes are solemn and still\u2014according to the art historian Hermann Beenken, Friedrich painted winter scenes in which \"no man has yet set his foot. The theme of nearly all the older winter pictures had been less winter itself than life in winter. In the 16th and 17th centuries, it was thought impossible to leave out such motifs as the crowd of skaters, the wanderer\u00a0... It was Friedrich who first felt the wholly detached and distinctive features of a natural life. Instead of many tones, he sought the one; and so, in his landscape, he subordinated the composite chord into one single basic note\".\nBare oak trees and tree stumps, such as those in \"\" (c.\u20091822), \"Man and Woman Contemplating the Moon\" (c.\u20091824), and \"Willow Bush under a Setting Sun\" (c.\u20091835), are recurring elements of his paintings, and usually symbolise death. Countering the sense of despair are Friedrich's symbols for redemption: the cross and the clearing sky promise eternal life, and the slender moon suggests hope and the growing closeness of Christ. In his paintings of the sea, anchors often appear on the shore, also indicating a spiritual hope. In \"The Abbey in the Oakwood\", the movement of the monks away from the open grave and toward the cross and the horizon imparts Friedrich's message that the final destination of man's life lies beyond the grave.\nWith dawn and dusk constituting prominent themes of his landscapes, Friedrich's own later years were characterised by a growing pessimism. His work becomes darker, revealing a fearsome monumentality. \"The Wreck of the Hope\"\u2014also known as \"The Polar Sea\" or \"The Sea of Ice\" (1823\u20131824)\u2014perhaps best summarises Friedrich's ideas and aims at this point, though in such a radical way that the painting was not well received. Completed in 1824, it depicted a grim subject, a shipwreck in the Arctic Ocean; \"the image he produced, with its grinding slabs of travertine-colored floe ice chewing up a wooden ship, goes beyond documentary into allegory: the frail bark of human aspiration crushed by the world's immense and glacial indifference.\"\nFriedrich's written commentary on aesthetics was limited to a collection of aphorisms set down in 1830, in which he explained the need for the artist to match natural observation with an introspective scrutiny of his own personality. His best-known remark advises the artist to \"close your bodily eye so that you may see your picture first with the spiritual eye. Then bring to the light of day that which you have seen in the darkness so that it may react upon others from the outside inwards.\"\nLoneliness and death.\nBoth Friedrich's life and art have at times been perceived as marked by an overwhelming sense of loneliness. Art historians and some of his contemporaries attribute such interpretations to the losses suffered during his youth to the bleak outlook of his adulthood, while Friedrich's pale and withdrawn appearance helped reinforce the popular notion of the \"taciturn man from the North\".\nFriedrich suffered depressive episodes in 1799, 1803\u20131805, c. 1813, in 1816 and between 1824 and 1826. There are noticeable thematic shifts in the works he produced during these episodes, which see the emergence of such motifs and symbols as vultures, owls, graveyards and ruins. From 1826, these motifs became a permanent feature of his output, while his use of colour became darker and muted. Carus wrote in 1829 that Friedrich \"is surrounded by a thick, gloomy cloud of spiritual uncertainty\", though the noted art historian and curator Hubertus Gassner disagrees with such notions, seeing in Friedrich's work a positive and life-affirming subtext inspired by Freemasonry and religion.\nGermanic folklore.\nReflecting Friedrich's patriotism and resentment of the 1813 French occupation of Pomerania, motifs from German folklore became increasingly prominent in his work. An anti-French German nationalist, Friedrich used motifs from his native landscape to celebrate Germanic culture, customs and mythology. He was impressed by the anti-Napoleonic poetry of Ernst Moritz Arndt and Theodor K\u00f6rner, and the patriotic literature of Adam M\u00fcller and Heinrich von Kleist. Moved by the deaths of three friends killed in battle against France, as well as by Kleist's 1808 drama \"Die Hermannsschlacht\", Friedrich undertook a number of paintings in which he intended to convey political symbols solely by means of the landscape\u2014a first in the history of art.\nIn ' (1812), a dilapidated monument inscribed \"Arminius\" invokes the Germanic chieftain, a symbol of nationalism, while the four tombs of fallen heroes are slightly ajar, freeing their spirits for eternity. Two French soldiers appear as small figures before a cave, lower and deep in a grotto surrounded by rock, as if farther from heaven. A second political painting, ' (c. 1813), depicts a lost French soldier dwarfed by a dense forest, while on a tree stump a raven is perched\u2014a prophet of doom, symbolizing the anticipated defeat of France.\nLegacy.\nInfluence.\nAlongside other Romantic painters, Friedrich helped position landscape painting as a major genre within Western art. Of his contemporaries, Friedrich's style most influenced the painting of Johan Christian Dahl (1788\u20131857). Among later generations, Arnold B\u00f6cklin (1827\u20131901) was strongly influenced by his work, and the substantial presence of Friedrich's works in Russian collections influenced many Russian painters, in particular Arkhip Kuindzhi (c. 1842\u20131910) and Ivan Shishkin (1832\u20131898). Friedrich's spirituality anticipated American painters such as Albert Pinkham Ryder (1847\u20131917), Ralph Blakelock (1847\u20131919), the painters of the Hudson River School and the New England Luminists.\nAt the turn of the 20th century, Friedrich was rediscovered by the Norwegian art historian Andreas Aubert (1851\u20131913), whose writing initiated modern Friedrich scholarship, and by the Symbolist painters, who valued his visionary and allegorical landscapes. The Norwegian Symbolist Edvard Munch (1863\u20131944) would have seen Friedrich's work during a visit to Berlin in the 1880s. Munch's 1899 print \"The Lonely Ones\" echoes Friedrich's \"R\u00fcckenfigur (back figure)\", although in Munch's work the focus has shifted away from the broad landscape and toward the sense of dislocation between the two melancholy figures in the foreground.\nFriedrich's modern revival gained momentum in 1906, when thirty-two of his works were featured in an exhibition in Berlin of Romantic-era art. His landscapes exercised a strong influence on the work of German artist Max Ernst (1891\u20131976), and as a result other Surrealists came to view Friedrich as a precursor to their movement. In 1934, the Belgian painter Ren\u00e9 Magritte (1898\u20131967) paid tribute in his work \"The Human Condition\", which directly echoes motifs from Friedrich's art in its questioning of perception and the role of the viewer.\nA few years later, the Surrealist journal \"Minotaure\" included Friedrich in a 1939 article by the critic Marie Landsberger, thereby exposing his work to a far wider circle of artists. The influence of \"The Wreck of Hope\" (or \"The Sea of Ice\") is evident in the 1940\u201341 painting \"Totes Meer\" by Paul Nash (1889\u20131946), a fervent admirer of Ernst. Friedrich's work has been cited as an inspiration by other major 20th-century artists, including Mark Rothko (1903\u20131970), Gerhard Richter (b. 1932), Gotthard Graubner and Anselm Kiefer (b. 1945). Friedrich's Romantic paintings have also been singled out by writer Samuel Beckett (1906\u201389), who, standing before \"Man and Woman Contemplating the Moon\", said \"This was the source of \"Waiting for Godot\", you know.\"\nIn his 1961 article \"The Abstract Sublime\", originally published in \"ARTnews\", the art historian Robert Rosenblum drew comparisons between the Romantic landscape paintings of both Friedrich and Turner with the Abstract Expressionist paintings of Mark Rothko. Rosenblum specifically describes Friedrich's 1809 painting \"The Monk by the Sea\", Turner's \"The Evening Star\" and Rothko's 1954 \"Light, Earth and Blue\" as revealing affinities of vision and feeling. According to Rosenblum, \"Rothko, like Friedrich and Turner, places us on the threshold of those shapeless infinities discussed by the aestheticians of the Sublime. The tiny monk in the Friedrich and the fisher in the Turner establish a poignant contrast between the infinite vastness of a pantheistic God and the infinite smallness of His creatures. In the abstract language of Rothko, such literal detail\u2014a bridge of empathy between the real spectator and the presentation of a transcendental landscape\u2014is no longer necessary; we ourselves are the monk before the sea, standing silently and contemplatively before these huge and soundless pictures as if we were looking at a sunset or a moonlit night.\"\nCritical appraisal.\nUntil 1890, and especially after his friends had died, Friedrich's work lay in near-oblivion for decades. Yet, by 1890, the symbolism in his work began to ring true with the artistic mood of the day, especially in central Europe. However, despite a renewed interest and an acknowledgment of his originality, his lack of regard for \"painterly effect\" and thinly rendered surfaces jarred with the theories of the time.\nFriedrich's work was used to promote the Nazi ideology in the 1930s, when attempts were made to align Romantic artist and musicians within the nationalistic \"Blut und Boden\" ethos. It took decades for Friedrich's reputation to recover from this association with Nazism. His reliance on symbolism and the fact that his work fell outside the narrow definitions of modernism contributed to his fall from favour. In 1949, art historian Kenneth Clark wrote that Friedrich \"worked in the frigid technique of his time, which could hardly inspire a school of modern painting\", and suggested that the artist was trying to express in painting what is best left to poetry. Clark's dismissal of Friedrich reflected the damage the artist's reputation sustained during the late 1930s.\nFriedrich's reputation suffered further damage when his imagery was adopted by a number of Hollywood directors, including Walt Disney, built on the work of such German cinema masters as Fritz Lang and F. W. Murnau, within the horror and fantasy genres. His rehabilitation was slow, but enhanced through the writings of such critics and scholars as Werner Hofmann, Helmut B\u00f6rsch-Supan and Sigrid Hinz, who successfully rebutted the political associations ascribed to his work, developed a \"catalogue raisonn\u00e9\", and placed Friedrich within a purely art-historical context.\nBy the 1970s, he was again being exhibited in major international galleries and found favour with a new generation of critics and art historians. Today, his international reputation is well established. He is a national icon in his native Germany, and highly regarded by art historians and connoisseurs across the Western World. He is generally viewed as a figure of great psychological complexity, and according to Vaughan, \"a believer who struggled with doubt, a celebrator of beauty haunted by darkness. In the end, he transcends interpretation, reaching across cultures through the compelling appeal of his imagery. He has truly emerged as a butterfly\u2014hopefully one that will never again disappear from our sight\".\nWork.\nFriedrich was a prolific artist who produced more than 500 attributed works. In line with the Romantic ideals of his time, he intended his paintings to function as pure aesthetic statements, so he was cautious that the titles given to his work were not overly descriptive or evocative. It is likely that some of today's more literal titles, such as \"The Stages of Life\", were not given by the artist himself, but were instead adopted during one of the revivals of interest in Friedrich. Complications arise when dating Friedrich's work, in part because he often did not directly name or date his canvases. He kept a carefully detailed notebook on his output, however, which has been used by scholars to tie paintings to their completion dates.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5655", "revid": "8561672", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5655", "title": "Courtney Love", "text": "American rock musician and actress (born 1964)\nCourtney Michelle Love (n\u00e9e Harrison; born July 9, 1964) is an American singer, songwriter, guitarist, and actress whose career has spanned four decades. She has had a significant impact on female-fronted alternative acts and performers, with \"NME\" naming her one of the most influential singers in alternative culture between 1990 and 2020. \nLove had an itinerant childhood, but was primarily raised in Portland, Oregon, where she played in a series of short-lived bands and was active in the local punk scene. Following a brief stay in a juvenile hall, she spent a year living in Dublin and Liverpool before returning to the United States and pursuing an acting career. She appeared in supporting roles in the Alex Cox films \"Sid and Nancy\" (1986) and \"Straight to Hell\" (1987). In 1989, Love formed the alternative rock band Hole with guitarist Eric Erlandson. She was its lead vocalist and rhythm guitarist. She was becoming a rising figure in the alternative and grunge scenes of the 1990s. However, her highly publicized relationship with, and 1992 marriage to, Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain followed by his death in 1994 temporarily overshadowed her music career. \nLove and Hole soon rose to prominence due to her uninhibited live performances and confrontational lyrics. The group received critical acclaim from underground rock press for their 1991 debut album \"Pretty on the Inside\", produced by Kim Gordon, while their second release, \"Live Through This\" (1994), was met with critical accolades and multi-platinum sales. In 1995, Love returned to acting, earning a Golden Globe Award nomination for her performance as Althea Leasure in Milo\u0161 Forman's \"The People vs. Larry Flynt\" (1996), which established her as a mainstream actress. Hole's third album, \"Celebrity Skin\" (1998), was nominated for three Grammy Awards.\nLove continued to work as an actress into the early 2000s, appearing in big-budget pictures such as \"Man on the Moon\" (1999) and \"Trapped\" (2002), before releasing her first solo album, \"America's Sweetheart\", in 2004. The subsequent several years were marred with publicity surrounding Love's legal troubles and drug relapse, which resulted in a mandatory lockdown rehabilitation sentence in 2005 while she was writing a second solo album. That project became \"Nobody's Daughter\", released in 2010 as a Hole album but without the former Hole lineup. Between 2014 and 2015, Love released two solo singles and returned to acting in the network series \"Sons of Anarchy\" and \"Empire\". She has also been active as a writer; she co-created and co-wrote three volumes of a manga, \"Princess Ai\", between 2004 and 2006, and wrote a memoir, \"\" (2006). \nLife and career.\n1964\u20131982: Childhood and education.\nCourtney Michelle Harrison was born July 9, 1964, at Saint Francis Memorial Hospital in San Francisco, the first child of psychotherapist Linda Carroll (n\u00e9e Risi) and Hank Harrison, a publisher and road manager for the Grateful Dead. Her parents met at a party held for Dizzy Gillespie in 1963, and the two married in Reno, Nevada after Carroll discovered she was pregnant. Carroll, who was adopted at birth, is the biological daughter of novelist Paula Fox. The identity of Love's maternal biological grandfather is unknown. Her matrilineal great-grandparents were screenwriters Elsie Fox (n\u00e9e de Sola), a Cuban immigrant, and Paul Hervey Fox. Phil Lesh, the founding bassist of the Grateful Dead, was Love's godfather. According to Love, she was named after Courtney Farrell, the protagonist of Pamela Moore's 1956 novel \"Chocolates for Breakfast\". Love is of mixed Cuban, English, Welsh, Irish, Ashkenazi Jewish, and German ancestry. She was baptized a Roman Catholic. Through her mother's subsequent marriages, she has two younger half-sisters, three younger half-brothers (one of whom died in infancy), and one adopted brother.\nIn 1970, Love's parents divorced after her mother and one of her father's girlfriends testified that Hank dosed her with LSD when she was a toddler. Carroll also alleged that Hank threatened to abduct his daughter and flee with her to a foreign country. Though Hank denied these allegations, his custody was revoked. Carroll relocated with Love to Oregon, residing in Marcola while completing a psychology degree at the University of Oregon. There, Carroll married schoolteacher Frank Rodr\u00edguez, who legally adopted Love. Love attended a Montessori school in Eugene, where she struggled academically and socially. She has said that she began seeing psychiatrists at \"like, [age] three. Observational therapy. TM for tots. You name it, I've been there.\" At age nine, a psychologist noted that she exhibited signs of autism, among them tactile defensiveness and nonverbal behavior.\nIn 1972, Love's mother divorced Rodr\u00edguez, remarried to sportswriter David Menely, and moved the family to Nelson, New Zealand. Love was enrolled at Nelson College for Girls, but soon expelled for misbehavior. In 1973, Carroll sent Love back to Portland, Oregon, where she was raised by her former stepfather and other family friends. At age 14, Love was arrested for shoplifting from a Portland department store and remanded at Hillcrest Correctional Facility, a juvenile hall in Salem, Oregon. While at Hillcrest, she became acquainted with records by Patti Smith, the Runaways, and the Pretenders. She was intermittently placed in foster care throughout late 1979 until becoming legally emancipated in 1980, after which she remained staunchly estranged from her mother. \nAfter her emancipation, Love spent two months in Japan working as a topless dancer, but was deported after her passport was confiscated. She returned to Portland, working as a DJ at a gay disco and a dancer at Mary's Club, adopting the surname Love to conceal her identity; she later adopted Love as her surname. Love said she lacked social skills as a teenager, and learned them while frequenting gay clubs and spending time with drag queens. During this period, she briefly enrolled at Portland State University, studying English and philosophy. She later commented that, had she not found a passion for music, she would have sought a career working with children.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBefore Liverpool, my life doesn't count. Ian McCulloch and Julian Cope taught me a great deal. I owe them a lot. Liverpool had been a great school to become a rock star.\n\u2013Love on her time in Liverpool\nIn 1981, Love was granted a small trust fund that had been left by her maternal grandparents. She used that money to travel to Dublin, Ireland, where her biological father was living, and audited theology courses at Trinity College. She later received honorary patronage from Trinity's University Philosophical Society in 2010. While in Dublin, Love met musician Julian Cope of the Teardrop Explodes at one of the band's concerts. Cope took a liking to Love and eventually allowed her and a friend to stay at his Liverpool home in his absence. Cope's roommate, musician Pete de Freitas, was initially hesitant to allow the girls to stay, but acquiesced as they were \"alarmingly young and obviously had nowhere else to go\". Cope writes of Love frequently in his 1994 autobiography, \"Head-On\", in which he refers to her as \"the adolescent\".\nIn July 1982, Love returned to the United States. In late 1982, she attended a Faith No More concert in San Francisco and convinced the members to let her join as a singer. The group recorded material with Love as a vocalist, but fired her; according to keyboardist Roddy Bottum, who remained Love's friend in the years after, the band wanted a \"male energy\". \nLove returned to working abroad as an erotic dancer, briefly in Taiwan, and then at a taxi dance hall in Hong Kong. By Love's account, she first used heroin while working at the Hong Kong dance hall, having mistaken it for cocaine. While still intoxicated, Love was pursued by a wealthy male client who requested that she return with him to the Philippines, and gave her money to purchase new clothes. She used the money to purchase an airfare back to the United States.\n1983\u20131987: Early music projects and film.\nAt age 19, through her then-boyfriend's mother, film costume designer Bernadene Mann, Love took a job at Paramount Studios cleaning out the wardrobe department of vintage pieces that had suffered dry rot or other damage. During this time, Love became interested in vintage fashion. She subsequently returned to Portland, where she formed short-lived musical projects with her friends Ursula Wehr and Robin Barbur (namely Sugar Babylon, later known as Sugar Babydoll). Love briefly fronted Faith No More for their first TV appearance in 1984: she sang with a Siouxsie Sioux-style vocal. After meeting Kat Bjelland at the Satyricon nightclub in 1984, the two formed the group the Pagan Babies. Love asked Bjelland to start the band with her as a guitarist, and the two moved to San Francisco in June 1985, where they recruited bassist Jennifer Finch and drummer Janis Tanaka. According to Bjelland, \"[Courtney] didn't play an instrument at the time\" aside from keyboards, so Bjelland would transcribe Love's musical ideas on guitar for her. The group played several house shows and recorded one 4-track demo before disbanding in late 1985. After Pagan Babies, Love moved to Minneapolis, where Bjelland had formed the group Babes in Toyland, and briefly worked as a concert promoter before returning to California. \nDeciding to shift her focus to acting, Love enrolled at the San Francisco Art Institute and studied film under experimental director George Kuchar, featuring in one of his short films, \"Club Vatican\". She also took experimental theater courses in Oakland taught by Whoopi Goldberg. Love has stated that she underwent a rhinoplasty at age 20, and that she felt the procedure helped advance her career.\nIn 1985, she submitted an audition tape for the role of Nancy Spungen in the Sid Vicious biopic \"Sid and Nancy\" (1986) and was given a minor supporting role by director Alex Cox. After filming \"Sid and Nancy\" in New York City, she worked at a peep show in Times Square and squatted at the ABC No Rio social center and Pyramid Club in the East Village. That year, Cox cast her in a leading role in his film \"Straight to Hell\" (1987), a Spaghetti Western starring Joe Strummer, Dennis Hopper, and Grace Jones, shot in Spain in 1986. The film was poorly reviewed by critics, but it caught the attention of Andy Warhol, who featured Love in an episode of \"Andy Warhol's Fifteen Minutes\". She also had a part in the 1988 Ramones music video for \"I Wanna Be Sedated\", appearing as a bride among dozens of party guests.\nDispleased by the \"celebutante\" fame she had attained, Love abandoned her acting career in 1988 and resumed work as a stripper in Oregon, where she was recognized by customers at a bar in the small town of McMinnville. This prompted Love to go into isolation and relocate to Anchorage, Alaska, where she lived for three months to \"gather her thoughts\", supporting herself by working at a strip club frequented by local fishermen. \"I decided to move to Alaska because I needed to get my shit together and learn how to work\", she said in retrospect. \"So I went on this sort of vision quest. I got rid of all my earthly possessions. I had my bad little strip clothes and some big sweaters, and I moved into a trailer with a bunch of other strippers.\"\n1988\u20131991: Beginnings of Hole.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nShe was the most gung-ho person I've ever met\u00a0... She gave 180%. I've worked with some people that you've had to coax the performance out of them. With Courtney, there was no attitude.\n\u2013Don Fleming, who co-produced Hole's debut album with Kim Gordon, on Love\nIn late 1988, Love taught herself to play guitar and relocated to Los Angeles, where she placed an ad in a local music zine: \"I want to start a band. My influences are Big Black, Sonic Youth, and Fleetwood Mac.\" By 1989, Love had recruited guitarist Eric Erlandson; bassist Lisa Roberts, her neighbor; and drummer Caroline Rue, whom she met at a Gwar concert. Love named the band Hole after a line from Euripides' \"Medea\" (\"There is a hole that pierces right through me\") and a conversation in which her mother told her that she could not live her life \"with a hole running through her\". On July 23, 1989, Love married Leaving Trains vocalist James Moreland in Las Vegas; the marriage was annulled the same year. She later said that Moreland was a transvestite and that they had married \"as a joke\". After forming Hole, Love and Erlandson had a romantic relationship that lasted over a year.\nIn Hole's formative stages, Love continued to work at strip clubs in Hollywood (including Jumbo's Clown Room and the Seventh Veil), saving money to purchase backline equipment and a touring van, while rehearsing at a Hollywood studio loaned to her by the Red Hot Chili Peppers. Hole played their first show in November 1989 at Raji's, a rock club in central Hollywood. Their debut single, \"Retard Girl\", was issued in April 1990 through the Long Beach indie label Sympathy for the Record Industry and was played by Rodney Bingenheimer on local rock station KROQ. Hole appeared on the cover of \"Flipside\", a Los Angeles-based punk fanzine. In early 1991, they released their second single, \"Dicknail\", through Sub Pop Records.\nWith no wave, noise rock, and grindcore bands being major influences on Love, Hole's first studio album, \"Pretty on the Inside\", captured an abrasive sound and contained disturbing, graphic lyrics, described by \"Q\" as \"confrontational [and] genuinely uninhibited\". The record was released in September 1991 on Caroline Records, produced by Kim Gordon of Sonic Youth with assistant production from Gumball's Don Fleming; Love and Gordon had met when Hole opened for Sonic Youth during their promotional tour for \"Goo\" at the Whisky a Go Go in November 1990. In early 1991, Love sent Gordon a personal letter asking her to produce the record for the band, to which she agreed.\n\"Pretty on the Inside\" received generally positive critical reception from indie and punk rock critics and was named one of the 20 best albums of the year by \"Spin\". It gained a following in the United Kingdom, charting at 59 on the UK Albums Chart, and its lead single, \"Teenage Whore\", entered the UK Indie Chart at number one. The album's feminist slant led many to tag the band as part of the riot grrrl movement, a movement with which Love did not associate. The band toured in support of the record, headlining with Mudhoney in Europe; in the United States, they opened for the Smashing Pumpkins, and performed at CBGB in New York City.\nDuring the tour, Love briefly dated Smashing Pumpkins frontman Billy Corgan and then the Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain. The journalist Michael Azerrad states that Love and Cobain met in 1989 at the Satyricon nightclub in Portland, Oregon. However, the Cobain biographer Charles Cross gives the date as February 12, 1990; Cross said that Cobain playfully wrestled Love to the floor after she said that he looked like Dave Pirner of Soul Asylum. According to Love, she met Cobain at a Dharma Bums show in Portland, while Love's bandmate Eric Erlandson said that he and Love were introduced to Cobain in a parking lot after a concert at the Hollywood Palladium on May 17, 1991. In late 1991, Love and Cobain became re-acquainted through Jennifer Finch, one of Love's friends and former bandmates. Love and Cobain were a couple by 1992.\n1992\u20131995: Marriage to Kurt Cobain, \"Live Through This\" and breakthrough.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJust marrying [him] created a mythology around me that I didn't expect for myself, because I had a very controlled, five-year plan about how I was going to be successful in the rock industry. Marrying Kurt, it all kind of went sideways in a way that I could not control and I became seen in a certain light\u2013a vilified light that made Yoko Ono look like Pollyanna\u2013and I couldn't stop it.\n\u2013Love on her public image after marrying Kurt Cobain\nShortly after completing the tour for \"Pretty on the Inside\", Love married Cobain on Waikiki Beach on February 24, 1992. She wore a satin and lace dress once owned by the actress Frances Farmer, and Cobain wore plaid pajamas. During Love's pregnancy, Hole recorded a cover of \"Over the Edge\" for a Wipers tribute album, and recorded their fourth single, \"Beautiful Son\", which was released in April 1993. On August 18, 1992, the couple's only child, a daughter, Frances Bean Cobain, was born in Los Angeles. They relocated to Carnation, Washington, and then Seattle.\nLove's first major media exposure came in a September 1992 profile with Cobain for \"Vanity Fair\" by Lynn Hirschberg, entitled \"Strange Love\". Cobain had become a major public figure following the surprise success of Nirvana's album \"Nevermind\". Love was urged by her manager to participate in the cover story. During the prior year, Love and Cobain had developed a heroin addiction; the profile portrayed them in an unflattering light, and suggested that Love had been addicted to heroin during her pregnancy. The Los Angeles Department of Children and Family Services investigated, and custody of Frances was temporarily awarded to Love's sister Jaimee. Love said she was misquoted by Hirschberg, and that she had immediately quit heroin during her first trimester once she discovered she was pregnant. Love later said the article had serious implications for her marriage and Cobain's mental state, suggesting it was a factor in his suicide two years later.\nOn September 8, 1993, Love and Cobain made their only public performance together at the Rock Against Rape benefit in Hollywood, performing two acoustic duets of \"Pennyroyal Tea\" and \"Where Did You Sleep Last Night\". Love also performed electric versions of two new Hole songs, \"Doll Parts\" and \"Miss World\", both written for their upcoming second album. In October 1993, Hole recorded their second album, \"Live Through This\", in Atlanta. The album featured a new lineup with bassist Kristen Pfaff and drummer Patty Schemel.\nIn April 1994, Cobain committed suicide in the Seattle home he shared with Love, who was in rehab in Los Angeles at the time. In the following months, Love was rarely seen in public, staying at her home with friends and family. Cobain's remains were cremated and his ashes divided into portions by Love, who kept some in a teddy bear and some in an urn. In June, she traveled to the Namgyal Buddhist Monastery in Ithaca, New York and had Cobain's ashes ceremonially blessed by Buddhist monks. Another portion was mixed into clay and made into memorial sculptures.\n\"Live Through This\" was released one week after Cobain's death, on Geffen's subsidiary label DGC. On June 16, Pfaff died of a heroin overdose in Seattle. For Hole's impending tour, Love recruited the Canadian bassist Melissa Auf der Maur. Hole's performance on August 26, 1994, at the Reading Festival\u2014Love's first public performance following Cobain's death\u2014was described by MTV as \"by turns macabre, frightening and inspirational\". John Peel wrote in \"The Guardian\" that Love's disheveled appearance \"would have drawn whistles of astonishment in Bedlam\", and that her performance \"verged on the heroic\u00a0... Love steered her band through a set which dared you to pity either her recent history or that of the band\u00a0... The band teetered on the edge of chaos, generating a tension which I cannot remember having felt before from any stage.\"\n\"Live Through This\" was certified platinum in April 1995 and received numerous accolades. The success combined with Cobain's suicide produced publicity for Love, and she was featured on Barbara Walters' \"10 Most Fascinating People\" in 1995. Her erratic onstage behavior and various legal troubles during Hole's tour compounded the media coverage of her. Hole performed a series of riotous concerts over the following year, with Love frequently appearing hysterical onstage, flashing crowds, stage diving, and getting into fights with audience members. One journalist reported that at the band's show in Boston in December 1994: \"Love interrupted the music and talked about her deceased husband Kurt Cobain, and also broke out into Tourette syndrome-like rants. The music was great, but the raving was vulgar and offensive, and prompted some of the audience to shout back at her.\"\nIn January 1995, Love was arrested in Melbourne for disrupting a Qantas flight after getting into an argument with a flight attendant. On July 4, 1995, at the Lollapalooza Festival in George, Washington, Love threw a lit cigarette at musician Kathleen Hanna before punching her in the face, alleging that she had made a joke about her daughter. She pleaded guilty to an assault charge and was sentenced to anger management classes. In November 1995, two male teenagers sued Love for allegedly punching them during a Hole concert in Orlando, Florida in March 1995. The judge dismissed the case on grounds that the teens \"weren't exposed to any greater amount of violence than could reasonably be expected at an alternative rock concert\". Love later said she had little memory of 1994 and 1995, as she had been using large quantities of heroin and Rohypnol at the time.\n1996\u20132002: Acting success and \"Celebrity Skin\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI went for that part so hard because I felt a need for atonement for some cultural damage that had arisen out of me and things that I had done. By doing that role, I felt that, personally and creatively, I could exemplify why this was the most un-glorious, unglamorous, fucked-up thing. And then, \"bang!\", I was done with all that. I could fuck off and do something else.\n\u2013Love on her role in \"The People vs. Larry Flynt\" (1996)\nAfter Hole's world tour concluded in 1996, Love made a return to acting, first in small roles in the Jean-Michel Basquiat biopic \"Basquiat\" and the drama \"Feeling Minnesota\" (1996), and then a starring role as Larry Flynt's wife Althea in Milo\u0161 Forman's critically acclaimed 1996 film \"The People vs. Larry Flynt\". Love went through rehabilitation and quit using heroin at the insistence of Forman; she was ordered to take multiple urine tests under the supervision of Columbia Pictures while filming, and passed all of them. Despite Columbia Pictures' initial reluctance to hire Love due to her troubled past, her performance received acclaim, earning a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress, and a New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Supporting Actress. Critic Roger Ebert called her work in the film \"quite a performance; Love proves she is not a rock star pretending to act, but a true actress.\" She won several other awards from various film critic associations for the film. During this time, Love maintained what the media noted as a more decorous public image, and she appeared in ad campaigns for Versace and in a \"Vogue Italia\" spread. Following the release of \"The People vs. Larry Flynt\", she dated her co-star Edward Norton, with whom she remained until 1999.\nIn late 1997, Hole released the compilations \"My Body, the Hand Grenade\" and \"The First Session\", both of which featured previously recorded material. Love attracted media attention in May 1998 after punching journalist Belissa Cohen at a party; the suit was settled out of court for an undisclosed sum. In September 1998, Hole released their third studio album, \"Celebrity Skin\", which featured a stark power pop sound that contrasted with their earlier punk influences. Love divulged her ambition of making an album where \"art meets commerce\u00a0... there are no compromises made, it has commercial appeal, and it sticks to [our] original vision.\" She said she was influenced by Neil Young, Fleetwood Mac, and My Bloody Valentine when writing the album. Smashing Pumpkins frontman Billy Corgan co-wrote several songs. \"Celebrity Skin\" was well received by critics; \"Rolling Stone\" called it \"accessible, fiery and intimate\u2014often at the same time\u00a0... a basic guitar record that's anything but basic.\" \"Celebrity Skin\" went multi-platinum, and topped \"Best of Year\" lists at \"Spin\" and \"The Village Voice\". It garnered Hole's only number-one single on the Modern Rock Tracks chart with \"Celebrity Skin\". Hole promoted the album through MTV performances and at the 1998 Billboard Music Awards, and were nominated for three Grammy Awards at the 41st Grammy Awards ceremony.\nBefore the release of \"Celebrity Skin\", Love and Fender designed a low-priced Squier brand guitar, the Vista Venus. The instrument featured a shape inspired by Mercury, a little-known independent guitar manufacturer, Stratocaster, and Rickenbacker's solid body guitars. It had a single-coil and a humbucker pickup and was available in 6-string and 12-string versions. In an early 1999 interview, Love said about the Venus: \"I wanted a guitar that sounded really warm and pop, but which required just one box to go dirty\u00a0... And something that could also be your first band guitar. I didn't want it all teched out. I wanted it real simple, with just one pickup switch.\"\nHole toured with Marilyn Manson on the Beautiful Monsters Tour in 1999, but dropped out after nine performances; Love and Manson disagreed over production costs, and Hole was forced to open for Manson under an agreement with Interscope Records. Hole resumed touring with Imperial Teen. Love later said Hole also abandoned the tour due to Manson and Korn's (whom they also toured with in Australia) sexualized treatment of teenage female audience members. Love told interviewers at 99X.FM in Atlanta: \"What I really don't like\u2014there are certain girls that like us, or like me, who are really messed up\u00a0... they're very young, and they do not need to be taken and raped, or filmed having enema contests\u00a0... [they were] going out into the audience and picking up fourteen and fifteen-year-old girls who obviously cut themselves, and then [I had] to see them in the morning\u00a0... it's just uncool.\"\nIn 1999, Love was awarded an Orville H. Gibson award for Best Female Rock Guitarist. During this time, she starred opposite Jim Carrey as his partner Lynne Margulies in the Andy Kaufman biopic \"Man on the Moon\" (1999), followed by a role as William S. Burroughs's wife Joan Vollmer in \"Beat\" (2000) alongside Kiefer Sutherland. Love was cast as the lead in John Carpenter's sci-fi horror film \"Ghosts of Mars\", but backed out after injuring her foot. She sued the ex-wife of her then-boyfriend, James Barber, whom Love alleged had caused the injury by running over her foot with her Volvo. The following year, she returned to film opposite Lili Taylor in \"Julie Johnson\" (2001), in which she played a woman who has a lesbian relationship; Love won an Outstanding Actress award at L.A.'s Outfest. She was then cast in the thriller \"Trapped\" (2002), alongside Kevin Bacon and Charlize Theron. The film was a box-office flop.\nIn the interim, Hole had become dormant. In March 2001, Love began a \"punk rock femme supergroup\", Bastard, enlisting Schemel, Veruca Salt co-frontwoman Louise Post, and bassist Gina Crosley. Post recalled: \"[Love] was like, 'Listen, you guys: I've been in my Malibu, manicure, movie-star world for two years, alright? I wanna make a record. And let's leave all that grunge shit behind us, eh? We were being so improvisational, and singing together, and with a trust developing between us. It was the shit.\" The group recorded a demo tape, but by September 2001, Post and Crosley had left, with Post citing \"unhealthy and unprofessional working conditions\". In May 2002, Hole announced their breakup amid continuing litigation with Universal Music Group over their record contract.\nIn 1997, Love and former Nirvana members Krist Novoselic and Dave Grohl formed a limited liability company, Nirvana LLC, to manage Nirvana's business dealings. In June 2001, Love filed a lawsuit to dissolve it, blocking the release of unreleased Nirvana material and delaying the release of the Nirvana compilation \"With the Lights Out\". Grohl and Novoselic sued Love, calling her \"irrational, mercurial, self-centered, unmanageable, inconsistent and unpredictable\". She responded with a letter stating that \"Kurt Cobain was Nirvana\" and that she and his family were the \"rightful heirs\" to the Nirvana legacy.\n2003\u20132008: Solo work and legal troubles.\nIn February 2003, Love was arrested at Heathrow Airport for disrupting a flight and was banned from Virgin Airlines. In October, she was arrested in Los Angeles after breaking several windows of her producer and then-boyfriend James Barber's home and was charged with being under the influence of a controlled substance; the ordeal resulted in her temporarily losing custody of her daughter.\nAfter the breakup of Hole, Love began composing material with songwriter Linda Perry, and in July 2003 signed a contract with Virgin Records. She began recording her debut solo album, \"America's Sweetheart\", in France shortly after. Virgin Records released \"America's Sweetheart\" in February 2004; it received mixed reviews. Charles Aaron of \"Spin\" called it a \"jaw-dropping act of artistic will and a fiery, proper follow-up to 1994's \"Live Through This\"\" and awarded it eight out of ten, while Amy Phillips of \"The Village Voice\" wrote: \"[Love is] willing to act out the dream of every teenage brat who ever wanted to have a glamorous, high-profile hissyfit, and she turns those egocentric nervous breakdowns into art. Sure, the art becomes less compelling when you've been pulling the same stunts for a decade. But, honestly, is there anybody out there who fucks up better?\" The album sold fewer than 100,000 copies. Love later expressed regret over the record, blaming her drug problems at the time. Shortly after it was released, she told Kurt Loder on \"TRL\": \"I cannot exist as a solo artist. It's a joke.\"\nOn March 17, 2004, Love appeared on the \"Late Show with David Letterman\" to promote \"America's Sweetheart\". Her appearance drew media coverage when she lifted her shirt multiple times, flashed Letterman, and stood on his desk. The \"New York Times\" wrote: \"The episode was not altogether surprising for Ms. Love, 39, whose most public moments have veered from extreme pathos\u2014like the time she read the suicide note of her famous husband, Kurt Cobain, on MTV\u2014to angry feminism to catfights to incoherent ranting.\" Hours later, in the early morning of March 18, Love was arrested in Manhattan for allegedly striking a fan with a microphone stand during a small concert in the East Village. She was released within hours and performed a scheduled concert the following evening at the Bowery Ballroom. Four days later, she called in multiple times to \"The Howard Stern Show\", claiming in broadcast conversations with Stern that the incident had not occurred, and that actress Natasha Lyonne, who was at the concert, was told by the alleged victim that he had been paid $10,000 to file a false claim leading to Love's arrest.\nOn July 9, 2004, her 40th birthday, Love was arrested for failing to make a court appearance for the March 2004 charges, and taken to Bellevue Hospital, allegedly incoherent, where she was placed on a 72-hour watch. According to police, she was believed to be a potential danger to herself, but deemed mentally sound and released to a rehab facility two days later. Amidst public criticism and press coverage, comedian Margaret Cho published an opinion piece, \"Courtney Deserves Better from Feminists\", arguing that negative associations of Love with her drug and personal problems (including from feminists) overshadowed her music and wellbeing. Love pleaded guilty in October 2004 to disorderly conduct over the incident in East Village.\nLove's appearance as a roaster on the \"Comedy Central Roast\" of Pamela Anderson in August 2005, in which she appeared intoxicated and disheveled, attracted further media attention. One review said that Love \"acted as if she belonged in an institution\". Six days after the broadcast, Love was sentenced to a 28-day lockdown rehab program for being under the influence of a controlled substance, violating her probation. To avoid jail time, she accepted an additional 180-day rehab sentence in September 2005. In November 2005, after completing the program, Love was discharged from the rehab center under the provision that she complete further outpatient rehab. In subsequent interviews, Love said she had been addicted to substances including prescription drugs, cocaine, and crack cocaine. She said she had been sober since completing rehabilitation in 2007, and cited her Soka Gakkai Buddhist practice (which she began in 1988) as integral to her sobriety.\nIn the midst of her legal troubles, Love had endeavors in writing and publishing. She co-wrote a semi-autobiographical manga, \"Princess Ai\" (Japanese: \u30d7\u30ea\u30f3\u30bb\u30b9\u00b7\u30a2\u30a4\u7269\u8a9e), with Stu Levy, illustrated by Misaho Kujiradou and Ai Yazawa; it was released in three volumes in the United States and Japan between 2004 and 2006. In 2006, Love published a memoir, \"\", and began recording her second solo album, \"How Dirty Girls Get Clean\", collaborating again with Perry and Billy Corgan. Love had written several songs, including an anti-cocaine song titled \"Loser Dust\", during her time in rehab in 2005. She told \"Billboard\": \"My hand-eye coordination was so bad [after the drug use], I didn't even know chords anymore. It was like my fingers were frozen. And I wasn't allowed to make noise [in rehab]\u00a0... I never thought I would work again.\" Tracks and demos for the album leaked online in 2006, and a documentary, \"The Return of Courtney Love\", detailing the making of the album, aired on the British television network More4 in the fall of that year. A rough acoustic version of \"Never Go Hungry Again\", recorded during an interview for \"The Times\" in November, was also released. Incomplete audio clips of the song \"Samantha\", originating from an interview with NPR, were distributed on the internet in 2007.\n2009\u20132012: Hole revival and visual art.\nIn March 2009, fashion designer Dawn Simorangkir brought a libel suit against Love concerning a defamatory post Love made on her Twitter account, which was eventually settled for $450,000. Several months later, in June 2009, \"NME\" published an article detailing Love's plan to reunite Hole and release a new album, \"Nobody's Daughter\". In response, former Hole guitarist Eric Erlandson stated in \"Spin\" magazine that contractually no reunion could take place without his involvement; therefore \"Nobody's Daughter\" would remain Love's solo record, as opposed to a \"Hole\" record. Love responded to Erlandson's comments in a Twitter post, claiming \"he's out of his mind, Hole is my band, my name, and my Trademark\". \"Nobody's Daughter\" was released worldwide as a Hole album on April 27, 2010. For the new line-up, Love recruited guitarist Micko Larkin, Shawn Dailey (bass guitar), and Stu Fisher (drums, percussion). \"Nobody's Daughter\" featured material written and recorded for Love's unfinished solo album, \"How Dirty Girls Get Clean\", including \"Pacific Coast Highway\", \"Letter to God\", \"Samantha\", and \"Never Go Hungry\", although they were re-produced in the studio with Larkin and engineer Michael Beinhorn. The album's subject matter was largely centered on Love's tumultuous life between 2003 and 2007, and featured a polished folk rock sound, and more acoustic guitar work than previous Hole albums.\nThe first single from \"Nobody's Daughter\" was \"Skinny Little Bitch\", released to promote the album in March 2010. The album received mixed reviews. Robert Sheffield of \"Rolling Stone\" gave the album three out of five, saying Love \"worked hard on these songs, instead of just babbling a bunch of druggy bullshit and assuming people would buy it, the way she did on her 2004 flop, \"America's Sweetheart\"\". Sal Cinquemani of \"Slant Magazine\" also gave the album three out of five: \"It's Marianne Faithfull's substance-ravaged voice that comes to mind most often while listening to songs like 'Honey' and 'For Once in Your Life'. The latter track is, in fact, one of Love's most raw and vulnerable vocal performances to date\u00a0... the song offers a rare glimpse into the mind of a woman who, for the last 15 years, has been as famous for being a rock star as she's been for being a victim.\" Love and the band toured internationally from 2010 into late 2012 promoting the record, with their pre-release shows in London and at South by Southwest receiving critical acclaim. In 2011, Love participated in \"Hit So Hard\", a documentary chronicling bandmate Schemel's time in Hole.\nIn May 2012, Love debuted an art collection at Fred Torres Collaborations in New York titled \"And She's Not Even Pretty\", which contained over 40 drawings and paintings by Love composed in ink, colored pencil, pastels, and watercolors. Later in the year, she collaborated with Michael Stipe on the track \"Rio Grande\" for Johnny Depp's sea shanty album \"\", and in 2013, co-wrote and contributed vocals on \"Rat A Tat\" from Fall Out Boy's album \"Save Rock and Roll\", also appearing in the song's music video.\n2013\u20132015: Return to acting; libel lawsuits.\nAfter dropping the Hole name and performing as a solo artist in late 2012, Love appeared in spring 2013 advertisements for Yves Saint Laurent alongside Kim Gordon and Ariel Pink. Love completed a solo tour of North America in mid-2013, which was purported to be in promotion of an upcoming solo album; however, it was ultimately dubbed a \"greatest hits\" tour, and featured songs from Love's and Hole's back catalogue. Love told \"Billboard\" at the time that she had recorded eight songs in the studio.\nLove was subject of a second landmark libel lawsuit brought against her in January 2014 by her former attorney Rhonda Holmes, who accused Love of online defamation, seeking $8 million in damages. It was the first case of alleged Twitter-based libel in U.S. history to make it to trial. The jury, however, found in Love's favor. A subsequent defamation lawsuit filed by fashion designer Simorangkir in February 2014, however, resulted in Love being ordered to pay a further $350,000 in recompense.\nOn April 22, 2014, Love debuted the song \"You Know My Name\" on BBC Radio 6 to promote her tour of the United Kingdom. It was released as a double A-side single with the song \"Wedding Day\" on May 4, 2014, on her own label Cherry Forever Records via Kobalt Label Services. The tracks were produced by Michael Beinhorn, and feature Tommy Lee on drums. In an interview with the BBC, Love revealed that she and former Hole guitarist Eric Erlandson had reconciled, and had been rehearsing new material together, along with former bassist Melissa Auf der Maur and drummer Patty Schemel, though she did not confirm a reunion of the band. On May 1, 2014, in an interview with \"Pitchfork\", Love commented further on the possibility of Hole reuniting, saying:\n\"I'm not going to commit to it happening, because we want an element of surprise. There's a lot of \"i\"s to be dotted and \"t\"s to be crossed.\"\nLove was cast in several television series in supporting parts throughout 2014, including the FX series \"Sons of Anarchy\", \"Revenge\", and Lee Daniels' network series \"Empire\" in a recurring guest role as Elle Dallas. The track \"Walk Out on Me\", featuring Love, was included on the \"\" album, which debuted at number 1 on the Billboard 200. Alexis Petridis of \"The Guardian\" praised the track, saying: \"The idea of Courtney Love singing a ballad with a group of gospel singers seems faintly terrifying\u00a0... The reality is brilliant. Love's voice fits the careworn lyrics, effortlessly summoning the kind of ravaged darkness that Lana Del Rey nearly ruptures herself trying to conjure up.\"\nIn January 2015, Love starred in a New York City stage production, \"Kansas City Choir Boy\", a \"pop opera\" conceived by and co-starring Todd Almond. Charles Isherwood of \"The New York Times\" praised her performance, noting a \"soft-edged and bewitching\" stage presence, and wrote: \"Her voice, never the most supple or rangy of instruments, retains the singular sound that made her an electrifying front woman for the band Hole: a single sustained noted can seem to simultaneously contain a plea, a wound and a threat.\" The show toured later in the year, with performances in Boston and Los Angeles. In April 2015, the journalist Anthony Bozza sued Love, alleging a contractual violation regarding his co-writing of her memoir. Love performed as the opening act for Lana Del Rey on her Endless Summer Tour for eight West Coast shows in May and June 2015. During her tenure, Love debuted the single \"Miss Narcissist\", released on Wavves' independent label Ghost Ramp. She was also cast in a supporting role in James Franco's film \"The Long Home\", based on the novel by William Gay, her first film role in over ten years; as of 2022, it remains unreleased.\n2016\u2013present: Fashion and forthcoming music.\nIn January 2016, Love released a clothing line in collaboration with Sophia Amoruso, \"Love, Courtney\", featuring 18 pieces reflecting her personal style. In November 2016, she began filming the pilot for \"A Midsummer's Nightmare\", a Shakespeare anthology series adapted for Lifetime. She starred as Kitty Menendez in \"\", a biopic television film based on the lives of Lyle and Erik Menendez, which premiered on Lifetime in June 2017.\nIn 2017, Love accompanied the museum director Nicholas Cullinan to the GQ Men of the Year awards at the Tate Modern, calling him her \"soulmate\" and her \"family for life\".\nIn October 2017, shortly after the Harvey Weinstein sexual abuse cases became public, a 2005 video of Love warning young actresses about Weinstein went viral. In the footage, while on the red carpet for the \"Comedy Central Roast of Pamela Anderson\", Love was asked by Natasha Leggero if she had any advice for \"a young girl moving to Hollywood\"; she responded, \"If Harvey Weinstein invites you to a private party in the Four Seasons [hotel], don't go.\" She later tweeted, \"Although I wasn't one of his victims, I was eternally banned by [Creative Artists Agency] for speaking out.\"\nIn the same year, Love was cast in Justin Kelly's biopic \"JT LeRoy\", portraying a film producer opposite Laura Dern. In March 2018, she appeared in the music video for Marilyn Manson's \"Tattooed in Reverse\", and in April she appeared as a guest judge on \"RuPaul's Drag Race\". In December, Love was awarded a restraining order against Sam Lutfi, who had acted as her manager for the previous six years, alleging verbal abuse and harassment. Her daughter, Frances, and sister, Jaimee, were also awarded restraining orders against Lutfi. In January 2019, a Los Angeles County judge extended the three-year order to five years, citing Lutfi's tendency to \"prey upon people\".\nOn August 18, 2019, Love performed a solo set at the Yola D\u00eda festival in Los Angeles, which also featured performances by Cat Power and Lykke Li. On September 9, Love garnered press attention when she publicly criticized Joss Sackler, an heiress to the Sackler family OxyContin fortune, after she allegedly offered Love $100,000 to attend her fashion show during New York Fashion Week. In the same statement, Love indicated that she had relapsed into opioid addiction in 2018, stating that she had recently celebrated a year of sobriety. In October 2019, Love relocated from Los Angeles to London.\nOn November 21, 2019, Love recorded the song \"Mother\", written and produced by Lawrence Rothman, as part of the soundtrack for the horror film \"The Turning\" (2020). In January 2020, she received the Icon Award at the \"NME\" Awards; \"NME\" described her as \"one of the most influential singers in alternative culture of the last 30 years\". The following month, she confirmed she was writing a new record which she described as \"really sad\u00a0... [I'm] writing in minor chords, and that appeals to my sadness.\" In March 2021, Love said she had been hospitalized with acute anemia in August 2020, which had nearly killed her and reduced her weight to ; she made a full recovery.\nIn August 2022, Love revealed the completion of her memoir, \"The Girl with the Most Cake\", after a nearly ten-year period of writing.\nLove is featured as a guest vocalist on the track \"Song to the Siren\" by rapper 070 Shake, from her studio album \"Petrichor\", which was released on November 15, 2024.\nArtistry.\nInfluences.\nLove has cited numerous musical acts and performers as influences, among the earliest being Patti Smith, the Runaways, and the Pretenders. As a child, her first exposure to music was records that her parents received each month through Columbia Record Club. The first album Love owned was Leonard Cohen's \"Songs of Leonard Cohen\" (1967), which she obtained from her mother: \"He was so lyric-conscious and morbid, and I was a pretty morbid kid\", she recalled. As a teenager, she named Flipper, Kate Bush, Soft Cell, Joni Mitchell, Laura Nyro, Lou Reed, and Dead Kennedys among her favorite artists. At age 15, Love attended a Virgin Prunes concert in Dublin which she credited as a pivotal influence: \"I had never seen so much sex, snarl, poetry, evil, restraint, grace, filth, raw power and the very essence of rock and roll...\u00a0[I had seen] U2 [who] gave me lashes of love and inspiration, and a few nights later the Virgin Prunes fucked\u2013me\u2013up.\" Decades later, in 2009, Love introduced the band's frontman Gavin Friday at a Carnegie Hall event, and performed a song with him.\nThough often associated with punk music, Love has noted that her most significant musical influences have been post-punk and new wave artists. Commenting in 2021, Love said: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There's this idea of \"Courtney is punk and stuck in 1995!\" but that's not the case. I was more [influenced by] new wave or post-punk. My number one greatest song of all time is \"Love Will Tear Us Apart\" by Joy Division, and I will take no fucking prisoners in that battle. But the band that affected me more than even Leonard Cohen and Bob Dylan was Echo and the Bunnymen. Over the years, Love has also named several other new wave and post-punk bands as influences, including the Smiths, Siouxsie and the Banshees, Television, and Bauhaus.\nLove's diverse genre interests were illustrated in a 1991 interview with \"Flipside\", in which she stated: \"There's a part of me that wants to have a grindcore band and another that wants to have a Raspberries-type pop band.\" Discussing the abrasive sound of Hole's debut album, she said she felt she had to \"catch up with all my hip peers who'd gone all indie on me, and who made fun of me for liking R.E.M. and The Smiths.\" She has also embraced the influence of experimental artists and punk rock groups, including Sonic Youth, Swans, Big Black, Diamanda Gal\u00e1s, the Germs, and the Stooges. While writing \"Celebrity Skin\", she drew influence from Neil Young and My Bloody Valentine. She has also cited her contemporary PJ Harvey as an influence, saying: \"The one rock star that makes me know I'm shit is Polly Harvey. I'm nothing next to the purity that she experiences.\"\nLiterature and poetry have often been a major influence on her songwriting; Love said she had \"always wanted to be a poet, but there was no money in it.\" She has named the works of T. S. Eliot and Charles Baudelaire as influential, and referenced works by Dante Rossetti, William Shakespeare, Rudyard Kipling, and Anne Sexton in her lyrics.\nMusical style and lyrics.\nMusically, Love's work with Hole and her solo efforts have been characterized as alternative rock; Hole's early material, however, was described by critics as being stylistically closer to grindcore and aggressive punk rock. \"Spin\"'s October 1991 review of Hole's first album noted Love's layering of harsh and abrasive riffs buried more sophisticated musical arrangements. In 1998, she stated that Hole had \"always been a pop band. We always had a subtext of pop. I always talked about it, if you go back\u00a0... what'll sound like some weird Sonic Youth tuning back then to you was sounding like the Raspberries to me, in my demented pop framework.\"\nLove's lyrics are composed from a female's point of view, and her lyrics have been described as \"literate and mordant\" and noted by scholars for \"articulating a third-wave feminist consciousness.\" Simon Reynolds, in reviewing Hole's debut album, noted: \"Ms. Love's songs explore the full spectrum of female emotions, from vulnerability to rage. The songs are fueled by adolescent traumas, feelings of disgust about the body, passionate friendships with women and the desire to escape domesticity. Her lyrical style could be described as emotional nudism.\" Journalist and critic Kim France, in critiquing Love's lyrics, referred to her as a \"dark genius\" and likened her work to that of Anne Sexton.\nLove has remarked that lyrics have always been the most important component of songwriting for her: \"The important thing for me\u00a0... is it has to look good on the page. I mean, you can love Led Zeppelin and not love their lyrics\u00a0... but I made a big effort in my career to have what's on the page mean something.\" Common themes in Love's early lyrics included body image, rape, suicide, conformity, pregnancy, prostitution, and death. In a 1991 interview with Everett True, she said: \"I try to place [beautiful imagery] next to fucked up imagery, because that's how I view things\u00a0... I sometimes feel that no one's taken the time to write about certain things in rock, that there's a certain female point of view that's never been given space.\"\nCritics have noted that Love's later musical work is more lyrically introspective. \"Celebrity Skin\" and \"America's Sweetheart\" are lyrically centered on celebrity life, Hollywood, and drug addiction, while still preoccupied with themes of vanity and body image. \"Nobody's Daughter\" was lyrically reflective of Love's past relationships and her struggle for sobriety, with the majority of its lyrics written while she was in rehab in 2006.\nPerformance.\nLove has a contralto vocal range. According to Love, she never wanted to be a singer, but rather aspired to be a skilled guitarist: \"I'm such a lazy bastard though that I never did that\", she said. \"I was always the only person with the nerve to sing, and so I got stuck with it.\" She has been regularly noted by critics for her husky vocals as well as her \"banshee [-like]\" screaming abilities. Her vocals have been compared to those of Johnny Rotten, and David Fricke of \"Rolling Stone\" described them as \"lung-busting\" and \"a corrosive, lunatic wail\". Upon the release of Hole's 2010 album, \"Nobody's Daughter\", Amanda Petrusich of \"Pitchfork\" compared Love's raspy, unpolished vocals to those of Bob Dylan. In 2023, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked Love at number 130 on its list of the 200 Greatest Singers of All Time.\nShe has played a variety of Fender guitars throughout her career, including a Jaguar and a vintage 1965 Jazzmaster; the latter was purchased by the Hard Rock Cafe and is on display in New York City. Between 1989 and 1991, Love primarily played a Rickenbacker 425 because she \"preferred the 3/4 neck\", but she destroyed the guitar onstage at a 1991 concert opening for the Smashing Pumpkins. In the mid-1990s, she often played a guitar made by Mercury, an obscure company that manufactured custom guitars, as well as a Univox Hi-Flier. Fender's Vista Venus, designed by Love in 1998, was partially inspired by Rickenbacker guitars as well as her Mercury. During tours after the release of \"Nobody's Daughter\" (post-2010), Love has played a Rickenbacker 360 onstage. Her setup has included Fender tube gear, Matchless, Ampeg, Silvertone and a solid-state 1976 Randall Commander.\nLove has referred to herself as \"a shit guitar player\", further commenting in a 2014 interview: \"I can still write a song, but [the guitar playing] sounds like shit\u00a0... I used to be a good rhythm player but I am no longer dependable.\" Throughout her career, she has also garnered a reputation for unpredictable live shows. In the 1990s, her performances with Hole were characterized by confrontational behavior, with Love stage diving, smashing guitars or throwing them into the audience, wandering into the crowd at the end of sets, and engaging in sometimes incoherent rants. Critics and journalists have noted Love for her comical, often stream-of-consciousness-like stage banter. Music journalist Robert Hilburn wrote in 1993 that, \"rather than simply scripted patter, Love's comments between songs [have] the natural feel of someone who is sharing her immediate feelings.\" In a review of a live performance published in 2010, it was noted that Love's onstage \"one-liners [were] worthy of the Comedy Store.\"\nPhilanthropy.\nIn 1993, Love and husband Kurt Cobain performed an acoustic set together at the Rock Against Rape benefit in Los Angeles, which raised awareness and provided resources for victims of sexual abuse. In 2000, Love publicly advocated for reform of the record industry in a personal letter published by \"Salon\". In the letter, Love said: \"It's not piracy when kids swap music over the Internet using Napster or Gnutella or Freenet or iMesh or beaming their CDs into a My.MP3.com or MyPlay.com music locker. It's piracy when those guys that run those companies make side deals with the cartel lawyers and label heads so that they can be 'the label's friend', and not the artists'.\" In a subsequent interview with Carrie Fisher, she said that she was interested in starting a union for recording artists, and also discussed race relations in the music industry, advocating for record companies to \"put money back into the black community [whom] white people have been stealing from for years.\"\nLove has been a long-standing supporter of LGBT causes. She has frequently collaborated with Los Angeles Gay and Lesbian Center, taking part in the center's \"An Evening with Women\" events. The proceeds of the event help provide food and shelter for homeless youth; services for seniors; legal assistance; domestic violence services; health and mental health services, and cultural arts programs. Love participated with Linda Perry for the event in 2012, and performed alongside Aimee Mann and comedian Wanda Sykes. Speaking on her collaboration on the event, Love said: \"Seven thousand kids in Los Angeles a year go out on the street, and forty percent of those kids are gay, lesbian, or transgender. They come out to their parents, and become homeless\u00a0... for whatever reason, I don't really know why, but gay men have a lot of foundations\u2014I've played many of them\u2014but the lesbian side of it doesn't have as much money and/or donors, so we're excited that this has grown to cover women and women's affairs.\"\nShe has also contributed to AIDS organizations, partaking in benefits for amfAR and the RED Campaign. In May 2011, she donated six of her husband Cobain's personal vinyl records for auction at Mariska Hargitay's Joyful Heart Foundation event for victims of child abuse, rape, and domestic violence. She has also supported the Sophie Lancaster Foundation as well as Stand For Courage, an anti-bullying organization started by Love's sister.\nIn 2021, Love and creative director and philanthropist Julie Panebianco launched From Her To Eternity, an initiative designed to collect and categorize a physical collection of related music materials that focus on and celebrate the contributions of women to popular music.\nThe first project of From Her to Eternity was a world-renowned female music photographers\u00b4 exhibition titled \"From Her to Eternity: The Women Who Photograph Music\". The installation was displayed at the corner of S. Wabash Avenue and E. Eight Street in Chicago's South Loop throughout Summer 2023. The name is a tribute by Love to the late Australian singer-songwriter Anita Lane. Lane was a member of the Birthday Party and Nick Cave &amp; The Bad Seeds who co-wrote the song \u201cFrom Her To Eternity\u201d with Nick Cave, who's an exhibition supporter alongside Anita Lane's family, Michael Stipe and artist Thomas Dozol.\nLegacy.\nLove has had an impact on female-fronted alternative acts and performers. She has been cited as influential on young female instrumentalists in particular, having once infamously proclaimed: \"I want every girl in the world to pick up a guitar and start screaming\u00a0... I strap on that motherfucking guitar and you cannot fuck with me. That's my feeling.\" In \"The Electric Guitar: A History of an American Icon\", it is noted: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Love] truly lived up to Paul Westerberg's (The Replacements) assessment of pretty girls \"playing makeup/wearing guitar\"\u00a0... She frequently stood on stage, microphone in hand and foot on monitor, and simply let her Fender guitar dangle around her neck. She truly embodied the empowerment that came with playing the electric guitar\u00a0... Love depended heavily upon her male lead guitar foil Eric Erlandson, but the rest of her band remained exclusively female throughout several lineup changes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen you're dying and your life is flashing before your eyes\u00a0... you're gonna be thinking about the great things you did, the horrible things that you did, the emotional impact that someone had on you and that you had on somebody else. Those are the things that are relevant. To have some sort of emotional impact that transcends time, that's great.\n\u2013Love on having a cultural impact, 1997\nWith over 3 million records sold in the United States alone, Hole became one of the most successful rock bands of all time fronted by a woman. VH1 ranked Love no. 69 in their list of \"The 100 Greatest Women in Music History\" in 2012. In 2015, the \"Phoenix New Times\" declared Love the number one greatest female rock star of all time, writing: \"To build a perfect rock star, there are several crucial ingredients: musical talent, physical attractiveness, tumultuous relationships, substance abuse, and public meltdowns, just to name a few. These days, Love seems to have rebounded from her epic tailspin and has leveled out in a slightly more normal manner, but there's no doubt that her life to date is the type of story people wouldn't believe in a novel or a movie.\"\nAmong the alternative musicians who have cited Love as an influence are Scout Niblett; Brody Dalle of The Distillers; Dee Dee Penny of Dum Dum Girls; Florence Welch; Annie Hardy of Giant Drag; and Sam Forrest of Nine Black Alps. Contemporary female pop artists Lana Del Rey, Avril Lavigne, Tove Lo, and Sky Ferreira have also cited Love as an influence. Love has frequently been recognized as the most high-profile contributor of feminist music during the 1990s, and for \"subverting [the] mainstream expectations of how a woman should look, act, and sound.\" According to music journalist Maria Raha, \"Hole was the highest-profile female-fronted band of the '90s to openly and directly sing about feminism.\" Patti Smith, a major influence of Love's, also praised her, saying: \"I hate genderizing things\u00a0... [but] when I heard Hole, I was amazed to hear a girl sing like that. Janis Joplin was her own thing; she was into Big Mama Thornton and Bessie Smith. But what Courtney Love does, I'd never heard a girl do that.\"\nShe has also been a gay icon since the mid-1990s, and has jokingly referred to her fanbase as consisting of \"females, gay guys, and a few advanced, evolved heterosexual men.\" Love's aesthetic image, particularly in the early 1990s, also became influential and was dubbed \"kinderwhore\" by critics and media. The subversive fashion mainly consisted of vintage babydoll dresses accompanied by smeared makeup and red lipstick. MTV reporter Kurt Loder described Love as looking like \"a debauched rag doll\" onstage. Love later said she had been influenced by the fashion of Chrissy Amphlett of the Divinyls. Interviewed in 1994, Love commented \"I would like to think\u2013in my heart of hearts\u2013that I'm changing some psychosexual aspects of rock music. Not that I'm so desirable. I didn't do the kinder-whore thing because I thought I was so hot. When I see the look used to make one more appealing, it pisses me off. When I started, it was a \"What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?\" thing. My angle was irony.\"\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5657", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5657", "title": "Cow (disambiguation)", "text": "Cow most commonly refers to adult female cattle, and colloquially used to refer to cattle in general. \nCow, cows or COW may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "5658", "revid": "45627014", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5658", "title": "Human cannibalism", "text": "Practice of humans eating other humans\nHuman cannibalism is the act or practice of humans eating the flesh or internal organs of other human beings. A person who practices cannibalism is called a cannibal. The meaning of \"cannibalism\" has been extended into zoology to describe animals consuming parts of individuals of the same species as food.\nAnatomically modern humans, Neanderthals, and \"Homo antecessor\" are known to have practised cannibalism to some extent in the Pleistocene. Cannibalism was occasionally practised in Egypt during ancient and Roman times, as well as later during severe famines. The Island Caribs of the Lesser Antilles, whose name is the origin of the word \"cannibal\", acquired a long-standing reputation as eaters of human flesh, reconfirmed when their legends were recorded in the 17th century. Some controversy exists over the accuracy of these legends and the prevalence of actual cannibalism in the culture.\nReports describing cannibal practices were most often recorded by outsiders and were especially during the colonialist epoch commonly used to justify the subjugation and exploitation of non-European peoples. Therefore, such sources need to be particularly critically examined before being accepted. A few scholars argue that no firm evidence exists that cannibalism has ever been a socially acceptable practice anywhere in the world, but such views have been largely rejected as irreconcilable with the actual evidence.\nCannibalism has been well documented in much of the world, including Fiji (once nicknamed the \"Cannibal Isles\"), the Amazon Basin, the Congo, and the M\u0101ori people of New Zealand. Cannibalism was also practised in New Guinea and in parts of the Solomon Islands, and human flesh was sold at markets in some parts of Melanesia and the Congo Basin. A form of cannibalism popular in early modern Europe was the consumption of body parts or blood for medical purposes. Reaching its height during the 17th century, this practice continued in some cases into the second half of the 19th century.\nCannibalism has occasionally been practised as a last resort by people suffering from famine. Well-known examples include the ill-fated Donner Party (1846\u20131847), the Holodomor (1932\u20131933), and the crash of Uruguayan Air Force Flight 571 (1972), after which the survivors ate the bodies of the dead. Additionally, there are cases of people engaging in cannibalism for sexual pleasure, such as Albert Fish, Issei Sagawa, Jeffrey Dahmer, and Armin Meiwes. Cannibalism has been both practised and fiercely condemned in several recent wars, especially in Liberia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It was still practised in Papua New Guinea as of 2012, for cultural reasons.\nCannibalism has been said to test the bounds of cultural relativism because it challenges anthropologists \"to define what is or is not beyond the pale of acceptable human behavior\".\nEtymology.\nThe word \"cannibal\" is derived from Spanish \"can\u00edbal\" or \"car\u00edbal\", originally used as a name variant for the Kalinago (Island Caribs), a people from the West Indies said to have eaten human flesh. The older term \"anthropophagy\", meaning \"eating humans\", is also used for human cannibalism.\nReasons and types.\nCannibalism has been practised under a variety of circumstances and for various motives. To adequately express this diversity, Shirley Lindenbaum suggests that \"it might be better to talk about 'cannibalisms'\" in the plural.\nInstitutionalized, survival, and pathological cannibalism.\nOne major distinction is whether cannibal acts are\nInstitutionalized cannibalism, sometimes also called \"learned cannibalism\", is the consumption of human body parts as \"an institutionalized practice\" generally accepted in the culture where it occurs.\nBy contrast, survival cannibalism means \"the consumption of others under conditions of starvation such as shipwreck, military siege, and famine, in which persons normally averse to the idea are driven [to it] by the will to live\". Also known as \"famine cannibalism\", such forms of cannibalism resorted to only in situations of extreme necessity have occurred in many cultures where cannibalism is otherwise clearly rejected. The survivors of the shipwrecks of the \"Essex\" and \"M\u00e9duse\" in the 19th century are said to have engaged in cannibalism, as did the members of Franklin's lost expedition and the Donner Party.\nSuch cases often involve only \"necro-cannibalism\" (eating the corpse of someone already dead) as opposed to \"homicidal cannibalism\" (killing someone for food). In modern English law, the latter is always considered a crime, even in the most trying circumstances. The case of \"R v Dudley and Stephens\", in which two men were found guilty of murder for killing and eating a cabin boy while adrift at sea in a lifeboat, set the precedent that necessity is no defence to a charge of murder. This decision outlawed and effectively ended the practice of shipwrecked sailors drawing lots in order to determine who would be killed and eaten to prevent the others from starving, a time-honoured practice that had been widely accepted in emergency situations.\nIn other cases, cannibalism is an expression of a psychopathology or mental disorder, condemned by the society in which it occurs and \"considered to be an indicator of [a] severe personality disorder or psychosis\". Well-known cases include Albert Fish, Issei Sagawa, and Armin Meiwes. Fantasies of cannibalism, whether acted out or not, are not specifically mentioned in manuals of mental disorders such as the \"DSM\", presumably because at least serious cases (that lead to murder) are very rare.\nExo-, endo-, and autocannibalism.\nWithin institutionalized cannibalism, \"exocannibalism\" is often distinguished from \"endocannibalism\". Endocannibalism refers to the consumption of a person from the same community. Often it is a part of a funerary ceremony, similar to burial or cremation in other cultures. The consumption of the recently deceased in such rites can be considered \"an act of affection\" and a major part of the grieving process. It has also been explained as a way of guiding the souls of the dead into the bodies of living descendants.\nIn contrast, exocannibalism is the consumption of a person from outside the community. It is frequently \"an act of aggression, often in the context of warfare\", where the flesh of killed or captured enemies may be eaten to celebrate one's victory over them.\nSome scholars explain both types of cannibalism as due to a belief that eating a person's flesh or internal organs will endow the cannibal with some of the positive characteristics of the deceased. However, several authors investigating exocannibalism in New Zealand, New Guinea, and the Congo Basin observe that such beliefs were absent in these regions.\nA further type, different from both exo- and endocannibalism, is \"autocannibalism\" (also called \"autophagy\" or \"self-cannibalism\"), \"the act of eating parts of oneself\". It does not ever seem to have been an institutionalized practice, but it occasionally occurs as pathological behaviour or due to other reasons such as curiosity. Also on record are instances of forced autocannibalism committed as acts of aggression, where individuals are forced to eat parts of their own bodies as a form of torture.\nExocannibalism is thus often associated with the consumption of enemies as an act of aggression, a practice also known as \"war cannibalism\". Endocannibalism is often associated with the consumption of deceased relatives in funerary rites driven by affection\u200a\u2014\u200aa practice known as \"funerary\" or \"mortuary cannibalism\".\nAdditional motives.\n\"Medicinal cannibalism\" (also called \"medical cannibalism\") means \"the ingestion of human tissue\u00a0... as a supposed medicine or tonic\". In contrast to other forms of cannibalism, which Europeans generally frowned upon, the \"medicinal ingestion\" of various \"human body parts was widely practiced throughout Europe from the sixteenth to the eighteenth centuries\", with early records of the practice going back to the first century CE. It was also frequently practised in China.\n\"Sacrificial cannibalism\" refers the consumption of the flesh of victims of human sacrifice, for example among the Aztecs. Human and animal remains excavated in Knossos, Crete, have been interpreted as evidence of a ritual in which children and sheep were sacrificed and eaten together during the Bronze Age. According to Ancient Roman reports, the Celts in Britain practised sacrificial cannibalism, and archaeological evidence backing these claims has been found.\n\"Infanticidal cannibalism\" or \"cannibalistic infanticide\" refers to cases where newborns or infants are killed because they are \"considered unwanted or unfit to live\" and then \"consumed by the mother, father, both parents or close relatives\".\nInfanticide followed by cannibalism was practised in various regions, but is particularly well documented among Aboriginal Australians. Among animals, such behaviour is called \"filial cannibalism\", and it is common in many species, especially among fish.\n\"Human predation\" is the hunting of people from unrelated and possibly hostile groups in order to eat them. In parts of the Southern New Guinea lowland rain forests, hunting people \"was an opportunistic extension of seasonal foraging or pillaging strategies\", with human bodies just as welcome as those of animals as sources of protein, according to the anthropologist Bruce M. Knauft. As populations living near coasts and rivers were usually better nourished and hence often physically larger and stronger than those living inland, they \"raided inland 'bush' peoples with impunity and often with little fear of retaliation\". Cases of human predation are also on record for the neighbouring Bismarck Archipelago and for Australia. In the Congo Basin, there lived groups such as the Bankutu who hunted humans for food even when game was plentiful.\nThe term \"innocent cannibalism\" has been used for cases of people eating human flesh without knowing what they are eating. It is a subject of myths, such as the myth of Thyestes who unknowingly ate the flesh of his own sons. There are also actual cases on record, for example from the Congo Basin, where cannibalism had been quite widespread and where even in the 1950s travellers were sometimes served a meat dish, learning only afterwards that the meat had been of human origin.\nGastronomic and functionalist explanations.\nThe term \"gastronomic cannibalism\" has been suggested for cases where human flesh is eaten to \"provide a supplement to the regular thus essentially for its nutritional or, in an alternative definition, for cases where it is \"eaten without ceremony (other than culinary), in the same manner as the flesh of any other animal\". While the term has been criticized as being too vague to clearly identify a specific type of cannibalism, various records indicate that nutritional or culinary concerns could indeed play a role in such acts even outside of periods of starvation. Referring to the Congo Basin, where many of the eaten were butchered slaves rather than enemies killed in war, the anthropologist Emil Torday notes that \"the most common [reason for cannibalism] was simply gastronomic: the natives loved 'the flesh that speaks' [as human flesh was commonly called] and paid for it\". The historian Key Ray Chong observes that, throughout Chinese history, \"learned cannibalism was often practiced\u00a0... for culinary appreciation\".\nJared Diamond suggests in \"Guns, Germs, and Steel\" that \"protein starvation is probably also the ultimate reason why cannibalism was widespread in traditional New Guinea highland societies\", and both in New Zealand and Fiji, cannibals explained their acts as due to a lack of animal meat. In Liberia, a former cannibal argued that it would have been wasteful to let the flesh of killed enemies spoil, and eaters of human flesh in New Guinea and the neighbouring Bismarck Archipelago expressed the same sentiment.\nIn many cases, human flesh was also described as particularly delicious, especially when it came from women, children, or both. Such statements are on record for various regions and peoples, including the Aztecs, Liberia and Nigeria, the Fang people in west-central Africa, the Congo Basin, China up to the 14th century, Sumatra, Borneo, Australia, New Guinea, New Zealand, Vanuatu, and Fiji.\nSome Europeans and Americans who ate human flesh accidentally, out of curiosity, or to comply with local customs likewise tended to describe it as very good.\nThere is a debate among anthropologists on how important functionalist reasons are for the understanding of institutionalized cannibalism. Diamond is not alone in suggesting \"that the consumption of human flesh was of nutritional benefit for some populations in New Guinea\" and the same case has been made for other \"tropical peoples\u00a0... exploiting a diverse range of animal foods\", including human flesh. The materialist anthropologist Marvin Harris argued that a \"shortage of animal protein\" was also the underlying reason for Aztec cannibalism. The cultural anthropologist Marshall Sahlins, on the other hand, rejected such explanations as overly simplistic, stressing that cannibal customs must be regarded as \"complex phenomen[a]\" with \"myriad attributes\" which can only be understood if one considers \"symbolism, ritual, and cosmology\" in addition to their \"practical function\".\nIn pre-modern medicine, an explanation given by the now-discredited theory of humorism for cannibalism was that it was caused by a black acrimonious humor, which, being lodged in the linings of the ventricles of the heart, produced a voracity for human flesh. On the other hand, the French philosopher Michel de Montaigne understood war cannibalism as a way of expressing vengeance and hatred towards one's enemies and celebrating one's victory over them, thus giving an interpretation that is close to modern explanations. He also pointed out that some acts of Europeans in his own time could be considered as equally barbarous, making his essay \"Of Cannibals\" (c.\u20091580) a precursor to later ideas of cultural relativism.\nBody parts and culinary practices.\nNutritional value of the human body.\nArchaeologist James Cole investigated the nutritional value of the human body and found it to be similar to that of animals of similar size.\nHe notes that, according to ethnographic and archaeological records, nearly all edible parts of humans were sometimes eaten \u2013 not only skeletal muscle tissue (\"flesh\" or \"meat\" in a narrow sense), but also \"lungs, liver, brain, heart, nervous tissue, bone marrow, genitalia and skin\", as well as kidneys. For a typical adult man, the combined nutritional value of all these edible parts is about 126,000 kilocalories (kcal). The nutritional value of women and younger individuals is lower because of their lower body weight \u2013 for example, around 86% of a male adult for an adult woman and 30% for a boy aged around 5 or 6.\nAs the daily energy need of an adult man is about 2,400 kilocalories, a dead male body could thus have fed a group of 25 men for a bit more than two days, provided they ate nothing but the human flesh alone \u2013 longer if it was part of a mixed diet. The nutritional value of the human body is thus not insubstantial, though Cole notes that for prehistoric hunters, large megafauna such as mammoths, rhinoceros, and bison would have been an even better deal as long as they were available and could be caught, because of their much higher body weight.\nHearts and livers.\nCases of people eating human livers and hearts, especially of enemies, have been reported from across the world. After the Battle of Uhud (625), Hind bint Utba ate (or at least attempted to) the liver of Hamza ibn Abd al-Muttalib, an uncle of Muhammad. At that time, the liver was considered \"the seat of life\".\nFrench Catholics ate livers and hearts of Huguenots at the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre in 1572, in some cases also offering them for sale.\nIn China, medical cannibalism was practised over centuries. People voluntarily cut their own body parts, including parts of their livers, and boiled them to cure ailing relatives. Children were sometimes killed because eating their boiled hearts was considered a good way of extending one's life. Emperor Wuzong of Tang supposedly ordered provincial officials to send him \"the hearts and livers of fifteen-year-old boys and girls\" when he had become seriously ill, hoping in vain that this folk \"medicine\" would cure him. Later, private individuals sometimes followed his example, paying soldiers who kidnapped preteen children for their kitchen.\nWhen \"human flesh and organs were sold openly at the marketplace\" during the Taiping Rebellion in 1850\u20131864, human hearts became a popular dish, according to some who afterwards freely admitted having consumed them.\nAccording to a missionary's report from the brutal suppression of the Dungan Revolt of 1895\u20131896 in northwestern China, \"thousands of men, women and children were ruthlessly massacred by the imperial soldiers\" and \"many a meal of human hearts and livers was partaken of by soldiers\", supposedly out of a belief that this would give them \"the courage their enemies had displayed\".\nIn World War II, Japanese soldiers ate the livers of killed Americans in the Chichijima incident.\nMany Japanese soldiers who died during the occupation of Jolo Island in the Philippines had their livers eaten by local Moro fighters, according to Japanese soldier Fujioka Akiyoshi.\nDuring the Cultural Revolution (1966\u20131976), hundreds of incidents of cannibalism occurred, mostly motivated by hatred against supposed \"class enemies\", but sometimes also by health concerns. In a case recorded by the local authorities, a school teacher in Mengshan County \"heard that consuming a 'beauty's heart' could cure disease\". He then chose a 13- or 14-year-old student of his and publicly denounced her as a member of the enemy faction, which was enough to get her killed by an angry mob. After the others had left, he \"cut open the girl's chest\u00a0..., dug out her heart, and took it home to enjoy\".\nIn a further case that took place in Wuxuan County, likewise in the Guangxi region, three brothers were beaten to death as supposed enemies; afterwards their livers were cut out, baked, and consumed \"as medicine\".\nAccording to the Chinese writer Zheng Yi, who researched these events, \"the consumption of human liver was mentioned at least fifty or sixty times\" in just a small number of archival documents. He talked with a man who had eaten human liver and told him that \"barbecued liver is delicious\".\nDuring a massacre of the Madurese minority in the Indonesian part of Borneo in 1999, reporter Richard Lloyd Parry met a young cannibal who had just participated in a \"human barbecue\" and told him without hesitation: \"It tastes just like chicken. Especially the liver \u2013 just the same as chicken.\" In 2013, during the Syrian civil war, Syrian rebel Abu Sakkar was filmed eating parts of the lung or liver of a government soldier while declaring that \"We will eat your hearts and your livers you soldiers of Bashar the dog\".\nBreasts, palms, and soles.\nVarious accounts from around the world mention women's breasts as a\nfavourite body part. Also frequently mentioned are the palms of the hands and sometimes the soles of the feet, regardless of the victim's gender.\nJerome, in his treatise \"Against Jovinianus\", claimed that the British Attacotti were cannibals who\nregarded the buttocks of men and the breasts of women as delicacies.\nDuring the Mongol invasion of Europe in the 13th century and their subsequent rule over China during the Yuan dynasty (1271\u20131368), some Mongol fighters practised cannibalism and both European and Chinese observers record a preference for women's breasts, which were considered \"delicacies\" and, if there were many corpses, sometimes the only part of a female body that was eaten (of men, only the thighs were said to be eaten in such circumstances).\nAfter meeting a group of cannibals in West Africa in the 14th century, the Moroccan explorer Ibn Battuta recorded that, according to their preferences, \"the tastiest part of women's flesh is the palms and the breast.\"\nCenturies later, the anthropologist Percy Amaury Talbot wrote that, in southern Nigeria, \"the parts in greatest favour are the palms of the hands, the fingers and toes, and, of a woman, the breast.\"\nRegarding the north of the country, his colleague Charles Kingsley Meek added: \"Among all the cannibal tribes the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet were considered the tit-bits of the body.\"\nAmong the Apambia, a cannibalistic clan of the Azande people in Central Africa, palms and soles were considered the best parts of the human body, while their favourite dish was prepared with \"fat from a woman's breast\", according to the missionary and ethnographer F. Gero.\nSimilar preferences are on record throughout Melanesia. According to the anthropologists Bernard Deacon and Camilla Wedgwood, women were \"specially fattened for eating\" in Vanuatu, \"the breasts being the great delicacy\". A missionary confirmed that \"a body of a female usually formed the principal part of the repast\" at feasts for chiefs and warriors.\nThe ethnologist Felix Speiser writes: \"Apart from the breasts of women and the genitals of men, palms of hands and soles of feet were the most coveted morsels.\" He knew a chief on Ambae, one of the islands of Vanuatu, who, \"according to fairly reliably sources\", dined on a young girl's breasts every few days.\nWhen visiting the Solomon Islands in the 1980s, anthropologist Michael Krieger met a former cannibal who told him that women's breasts had been considered the best part of the human body because they were so fatty, with fat being a rare and sought delicacy.\nThey were also considered among the best parts in Fiji, New Guinea, and the Bismarck Archipelago.\nModes of preparation.\nBased on theoretical considerations, the structuralist anthropologist Claude L\u00e9vi-Strauss suggested that human flesh was most typically boiled, with roasting also used to prepare the bodies of enemies and other outsiders in exocannibalism, but rarely in funerary endocannibalism (when eating deceased relatives).\nBut an analysis of 60 sufficiently detailed and credible descriptions of institutionalized cannibalism by anthropologist Paul Shankman failed to confirm this hypothesis. Shankman found that roasting and boiling together accounted for only about half of the cases, with roasting being slightly more common. In contrast to L\u00e9vi-Strauss's predictions, boiling was more often used in exocannibalism, while roasting was about equally common for both.\nShankman observed that various other \"ways of preparing people\" were repeatedly employed as well; in one third of all cases, two or more modes were used together (e.g. some bodies or body parts were boiled or baked, while others were roasted). Human flesh was baked in steam on preheated rocks or in earth ovens (a technique widely used in the Pacific), smoked (which allowed to preserve it for later consumption), or eaten raw. While these modes were used in both exo- and endocannibalism, another method that was only used in the latter and only in the Americas was to burn the bones or bodies of deceased relatives and then to consume the bone ash.\nAfter analysing numerous accounts from China, Key Ray Chong similarly concludes that \"a variety of methods for cooking human flesh\" were used in this country. Most popular were \"broiling, roasting, boiling and steaming\", followed by \"pickling in salt, wine, sauce and the like\". Human flesh was also often \"cooked into soup\" or stewed in cauldrons. Eating human flesh raw was the \"least popular\" method, but a few cases are on record too. Chong notes that human flesh was typically cooked in the same way as \"ordinary foodstuffs for daily consumption\" \u2013 no principal distinction from the treatment of animal meat is detectable, and nearly any mode of preparation used for animals could also be used for people.\nWhole-body roasting and baking.\nThough human corpses, like those of animals, were usually cut into pieces for further processing, reports of people being roasted or baked whole are on record throughout the world.\nAt the archaeological site of Herxheim, Germany, more than a thousand people were killed and eaten about 7000 years ago, and the evidence indicates that many of them were spit-roasted whole over open fires.\nDuring severe famines in China and Egypt during the 12th and early 13th centuries, there was a black-market trade in corpses of little children that were roasted or boiled whole.\nIn China, human-flesh sellers advertised such corpses as good for being boiled or steamed whole, \"including their bones\", and praised their particular tenderness.\nIn Cairo, Egypt, the Arab physician Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi repeatedly saw \"little children, roasted or boiled\", offered for sale in baskets on street corners during a heavy famine that started in 1200 CE.\nOlder children and possibly adults were sometimes prepared in the same way.\nOnce he saw \"a child nearing the age of puberty, who had been found roasted\"; two young people confessed to having killed and cooked the child.\nAnother time, remains were found of a person who had apparently been roasted and served whole, the legs tied like those of \"a sheep trussed for cooking\".\nOnly the skeleton was found, still undivided and in the trussed position, but \"with all the flesh stripped off for food\".\nIn some cases children were roasted and offered for sale by their own parents; other victims were street children, who had become very numerous and were often kidnapped and cooked by people looking for food or extra income.\nThe victims were so numerous that sometimes \"two or three children, even more, would be found in a single cooking pot.\"\nAl-Latif notes that, while initially people were shocked by such acts, they \"eventually\u00a0... grew accustomed, and some conceived such a taste for these detestable meats that they made them their ordinary provender\u00a0... The horror people had felt at first vanished entirely\".\nAfter the end of the Mongol-led Yuan dynasty (1271\u20131368), a Chinese writer criticized in his recollections of the period that some Mongol soldiers ate human flesh because of its taste rather than (as had also occurred in other times) merely in cases of necessity. He added that they enjoyed torturing their victims (often children or women, whose flesh was preferred over that of men) by roasting them alive, in \"large jars whose outside touched the fire [or] on an iron grate\".\nOther victims were placed \"inside a double bag\u00a0... which was put into a large pot\" and so boiled alive.\nWhile not mentioning live roasting or boiling, European authors also complained about cannibalism and cruelty during the Mongol invasion of Europe, and a drawing in the \"Chronica Majora\" (compiled by Matthew Paris) shows Mongol fighters spit-roasting a human victim.\nPedro de Margarit, who accompanied Christopher Columbus during his second voyage, afterwards stated \"that he saw there with his own eyes several Indians skewered on spits being roasted over burning coals as a treat for the gluttonous.\"\nJean de L\u00e9ry, who lived for several months among the Tupinamb\u00e1 in Brazil, writes that several of his companions reported \"that they had seen not only a number of men and women cut in pieces and grilled on the \"boucans\", but also little unweaned children roasted whole\" after a successful attack on an enemy village.\nAccording to German ethnologist Leo Frobenius, children captured by Songye slave raiders in the Central African Kasa\u00ef region that were too young to be sold with a profit were instead \"skewered on long spears like rats and roasted over a quickly kindled large fire\" for consumption by the raiders.\nIn the Solomon Islands in the 1870s, a British captain saw a \"dead body, dressed and cooked whole\" offered for sale in a canoe. A settler treated the scene as \"an every-day occurrence\" and told him \"that he had seen as many as twenty bodies lying on the beach, dressed and cooked\". Decades later, a missionary reported that whole bodies were still offered \"up and down the coast in canoes for sale\" after battles, since human flesh was eaten \"for pleasure\".\nIn Fiji, whole human bodies cooked in earth ovens were served in carefully pre-arranged postures, according to anthropologist Lorimer Fison and several other sources:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The limbs having been arranged in the posture which it is intended they shall assume, banana leaves are wrapped round them to prevent the flesh falling off in the possible event of over-baking... A hole of sufficient size is then dug in the earth, and filled with dry wood, which is set on fire. When it is well kindled, a number of stones, about the size of a man's fist, are thrown into it; and when the firewood is burnt down to a mass of glowing embers, some of the heated stones are lifted nimbly by tongs made of bent withes, and thrust within the dead man's body... Presently the mound swells and rises; little cracks appear, whence issue jets of steam diffusing a savoury odour; and in due time, of which the Fijians are excellent judges, the culinary process is complete. The earth is then cautiously removed, the body lifted out, its wrappings taken off, its face painted, a wig or a turban placed upon its head, and there we have a \"trussed frog\" [as such steamed corpses were called] in all its unspeakable hideousness, staring at us with wide open, prominent, lack-lustre eyes. There is no burning or roasting: the body is cooked in its own steam, and the features are so little disturbed by the process that the dead man can almost always be recognised by those who knew him when he was alive.\nWithin this archipelago, it was especially the Gau Islanders who \"were famous for cooking bodies whole\".\nIn New Caledonia, a missionary named Ta'unga from the Cook Islands repeatedly saw how whole human bodies were cooked in earth ovens: \"They tie the hands together and bundle them up together with the intestines. The legs are bent up and bound with hibiscus bark. When it is completed they lay the body out flat on its back in the earth oven, then when it is baked ready they cut it up and eat it.\" Ta'unga commented: \"One curious thing is that when a man is alive he has a human appearance, but after he is baked he looks more like a dog, as the lips are shriveled back and his teeth are bared.\"\nAmong the M\u0101ori in New Zealand, children captured in war campaigns were sometimes spit-roasted whole (after slitting open their bellies to remove the intestines), as various sources report. Enslaved children, including teenagers, could meet the same fate, and whole babies were sometimes served at the tables of chiefs.\nIn the Marquesas Islands, captives (preferably women) killed for consumption \"were spitted on long poles that entered between their legs and emerged from their mouths\" and then roasted whole. Similar customs had a long history: In Nuku Hiva, the largest of these islands, archaeologists found the partially consumed \"remains of a young child\" that had been roasted whole in an oven during the 14th century or earlier.\nWhile a stereotype of cannibalism depicts the boiling of whole persons \u2013 often missionaries \u2013 in giant pots, this does not reflect reality. Human flesh was sometimes boiled in (normal-sized) pots, but whole human bodies rarely were.\nMedical aspects.\nA well-known case of mortuary cannibalism is that of the Fore tribe in New Guinea, which resulted in the spread of the prion disease kuru. Although the Fore's mortuary cannibalism was well-documented, the practice had ceased before the cause of the disease was recognized. However, some scholars argue that although post-mortem dismemberment was the practice during funeral rites, cannibalism was not. Marvin Harris theorizes that it happened during a famine period coincident with the arrival of Europeans and was rationalized as a religious rite.\nIn 2003, a publication in \"Science\" received a large amount of press attention when it suggested that early humans may have practised extensive cannibalism. According to this research, genetic markers commonly found in modern humans worldwide suggest that today many people carry a gene that evolved as protection against the brain diseases that can be spread by consuming human brain tissue. A 2006 reanalysis of the data questioned this hypothesis, because it claimed to have found a data collection bias, which led to an erroneous conclusion. This claimed bias came from incidents of cannibalism used in the analysis not being due to local cultures, but having been carried out by explorers, stranded seafarers or escaped convicts. The original authors published a subsequent paper in 2008 defending their conclusions.\nMyths, legends and folklore.\nCannibalism features in the folklore and legends of many cultures and is most often attributed to evil characters or as extreme retribution for some wrongdoing. Examples include the witch in \"Hansel and Gretel\", Lamia of Greek mythology, the witch Baba Yaga of Slavic folklore, and the Yama-uba in Japanese folklore.\nA number of stories in Greek mythology involve cannibalism, in particular the eating of close family members, e.g., the stories of Thyestes, Tereus, and especially Cronus, who became Saturn in the Roman pantheon. The story of Tantalus is another example, though here a family member is prepared for consumption by others.\nThe wendigo is a creature appearing in the legends of the Algonquian people. It is thought of variously as a malevolent cannibalistic spirit that could possess humans or a monster that humans could physically transform into. Those who indulged in cannibalism were at particular risk, and the legend appears to have reinforced this practice as taboo. The Zuni people tell the story of the \u00c1tahsaia \u2013 a giant who cannibalizes his fellow demons and seeks out human flesh.\nThe wechuge is a demonic cannibalistic creature that seeks out human flesh appearing in the mythology of the Athabaskan people. It is said to be half monster and half human-like; however, it has many shapes and forms.\nIn literature and popular culture.\nCannibalism is depicted in literary and other imaginative works across history. Homer's \"Odyssey\", \"Beowulf\", Shakespeare's \"Titus Andronicus\", Daniel Defoe's \"Robinson Crusoe\", Herman Melville's \"Moby-Dick\", and Gustave Flaubert's \"Salammbo\" are prominent examples. It also features in several classic Chinese novels, such as \"Romance of the Three Kingdoms\" and \"Water Margin\".\nOne of the most famous satirical essays in the English language concerns cannibalism. \"A Modest Proposal for Preventing the Children of Poor People from Being a Burthen to Their Parents or Country, and for Making Them Beneficial to the Publick,\" commonly referred to as \"A Modest Proposal\", is a Juvenalian satire published by Anglo-Irish writer and clergyman Jonathan Swift in 1729. It suggests that poor people in Ireland could ease their economic troubles by selling their young children as food to the elite, and describes in detail the various advantages this would ostensibly have. Among other satirical works depicting cannibalism are Mark Twain's short story \"Cannibalism in the Cars\" (1868) and Mo Yan's novel \"The Republic of Wine\" (1992).\nCannibalism is also a recurring theme in popular culture, especially within the horror genre, with cannibal films being a notable subgenre. One of the best known fictional serial killers is a cannibal: Hannibal Lecter, created by Thomas Harris. Survival cannibalism is a topic of films such as \"Society of the Snow\" (2023) and TV series such as \"Yellowjackets\" (2021\u2013). Other works mention cannibalism in post-apocalyptic settings, among them Cormac McCarthy's novel \"The Road\" (2006) and its 2009 film adaptation. People who consume human flesh without knowing it are depicted in various films, among them the science fiction classic \"Soylent Green\" (1973) and the horror comedy \"The Rocky Horror Picture Show\" (1975).\nTropes and discourses.\nPrejudices.\nCameroonian anthropologist Francis B. Nyamnjoh notes that accusations of cannibalism, whether justified or not, were often used to \"other\" non-Western peoples, thus serving to justify their colonization and exploitation. He notes that cannibalism was and is often regarded as \"an evil act... associated with primitive savages living dangerously like wild animals at the margins of humanity and human civilisation, and needing to be stamped out at all costs\", with even those advocating cultural relativism usually becoming \"uneas[y] when it comes to making a case for tolerance and accommodation of cannibalism\".\nSome authors, who find it difficult to accept cannibalism as one of many possible human behaviours, but do not want to appear narrow-minded by openly condemning it, have responded with a \"blanket disbelief in ritual [= not just exceptional] cannibalism\". This stance superficially acknowledges cultural relativism, but avoids confronting the complex realities of diverse human experiences in other societies, the sometimes challenging \"other ways of being human\" that may including consuming the flesh of others. Nyamnjoh suggests that instead of making implausible arguments against the mere existence of cannibalism, it is more productive to accept it and view it in context. This perspective means recognizing that there are exploitative practices that, while not involving the physical consumption of others, are still deeply harmful to them.\nNyamnjoh warns that one must be careful when considering historical accounts attributing cannibalism to others, since \"claims and accusations of cannibalism served as the perfect excuse for enslavement, colonisation, exploitation and forceful Christianisation and Westernisation\". Whether factual, exaggerated, or imagined, such statements were used to justify \"the colonising, enslaving and dispossessing... of non-Western 'Others'\". He warns, however, against throwing out the \"baby\" of credible evidence with the \"bathwater\" of exaggerated or merely rumoured \"cannibal talk\". He describes it as illogical that sceptics readily accept \"state violence, bloody wars of genocidal proportions and violent encounters, slavery, colonialism and myriad forms of rabid imperialism\" as part of the historical record, while rejecting the idea of cannibal practices that may well \"have gone with or resulted from such conflicts\". Nyamnjoh and others also note that Europeans were quite hypocritical when condemning the cannibalism of others, while at the same or almost the same time practising their own forms of cannibalism \u2013 especially medicinal cannibalism \u2013 at home.\nTaboo.\nWhile cannibalism has sometimes been called \"mankind's oldest taboo\", \nseveral authors have identified this as a misleading trope contradicted by evidence showing that certain forms of cannibalism were, until fairly recent times, accepted in various parts of the world, including (for medical purposes and survival) in Europe. While there is no universal taboo against cannibalism, the idea that the practice is wrong is \"deeply ingrained in the religions which have shaped the societies and the attitudes of the richer nations of the western hemisphere today.\" This allowed the taboo to spread so widely and thoroughly that many now regard it as self-evident and ancient.\nRomanian philosopher C\u01cet\u01celin Avramescu suggests that the cannibalism taboo became so strong in the Christian world because of concerns about the resurrection of the flesh, the idea that the dead will ultimately be resurrected not just spiritually, but bodily as well. Everyone's body is made up of what they eat, and so, if people eat others, the eaten flesh would effectively have to exist twice to allow both the eaten and the eater to be resurrected at the same time. This paradox worried Christian thinkers such as Athenagoras of Athens and Thomas Aquinas. Though they concluded that the \"infinite power\" of God would nevertheless make it possible to bodily and fully resurrect both, it made cannibalism appear as a challenge to a central Christian doctrine, making it a \"diabolical\" act that had to be severely condemned.\nGender.\nAmerican sociologist Katherine Martinez describes violent cannibalism as a form of \"gendered consumption\". She notes that, whether cannibalism was practised by ethnic groups or by individual murders such as Albert Fish or Issei Sagawa, the perpetrators and consumers were primarily men, while the victims were often women and children, or \"feminized\" men such as captured enemies who were deliberately consumed to humiliate and dominate them and their communities. The flesh of women and children was widely described as better than that of adult men, while women's breasts were sought as particular delicacies. In other cases, the victims belonged to particularly vulnerable groups such as the mostly homosexual, African American men and boys targeted by Jeffrey Dahmer. Martinez interprets many cannibal practices as forms of \"patriarchal control\", exerted by men over the \"feminized bodies\" of women, children, and \"othered\" men through their literal consumption \u2013 a particularly violent way of seeking \"domination and control\" over others, establishing a clear (and deadly) hierarchy between the eaters and the eaten.\nScepticism.\nWilliam Arens, author of \"The Man-Eating Myth: Anthropology and Anthropophagy\", questions the credibility of reports of cannibalism and argues that the description by one group of people of another people as cannibals is a consistent and demonstrable ideological and rhetorical device to establish perceived cultural superiority. Arens bases his thesis on a detailed analysis of various \"classic\" cases of cannibalism reported by explorers, missionaries, and anthropologists. He claims that all of them were steeped in racism, unsubstantiated, or based on second-hand or hearsay evidence. Though widely discussed, Arens's book generally failed to convince the academic community. Claude L\u00e9vi-Strauss observes that, in spite of his \"brilliant but superficial book ... [n]o serious ethnologist disputes the reality of cannibalism\". Shirley Lindenbaum notes that, while after \"Arens['s] ... provocative suggestion ... many anthropologists ... reevaluated their data\", the outcome was an improved and \"more nuanced\" understanding of where, why and under which circumstances cannibalism took place rather than a confirmation of his claims: \"Anthropologists working in the Americas, Africa, and Melanesia now acknowledge that institutionalized cannibalism occurred in some places at some times. Archaeologists and evolutionary biologists are taking cannibalism seriously.\"\nLindenbaum and others point out that Arens displays a \"strong ethnocentrism\". His refusal to admit that institutionalized cannibalism ever existed seems to be motivated by the implied idea \"that cannibalism is the worst thing of all\" \u2013 worse than any other behaviour people engaged in, and therefore uniquely suited to vilifying others. Kajsa Ekholm Friedman calls this \"a remarkable opinion in a culture [the European/American one] that has been capable of the most extreme cruelty and destructive behavior, both at home and in other parts of the world.\"\nShe observes that, contrary to European values and expectations, \"in many parts of the Congo region there was no negative evaluation of cannibalism. On the contrary, people expressed their strong appreciation of this very special meat and could not understand the hysterical reactions from the white man's side.\" And why indeed, she goes on to ask, should they have had the same negative reactions to cannibalism as Arens and his contemporaries? Implicitly he assumes that everybody throughout human history must have shared the strong taboo placed by his own culture on cannibalism, but he never attempts to explain why this should be so, and \"neither logic nor historical evidence justifies\" this viewpoint, as Christian Siefkes commented.\nSome have argued that it is the taboo against cannibalism, rather than its practice, that needs to be explained. Hubert Murray, the Lieutenant-Governor of Papua in the early 20th century, admitted that \"I have never been able to give a convincing answer to a native who says to me, 'Why should I not eat human flesh?'\" After observing that the Orokaiva people in New Guinea explained their cannibal customs as due to \"a simple desire for good food\", the Australian anthropologist F. E. Williams commented: \"Anthropologically speaking the fact that we ourselves should persist in a superstitious, or at least sentimental, prejudice against human flesh is more puzzling than the fact that the Orokaiva, a born hunter, should see fit to enjoy perfectly good meat when he gets it.\"\nAccusations of cannibalism could be used to characterize indigenous peoples as \"uncivilized\", \"primitive\", or even \"inhuman.\" While this means that the reliability of reports of cannibal practices must be carefully evaluated especially if their wording suggests such a context, many actual accounts do not fit this pattern. The earliest firsthand account of cannibal customs in the Caribbean comes from Diego \u00c1lvarez Chanca, who accompanied Christopher Columbus on his second voyage. His description of the customs of the Caribs of Guadeloupe includes their cannibalism (men killed or captured in war were eaten, while captured boys were \"castrated [and used as] servants until they gr[e]w up, when they [were] slaughtered\" for consumption), but he nevertheless notes \"that these people are more civilized than the other islanders\" (who did not practice cannibalism). Nor was he an exception. Among the earliest reports of cannibalism in the Caribbean and the Americas, there are some (like those of Amerigo Vespucci) that seem to mostly consist of hearsay and \"gross exaggerations\", but others (by Chanca, Columbus himself, and other early travellers) show \"genuine interest and respect for the natives\" and include \"numerous cases of sincere praise\".\nReports of cannibalism from other continents follow similar patterns. Condescending remarks can be found, but many Europeans who described cannibal customs in Central Africa wrote about those who practised them in quite positive terms, calling them \"splendid\" and \"the finest people\" and not rarely, like Chanca, actually considering them as \"far in advance of\" and \"intellectually and morally superior\" to the non-cannibals around them. Writing from Melanesia, the missionary George Brown explicitly rejects the European prejudice of picturing cannibals as \"particularly ferocious and repulsive\", noting instead that many cannibals he met were \"no more ferocious than\" others and \"indeed ... very nice people\".\nReports or assertions of cannibal practices could nevertheless be used to promote the use of military force as a means of \"civilizing\" and \"pacifying\" the \"savages\". During the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire and its earlier conquests in the Caribbean there were widespread reports of cannibalism, and cannibals became exempted from Queen Isabella's prohibition on enslaving the indigenous. Another example of the sensationalism of cannibalism and its connection to imperialism occurred during Japan's 1874 expedition to Taiwan. As Robert Eskildsen describes, Japan's popular media \"exaggerated the aborigines' violent nature\", in some cases by wrongly accusing them of cannibalism.\n\"This Horrid Practice: The Myth and Reality of Traditional Maori Cannibalism\" (2008) by New Zealand historian Paul Moon received a hostile reception by some M\u0101ori, who felt the book tarnished their whole people. However, the factual accuracy of the book was not seriously disputed and even critics such as Margaret Mutu grant that cannibalism was \"definitely\" practised and that it was \"part of our [M\u0101ori] culture.\"\nEthics.\nModern views.\nWhile in modern society, cannibalism is widely considered ethically and morally wrong, Mathew Lu notes that \"it is surprisingly difficult to explain why\". Distinguishing \"active\" (killing someone to eat them) from \"passive cannibalism\" (eating the flesh of somebody whose death one has not caused), Lu notes that it is chiefly passive cannibalism that poses a problem, since killing somebody is in most cases considered wrong anyway. In such cases, the wrongness comes from the killing, regardless of whether or not it is followed by cannibalism. But the question of eating the body of someone who has died of unrelated reasons is harder to evaluate. Lu agrees with several other authors that on a utilitarian or Kantian basis it seems impossible to establish that such acts are wrong, since no living person is wronged in the process. In utilitarianism, if a cannibal act increases the happiness of some people \u2013 say the eaters enjoy their meal \u2013 without decreasing the happiness of others (maybe the eaten had no friends or relatives or they do not know about the cannibalism), it can even be considered as beneficial, leading to a net gain in happiness.\nWhile Kantian philosophy demands that other human beings should always be treated \"as ends, never merely as means\", corpses are no longer autonomous persons and there is no straightforward basis on which to establish that they cannot be used as means, for example for eating. J.Jeremy Wisnewski, who evaluates these and other arguments in a similar manner, concludes that there is no \"rational justification for the cannibalism prohibition\", since all \"arguments for the immorality of cannibalism\" he was able to find and examine \"have been found wanting\". For him, a general decision against eating human flesh can therefore only be based on \"sentimental\", not on \"moral\" reasons.\nWhile Lu agrees that utilitarian and Kantian philosophy cannot explain why (non-deadly) cannibalism is wrong, he suggests instead turning to a virtue ethics in the Aristotelian tradition. On this basis, he argues, it is possible to assign \"genuine moral value\" to human corpses that therefore deserve to be treated with respect \u2013 a respect that would be violated by using them as food, except in life-or-death situations. He considers the preservation of human life the sole acceptable justification for cannibalism, meaning that corpses may be eaten as a last resort to face off starvation if other provisions are unavailable. Other than that, while some usages of a corpse may still be respectful, eating it is not, since it reduces the body to mere food, a general form it shares with other edible substances. In the process of cooking and eating a body, the previous human form of the eaten is disregarded and completely destroyed. Lu argues that whenever alternative, non-human foods are available, it is unnecessary, disrespectful, and therefore wrong to destroy the \"residual humanity\" still present in a corpse in such a way.\nFrom a consequentialist perspective, John Shand considers it impossible to give a \"rational moral justification\" against non-deadly cannibalism, because a person who is already dead cannot be harmed further by being consumed. He concludes that the \"strong moral abhorrence\" of cannibalism, widely felt in modern society, is groundless and \"impervious to argument\". Considering this and some other widely held, but rarely rationally justified convictions, he concludes that \"we are not as rational as we like to think we are\". He moreover notes that the evaluation of cases following a violent death depends on how one morally evaluates the death. Murdering someone is wrong by definition, hence murdering someone to eat them is wrong too. But killing enemy fighters in warfare is often considered justified at least in certain cases, and Shand argues that in such cases there can be no rational reason to consider the subsequent cannibalization of fallen enemies \u2013 once a widespread practice in societies that engaged in exocannibalism \u2013 as wrong.\nIn a 1982 paper that \"attracted most notoriety\", New Zealand\u2013born philosopher Richard Routley likewise argues that certain forms of cannibalism are morally admissible. Taking a non-speciesist viewpoint, he rejects the assumption \"that \"Homo sapiens\" as a species deserves special treatment\", instead arguing that \"there is no morally relevant distinction between humans and all other creatures\". For him, a \"non-chauvinist ethics\" only leaves the choice between \"vegetarian options\", which exclude the eating of any meat, and \"cannibal(istic) options\", which allow the consumption of both animal and human meat under specific circumstances. As long as people are not deliberately killed, he regards the \"respectful\" consumption of their dead bodies as admissible, especially if they had consented to this treatment in advance (like many people agree to donate their organs after death), but also if they had not. Regarding the latter case, he argues that buried bodies are eaten by bacteria, other microorganisms, and small animals (detritivores), so a process of consumption happens in either case without requiring consent. While cremation is another alternative, he rejects it as wasteful compared to \"carefully compost[ing]\" a body through consumption.\nRoutley furthermore writes that in cases where killing someone is justified (in warfare, self-defence, or possibly as punishment), the subsequent cannibalization of the dead body is admissible, since it was not the reason for the killing. For him, the fact that most people consider it unacceptable \"to raise other humans for food\", while accepting that animals are bred and raised for this purpose, poses \"a serious and difficult question\". He argues that there are no sufficiently \"significant and relevant differences between humans and other creatures\" to justify such a difference in treatment. For him, any \"nonchauvinistic\" solution to when raising or killing an individual for food is considered acceptable must not take the individual's species into account \u2013 he considers it unjustifiable to treat humans differently from (other) animals merely because they are human.\nAccording to some versions of moral relativism, it is impossible to summarily reject or accept cannibalism, because any practice can only be judged within the context of the culture where it takes place. Hence if the members of a culture accept and practise the consumption of human flesh in certain circumstances or even the killing of (certain) persons to eat them, outsiders from other cultures cannot tell them that they are wrong.\nCultivated human meat.\nModern technology has made it possible to cultivate meat in the laboratory instead of butchering a creature to provide it. This had triggered discussions about whether eating such meat from species that are normally considered \"off-limits\" (including humans) is ethically acceptable since no suffering and death is involved. Philosophers Thomas Montefiore and John Goris argue that, though the usual distinction between \"fair-game\" meats (e.g. chicken and fish) and \"off-limits\" meats (e.g. from humans or from threatened species such as rhinos and tigers) remains intuitively relevant when eating cultivated meat, there is no rational justification for upholding it. Logically, one either has to reject the consumption of \"any\" cultivated meat or to accept that it might come from arbitrary species, including humans.\nG. Owen Schaefer and Julian Savulescu discuss \"the possible spectre of cannibalism\" as a potential objection against cultivated meat in general. They note that most cases of cannibalism are \"morally objectionable\" because they involve \"the desecration of a corpse\" and often also the deliberate \"killing of a human being\", with neither factor applying to cultivated human meat. Eating such meat could be considered disrespectful towards the \"donor\" whose genetic or tissue samples are used, but they argue that this is only a problem if it happens without the donor's consent. Hence they see no ethical reason for banning the cultivation of human meat for eating purposes as long as proper consent was received. Considering that most people feel \"revulsion at the prospect of cannibalism\", they doubt that such consumption could become widespread, while granting that it might find a niche audience.\nMarco Locarno, on the other hand, argues that the consumption of cultivated human meat should be forbidden. He writes that, from a deontological standpoint, treating human tissue as food would be degrading for both the donor and humanity as a whole, since \"eating implies superiority over the object eaten\" and eating this tissue would deny its specific humanness, treating it as not essentially different from other food. He admits that, when taking a consequentialist/utilitarian standpoint instead, eating cultivated human meat seems acceptable as long as the donor had consented to this, but continues that even from this standpoint it should be forbidden because of possible negative consequences. Among these he sees the risk that if people discover they like the taste, some might develop a curiosity or even a craving for \"natural\" human meat, possibly causing some to engage in harmful acts such as stealing corpses or even killing others to eat them. Another risk he sees is the possible emergence of a \"black market\" in cultivated human meat from nonconsenting donors.\nIn a 2024 British survey, 88% of the respondents said that the commercial production of cultivated human meat should be forbidden \u2013 a higher ratio than for any animal species included in the survey. On the other hand, when questioned whether they would try such meat \"it were legally allowed and commercially available\", 20% of the respondents said they would, for reasons such as curiosity. This constituted a considerable fraction of the 26% willing to try cultivated animal meat. Women and young people (below 25) were more inclined to try human meat than men and older persons.\nHistory.\nThere is archaeological evidence that cannibalism has been practised for at least hundreds of thousands of years by early \"Homo sapiens\" and archaic hominins.\nAmong modern humans, cannibalism has been practised by various groups. An incomplete list of cases where it is documented to have occurred in institutionalized form includes prehistoric and early modern Europe, South America, Mesoamerica, Iroquoian peoples in North America, parts of Western and Central Africa, China and Sumatra, among pre-contact Aboriginal Australians, among M\u0101ori in New Zealand, on some other Polynesian islands as well as in New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, and Fiji. Evidence of cannibalism has also been found in ruins associated with the Ancestral Puebloans, at Cowboy Wash in the Southwestern United States.\nAfter World War I, institutionalized cannibalism has become very rare, but cases were still reported during times of famine. Occasional cannibal acts committed by individual criminals also are documented throughout the 20th and 21st centuries.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5659", "revid": "50479220", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5659", "title": "Chemical element", "text": "Chemical substance not composed of simpler ones\nA chemical element is a species of atom defined by its number of protons. The number of protons is called the atomic number of that element. For example, oxygen has an atomic number of 8: each oxygen atom has 8 protons in its nucleus. Atoms of the same element can have different numbers of neutrons in their nuclei, known as isotopes of the element. Atoms of one element can be transformed into atoms of a different element in nuclear reactions, which change an atom's atomic number. Almost all baryonic matter in the universe is composed of elements (among rare exceptions are neutron stars).\nThe term \"chemical element\" is also widely used to mean a pure chemical substance consisting of a single element. For example, oxygen gas consists only of atoms of oxygen.\nHistorically, the term \"chemical element\" meant a substance that cannot be broken down into constituent substances by chemical reactions, and for most practical purposes this definition still has validity. There was some controversy in the 1920s over whether isotopes deserved to be recognised as separate elements if they could be separated by chemical means. By November 2016, the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) recognized a total of 118 elements. The first 94 occur naturally on Earth, and the remaining 24 are synthetic elements produced in nuclear reactions. Save for unstable radioactive elements (radioelements) which decay quickly, nearly all elements are available industrially in varying amounts. The discovery and synthesis of further new elements is an ongoing area of scientific study.\nThe history of the discovery and use of elements began with early human societies that discovered native minerals like carbon, sulfur, copper and gold (though the modern concept of an element was not yet understood). Attempts to classify materials such as these resulted in the concepts of classical elements, alchemy, and similar theories throughout history. Much of the modern understanding of elements developed from the work of Dmitri Mendeleev, a Russian chemist who published the first recognizable periodic table in 1869. This table organizes the elements by increasing atomic number into rows (\"periods\") in which the columns (\"groups\") share recurring (\"periodic\") physical and chemical properties. The periodic table summarizes various properties of the elements, allowing chemists to derive relationships between them and to make predictions about elements not yet discovered, and potential new compounds.\nDescription.\nThe term \"(chemical) element\" is used in two different but closely related meanings: it can mean a chemical substance consisting of a single kind of atom (a free element), or it can mean that kind of atom as a component of various chemical substances. For example, water (H2O) consists of the elements hydrogen (H) and oxygen (O) even though it does not contain the chemical substances (di)hydrogen (H2) and (di)oxygen (O2), as H2O molecules are different from H2 and O2 molecules. For the meaning \"chemical substance consisting of a single kind of atom\", the terms \"elementary substance\" and \"simple substance\" have been suggested, but they have not gained much acceptance in English chemical literature, whereas in some other languages their equivalent is widely used. For example, French distinguishes (kind of atoms) and (chemical substance consisting of one kind of atom); Russian distinguishes and .\nChemical elements can be organized by name, chemical symbol, and also by properties (as atoms or as substances). The properties of chemical elements as kinds of atom include the atomic number, atomic weight, isotopes, abundance in nature, ionization energy, electron affinity, oxidation states, and electronegativity. The radioactive nuclides can be arranged by length of half-life. As substances, the properties of chemical elements include their density, melting point, boiling point, electrical conductance, thermal conductivity.\nOne of the most convenient, and certainly the most traditional presentation of the elements, is in the form of the periodic table, which groups together elements with similar chemical properties (and usually also similar electronic structures). Chemical elements can be categorised by their origin on Earth, with the first 94 considered naturally occurring, while those with atomic numbers beyond 94 have only been produced artificially via human-made nuclear reactions.\nOccurrence.\nThe lightest elements are hydrogen and helium, both created by Big Bang nucleosynthesis in the first 20 minutes of the universe in a ratio of around 3:1 by mass (or 12:1 by number of atoms), along with tiny traces of the next two elements, lithium and beryllium. Almost all other elements found in nature were made by various natural methods of nucleosynthesis. On Earth, small amounts of new atoms are naturally produced in nucleogenic reactions, or in cosmogenic processes, such as cosmic ray spallation. New atoms are also naturally produced on Earth as radiogenic daughter isotopes of ongoing radioactive decay processes such as alpha decay, beta decay, spontaneous fission, cluster decay, and other rarer modes of decay.\nThere are now 118 known elements. \"Known\" here means observed well enough, even from just a few decay products, to have been differentiated from other elements. Most recently, the synthesis of element 118 (since named oganesson) was reported in October 2006, and the synthesis of element 117 (tennessine) was reported in April 2010. Of these 118 elements, the first 94 elements have been detected directly on Earth as primordial nuclides present from the formation of the Solar System, or as naturally occurring fission or transmutation products of uranium and thorium. Six of these occur in extreme trace amounts: technetium, atomic number 43; promethium, number 61; astatine, number 85; francium, number 87; neptunium, number 93; and plutonium, number 94. These 94 elements have been detected in the universe at large, in the spectra of stars, as well as neutron star mergers and supernovae, where short-lived radioactive elements are newly being made.\nTwo or more atoms can combine to form molecules. Some elements form molecules of atoms of said element only: e.g. atoms of hydrogen (H) form diatomic molecules (H2). Chemical compounds are substances made of atoms of different elements; they can have molecular or non-molecular structure. Mixtures are materials containing different chemical substances; that means (in case of molecular substances) that they contain different types of molecules. When different elements undergo chemical reactions, atoms are rearranged into new compounds held together by chemical bonds. Less than twenty elements, including the gold, platinum, iron group metals, can sometimes be found uncombined as relatively pure native element minerals. Nearly all other naturally occurring elements exist in the Earth as compounds or mixtures. Air is mostly a mixture of molecular nitrogen and oxygen, though it does contain compounds including carbon dioxide and water, as well as atomic argon, a noble gas which is chemically inert and therefore does not undergo chemical reactions.\nAtomic nucleus properties.\nThe standard model of an atom is of a dense nucleus of charged protons and electrically-neutral neutrons, surrounded by an electrically-bound cloud of low mass, negatively charged electrons. Despite the force of mutual repulsion between the protons, the nucleus is held together by the short-ranged strong nuclear force between the particles. The neutron\u2013proton ratio determines the stability of a nucleus, as a proper balance of neutrons counteracts the mutual repulsion of the protons.\nNuclide.\nA nuclide, or nuclear species, is a class of atoms characterized by their number of protons, \"Z\", their number of neutrons, \"N\", and their nuclear energy state. Atomic nuclei other than H, a lone proton, consist of protons and neutrons bound together by the residual strong force, overcoming electrical repulsion between protons. For that reason, neutrons are required to bind protons together; as the number of protons increases, so does the neutron\u2013proton ratio necessary for stability. For example, although light elements up through oxygen have stable nuclides with the same number of neutrons as protons, lead requires about 3 neutrons for 2 protons.\nThe atomic number of an element is equal to the number of protons in each atom, and defines the element. For example, all carbon atoms contain 6 protons in their atomic nucleus; so the atomic number of carbon is 6. The number of protons in the nucleus determines its electric charge, which in turn determines the number of bound electrons of an atom in its non-ionized state. The electrons occupy atomic orbitals that determine the atom's chemical properties.\nIsotopes are atoms of the same element (that is, with the same number of protons in their nucleus), but having \"different\" numbers of neutrons. Thus, for example, there are three main isotopes of carbon. All carbon atoms have 6 protons, but they can have either 6, 7, or 8 neutrons. Since the mass numbers of these are 12, 13 and 14 respectively, said three isotopes are known as carbon-12, carbon-13, and carbon-14 (12C, 13C, and 14C). Natural carbon is a mixture of 12C (about 98.9%), 13C (about 1.1%) and about 1 atom per trillion of 14C. The number of neutrons in a nucleus usually has very little effect on an element's chemical properties. An exception is hydrogen, for which the kinetic isotope effect is significant. Thus, all carbon isotopes have nearly identical chemical properties because they all have six electrons, even though they may have 6 to 8 neutrons. That is why atomic number, rather than mass number or atomic weight, is considered the identifying characteristic of an element.\nStability.\nAll elements have radioactive isotopes (radioisotopes), but many of these radioisotopes are not found in nature due to a low half life. Radioisotopes typically decay into other elements via alpha decay, beta decay, or inverse beta decay; some isotopes of the heaviest elements also undergo spontaneous fission. Isotopes that are not radioactive, are termed \"stable\" isotopes. Isotopes with even numbers of protons, even numbers of neutrons, or both, tend to be more stable as like particle can pair up with like. This pairing effect allows the identical particles to align with opposite spins, increasing the binding energy.\nMost (54 of 94) naturally occurring elements have more than one stable isotope. Only 26 elements are monoisotopic, having exactly one stable isotope; these have an odd atomic number of protons, with the exception of beryllium-9 which has an odd number of neutrons. The mean number of stable isotopes for the 80 stable elements is 3.1 stable isotopes per element. The largest number of stable isotopes for a single element is 10 (for tin, element 50).\nElements with atomic numbers 1 through 82 each have at least one stable isotope (except for technetium, element 43 and promethium, element 61, which have no stable isotopes). However, observationally stable isotopes of some elements (such as tungsten and lead) are predicted to be slightly radioactive with very long half-lives: for example, the half-lives predicted for the observationally stable lead isotopes range from 1035 to 10189 years. Isotopes are observationally stable when they are theoretically unstable but no radioactive decay has yet been observed. Out of the over 250 nuclides that are called stable, only 90 are considered theoretically stable, meaning they lack a known decay mode.\nElements with atomic numbers 83 through 94 are unstable enough that radioactive decay of all isotopes can be detected. Some of these elements, notably bismuth (atomic number 83), thorium (atomic number 90), and uranium (atomic number 92), have one or more isotopes with half-lives long enough to survive from before the Solar System formed. The remaining longest-lived isotopes have half lives too short for them to have been present at the beginning of the Solar System, and are therefore \"transient elements\". Of these 11 transient elements, five (polonium, radon, radium, actinium, and protactinium) are relatively common decay products of thorium and uranium. The remaining six transient elements (technetium, promethium, astatine, francium, neptunium, and plutonium) occur only rarely, as products of rare decay modes or nuclear reaction processes involving uranium or other heavy elements.\nThe remaining 24 heaviest elements (those beyond plutonium, element 94) are radioactive, with half-lives so short that they are not found on Earth and must be synthesized. Five have been discovered in the spectrum of Przybylski's star, from element 95 (americium) to 99 (einsteinium). These are thought to be neutron capture products of uranium and thorium. All 24 heavier elements are radioactive, with short half-lives; if any of these elements were present when the Earth formed, they are certain to have completely decayed, and if present in novae, are in quantities too small to have been noted. Technetium was the first purportedly non-naturally occurring element synthesized, in 1937, though traces of technetium have since been found in nature (and also the element may have been discovered naturally in 1925). This pattern of artificial production and later natural discovery has been repeated with several other radioactive naturally occurring rare elements.\nThe lightest radioactive isotope is tritium, which undergoes Beta decay with a half-life of 12.3\u00a0years. At 2\u00d71019 years, over 109 times the estimated age of the universe, bismuth-209 has the longest known alpha decay half-life of any nuclide, and is almost always considered on par with the 80 stable elements. The isotope tellurium-128 transmutes through double beta decay with a half life of 2.25\u00d71024 years, over 100,000 longer than bismuth-209. The primary source of radiation exposure from isotope decays in the human body come from carbon-14 and potassium-40 intake, which produce an annual effective dose of .\nIsotopic mass and atomic mass.\nThe mass number of an element, \"A\", is the number of nucleons (protons and neutrons) in the atomic nucleus. Different isotopes of a given element are distinguished by their mass number, which is written as a superscript on the left hand side of the chemical symbol (e.g., 238U). The mass number is always an integer and has units of \"nucleons\". Thus, magnesium-24 (24 is the mass number) is an atom with 24 nucleons (12 protons and 12 neutrons).\nWhereas the mass number simply counts the total number of neutrons and protons and is thus an integer, the atomic mass of a particular isotope (or \"nuclide\") of the element is the mass of a single atom of that isotope, and is typically expressed in daltons (symbol: Da), aka universal atomic mass units (symbol: u). Its relative atomic mass is a dimensionless number equal to the atomic mass divided by the atomic mass constant, which equals 1\u00a0Da. In general, the mass number of a given nuclide differs in value slightly from its relative atomic mass. This mass deficit is primarily due to the nuclear binding energy. For example, the atomic mass of chlorine-35 to five significant digits is 34.969\u00a0Da and that of chlorine-37 is 36.966\u00a0Da. However, the relative atomic mass of each isotope is quite close to its mass number (always within 1%). The only isotope whose atomic mass is exactly a natural number is 12C, which has a mass of 12\u00a0Da; because the dalton is defined as 1/12 of the mass of a free neutral carbon-12 atom in the ground state.\nDuring the nuclear fusion of lower mass atoms such as hydrogen, the net change in mass deficit is released as energy, as determined by the mass\u2013energy equivalence relationship. This process of fusing hydrogen atoms into helium is what drives the energy output of the Sun. Over time, the result is an increasing concentration of helium at the stellar core. During the evolution of stars much more massive than the Sun, increasingly massive nuclei are then formed through a type of fusion called the alpha process, until iron-52 is reached. The binding energy of a nucleus reaches its peak value for isotopes of iron and nickel. Hence, beyond that point, further fusion results in a lower binding energy, so energy is absorbed rather than released. As a result, an inert iron core forms that does not contribute to the star's energy output.\nIn the nuclear fission process, the resulting particles have a higher net binding energy. This change in the net mass deficit again results in a release of energy. Hence, highly radioactive elements such as uranium-235 can be useful sources of energy production.\nThe standard atomic weight (commonly called \"atomic weight\") of an element is the \"average\" of the atomic masses of all the chemical element's isotopes as found in a particular environment, weighted by isotopic abundance, relative to the atomic mass unit. This number may be a fraction that is \"not\" close to a whole number. For example, the relative atomic mass of chlorine is 35.453\u00a0u, which differs greatly from a whole number as it is an average of about 76% chlorine-35 and 24% chlorine-37. Whenever a relative atomic mass value differs by more than \u22481% from a whole number, it is due to this averaging effect, as significant amounts of more than one isotope are naturally present in a sample of that element.\nChemically pure and isotopically pure.\nChemists and nuclear scientists have different definitions of a \"pure element\". In chemistry, a pure element means a substance whose atoms all (or in practice almost all) have the same atomic number, or number of protons. Nuclear scientists, however, define a pure element as one that consists of only one isotope.\nFor example, a copper wire is 99.99% chemically pure if 99.99% of its atoms are copper, with 29 protons each. However it is not isotopically pure since natural copper consists of two stable isotopes, 69% 63Cu and 31% 65Cu, with different numbers of neutrons &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;. However, pure gold would be both chemically and isotopically pure, since ordinary gold consists only of one isotope, 197Au.\nChemical and physical properties.\nQuantum mechanics causes the bound electrons to be organized into a set of layered shells. Each shell can only contain a fixed number of electrons occupying paired orbitals. The electron configurations of these shells mediate the interaction with neighboring atoms and determine the chemical properties of atoms. The shell configuration determines the structure of the periodic table.\nShells.\nElectrons that are confined to an atom are only allowed to assume certain discrete energy levels. This restriction, known as quantization, is a fundamental facet of the quantum mechanics theory that predicts the wave-like behavior of particles and energy at the smallest scale. For atoms, these energy levels are represented by electron subshells, where the wave form of an electron is held in a type of standing wave with a specific wavelength. Each whole number of wavelengths yields one or more atomic orbitals, which describe each the electron's charge distribution at that energy level. Every orbital can hold a pair of electrons. The arrangement of electrons in an atom's orbitals is called the electron configuration.\nThese orbitals and their sub-shells are grouped together in shells, with each shell having a principal quantum number that indicates the energy level. Each shell can only have a fixed number of electrons, which is given by the formula formula_1, where formula_2 is 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on. Hence, the count of electrons each shell can contain are 2, 8, 18, 32, and so forth. A shell is represented by a row on the periodic table.\nThe simplest atom is ordinary hydrogen, which consists of one proton and one electron. In its minimum energy ground state, the electron occupies the first shell, designated \"K\". This shell has one subshell designated 1s. The second element, helium, has two protons, two electrons, and usually two neutrons. The second electron occupies the same orbital as the first, completing the shell with spin-paired electrons. For lithium there are three electrons, so one needs to occupy an orbital in the second shell, designated \"L\". Per the Aufbau principle, the third electron occupies the next lowest available energy subshell, which is 2s. This process continues, with successive electrons being placed in the next available lowest energy orbital.\nPeriodic trends.\nSeveral terms are commonly used to characterise the general physical and chemical properties of the chemical elements. A first distinction is between metals, which readily conduct electricity, nonmetals, which do not, and a small group, the \"metalloids\", having intermediate properties and often behaving as semiconductors.\nBesides being different by physical properties as substances, metallic and nonmetallic elements have different chemical properties as kinds of atoms: metallic elements form simple cations, whereas nonmetallic elements (and weak metals) form simple anions and oxoanions. An exception is noble gases, which do not form \"simple\" anions, whereas oxoanions are known for xenon. However, some metallic elements in higher oxidation states form oxoanions as well. Atoms of nonmetallic elements also form compounds with covalent bonds.\nDistinguishing terms are used for certain sets of the more broadly viewed metals and nonmetals. These sets include: actinides, alkali metals, alkaline earth metals, halogens, lanthanides, transition metals, post-transition metals, metalloids, reactive nonmetals, and noble gases. In this system, the alkali metals, alkaline earth metals, and transition metals, as well as the lanthanides and the actinides, are special groups of the metals viewed in a broader sense. Similarly, the reactive nonmetals and the noble gases are nonmetals viewed in the broader sense. In some presentations, the halogens are not distinguished, with astatine identified as a metalloid and the others identified as nonmetals.\nA more refined classification is often shown in coloured presentations of the periodic table. The properties of the elements can be summarized in this form, which powerfully and elegantly organizes the elements by physical and chemical properties. Each row forms a period of elements that have the same number of electron shells. There are 18 numbered groups, each forming its own column of elements whose chemical properties are dominated by the orbital location of the outermost electron. A block is set of elements sharing atomic orbitals that their valence electrons or vacancies occupy.\nUse of the periodic table is now ubiquitous in chemistry, providing an extremely useful framework to classify, systematize and compare all the many different forms of chemical behavior. The table has also found wide application in physics, geology, biology, materials science, engineering, agriculture, medicine, nutrition, environmental health, and astronomy. Its principles are especially important in chemical engineering.\nPhase transition.\nA commonly used basic distinction among the elements is their state of matter (phase), whether solid, liquid, or gas, at standard temperature and pressure (STP). Most elements are solids at STP, while several are gases. Only bromine and mercury are liquid at 0 degrees Celsius (32 degrees Fahrenheit) and 1 atmosphere pressure; caesium and gallium are solid at that temperature, but melt at and , respectively.\nMelting and boiling points, typically expressed in degrees Celsius at a pressure of one atmosphere, are commonly used in characterizing the various elements. Those elements with boiling points above are termed refractory, while those easily vaporized are volatiles. The element with the widest range between melting and boiling points is gallium, which boils at . While known for most elements, either or both of these measurements is still undetermined for some of the radioactive elements available in only tiny quantities. Since helium remains a liquid even at absolute zero at atmospheric pressure, it has only a boiling point, and not a melting point, in conventional presentations.\nAllotropes.\nAtoms of the same element may bond to each other chemically in more than one way, allowing the pure element to exist in multiple chemical structures (spatial arrangements of atoms) which differ in their properties. The ability of an element to polymorph in one of many structural forms is known as 'allotropy'. Non-metallic elements known for polymorphism include carbon, sulfur, phosphorus, oxygen, and nitrogen.\nFor example, carbon can be found as diamond, which has a tetrahedral structure around each carbon atom; graphite, which has layers of carbon atoms with a hexagonal structure stacked on top of each other; graphene, which is a single layer of graphite that is very strong; fullerenes, which have nearly spherical shapes; and carbon nanotubes, which are tubes with a hexagonal structure (even these may differ from each other in electrical properties).\nThe reference state of an element is defined by convention, usually as the thermodynamically most stable allotrope and physical state at a pressure of 1 bar and a given temperature (typically ). However, for phosphorus, the reference state is white phosphorus even though it is not the most stable allotrope, and the reference state for carbon is graphite, because the structure of graphite is more stable than that of the other allotropes. In thermochemistry, an element is defined to have an enthalpy of formation of zero in its reference state.\nCrystal structures.\nUnder conditions of stable equilibrium, solid elements are structured into a crystalline form, with each element having its own structure. These belong to the seven families of crystal structures: cubic (including body-centered and face-centered), triclinic, hexagonal, monoclinic, orthorhombic, rhombohedral, and tetragonal. Over 30 elements crystallize in the cubic form.\n40% of the elements form close-packed crystals: either face-centered cubic or hexagonal close-packed. For some of the synthetically produced transuranic elements, available samples have been too small to determine crystal structures.\nUnder the high pressure conditions found within a planetary interior, elements can appear in new crystalline forms, forming allotropes. For example, seven dense classes of silicon crystals can appear at pressures from to , under room temperature conditions. In the extreme conditions found inside a carbon-rich white dwarf, diamond-like amorphous glass may form.\nMass densities.\nThe density at selected standard temperature and pressure (STP) is often used in characterizing the elements. The mass density of an element depends on the mass of the atomic nucleus and the separation beween the atoms created by the bound electrons. Density is given in kilograms per cubic meter (kg/m3), but may also be expressed in grams per cubic centimetre (g/cm3). Since several elements are gases at commonly encountered temperatures, their densities are usually stated for their gaseous forms; when liquefied or solidified, the gaseous elements have densities similar to those of the other elements. The general trend is for densities to increase as the atomic number rises. Lower density elements are the noble gases and the alkali metals. Higher densities are found in the middle of the rows of the periodic elements, as they can form more covalent bonds, drawing the atoms closer together.\nAtoms do not have a fixed radius, but rather their dimension is determined by the charge distribution of their electron cloud. The measured size depends on the interaction of this cloud with the instrument used to measure it. Hence, various methods will give similar, but slightly different results. Along each row of the periodic table, the radius tends to decrease from the alkali metal column to the noble gases. This is caused by the increasing attraction of the nuclear charge overcoming the mutual repulsion of the electrons as a shell is filled. A smaller radius means the atom is less chemically reactive, as the valence electrons are drawn closer to the nucleus. Depending on the type of chemical bond, the atomic radius determines the atomic separation in a crystal, and hence the mass density.\nWhen an element has allotropes with different densities, one representative allotrope is typically selected in summary presentations, while densities for each allotrope can be stated where more detail is provided. For example, the three familiar allotropes of carbon (amorphous carbon, graphite, and diamond) have densities of 1.8\u20132.1, 2.267, and 3.515\u00a0g/cm3, respectively.\nNomenclature and symbols.\nThe various chemical elements are formally identified by their unique atomic numbers, their accepted names, and their chemical symbols.\nAtomic numbers.\nThe known elements have atomic numbers from 1 to 118, conventionally presented as Arabic numerals. Since the elements can be uniquely sequenced by atomic number, conventionally from lowest to highest (as in a periodic table), sets of elements are sometimes specified by such notation as \"through\", \"beyond\", or \"from ... through\", as in \"through iron\", \"beyond uranium\", or \"from lanthanum through lutetium\". The terms \"light\" and \"heavy\" are sometimes also used informally to indicate relative atomic numbers (not densities), as in \"lighter than carbon\" or \"heavier than lead\", though their atomic weights of the elements do not always increase monotonically with their atomic numbers. For example, argon with an atomic number of 18 has an atomic weight of 39.95, while potassium with an atomic number of 19 has an atomic weight of 39.098.\nElement names.\nThe naming of various substances now known as elements precedes the atomic theory of matter, as names were given locally by various cultures to various minerals, metals, compounds, alloys, mixtures, and other materials, though at the time it was not known which chemicals were elements and which compounds. As they were identified as elements, the existing names for anciently known elements (e.g., gold, mercury, iron) were kept in most countries.\nNational differences emerged over the element names either for convenience, linguistic niceties, or nationalism. For example, German speakers use \"Wasserstoff\" (water stuff) for \"hydrogen\", \"Sauerstoff\" (acid stuff) for \"oxygen\", and \"Stickstoff\" (smothering stuff) for \"nitrogen\"; English and some other languages use \"sodium\" for \"natrium\", and \"potassium\" for \"kalium\"; and the French, Italians, Greeks, Portuguese and Poles prefer \"azote/azot/azoto\" (from roots meaning \"no life\") for \"nitrogen\".\nIn the past, the name for new elements was traditionally decided by their discoverers. This changed in 1947, when a conference of the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) decided that the names and symbols of new elements would be determined by the IUPAC. The discoverer of a new element had the right to suggest a name, but for purposes of international communication and trade, the official names of the chemical elements both ancient and more recently recognised are decided by the IUPAC.\nThe IUPAC organization has decided on a style of international English language as a \"Lingua franca\", drawing on traditional English names even when an element's chemical symbol is based on a Latin or other traditional word. For example, adopting \"gold\" rather than \"aurum\" as the name for the 79th element (Au). IUPAC prefers the British spellings \"aluminium\" and \"caesium\" over the U.S. spellings \"aluminum\" and \"cesium\", and the U.S. \"sulfur\" over British \"sulphur\". However, elements that are practical to sell in bulk in many countries often still have locally used national names, and countries whose national language does not use the Latin alphabet are likely to use the IUPAC element names.\nNew elements have been named for their properties, after a mineral from which it was extracted, the location of its discovery, a mythical subject, an astronomical object, or a prominent scientist. According to IUPAC, element names are not proper nouns; therefore, the full name of an element is not capitalised in English, even if derived from a proper noun, as in californium and einsteinium. Isotope names are also uncapitalised if written out, \"e.g.,\" carbon-12 or uranium-235. Chemical element \"symbols\" (such as Cf for californium and Es for einsteinium), are always capitalised.\nIn the second half of the 20th century, physics laboratories became able to produce elements with half-lives too short for an appreciable amount of them to exist at any time. These are also named by IUPAC, which generally adopts the name chosen by the discoverer. This practice can lead to the controversial question of which research group actually discovered an element, a question that delayed the naming of elements with atomic number of 104 and higher for a considerable amount of time.\nPrecursors of such controversies involved the nationalistic namings of elements in the late 19th century. For example, \"lutetium\" was named after Paris, France. The Germans were reluctant to relinquish naming rights to the French, often calling it \"cassiopeium\". Similarly, the British discoverer of \"niobium\" originally named it \"columbium\", in reference to the New World. It was used extensively as such by American publications before the international standardisation (in 1950).\nChemical symbols.\nSpecific elements.\nBefore chemistry became a science, alchemists designed arcane symbols for both metals and common compounds. These were however used as abbreviations in diagrams or procedures; there was no concept of atoms combining to form molecules. With his advances in the atomic theory of matter, John Dalton devised his own simpler symbols, based on circles, to depict atoms and molecules.\nThe current system of chemical notation was invented by J\u00f6ns Jacob Berzelius in 1814. In this system, chemical symbols are not mere abbreviations\u2014though each consists of letters of the Latin alphabet. They are intended as universal symbols for people of all languages and alphabets.\nSince Latin was the common language of science at Berzelius' time, his symbols were abbreviations based on the Latin names of elements (they may be Classical Latin names of elements known since antiquity or Neo-Latin coinages for later elements). The symbols are not followed by a period (full stop) as with abbreviations. In most cases, Latin names of elements as used by Berzelius have the same roots as the modern English name. For example, hydrogen has the symbol \"H\" from Neo-Latin , which has the same Greek roots as English \"hydrogen\". However, in eleven cases Latin (as used by Berzelius) and English names of elements have different roots. Eight of them are the seven metals of antiquity and a metalloid also known since antiquity: \"Fe\" (Latin ) for iron, \"Hg\" (Latin ) for mercury, \"Sn\" (Latin ) for tin, \"Au\" (Latin ) for gold, \"Ag\" (Latin ) for silver, \"Pb\" (Latin ) for lead, \"Cu\" (Latin ) for copper, and \"Sb\" (Latin ) for antimony. The three other mismatches between Neo-Latin (as used by Berzelius) and English names are \"Na\" (Neo-Latin ) for sodium, \"K\" (Neo-Latin ) for potassium, and \"W\" (Neo-Latin ) for tungsten. These mismatches came from different suggestings of naming the elements in the Modern era. Initially Berzelius had suggested \"So\" and \"Po\" for sodium and potassium, but he changed the symbols to \"Na\" and \"K\" later in the same year.\nElements discovered after 1814 were also assigned unique chemical symbols, based on the name of the element. The use of Latin as the universal language of science was fading, but chemical names of newly discovered elements came to be borrowed from language to language with little or no modification. Symbols of elements discovered after 1814 match their names in English, French (ignoring the acute accent on \u27e8\u00e9\u27e9), and German (though German often allows alternate spellings with \u27e8k\u27e9 or \u27e8z\u27e9 instead of \u27e8c\u27e9: e.g., the name of calcium may be spelled or in German, but its symbol is always \"Ca\"). Other languages sometimes modify element name spellings: Spanish (ytterbium), Italian (hafnium), Swedish (moscovium); but those modifications do not affect chemical symbols: Yb, Hf, Mc.\nChemical symbols are understood internationally when element names might require translation. There have been some differences in the past. For example, Germans in the past have used \"J\" (for the name ) for iodine, but now use \"I\" and .\nThe first letter of a chemical symbol is always capitalised, and the subsequent letters, if any, are always lowercase; see the preceding examples.\nGeneral chemical symbols.\nThere are also symbols in chemical equations for groups of elements, for example in comparative formulas. These are often a single capital letter, and the letters are reserved and not used for names of specific elements. For example, \"X\" indicates a variable group (usually a halogen) in a class of compounds, while \"R\" is a radical, meaning a compound structure such as a hydrocarbon chain. The letter \"Q\" is reserved for \"heat\" in a chemical reaction. \"Y\" is also often used as a general chemical symbol, though it is also the symbol of yttrium and tyrosine. \"Z\" is also often used as a general variable group. \"E\" is used in organic chemistry to denote an electron-withdrawing group or an electrophile; similarly \"Nu\" denotes a nucleophile. \"L\" is used to represent a general ligand in inorganic and organometallic chemistry. \"M\" is often used in place of a general metal.\nAt least two other, two-letter generic chemical symbols are also in informal use, \"Ln\" for any lanthanide and \"An\" for any actinide. \"Rg\" was formerly used for any rare gas element, but the group of rare gases has now been renamed noble gases and \"Rg\" now refers to roentgenium.\nIsotope symbols.\nIsotopes of an element are distinguished by mass number (total protons and neutrons), with this number combined with the element's symbol. IUPAC prefers that isotope symbols be written in superscript notation when practical, for example 12C and 235U. However, other notations, such as carbon-12 and uranium-235, or C-12 and U-235, are also used.\nAs a special case, the three naturally occurring isotopes of hydrogen are often specified as H for 1H (protium), D for 2H (deuterium), and T for 3H (tritium). This convention is easier to use in chemical equations, replacing the need to write out the mass number each time. Thus, the formula for heavy water may be written D2O instead of 2H2O.\nOrigin of the elements.\nOnly about 4.6% of the total mass of the universe is made of ordinary matter, including atoms or ions represented by elements, plus neutrinos and photons. The rest of the mass (63%) is an unknown dark matter that is not composed of atoms of elements because it contains no protons, neutrons, or electrons. The remaining non-matter part of the mass of the universe is composed of the even less well understood dark energy.\nThe 94 naturally occurring elements were produced by at least four classes of astrophysical process. Most of the hydrogen, helium and a very small quantity of lithium were produced in the first few minutes of the Big Bang. This Big Bang nucleosynthesis happened only once; the other processes are ongoing. Nuclear fusion inside stars produces elements through stellar nucleosynthesis, including all elements from carbon to iron in atomic number. Elements higher in atomic number than iron, including heavy elements like uranium and plutonium, are produced by various forms of explosive nucleosynthesis in supernovae and neutron star mergers. The light elements lithium, beryllium and boron are produced mostly through cosmic ray spallation (fragmentation induced by cosmic rays) of carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen.\nIn the early phases of the Big Bang, nucleosynthesis of hydrogen resulted in the production of hydrogen-1 (protium, 1H) and helium-4 (4He), as well as a smaller amount of deuterium (2H) and tiny amounts (on the order of 10\u221210) of lithium and beryllium. Even smaller amounts of boron may have been produced in the Big Bang, since it has been observed in some very old stars, while carbon has not. No elements heavier than boron were produced in the Big Bang. As a result, the primordial abundance of atoms (or ions) consisted of ~75% 1H, 25% 4He, and 0.01% deuterium, with only tiny traces of lithium, beryllium, and perhaps boron. Subsequent enrichment of galactic halos occurred due to stellar nucleosynthesis and supernova nucleosynthesis. However, the element abundance in intergalactic space can still closely resemble primordial conditions, unless it has been enriched by a galactic wind or some other means.\nOn Earth (and elsewhere), trace amounts of various elements continue to be produced from other elements as products of nuclear transmutation processes. These include some produced by cosmic rays or other nuclear reactions (see cosmogenic and nucleogenic nuclides), and others produced as decay products of long-lived primordial nuclides. For example, trace (but detectable) amounts of carbon-14 (14C) are continually produced in the air by cosmic rays impacting nitrogen atoms, and argon-40 (40Ar) is continually produced by the decay of primordially occurring but unstable potassium-40 (40K).\nThree primordially occurring but radioactive actinides, thorium, uranium, and plutonium, decay through a series of recurrently produced but unstable elements such as radium and radon, which are transiently present in any sample of containing these metals. Three other radioactive elements, technetium, promethium, and neptunium, occur only incidentally in natural materials, produced as individual atoms by nuclear fission of the nuclei of various heavy elements or in other rare nuclear processes.\nBesides the 94 naturally occurring elements, several artificial elements have been produced by nuclear physics technology. By 2016, these experiments had produced all elements up to atomic number 118. , more than a thousand different isotopes have been created through nuclear transmutation, of which 900 do not appear naturally.\nAbundance.\nThe abundance of elements in the Solar System is in keeping with their origin Big Bang nucleosynthesis and a number of progenitor supernova stars. Very abundant hydrogen and helium are products of the Big Bang, but the next three elements are rare since they had little time to form in the Big Bang and are not made in stars. They are, however, produced in small quantities by the breakup of heavier elements in interstellar dust, as a result of impact by cosmic rays.\nBeginning with carbon, elements are produced in stars by buildup from alpha particles (helium nuclei), resulting in an alternatingly larger abundance of elements with even atomic numbers, as these are more stable. In general, such elements up to the iron peak are made in massive stars in the process of becoming supernovas. Iron-56 is particularly common, since it is the most stable nuclide that can easily be made from alpha particles, being a product of decay of radioactive nickel-56, ultimately made from 14 helium nuclei. Elements heavier than iron and up to bismuth are made in neutron capture processes in lower mass stars, and their abundance in the universe (and on Earth) generally decreases with their atomic number.\nNearby galaxies that have evolved along similar lines to the Milky Way have a corresponding enrichment of elements heavier than hydrogen and helium. The more distant galaxies are being viewed as they appeared in the past, so their abundances of elements appear closer to the primordial mixture. However, as physical laws and processes appear common throughout the visible universe, scientists expect that these galaxies evolved elements in similar abundance.\nThe abundance of the chemical elements on Earth varies from air to crust to ocean, and in various types of life. The abundance of elements in Earth's crust differs from that in the Solar System (as seen in the Sun and massive planets like Jupiter) mainly in selective loss of the very lightest elements (hydrogen and helium) and also volatile neon, carbon (as hydrocarbons), nitrogen and sulfur, as a result of solar heating in the early formation of the Solar System. Oxygen, the most abundant element by mass in the Earth as a whole, is retained on Earth by combination with silicon, magnesium, and iron. Aluminium at 8% by mass is more common in the Earth's crust compared to the solar abundance, but it is only 2% by mass in the mantle, which has magnesium and iron in place of aluminium. The surface abundance of iron is lower because it has migrated to the Earth's core during the process of planetary differentiation.\nThe composition of the human body, by contrast, more closely follows the composition of seawater\u2014save that the human body has additional stores of carbon and nitrogen necessary to form the proteins and nucleic acids, together with phosphorus in the nucleic acids and energy transfer molecule adenosine triphosphate (ATP) that occurs in the cells of all living organisms. The bulk of all life forms on Earth consist of just six elements, described by the acronym CHNOPS: carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, and sulfur. Certain kinds of organisms require particular additional elements, for example the magnesium in chlorophyll in green plants, the calcium in mollusc shells, or the iron in the hemoglobin in vertebrates' red blood cells.\nHistory.\nThe concept of an \"element\" as an indivisible substance has developed through three major historical phases: Classical definitions (such as those of the ancient Greeks), chemical definitions, and atomic definitions.\nClassical definitions.\nAncient philosophy posited a set of classical elements to explain observed patterns in nature. These \"elements\" originally referred to \"earth\", \"water\", \"air\" and \"fire\" rather than the chemical elements of modern science.\nThe term 'elements' (\"stoicheia\") was first used by Greek philosopher Plato around 360\u00a0BCE in his dialogue Timaeus, which includes a discussion of the composition of inorganic and organic bodies and is a speculative treatise on chemistry. Plato believed the elements introduced a century earlier by Empedocles were composed of small polyhedral forms: tetrahedron (fire), octahedron (air), icosahedron (water), and cube (earth).\nAristotle, c.\u2009350 BCE, also used the term \"stoicheia\" and added a fifth element, aether, which formed the heavens. Aristotle defined an element as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Element \u2013 one of those bodies into which other bodies can decompose, and that itself is not capable of being divided into other.\nChemical definitions.\nRobert Boyle.\nIn 1661, in \"The Sceptical Chymist\", Robert Boyle proposed his theory of corpuscularism, which favoured the analysis of matter as constituted of irreducible units of matter (atoms). Boyle argued against deciding upon a pre-determined number of elements. This was in contrast with Aristotle's view of the four classical element and Paracelsus' view of three chemical principles of sulfur, mercury, and salt.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Much of what I am to deliver ... may be indifferently apply'd to the four Peripatetick Elements, and the three Chymical Principles ... the Chymical \"Hypothesis\" seeming to be much more countenanc'd by Experience then the other, it will be expedient to insist chiefly upon the disproving of that; especially since most of the Arguments that are imploy'd against it, may, by a little variation, be made ... at least as strongly against the less plausible, \"Aristotelian\" Doctrine.\nBoyle stated his view in four propositions. In the first and second, he suggests that matter consists of particles, but that these particles may be difficult to separate. Boyle used the concept of \"corpuscles\"\u2014or \"atomes\", as he also called them\u2014to explain how a limited number of elements could combine into a vast number of compounds.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Propos. I. \"... At the first Production of mixt Bodies, the Universal Matter whereof they ... consisted, was actually divided into little Particles.\" ... The Generation ... and wasting of Bodies ... and ... the Chymical Resolutions of mixt Bodies, and ... Operations of ... Fires upon them ... manifest their consisting of parts very minute... \"Epicurus\" ... as you well know, supposes ... all ... Bodies ... to be produc'd by ... Atomes, moving themselves to and fro ... in the ... Infinite \"Vacuum\". ... Propos. II. \"... These minute Particles ... were ... associated into minute ... Clusters ... not easily dissipable into such Particles as compos'd them.\" ... If we assigne to the Corpuscles, whereof each Element consists, a peculiar size and shape ... such ... Corpuscles may be mingled in such various Proportions, and ... connected so many ... wayes, that an almost incredible number of ... Concretes may be compos'd of them.\nBoyle explained that gold reacts with \"aqua regia,\" and mercury with nitric acid, sulfuric acid, and sulfur to produce various \"compounds\", and that they could be recovered from those compounds, just as would be expected of elements. Yet, Boyle did not consider gold, mercury, or lead elements, but rather\u2014together with wine\u2014\"perfectly mixt bodies\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Quicksilver ... with \"Aqua fortis\" will be brought into a ... white Powder ... with Sulphur it will compose a blood-red ... Cinaber. And yet out of all these exotick Compounds, we may recover the very same running Mercury. ... Propos. III. \"... From most of such mixt Bodies ... there may by the Help of the Fire, be actually obtain'd a determinate number (whether Three, Four or Five, or fewer or more) of Substances ...\"\nThe Chymists are wont to call the Ingredients of mixt Bodies, \"Principles\", as the \"Aristotelians\" name them \"Elements\". ... \"Principles\" ... as not being compounded of any more primary Bodies: and \"Elements\", in regard that all mix'd Bodies are compounded of them.\nEven though Boyle is primarily regarded as the first modern chemist, \"The Sceptical Chymist\" still contains old ideas about the elements, which are alien to a contemporary viewpoint. For example, sulfur is not only the familiar yellow non-metal but also an inflammable \"spirit\".\nIsaac Watts.\nIn 1724, in his book \"Logick\", the English minister and logician Isaac Watts enumerated the elements then recognised by chemists. Watts' list of elements included two of Paracelsus' \"principles\" (sulfur and salt) and two classical elements (earth and water) as well as \"spirit\". Watts did, however, note a lack of consensus among chemists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Elements are such Substances as cannot be resolved, or reduced, into two or more Substances of different Kinds. ... Followers of Aristotle made Fire, Air, Earth and Water to be the four Elements, of which all earthly Things were compounded; and they suppos'd the Heavens to be a Quintessence, or fifth sort of Body, distinct from all these : But, since experimental Philosophy ... have been better understood, this Doctrine has been abundantly refuted. The Chymists make Spirit, Salt, Sulphur, Water and Earth to be their five Elements, because they can reduce all terrestrial Things to these five :.. tho' they are not all agreed.\nTabulation.\nThe first modern list of elements was given in Antoine Lavoisier's 1789 \"Elements of Chemistry\", which contained 33 elements, including light and caloric. By 1818, J\u00f6ns Jacob Berzelius had determined atomic weights for 45 of the 49 then-accepted elements. Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev had 63 elements in his 1869 periodic table. Though earlier precursors to this presentation exist, its invention is generally credited to Mendeleev, who intended the table to illustrate recurring trends in the properties of the elements. The layout of the table has been refined and extended over time as new elements have been discovered and new theoretical models have been developed to explain chemical behavior.\nFrom Boyle until the early 20th century, an element was defined as a pure substance that cannot be decomposed into any simpler substance and cannot be transformed into other elements by chemical processes. Elements at the time were generally distinguished by their atomic weights, a property measurable with fair accuracy by available analytical techniques.\nAtomic definitions.\nThe 1913 discovery by English physicist Henry Moseley that the nuclear charge is the physical basis for the atomic number, further refined when the nature of protons and neutrons became appreciated, eventually led to the current definition of an element based on atomic number (number of protons). The use of atomic numbers, rather than atomic weights, to distinguish elements has greater predictive value (since these numbers are integers) and also resolves some ambiguities in the chemistry-based view due to varying properties of isotopes and allotropes within the same element. Currently, IUPAC defines an element to exist if it has isotopes with a lifetime longer than the 10\u221214 seconds it takes the nucleus to form an electronic cloud.\nBy 1914, eighty-seven elements were known, all naturally occurring (see Discovery of chemical elements). The remaining naturally occurring elements were discovered or isolated in subsequent decades, and various additional elements have also been produced synthetically, with much of that work pioneered by Glenn T. Seaborg. The final naturally-occurring radioactive element, francium, was discovered in 1939 by Marguerite Perey. In 1955, element 101 was discovered and named mendelevium in honor of D. I. Mendeleev, the first to arrange the elements periodically.\nDiscovery and recognition of various elements.\nEleven materials familiar to various prehistoric cultures are now known to be elements: antimony, carbon, copper, gold, iron, lead, mercury, silver, sulfur, tin, and zinc. Two additional materials now accepted as elements, arsenic and bismuth, were recognised as distinct substances before 1500 AD. Platinum was known in Pre-Columbian America. The first recorded discovery of a new element was of phosphorus by the German alchemist Hennig Brand in 1669. In 1896 Henri Becquerel serendipitously discovered radioactivity from uranium.\nMost of the remaining naturally occurring elements were identified and characterised by 1900, including:\nElements isolated or produced since 1900 include:\nRecently discovered elements.\nThe first transuranium element (element with an atomic number greater than 92) discovered was neptunium in 1940. Since 1999, the IUPAC/IUPAP Joint Working Party has considered claims for the discovery of new elements. As of January 2016, all 118 elements have been confirmed by IUPAC as being discovered. The discovery of element 112 was acknowledged in 2009, and the name \"copernicium\" and the chemical symbol \"Cn\" were suggested for it. The name and symbol were officially endorsed by IUPAC on 19 February 2010. The heaviest element that is believed to have been synthesised to date is element 118, oganesson, on 9 October 2006, by the Flerov Laboratory of Nuclear Reactions in Dubna, Russia. Tennessine, element 117 was the latest element claimed to be discovered, in 2009. On 28 November 2016, scientists at the IUPAC officially recognised the names for the four newest elements, with atomic numbers 113, 115, 117, and 118.\nPrimordial\u2003 From decay\u2003 Synthetic\u2003Border shows natural occurrence of the element\nStandard atomic weight \"A\"r, std(E)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt; \nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5661", "revid": "41719756", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5661", "title": "Centime", "text": "Fraction currency in several Francophone countries\nA centime (from ) is a fractional monetary unit. It equals one-hundredth of a franc in Switzerland, one-hundredth of a dinar in Algeria, and one-hundredth of a dirham in Morocco. It was formerly worth one-hundredth of a franc in other Francophone countries, such as Belgium and France, until the adoption of the euro.\nIn France, the usage of \"centime\" goes back to the introduction of the decimal monetary system under Napoleon. This system aimed at replacing non-decimal fractions of older coins. A five-centime coin was known as a \"sou\", i.e. a solidus or shilling.\nIn Francophone Canada &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u2044100 of a Canadian dollar is officially known as a \"cent\" (pronounced /s\u025bnt/) in both English and French. However, in practice, the form of \"cenne\" (pronounced /s\u025bn/) has completely replaced the official \"cent\". Spoken and written use of the official form \"cent\" in Francophone Canada is exceptionally uncommon.\nIn the Canadian French vernacular \"sou\", \"sou noir\" ( means \"black\" in French), \"cenne\", and \"cenne noire\" are all widely known, used, and accepted monikers when referring to either &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u2044100 of a Canadian dollar or the 1\u00a2 coin (colloquially known as a \"penny\" in North American English).\nSubdivision of euro.\nIn the European community, \"cent\" is the official name for one hundredth of a euro. However, in French-speaking countries, the word \"centime \"is the preferred term. The Superior Council of the French language of Belgium recommended in 2001 the use of \"centime\", since \"cent\" is also the French word for \"hundred\". An analogous decision was published in the \"Journal officiel\" in France (2 December 1997).\nIn Morocco, dirhams are divided into 100 \"centime\"s and one may find prices in the country quoted in \"centime\"s rather than in dirhams. Sometimes \"centime\"s are known as francs or, in former Spanish areas, pesetas.\nUsage.\nA centime is one-hundredth of the following basic monetary units:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5662", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5662", "title": "Calendar year", "text": "Period of time\nA calendar year begins on the New Year's Day of the given calendar system and ends on the day before the following New Year's Day, and thus consists of a whole number of days.\nThe Gregorian calendar year, which is in use as civil calendar in most of the world, begins on January 1 and ends on December 31. It has a length of 365 days in an ordinary year but, in order to reconcile the calendar year with the astronomical cycle, it has 366 days in a leap year. With 97 leap years every 400 years, the Gregorian calendar year has an average length of 365.2425 days.\nOther formula-based calendars can have lengths which are further out of step with the solar cycle: for example, the Julian calendar has an average length of 365.25 days, and the Hebrew calendar has an average length of 365.2468 days. The Lunar Hijri calendar (\"Islamic calendar\") is a lunar calendar consisting of 12 lunar months in a year of 354 or 355 days. The astronomer's mean tropical year, which is averaged over equinoxes and solstices, is currently 365.24219 days, slightly shorter than the average length of the calendar year in most calendars.\nA year can also be measured by starting on any other named day of the calendar, and ending on the day before this named day in the following year. This may be termed a \"year's time\", but is not a \"calendar year\".\nQuarter year.\nThe calendar year can be divided into four quarters, often abbreviated as Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4. Since they are three months each, they are also called trimesters. In the Gregorian calendar:\nIn some domains, weeks are preferred over months for scheduling and reporting, so they use quarters of exactly 13 weeks each, often following ISO week date conventions. One in five to six years has a 53rd week which is usually appended to the last quarter. It is then 98 days instead of 91 days long, which complicates comparisons.\nIn the Chinese calendar, the quarters are traditionally associated with the 4 seasons of the year:\nQuadrimester.\nThe calendar year can also be divided into quadrimesters (from French \"quadrimestre\"), lasting for four months each. They can also be called the early, middle, or late parts of the year. In the Gregorian calendar:\nSemester.\nThe calendar year can also be divided into semesters, lasting six months each and often being abbreviated as S1 and S2. In the Gregorian calendar:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5663", "revid": "38919044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5663", "title": "CFA franc", "text": "Two common currencies of 14 African countries\nCFA franc (, ) is the name of two currencies used by 210 million people (as of 2023) in fourteen African countries: the West African CFA franc (where \"CFA\" stands for , i.e. \"African Financial Community\" in English), used in eight West African countries, and the Central African CFA franc (where \"CFA\" stands for , i.e. \"Financial Cooperation in Central Africa\" in English), used in six Central African countries. The ISO currency codes are XOF for the West African CFA franc and XAF for the Central African CFA franc. Although the two currencies are commonly called \"CFA franc\" and (currently) have the same value, they are not interchangeable. It is therefore not a common monetary zone but two juxtaposed zones.\nBoth CFA francs have a fixed exchange rate (peg) to the euro guaranteed by France: \u20ac1 = F.CFA\u00a0655.957 exactly. To ensure this convertibility guarantee, member countries were required to deposit half of their foreign exchange reserves with the French Treasury, but this requirement was dropped in 2019 (effective in 2021) for the West African CFA franc. This requirement remains unchanged for the Central African CFA franc, which wasn't reformed in 2019. These currencies have been criticized for restricting the sovereignty of the African member states, effectively putting their monetary policy in the hands of the European Central Bank. Others argue that countries using CFA franc are all equal and that CFA franc \"helps stabilize the national currencies of Franc Zone member-countries and greatly facilitates the flow of exports and imports between France and the member-countries\".\nOn 22 December 2019, it was announced that the West African currency would be reformed and replaced by an independent currency to be called Eco. In May 2020, the French National Assembly agreed to end the French engagement in the West African CFA franc, including the foreign reserve deposit requirements, thereby facilitating the transition to the Eco. Despite initial plans for a monetary union by late 2020, setbacks including the COVID-19 pandemic, global geopolitical uncertainties, and failure to meet criteria resulted postponements, with the fifth launch target date set for July 2027.\nUsage.\nCFA francs are used in fourteen countries: twelve nations formerly ruled by France in West and Central Africa (excluding Guinea and Mauritania, which withdrew), plus Guinea-Bissau (a former Portuguese colony), and Equatorial Guinea (a former Spanish colony). These fourteen countries have a combined population of 210.4\u00a0million people (as of 2023), and a combined annual GDP of US$313.7\u00a0billion (as of 2023).\nName.\nBetween 1945 and 1958, CFA stood for (\"French colonies of Africa\"); then for (\"French Community of Africa\") between 1958 (establishment of the French Fifth Republic) and the independence of these African countries at the beginning of the 1960s. Since independence, CFA is taken to mean (African Financial Community) or \"Coop\u00e9ration financi\u00e8re en Afrique centrale\" (see Institutions below).\nHistory.\nCreation.\nThe CFA franc was created on 26 December 1945, along with the CFP franc. The reason for their creation was the weakness of the French franc immediately after World War II. When France ratified the Bretton Woods Agreement in December 1945, the French franc was devalued in order to set a fixed exchange rate with the US dollar. New currencies were created in the French colonies to spare them the strong devaluation, thereby making it easier for them to import goods from France (and simultaneously making it harder for them to export goods to France). French officials presented the decision as an act of generosity. Ren\u00e9 Pleven, the French Minister of Finance, was quoted as saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In a show of her generosity and selflessness, metropolitan France, wishing not to impose on her far-away daughters the consequences of her own poverty, is setting different exchange rates for their currency.\nExchange rate.\nThe CFA franc was created with a fixed exchange rate versus the French franc. This exchange rate was changed only twice, in 1948 and in 1994 (besides nominal adaptation to the new French franc in 1960 and the Euro in 1999).\nExchange rate:\nThe 1960 and 1999 events merely reflect changes of currency in use in France: the actual relative value of the CFA franc versus the French franc/euro only changed in 1948 and 1994.\nChanges in countries using the franc.\nIn 1960, the period of global decolonization began, marking the end of European empires on the African continent. France disappeared from the map, leaving behind the CFA franc, a legacy of colonization, which circulates in almost all former French possessions in Africa. Over time, the number of countries and territories using the CFA franc has changed as some countries began introducing their own separate currencies. A couple of nations in West Africa have also chosen to adopt the CFA franc since its introduction, despite the fact that they had never been French colonies.\nEuropean Monetary Union.\nIn 1998, in anticipation of Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union, the Council of the European Union addressed the monetary agreements France had with the CFA Zone and Comoros and ruled that:\nCriticism in France.\nThe yellow vest movement in France includes in its brochure the demand for the end of the CFA franc in Central and West Africa. The yellow vest movement, perceives the CFA franc as a tool of French imperialism and a catch-all on African economies.\nCurrency printed in France.\nThe Banque de France is responsible for producing CFA franc notes and coins in its Chamali\u00e8res factory, which is seen by some critics as a lack of sovereignty for African states.\nCurrency devaluation.\nThe countries of the CFA franc zone are seen as the preserve of the former guardian power, France, which leads to situation that sometimes fuels rumors of a devaluation of the CFA franc. The CFA franc is too strong a currency, overvalued by about 10%. Even if in the short term, the option of a devaluation seems to be excluded.\nSymbolism.\nFor some African economists, the debate on economic realities should be prioritized over the symbols of the CFA franc.\nRight of veto.\nFrance retains a right of veto over the monetary policies of the states of the CFA Franc Zone of West Africa and Central Africa.\nStability.\nFor supporters of the CFA Franc, the economic stability that the CFA Franc provides lies in monetary cooperation. The underdevelopment of the countries in the franc zone is attributed to factors independent of their monetary and exchange rate policies.\nProfits of French companies.\nThe actual flows of the CFA franc come mainly from Africa, with profits from African economies going to French companies.\nCriticism and replacement in West Africa.\nThe currency has been criticized for making national monetary policy for the developing countries of French West Africa all but impossible, since the CFA's value is pegged to the euro (whose monetary policy is set by the European Central Bank). Others disagree and argue that the CFA \"helps stabilize the national currencies of Franc Zone member-countries and greatly facilitates the flow of exports and imports between France and the member-countries\". The European Union's 2008 assessment of the CFA's link to the euro noted that \"benefits from economic integration within each of the two monetary unions of the CFA franc zone, and even more so between them, remained remarkably low\" but that \"the peg to the French franc and, since 1999, to the euro as exchange rate anchor is usually found to have had favourable effects in the region in terms of macroeconomic stability\".\nCritics point out that the currency is controlled by the French treasury, and in turn African countries channel more money to France than they receive in aid and have no sovereignty over their monetary policies. In January 2019, Italian ministers accused France of impoverishing Africa through the CFA franc, and criticism continued from various African organizations. On 21 December 2019, President Alassane Ouattara of the Ivory Coast and President Emmanuel Macron of France announced an initiative to replace the West African CFA Franc with the Eco. Subsequently, a reform of the West African CFA franc was initiated. In May 2020, the French National Assembly agreed to end the French engagement in the West African CFA franc. The countries using the currency will no longer have to deposit half of their foreign exchange reserves with the French Treasury. In December 2024, in a report adopted by the French Foreign Affairs Committee, it was published that the reform of the CFA franc in 2019 had been incomplete, largely due to the reluctance of African heads of state to complete it.\nIn November 2024, the 'Tournons la Page' network and the Sciences Po Center for International Research (CERI) published a survey on relations between West African and Central African countries from former French possessions. Nearly 95% of West Africans surveyed expressed their desire to leave.\nThe broader Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), which includes the members of UEMOA, plans to introduce its own common currency for its member states by 2027, for which they have also formally adopted the name Eco.\nDebate on ending the Central African CFA.\nOn April 25, 2023, the subject of the CFA franc was discussed at the ministerial meeting of the Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa (CEMAC) and France. The French perceive the guarantee provided to the CFA franc, and the assurance of its convertibility, as a pillar of economic stability for the region. France remains \u201copen\u201d and \u201cavailable\u201d to CEMAC proposals to reform monetary cooperation in Central Africa, as has happened in West Africa.https://\nActivism against the CFA Franc.\nIn May 2025, activists, economists and civil society representatives opposed to the use of the CFA franc will organize conferences and meetings across African capitals.\nInstitutions.\nThere are two different currencies called the CFA franc: the West African CFA franc (ISO 4217 currency code XOF), and the Central Africa CFA franc (ISO 4217 currency code XAF). They are distinguished in French by the meaning of the abbreviation CFA. These two CFA francs have the same exchange rate with the euro (1 euro = 655.957 XOF = 655.957 XAF), and they are both guaranteed by the French treasury (), but the two currencies are only legal tender in their respective member countries.\nWest African.\nThe West African CFA franc (XOF) is known in French as the , where CFA stands for ('Financial Community of Africa') or (\"African Financial Community\"). It is issued by the BCEAO (, i.e., \"Central Bank of the West African States\"), located in Dakar, Senegal, for the eight countries of the UEMOA (, i.e., \"West African Economic and Monetary Union\"):\nThese eight countries have a combined population of 147.6\u00a0million people (as of 2023), and a combined GDP of US$199.4\u00a0billion (as of 2023).\nCentral Africa.\nThe Central Africa CFA franc (XAF) is known in French as the , where CFA stands for (\"Financial Cooperation in Central Africa\"). It is issued by the BEAC (, i.e., \"Bank of the Central African States\"), located in Yaound\u00e9, Cameroon, for the six countries of the CEMAC (, i.e., \"Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa\"):\nThese six countries have a combined population of 62.8\u00a0million people (as of 2023), and a combined GDP of US$114.3\u00a0billion (as of 2023).\nIn 1975, Central African CFA banknotes were issued with an obverse unique to each participating country, and common reverse, in a fashion similar to euro coins.\nEquatorial Guinea, the only former Spanish colony in the zone, adopted the CFA in 1984.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "5664", "revid": "49989869", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5664", "title": "Consciousness", "text": "Awareness of existence\nConsciousness, at its simplest, is awareness of states or objects either internal to one's self or in one's external environment. However, its nature has led to millennia of explanations, analyses, and debate among philosophers, scientists, and theologians. Opinions differ about \"what\" exactly needs to be studied, or can even be considered consciousness. In some explanations, it is synonymous with mind, and at other times, an aspect of it.\nIn the past, consciousness meant one's \"inner life\": the world of introspection, private thought, imagination, and volition. Today, it often includes any kind of cognition, experience, feeling, or perception. It may be awareness, awareness of awareness, metacognition, or self-awareness, either continuously changing or not. There is also a medical definition that helps, for example, to discern \"coma\" from other states. The disparate range of research, notions, and speculations raises some curiosity about whether the right questions are being asked.\nExamples of the range of descriptions, definitions and explanations are: ordered distinction between self and environment, simple wakefulness, one's sense of selfhood or soul explored by \"looking within\", being a metaphorical \"stream\" of contents, or being a mental state, mental event, or mental process of the brain.\nEtymology.\nThe words \"conscious\" and \"consciousness\" in the English language date to the 17th century, and the first recorded use of \"conscious\" as a simple adjective was applied figuratively to inanimate objects (\"the conscious Groves\", 1643).175 It derived from the Latin \"conscius\" (\"con-\" \"together\" and \"scio\" \"to know\") which meant \"knowing with\" or \"having joint or common knowledge with another\", especially as in sharing a secret. Thomas Hobbes in \"Leviathan\" (1651) wrote: \"Where two, or more men, know of one and the same fact, they are said to be Conscious of it one to another\". There were also many occurrences in Latin writings of the phrase \"conscius sibi\", which translates literally as \"knowing with oneself\", or in other words \"sharing knowledge with oneself about something\". This phrase has the figurative sense of \"knowing that one knows\", which is something like the modern English word \"conscious\", but it was rendered into English as \"conscious to oneself\" or \"conscious unto oneself\". For example, Archbishop Ussher wrote in 1613 of \"being so conscious unto myself of my great weakness\".\nThe Latin ', literally \"knowledge-with\", first appears in Roman juridical texts by writers such as Cicero. It means a kind of shared knowledge with moral value, specifically what a witness knows of someone else's deeds. Although Ren\u00e9 Descartes (1596\u20131650), writing in Latin, is generally taken to be the first philosopher to use \"conscientia\" in a way less like the traditional meaning and more like the way modern English speakers would use \"conscience\", his meaning is nowhere defined. In \"Search after Truth\" (', Amsterdam 1701) he wrote the word with a gloss: \"conscienti\u00e2, vel interno testimonio\" (translatable as \"conscience, or internal testimony\"). It might mean the knowledge of the value of one's own thoughts.\nThe origin of the modern concept of consciousness is often attributed to John Locke who defined the word in his \"Essay Concerning Human Understanding\", published in 1690, as \"the perception of what passes in a man's own mind\". The essay strongly influenced 18th-century British philosophy, and Locke's definition appeared in Samuel Johnson's celebrated \"Dictionary\" (1755).\nThe French term \"conscience\" is defined roughly like English \"consciousness\" in the 1753 volume of Diderot and d'Alembert's Encyclop\u00e9die as \"the opinion or internal feeling that we ourselves have from what we do\".\nProblem of definition.\nScholars are divided as to whether Aristotle had a concept of consciousness. He does not use any single word or terminology that is clearly similar to the phenomenon or concept defined by John Locke. Victor Caston contends that Aristotle did have a concept more clearly similar to perception.\nModern dictionary definitions of the word \"consciousness\" evolved over several centuries and reflect a range of seemingly related meanings, with some differences that have been controversial, such as the distinction between \"inward awareness\" and \"perception\" of the physical world, or the distinction between \"conscious\" and \"unconscious\", or the notion of a \"mental entity\" or \"mental activity\" that is not physical.\nThe common-usage definitions of \"consciousness\" in \"Webster's Third New International Dictionary\" (1966) are as follows:\nThe \"Cambridge English Dictionary\" defines consciousness as \"the state of being awake, thinking, and knowing what is happening around you\", as well as \"the state of understanding and realizing something\".\nThe \"Oxford Living Dictionary\" defines consciousness as \"[t]he state of being aware of and responsive to one's surroundings\", \"[a] person's awareness or perception of something\", and \"[t]he fact of awareness by the mind of itself and the world\".\nPhilosophers have attempted to clarify technical distinctions by using a jargon of their own. The corresponding entry in the \"Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy\" (1998) reads:\nTraditional metaphors for mind.\nDuring the early 19th century, the emerging field of geology inspired a popular metaphor that the mind likewise had hidden layers \"which recorded the past of the individual\".3 By 1875, most psychologists believed that \"consciousness was but a small part of mental life\",3 and this idea underlies the goal of Freudian therapy, to expose the unconscious layer of the mind.\nOther metaphors from various sciences inspired other analyses of the mind, for example: Johann Friedrich Herbart described ideas as being attracted and repulsed like magnets; John Stuart Mill developed the idea of \"mental chemistry\" and \"mental compounds\", and Edward B. Titchener sought the \"structure\" of the mind by analyzing its \"elements\". The abstract idea of \"states of consciousness\" mirrored the concept of states of matter.\nIn 1892, William James noted that the \"ambiguous word 'content' has been recently invented instead of 'object'\" and that the metaphor of mind as a container seemed to minimize the dualistic problem of how \"states of consciousness can know\" things, or objects;465 by 1899 psychologists were busily studying the \"contents of conscious experience by introspection and experiment\". Another popular metaphor was James's doctrine of the stream of consciousness, with continuity, fringes, and transitions.vii\nJames discussed the difficulties of describing and studying psychological phenomena, recognizing that commonly used terminology was a necessary and acceptable starting point towards more precise, scientifically justified language. Prime examples were phrases like \"inner experience\" and \"personal consciousness\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The first and foremost concrete fact which every one will affirm to belong to his inner experience is the fact that consciousness of some sort goes on. 'States of mind' succeed each other in him. [...] But everyone knows what the terms mean [only] in a rough way; [...] When I say every 'state' or 'thought' is part of a personal consciousness, 'personal consciousness' is one of the terms in question. Its meaning we know so long as no one asks us to define it, but to give an accurate account of it is the most difficult of philosophic tasks. [...] The only states of consciousness that we naturally deal with are found in personal consciousnesses, minds, selves, concrete particular I's and you's.\nFrom introspection to awareness and experience.\nPrior to the 20th century, philosophers treated the phenomenon of consciousness as the \"inner world [of] one's own mind\", and introspection was the mind \"attending to\" itself, an activity seemingly distinct from that of perceiving the \"outer world\" and its physical phenomena. In 1892 William James noted the distinction along with doubts about the inward character of the mind:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;'Things' have been doubted, but thoughts and feelings have never been doubted. The outer world, but never the inner world, has been denied. Everyone assumes that we have direct introspective acquaintance with our thinking activity as such, with our consciousness as something inward and contrasted with the outer objects which it knows. Yet I must confess that for my part I cannot feel sure of this conclusion. [...] It seems as if consciousness as an inner activity were rather a \"postulate\" than a sensibly given fact...\nBy the 1960s, for many philosophers and psychologists who talked about consciousness, the word no longer meant the 'inner world' but an indefinite, large category called \"awareness\", as in the following example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMany philosophers and scientists have been unhappy about the difficulty of producing a definition that does not involve circularity or fuzziness. In The \"Macmillan Dictionary of Psychology\" (1989 edition), Stuart Sutherland emphasized external awareness, and expressed a skeptical attitude more than a definition:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Consciousness\u2014The having of perceptions, thoughts, and feelings; awareness. The term is impossible to define except in terms that are unintelligible without a grasp of what consciousness means. Many fall into the trap of equating consciousness with self-consciousness\u2014to be conscious it is only necessary to be aware of the external world. Consciousness is a fascinating but elusive phenomenon: it is impossible to specify what it is, what it does, or why it has evolved. Nothing worth reading has been written on it.\nUsing 'awareness', however, as a definition or synonym of consciousness is not a simple matter:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If awareness of the environment . . . is the criterion of consciousness, then even the protozoans are conscious. If awareness of awareness is required, then it is doubtful whether the great apes and human infants are conscious.\nIn 1974, philosopher Thomas Nagel used 'consciousness', 'conscious experience', 'subjective experience' and the 'subjective character of experience' as synonyms for something that \"occurs at many levels of animal life\u00a0... [although] it is difficult to say in general what provides evidence of it.\" Nagel's terminology also included what has been described as \"the standard 'what it's like' locution\" in reference to the impenetrable subjectivity of any organism's experience which Nagel referred to as \"inner life\" without implying any kind of introspection. On Nagel's approach, Peter Hacker commented:158 \"Consciousness, thus conceived, is extended to the whole domain of 'experience'\u2014of 'Life' subjectively understood.\" He regarded this as a \"novel analysis of consciousness\"14 and has been particularly critical of Nagel's terminology and its philosophical consequences. In 2002 he attacked Nagel's 'what it's like' phrase as \"malconstructed\" and meaningless English\u2014it sounds as if it asks for an analogy, but does not\u2014and he called Nagel's approach logically \"misconceived\" as a definition of consciousness. In 2012 Hacker went further and asserted that Nagel had \"laid the groundwork for\u00a0... forty years of fresh confusion about consciousness\" and that \"the contemporary philosophical conception of consciousness that is embraced by the 'consciousness studies community' is incoherent\".13-15\nInfluence on research.\nMany philosophers have argued that consciousness is a unitary concept that is understood by the majority of people despite the difficulty philosophers have had defining it. The term 'subjective experience', following Nagel, is amibiguous, as philosophers seem to differ from non-philosophers in their intuitions about its meaning. Max Velmans proposed that the \"everyday understanding of consciousness\" uncontroversially \"refers to experience itself rather than any particular thing that we observe or experience\" and he added that consciousness \"is [therefore] exemplified by all the things that we observe or experience\",4 whether thoughts, feelings, or perceptions. Velmans noted however, as of 2009, that there was a deep level of \"confusion and internal division\" among experts about the phenomenon of consciousness, because researchers lacked \"a sufficiently well-specified use of the term...to agree that they are investigating the same thing\".3 He argued additionally that \"pre-existing theoretical commitments\" to competing explanations of consciousness might be a source of bias.\nWithin the \"modern consciousness studies\" community the technical phrase 'phenomenal consciousness' is a common synonym for all forms of awareness, or simply 'experience',4 without differentiating between inner and outer, or between higher and lower types. With advances in brain research, \"the presence or absence of \"experienced phenomena\"\"3 of any kind underlies the work of those neuroscientists who seek \"to analyze the precise relation of conscious phenomenology to its associated information processing\" in the brain.10 This neuroscientific goal is to find the \"neural correlates of consciousness\" (NCC). One criticism of this goal is that it begins with a theoretical commitment to the neurological origin of all \"experienced phenomena\" whether inner or outer. Also, the fact that the easiest 'content of consciousness' to be so analyzed is \"the experienced three-dimensional world (the phenomenal world) beyond the body surface\"4 invites another criticism, that most consciousness research since the 1990s, perhaps because of bias, has focused on processes of external perception.\nFrom a history of psychology perspective, Julian Jaynes rejected popular but \"superficial views of consciousness\"447 especially those which equate it with \"that vaguest of terms, experience\". In 1976 he insisted that if not for introspection, which for decades had been ignored or taken for granted rather than explained, there could be no \"conception of what consciousness is\"18 and in 1990, he reaffirmed the traditional idea of the phenomenon called 'consciousness', writing that \"its denotative definition is, as it was for Ren\u00e9 Descartes, John Locke, and David Hume, what is introspectable\".450 Jaynes saw consciousness as an important but small part of human mentality, and he asserted: \"there can be no progress in the science of consciousness until\u00a0... what is introspectable [is] sharply distinguished\"447 from the unconscious processes of cognition such as perception, reactive awareness and attention, and automatic forms of learning, problem-solving, and decision-making.21-47\nThe cognitive science point of view\u2014with an inter-disciplinary perspective involving fields such as psychology, linguistics and anthropology\u2014requires no agreed definition of \"consciousness\" but studies the interaction of many processes besides perception. For some researchers, consciousness is linked to some kind of \"selfhood\", for example to certain pragmatic issues such as the feeling of agency and the effects of regret and action on experience of one's own body or social identity. Similarly Daniel Kahneman, who focused on systematic errors in perception, memory and decision-making, has differentiated between two kinds of mental processes, or cognitive \"systems\": the \"fast\" activities that are primary, automatic and \"cannot be turned off\",22 and the \"slow\", deliberate, effortful activities of a secondary system \"often associated with the subjective experience of agency, choice, and concentration\".13 Kahneman's two systems have been described as \"roughly corresponding to unconscious and conscious processes\". The two systems can interact, for example in sharing the control of attention.22 While System 1 can be impulsive, \"System 2 is in charge of self-control\",26 and \"When we think of ourselves, we identify with System 2, the conscious, reasoning self that has beliefs, makes choices, and decides what to think about and what to do\".21\nSome have argued that we should eliminate the concept from our understanding of the mind, a position known as consciousness semanticism.\nMedical definition.\nIn medicine, a \"level of consciousness\" terminology is used to describe a patient's arousal and responsiveness, which can be seen as a continuum of states ranging from full alertness and comprehension, through disorientation, delirium, loss of meaningful communication, and finally loss of movement in response to painful stimuli. Issues of practical concern include how the level of consciousness can be assessed in severely ill, comatose, or anesthetized people, and how to treat conditions in which consciousness is impaired or disrupted. The degree or level of consciousness is measured by standardized behavior observation scales such as the Glasgow Coma Scale.\nPhilosophy of mind.\nWhile historically philosophers have defended various views on consciousness, surveys indicate that physicalism is now the dominant position among contemporary philosophers of mind. For an overview of the field, approaches often include both historical perspectives (e.g., Descartes, Locke, Kant) and organization by key issues in contemporary debates. An alternative is to focus primarily on current philosophical stances and empirical findings.\nCoherence of the concept.\nPhilosophers differ from non-philosophers in their intuitions about what consciousness is. While most people have a strong intuition for the existence of what they refer to as consciousness, skeptics argue that this intuition is too narrow, either because the concept of consciousness is embedded in our intuitions, or because we all are illusions. Gilbert Ryle, for example, argued that traditional understanding of consciousness depends on a Cartesian dualist outlook that improperly distinguishes between mind and body, or between mind and world. He proposed that we speak not of minds, bodies, and the world, but of entities, or identities, acting in the world. Thus, by speaking of \"consciousness\" we end up leading ourselves by thinking that there is any sort of thing as consciousness separated from behavioral and linguistic understandings.\nTypes.\nNed Block argues that discussions on consciousness often fail to properly distinguish \"phenomenal consciousness\" from \"access consciousness\". These terms had been used before Block, but he adopted the short forms P-consciousness and A-consciousness. According to Block:\nBlock adds that P-consciousness does not allow of easy definition: he admits that he \"cannot define P-consciousness in any remotely noncircular way.\nAlthough some philosophers, such as Daniel Dennett, have disputed the validity of this distinction, others have broadly accepted it. David Chalmers has argued that A-consciousness can in principle be understood in mechanistic terms, but that understanding P-consciousness is much more challenging: he calls this the hard problem of consciousness.\nSome philosophers believe that Block's two types of consciousness are not the end of the story. William Lycan, for example, argued in his book \"Consciousness and Experience\" that at least eight clearly distinct types of consciousness can be identified (organism consciousness; control consciousness; consciousness \"of\"; state/event consciousness; reportability; introspective consciousness; subjective consciousness; self-consciousness)\u2014and that even this list omits several more obscure forms.\nThere is also debate over whether or not A-consciousness and P-consciousness always coexist or if they can exist separately. Although P-consciousness without A-consciousness is more widely accepted, there have been some hypothetical examples of A without P. Block, for instance, suggests the case of a \"zombie\" that is computationally identical to a person but without any subjectivity. However, he remains somewhat skeptical concluding \"I don't know whether there are any actual cases of A-consciousness without P-consciousness, but I hope I have illustrated their conceptual possibility\".\nDistinguishing consciousness from its contents.\nSam Harris observes: \"At the level of your experience, you are not a body of cells, organelles, and atoms; you are consciousness and its ever-changing contents\". Seen in this way, consciousness is a subjectively experienced, ever-present field in which things (the contents of consciousness) come and go.\nChristopher Tricker argues that this field of consciousness is symbolized by the mythical bird that opens the Daoist classic the \"Zhuangzi.\" This bird's name is Of a Flock (\"peng\" \u9d6c), yet its back is countless thousands of miles across and its wings are like clouds arcing across the heavens. \"Like Of a Flock, whose wings arc across the heavens, the wings of your consciousness span to the horizon. At the same time, the wings of every other being's consciousness span to the horizon. You are of a flock, one bird among kin.\"\nMind\u2013body problem.\nMental processes (such as consciousness) and physical processes (such as brain events) seem to be correlated, however the specific nature of the connection is unknown.\nThe first influential philosopher to discuss this question specifically was Descartes, and the answer he gave is known as mind\u2013body dualism. Descartes proposed that consciousness resides within an immaterial domain he called \"res cogitans\" (the realm of thought), in contrast to the domain of material things, which he called \"res extensa\" (the realm of extension). He suggested that the interaction between these two domains occurs inside the brain, perhaps in a small midline structure called the pineal gland.\nAlthough it is widely accepted that Descartes explained the problem cogently, few later philosophers have been happy with his solution, and his ideas about the pineal gland have especially been ridiculed. However, no alternative solution has gained general acceptance. Proposed solutions can be divided broadly into two categories: dualist solutions that maintain Descartes's rigid distinction between the realm of consciousness and the realm of matter but give different answers for how the two realms relate to each other; and monist solutions that maintain that there is really only one realm of being, of which consciousness and matter are both aspects. Each of these categories itself contains numerous variants. The two main types of dualism are substance dualism (which holds that the mind is formed of a distinct type of substance not governed by the laws of physics), and property dualism (which holds that the laws of physics are universally valid but cannot be used to explain the mind). The three main types of monism are physicalism (which holds that the mind is made out of matter), idealism (which holds that only thought or experience truly exists, and matter is merely an illusion), and neutral monism (which holds that both mind and matter are aspects of a distinct essence that is itself identical to neither of them). There are also, however, a large number of idiosyncratic theories that cannot cleanly be assigned to any of these schools of thought.\nSince the dawn of Newtonian science with its vision of simple mechanical principles governing the entire universe, some philosophers have been tempted by the idea that consciousness could be explained in purely physical terms. The first influential writer to propose such an idea explicitly was Julien Offray de La Mettrie, in his book \"Man a Machine\" (\"L'homme machine\"). His arguments, however, were very abstract. The most influential modern physical theories of consciousness are based on psychology and neuroscience. Theories proposed by neuroscientists such as Gerald Edelman and Antonio Damasio, and by philosophers such as Daniel Dennett, seek to explain consciousness in terms of neural events occurring within the brain. Many other neuroscientists, such as Christof Koch, have explored the neural basis of consciousness without attempting to frame all-encompassing global theories. At the same time, computer scientists working in the field of artificial intelligence have pursued the goal of creating digital computer programs that can simulate or embody consciousness.\nA few theoretical physicists have argued that classical physics is intrinsically incapable of explaining the holistic aspects of consciousness, but that quantum theory may provide the missing ingredients. Several theorists have therefore proposed quantum mind (QM) theories of consciousness. Notable theories falling into this category include the holonomic brain theory of Karl Pribram and David Bohm, and the Orch-OR theory formulated by Stuart Hameroff and Roger Penrose. Some of these QM theories offer descriptions of phenomenal consciousness, as well as QM interpretations of access consciousness. None of the quantum mechanical theories have been confirmed by experiment. Recent publications by G. Guerreshi, J. Cia, S. Popescu, and H. Briegel could falsify proposals such as those of Hameroff, which rely on quantum entanglement in protein. At the present time many scientists and philosophers consider the arguments for an important role of quantum phenomena to be unconvincing. Empirical evidence is against the notion of quantum consciousness, an experiment about wave function collapse led by Catalina Curceanu in 2022 suggests that quantum consciousness, as suggested by Roger Penrose and Stuart Hameroff, is highly implausible.\nApart from the general question of the \"hard problem\" of consciousness (which is, roughly speaking, the question of how mental experience can arise from a physical basis), a more specialized question is how to square the subjective notion that we are in control of our decisions (at least in some small measure) with the customary view of causality that subsequent events are caused by prior events. The topic of free will is the philosophical and scientific examination of this conundrum.\nProblem of other minds.\nMany philosophers consider experience to be the essence of consciousness, and believe that experience can only fully be known from the inside, subjectively. The problem of other minds is a philosophical problem traditionally stated as the following epistemological question: Given that I can only observe the behavior of others, how can I know that others have minds? The problem of other minds is particularly acute for people who believe in the possibility of philosophical zombies, that is, people who think it is possible in principle to have an entity that is physically indistinguishable from a human being and behaves like a human being in every way but nevertheless lacks consciousness. Related issues have also been studied extensively by Greg Littmann of the University of Illinois, and by Colin Allen (a professor at the University of Pittsburgh) regarding the literature and research studying artificial intelligence in androids.\nThe most commonly given answer is that we attribute consciousness to other people because we see that they resemble us in appearance and behavior; we reason that if they look like us and act like us, they must be like us in other ways, including having experiences of the sort that we do. There are, however, a variety of problems with that explanation. For one thing, it seems to violate the principle of parsimony, by postulating an invisible entity that is not necessary to explain what we observe. Some philosophers, such as Daniel Dennett in a research paper titled \"The Unimagined Preposterousness of Zombies\", argue that people who give this explanation do not really understand what they are saying. More broadly, philosophers who do not accept the possibility of zombies generally believe that consciousness is reflected in behavior (including verbal behavior), and that we attribute consciousness on the basis of behavior. A more straightforward way of saying this is that we attribute experiences to people because of what they can \"do\", including the fact that they can tell us about their experiences.\nQualia.\nThe term \"qualia\" was introduced in philosophical literature by C. I. Lewis. The word is derived from Latin and means \"of what sort\". It is basically a quantity or property of something as perceived or experienced by an individual, like the scent of rose, the taste of wine, or the pain of a headache. They are difficult to articulate or describe. The philosopher and scientist Daniel Dennett describes them as \"the way things seem to us\", while philosopher and cognitive scientist David Chalmers expanded on qualia as the \"hard problem of consciousness\" in the 1990s. When qualia are experienced, activity is simulated in the brain, and these processes are called neural correlates of consciousness (NCCs). Many scientific studies have been done to attempt to link particular brain regions with emotions or experiences.\nSpecies which experience qualia are said to have sentience, which is central to the animal rights movement, because it includes the ability to experience pain and suffering.\nIdentity.\nAn unsolved problem in the philosophy of consciousness is how it relates to the nature of personal identity. This includes questions regarding whether someone is the \"same person\" from moment to moment. If that is the case, another question is what exactly the \"identity carrier\" is that makes a conscious being \"the same\" being from one moment to the next. The problem of determining personal identity also includes questions such as Benj Hellie's vertiginous question, which can be summarized as \"Why am I me and not someone else?\". The philosophical problems regarding the nature of personal identity have been extensively discussed by Thomas Nagel in his book \"The View from Nowhere\".\nA common view of personal identity is that an individual has a continuous identity that persists from moment to moment, with an individual having a continuous identity consisting of a line segment stretching across time from birth to death. In the case of an afterlife as described in Abrahamic religions, one's personal identity is believed to stretch infinitely into the future, forming a ray or line. This notion of identity is similar to the form of dualism advocated by Ren\u00e9 Descartes. However, some philosophers argue that this common notion of personal identity is unfounded. Daniel Kolak has argued extensively against it in his book \"I am You\". Kolak refers to the aforementioned notion of personal identity being linear as \"Closed individualism\". Another view of personal identity according to Kolak is \"Empty individualism\", in which one's personal identity only exists for a single moment of time. However, Kolak advocates for a view of personal identity called Open individualism, in which all consciousness is in reality a single being and individual personal identity in reality does not exist at all. Another philosopher who has contested the notion of personal identity is Derek Parfit. In his book \"Reasons and Persons\", he describes a thought experiment known as the teletransportation paradox. In Buddhist philosophy, the concept of anatt\u0101 refers to the idea that the self is an illusion.\nOther philosophers have argued that Hellie's vertiginous question has a number of philosophical implications relating to the metaphysical nature of consciousness. Christian List argues that the vertiginous question and the existence of first-personal facts is evidence against physicalism, and evidence against other third-personal metaphysical pictures, including standard versions of dualism. List also argues that the vertiginous question implies a \"quadrilemma\" for theories of consciousness. He claims that at most three of the following metaphysical claims can be true: 'first-person realism', 'non-solipsism', 'non-fragmentation', and 'one world'\u2014and at least one of these four must be false. List has proposed a model he calls the \"many-worlds theory of consciousness\" in order to reconcile the subjective nature of consciousness without lapsing into solipsism. Vincent Conitzer argues that the nature of identity is connected to A series and B series theories of time, and that A-theory being true implies that the \"I\" is metaphysically distinguished from other perspectives. Other philosophical theories regarding the metaphysical nature of self are Caspar Hare's theories of perspectival realism, in which things within perceptual awareness have a defining intrinsic property that exists absolutely and not relative to anything, and egocentric presentism, in which the experiences of other individuals are not \"present\" in the way that one's current perspective is.\nScientific study.\nFor many decades, consciousness as a research topic was avoided by the majority of mainstream scientists, because of a general feeling that a phenomenon defined in subjective terms could not properly be studied using objective experimental methods. In 1975 George Mandler published an influential psychological study which distinguished between slow, serial, and limited conscious processes and fast, parallel and extensive unconscious ones. The Science and Religion Forum 1984 annual conference, \"'From Artificial Intelligence to Human Consciousness\"' identified the nature of consciousness as a matter for investigation; Donald Michie was a keynote speaker. Starting in the 1980s, an expanding community of neuroscientists and psychologists have associated themselves with a field called \"Consciousness Studies\", giving rise to a stream of experimental work published in books, journals such as \"Consciousness and Cognition\", \"Frontiers in Consciousness Research\", \"Psyche\", and the \"Journal of Consciousness Studies\", along with regular conferences organized by groups such as the Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness and the Society for Consciousness Studies.\nModern medical and psychological investigations into consciousness are based on psychological experiments (including, for example, the investigation of priming effects using subliminal stimuli), and on case studies of alterations in consciousness produced by trauma, illness, or drugs. Broadly viewed, scientific approaches are based on two core concepts. The first identifies the content of consciousness with the experiences that are reported by human subjects; the second makes use of the concept of consciousness that has been developed by neurologists and other medical professionals who deal with patients whose behavior is impaired. In either case, the ultimate goals are to develop techniques for assessing consciousness objectively in humans as well as other animals, and to understand the neural and psychological mechanisms that underlie it.\nMeasurement via verbal report.\nExperimental research on consciousness presents special difficulties, due to the lack of a universally accepted operational definition. In the majority of experiments that are specifically about consciousness, the subjects are human, and the criterion used is verbal report: in other words, subjects are asked to describe their experiences, and their descriptions are treated as observations of the contents of consciousness.\nFor example, subjects who stare continuously at a Necker cube usually report that they experience it \"flipping\" between two 3D configurations, even though the stimulus itself remains the same. The objective is to understand the relationship between the conscious awareness of stimuli (as indicated by verbal report) and the effects the stimuli have on brain activity and behavior. In several paradigms, such as the technique of response priming, the behavior of subjects is clearly influenced by stimuli for which they report no awareness, and suitable experimental manipulations can lead to increasing priming effects despite decreasing prime identification (double dissociation).\nVerbal report is widely considered to be the most reliable indicator of consciousness, but it raises a number of issues. For one thing, if verbal reports are treated as observations, akin to observations in other branches of science, then the possibility arises that they may contain errors\u2014but it is difficult to make sense of the idea that subjects could be wrong about their own experiences, and even more difficult to see how such an error could be detected. Daniel Dennett has argued for an approach he calls heterophenomenology, which means treating verbal reports as stories that may or may not be true, but his ideas about how to do this have not been widely adopted. Another issue with verbal report as a criterion is that it restricts the field of study to humans who have language: this approach cannot be used to study consciousness in other species, pre-linguistic children, or people with types of brain damage that impair language. As a third issue, philosophers who dispute the validity of the Turing test may feel that it is possible, at least in principle, for verbal report to be dissociated from consciousness entirely: a philosophical zombie may give detailed verbal reports of awareness in the absence of any genuine awareness.\nAlthough verbal report is in practice the \"gold standard\" for ascribing consciousness, it is not the only possible criterion. In medicine, consciousness is assessed as a combination of verbal behavior, arousal, brain activity, and purposeful movement. The last three of these can be used as indicators of consciousness when verbal behavior is absent. The scientific literature regarding the neural bases of arousal and purposeful movement is very extensive. Their reliability as indicators of consciousness is disputed, however, due to numerous studies showing that alert human subjects can be induced to behave purposefully in a variety of ways in spite of reporting a complete lack of awareness. Studies related to the neuroscience of free will have also shown that the influence consciousness has on decision-making is not always straightforward.\nMirror test and contingency awareness.\nAnother approach applies specifically to the study of self-awareness, that is, the ability to distinguish oneself from others. In the 1970s Gordon Gallup developed an operational test for self-awareness, known as the mirror test. The test examines whether animals are able to differentiate between seeing themselves in a mirror versus seeing other animals. The classic example involves placing a spot of coloring on the skin or fur near the individual's forehead and seeing if they attempt to remove it or at least touch the spot, thus indicating that they recognize that the individual they are seeing in the mirror is themselves. Humans (older than 18 months) and other great apes, bottlenose dolphins, orcas, pigeons, European magpies and elephants have all been observed to pass this test. While some other animals like pigs have been shown to find food by looking into the mirror.\nContingency awareness is another such approach, which is basically the conscious understanding of one's actions and its effects on one's environment. It is recognized as a factor in self-recognition. The brain processes during contingency awareness and learning is believed to rely on an intact medial temporal lobe and age. A study done in 2020 involving transcranial direct current stimulation, Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and eyeblink classical conditioning supported the idea that the parietal cortex serves as a substrate for contingency awareness and that age-related disruption of this region is sufficient to impair awareness.\nNeural correlates.\nA major part of the scientific literature on consciousness consists of studies that examine the relationship between the experiences reported by subjects and the activity that simultaneously takes place in their brains\u2014that is, studies of the neural correlates of consciousness. The hope is to find that activity in a particular part of the brain, or a particular pattern of global brain activity, which will be strongly predictive of conscious awareness. Several brain imaging techniques, such as EEG and fMRI, have been used for physical measures of brain activity in these studies.\nAnother idea that has drawn attention for several decades is that consciousness is associated with high-frequency (gamma band) oscillations in brain activity. This idea arose from proposals in the 1980s, by Christof von der Malsburg and Wolf Singer, that gamma oscillations could solve the so-called binding problem, by linking information represented in different parts of the brain into a unified experience. Rodolfo Llin\u00e1s, for example, proposed that consciousness results from recurrent thalamo-cortical resonance where the specific thalamocortical systems (content) and the non-specific (centromedial thalamus) thalamocortical systems (context) interact in the gamma band frequency via synchronous oscillations.\nA number of studies have shown that activity in primary sensory areas of the brain is not sufficient to produce consciousness: it is possible for subjects to report a lack of awareness even when areas such as the primary visual cortex (V1) show clear electrical responses to a stimulus. Higher brain areas are seen as more promising, especially the prefrontal cortex, which is involved in a range of higher cognitive functions collectively known as executive functions. There is substantial evidence that a \"top-down\" flow of neural activity (i.e., activity propagating from the frontal cortex to sensory areas) is more predictive of conscious awareness than a \"bottom-up\" flow of activity. The prefrontal cortex is not the only candidate area, however: studies by Nikos Logothetis and his colleagues have shown, for example, that visually responsive neurons in parts of the temporal lobe reflect the visual perception in the situation when conflicting visual images are presented to different eyes (i.e., bistable percepts during binocular rivalry). Furthermore, top-down feedback from higher to lower visual brain areas may be weaker or absent in the peripheral visual field, as suggested by some experimental data and theoretical arguments; nevertheless humans can perceive visual inputs in the peripheral visual field arising from bottom-up V1 neural activities. Meanwhile, bottom-up V1 activities for the central visual fields can be vetoed, and thus made invisible to perception, by the top-down feedback, when these bottom-up signals are inconsistent with the brain's internal model of the visual world.\nModulation of neural responses may correlate with phenomenal experiences. In contrast to the raw electrical responses that do not correlate with consciousness, the modulation of these responses by other stimuli correlates surprisingly well with an important aspect of consciousness: namely with the phenomenal experience of stimulus intensity (brightness, contrast). In the research group of Danko Nikoli\u0107 it has been shown that some of the changes in the subjectively perceived brightness correlated with the modulation of firing rates while others correlated with the modulation of neural synchrony. An fMRI investigation suggested that these findings were strictly limited to the primary visual areas. This indicates that, in the primary visual areas, changes in firing rates and synchrony can be considered as neural correlates of qualia\u2014at least for some type of qualia.\nIn 2013, the perturbational complexity index (PCI) was proposed, a measure of the algorithmic complexity of the electrophysiological response of the cortex to transcranial magnetic stimulation. This measure was shown to be higher in individuals that are awake, in REM sleep or in a locked-in state than in those who are in deep sleep or in a vegetative state, making it potentially useful as a quantitative assessment of consciousness states.\nAssuming that not only humans but even some non-mammalian species are conscious, a number of evolutionary approaches to the problem of neural correlates of consciousness open up. For example, assuming that birds are conscious\u2014a common assumption among neuroscientists and ethologists due to the extensive cognitive repertoire of birds\u2014there are comparative neuroanatomical ways to validate some of the principal, currently competing, mammalian consciousness\u2013brain theories. The rationale for such a comparative study is that the avian brain deviates structurally from the mammalian brain. So how similar are they? What homologs can be identified? The general conclusion from the study by Butler, et al. is that some of the major theories for the mammalian brain also appear to be valid for the avian brain. The structures assumed to be critical for consciousness in mammalian brains have homologous counterparts in avian brains. Thus the main portions of the theories of Crick and Koch, Edelman and Tononi, and Cotterill seem to be compatible with the assumption that birds are conscious. Edelman also differentiates between what he calls primary consciousness (which is a trait shared by humans and non-human animals) and higher-order consciousness as it appears in humans alone along with human language capacity. Certain aspects of the three theories, however, seem less easy to apply to the hypothesis of avian consciousness. For instance, the suggestion by Crick and Koch that layer 5 neurons of the mammalian brain have a special role, seems difficult to apply to the avian brain, since the avian homologs have a different morphology. Likewise, the theory of Eccles seems incompatible, since a structural homolog/analogue to the dendron has not been found in avian brains. The assumption of an avian consciousness also brings the reptilian brain into focus. The reason is the structural continuity between avian and reptilian brains, meaning that the phylogenetic origin of consciousness may be earlier than suggested by many leading neuroscientists.\nJoaquin Fuster of UCLA has advocated the position of the importance of the prefrontal cortex in humans, along with the areas of Wernicke and Broca, as being of particular importance to the development of human language capacities neuro-anatomically necessary for the emergence of higher-order consciousness in humans.\nA study in 2016 looked at lesions in specific areas of the brainstem that were associated with coma and vegetative states. A small region of the rostral dorsolateral pontine tegmentum in the brainstem was suggested to drive consciousness through functional connectivity with two cortical regions, the left ventral anterior insular cortex, and the pregenual anterior cingulate cortex. These three regions may work together as a triad to maintain consciousness.\nKrista and Tatiana Hogan have a unique thalamic connection that may provide insight into the philosophical and neurological foundations of consciousness. It has been argued that there's no empirical test that can conclusively establish that for some sensations, the twins share one token experience rather than two exactly matching token experiences. Yet background considerations about the way the brain has specific locations for conscious contents, combined with the evident overlapping pathways in the twins' brains, arguably implies that the twins share some conscious experiences. If this is true, then the twins may offer a proof of concept for how experiences in general could be shared between brains.\nAcademic definitions of consciousness.\nClear definitions of consciousness in academic literature are rare. David Chalmers declared the task the hard problem of consciousness. However academic definitions do exist, from Tononi's integrated information theory, Craig MacKenzie, and Cleeremans and Jimenez - the latter being a Definition of Learning with remarkable similarity to both Tononi and MacKenzie's definitions. Both Bernard Baars and Igor Aleksander worked out the aspects necessary for consciousness.\nTononi's definition is as follows: \naccording to Integrated information theory (IIT), consciousness requires a grouping of elements within a system that have physical cause-effect power upon one another. This in turn implies that only reentrant architecture consisting of feedback loops, whether neural or computational, will realize consciousness.\nMcKenzie's definition begins: \nConsciousness is the capacity to generate desires and decisions about perceived or imagined realities by distinguishing self from non-self through the use of perception, memory and imagination.\nAccording to Axel Cleeremans and Luis Jim\u00e9nez, learning is defined as:\na set of phylogenetically advanced adaptation processes that critically depend on an evolved sensitivity to subjective experience so as to enable agents to afford flexible control over their actions in complex, unpredictable environments.\nThis definition is notable for its similarity to the global workspace theory (GWT) theatre analogy\nModels.\nA wide range of empirical theories of consciousness have been proposed. Adrian Doerig and colleagues list 13 notable theories, while Anil Seth and Tim Bayne list 22 notable theories.\nGlobal workspace theory.\nGlobal workspace theory (GWT) is a cognitive architecture and theory of consciousness proposed by the cognitive psychologist Bernard Baars in 1988. Baars explains the theory with the metaphor of a theater, with conscious processes represented by an illuminated stage. This theater integrates inputs from a variety of unconscious and otherwise autonomous networks in the brain and then broadcasts them to unconscious networks (represented in the metaphor by a broad, unlit \"audience\"). The theory has since been expanded upon by other scientists including cognitive neuroscientist Stanislas Dehaene and Lionel Naccache.\nSee also the Dehaene\u2013Changeux model.\nIntegrated information theory.\nIntegrated information theory (IIT), pioneered by neuroscientist Giulio Tononi in 2004, postulates that consciousness resides in the information being processed and arises once the information reaches a certain level of complexity. IIT proposes a 1:1 mapping between conscious states and precise, formal mathematical descriptions of those mental states. Proponents of this model suggest that it may provide a physical grounding for consciousness in neurons, as they provide the mechanism by which information is integrated. This also relates to the \"hard problem of consciousness\" proposed by David Chalmers. In 2023, 124 scholars signed a letter saying that IIT gets disproportionate media attention relative to its supporting empirical evidence, and called it \"pseudoscience\", arguing that its core assumptions are not adequately testable. This led to academic debate, as some other researchers objected to the \"pseudoscience\" characterization.\nOrchestrated objective reduction.\nOrchestrated objective reduction (Orch-OR), or the quantum theory of mind, was proposed by scientists Roger Penrose and Stuart Hameroff, and states that consciousness originates at the quantum level inside neurons. The mechanism is held to be a quantum process called objective reduction that is orchestrated by cellular structures called microtubules, which form the cytoskeleton around which the brain is built. The duo proposed that these quantum processes accounted for creativity, innovation, and problem-solving abilities. Penrose published his views in the book \"The Emperor's New Mind\". In 2014, the discovery of quantum vibrations inside microtubules gave new life to the argument.\nHowever, scientists and philosophers have criticized Penrose's interpretation of G\u00f6del's theorem and his conclusion that quantum phenomena play a role in human cognition.\nAttention schema theory.\nIn 2011, Michael Graziano and Kastner proposed the \"attention schema\" theory of awareness. Graziano went on to publish an expanded discussion of this theory in his book \"Consciousness and the Social Brain\". In that theory, specific cortical areas, notably in the superior temporal sulcus and the temporo-parietal junction, are used to build the construct of awareness and attribute it to other people. The same cortical machinery is also used to attribute awareness to oneself. Damage to these cortical regions can lead to deficits in consciousness such as hemispatial neglect. In the attention schema theory, the value of explaining the feature of awareness and attributing it to a person is to gain a useful predictive model of that person's attentional processing. Attention is a style of information processing in which a brain focuses its resources on a limited set of interrelated signals. Awareness, in this theory, is a useful, simplified schema that represents attentional states. To be aware of X is explained by constructing a model of one's attentional focus on X.\nEntropic brain theory.\nThe entropic brain is a theory of conscious states informed by neuroimaging research with psychedelic drugs. The theory suggests that the brain in primary states such as rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, early psychosis and under the influence of psychedelic drugs, is in a disordered state; normal waking consciousness constrains some of this freedom and makes possible metacognitive functions such as internal self-administered reality testing and self-awareness. Criticism has included questioning whether the theory has been adequately tested.\nProjective consciousness model.\nIn 2017, work by David Rudrauf and colleagues, including Karl Friston, applied the active inference paradigm to consciousness, leading to the projective consciousness model (PCM), a model of how sensory data is integrated with priors in a process of projective transformation. The authors argue that, while their model identifies a key relationship between computation and phenomenology, it does not completely solve the hard problem of consciousness or completely close the explanatory gap.\nClaustrum being the conductor for consciousness.\nIn 2004, a proposal was made by molecular biologist Francis Crick (co-discoverer of the double helix), which stated that to bind together an individual's experience, a conductor of an orchestra is required. Together with neuroscientist Christof Koch, he proposed that this conductor would have to collate information rapidly from various regions of the brain. The duo reckoned that the claustrum was well suited for the task. However, Crick died while working on the idea.\nThe proposal is backed by a study done in 2014, where a team at the George Washington University induced unconsciousness in a 54-year-old woman suffering from intractable epilepsy by stimulating her claustrum. The woman underwent depth electrode implantation and electrical stimulation mapping. The electrode between the left claustrum and anterior-dorsal insula was the one which induced unconsciousness. Correlation for interactions affecting medial parietal and posterior frontal channels during stimulation increased significantly as well. Their findings suggested that the left claustrum or anterior insula is an important part of a network that subserves consciousness, and that disruption of consciousness is related to increased EEG signal synchrony within frontal-parietal networks. However, this remains an isolated, hence inconclusive study.\nA study published in 2022 opposed the idea Claustrum is the seat of consciousness but instead concluded that it is more like a \"router\" transferring command and information across the brain. The study showed that when the Claustrum is disabled, complex tasks could not be performed.\nBiological function and evolution.\nThe emergence of consciousness during biological evolution remains a topic of ongoing scientific inquiry. The survival value of consciousness is still a matter of exploration and understanding. While consciousness appears to play a crucial role in human cognition, decision-making, and self-awareness, its adaptive significance across different species remains a subject of debate.\nSome people question whether consciousness has any survival value. Some argue that consciousness is a by-product of evolution. Thomas Henry Huxley for example defends in an essay titled \"On the Hypothesis that Animals are Automata, and its History\" an epiphenomenalist theory of consciousness, according to which consciousness is a causally inert effect of neural activity\u2014\"as the steam-whistle which accompanies the work of a locomotive engine is without influence upon its machinery\". To this William James objects in his essay \"Are We Automata?\" by stating an evolutionary argument for mind-brain interaction implying that if the preservation and development of consciousness in the biological evolution is a result of natural selection, it is plausible that consciousness has not only been influenced by neural processes, but has had a survival value itself; and it could only have had this if it had been efficacious. Karl Popper develops a similar evolutionary argument in the book \"The Self and Its Brain\".\nOpinions are divided on when and how consciousness first arose. It has been argued that consciousness emerged (i) exclusively with the first humans, (ii) exclusively with the first mammals, (iii) independently in mammals and birds, or (iv) with the first reptiles. Other authors date the origins of consciousness to the first animals with nervous systems or early vertebrates in the Cambrian over 500 million years ago. Donald Griffin suggests in his book \"Animal Minds\" a gradual evolution of consciousness. Further exploration of the origins of consciousness, particularly in molluscs, has been done by Peter Godfrey Smith in his book \"Metazoa\".\nRegarding the primary function of conscious processing, a recurring idea in recent theories is that phenomenal states somehow integrate neural activities and information-processing that would otherwise be independent. This has been called the \"integration consensus\". Another example has been proposed by Gerald Edelman called dynamic core hypothesis which puts emphasis on reentrant connections that reciprocally link areas of the brain in a massively parallel manner. Edelman also stresses the importance of the evolutionary emergence of higher-order consciousness in humans from the historically older trait of primary consciousness which humans share with non-human animals (see \"Neural correlates\" section above). These theories of integrative function present solutions to two classic problems associated with consciousness: differentiation and unity. They show how our conscious experience can discriminate between a virtually unlimited number of different possible scenes and details (differentiation) because it integrates those details from our sensory systems, while the integrative nature of consciousness in this view easily explains how our experience can seem unified as one whole despite all of these individual parts. However, it remains unspecified which kinds of information are integrated in a conscious manner and which kinds can be integrated without consciousness. Nor is it explained what specific causal role conscious integration plays, nor why the same functionality cannot be achieved without consciousness. Not all kinds of information are capable of being disseminated consciously (e.g., neural activity related to vegetative functions, reflexes, unconscious motor programs, low-level perceptual analyzes, etc.), and many kinds of information can be disseminated and combined with other kinds without consciousness, as in intersensory interactions such as the ventriloquism effect. Hence it remains unclear why any of it is conscious. For a review of the differences between conscious and unconscious integrations, see the article of Ezequiel Morsella.\nAs noted earlier, even among writers who consider consciousness to be well-defined, there is widespread dispute about which animals other than humans can be said to possess it. Edelman has described this distinction as that of humans possessing higher-order consciousness while sharing the trait of primary consciousness with non-human animals (see previous paragraph). Thus, any examination of the evolution of consciousness is faced with great difficulties. Nevertheless, some writers have argued that consciousness can be viewed from the standpoint of evolutionary biology as an adaptation in the sense of a trait that increases fitness. In his article \"Evolution of consciousness\", John Eccles argued that special anatomical and physical properties of the mammalian cerebral cortex gave rise to consciousness (\"[a] psychon ... linked to [a] dendron through quantum physics\"). Bernard Baars proposed that once in place, this \"recursive\" circuitry may have provided a basis for the subsequent development of many of the functions that consciousness facilitates in higher organisms. Peter Carruthers has put forth one such potential adaptive advantage gained by conscious creatures by suggesting that consciousness allows an individual to make distinctions between appearance and reality. This ability would enable a creature to recognize the likelihood that their perceptions are deceiving them (e.g. that water in the distance may be a mirage) and behave accordingly, and it could also facilitate the manipulation of others by recognizing how things appear to them for both cooperative and devious ends.\nOther philosophers, however, have suggested that consciousness would not be necessary for any functional advantage in evolutionary processes. No one has given a causal explanation, they argue, of why it would not be possible for a functionally equivalent non-conscious organism (i.e., a philosophical zombie) to achieve the very same survival advantages as a conscious organism. If evolutionary processes are blind to the difference between function \"F\" being performed by conscious organism \"O\" and non-conscious organism \"O*\", it is unclear what adaptive advantage consciousness could provide. As a result, an exaptive explanation of consciousness has gained favor with some theorists that posit consciousness did not evolve as an adaptation but was an exaptation arising as a consequence of other developments such as increases in brain size or cortical rearrangement. Consciousness in this sense has been compared to the blind spot in the retina where it is not an adaption of the retina, but instead just a by-product of the way the retinal axons were wired. Several scholars including Pinker, Chomsky, Edelman, and Luria have indicated the importance of the emergence of human language as an important regulative mechanism of learning and memory in the context of the development of higher-order consciousness (see \"Neural correlates\" section above).\nAltered states.\nThere are some brain states in which consciousness seems to be absent, including dreamless sleep or coma. There are also a variety of circumstances that can change the relationship between the mind and the world in less drastic ways, producing what are known as altered states of consciousness. Some altered states occur naturally; others can be produced by drugs or brain damage. Altered states can be accompanied by changes in thinking, disturbances in the sense of time, feelings of loss of control, changes in emotional expression, alternations in body image and changes in meaning or significance.\nThe two most widely accepted altered states are sleep and dreaming. Although dream sleep and non-dream sleep appear very similar to an outside observer, each is associated with a distinct pattern of brain activity, metabolic activity, and eye movement; each is also associated with a distinct pattern of experience and cognition. During ordinary non-dream sleep, people who are awakened report only vague and sketchy thoughts, and their experiences do not cohere into a continuous narrative. During dream sleep, in contrast, people who are awakened report rich and detailed experiences in which events form a continuous progression, which may however be interrupted by bizarre or fantastic intrusions. Thought processes during the dream state frequently show a high level of irrationality. Both dream and non-dream states are associated with severe disruption of memory: it usually disappears in seconds during the non-dream state, and in minutes after awakening from a dream unless actively refreshed.\nResearch conducted on the effects of partial epileptic seizures on consciousness found that patients who have partial epileptic seizures experience altered states of consciousness. In partial epileptic seizures, consciousness is impaired or lost while some aspects of consciousness, often automated behaviors, remain intact. Studies found that when measuring the qualitative features during partial epileptic seizures, patients exhibited an increase in arousal and became absorbed in the experience of the seizure, followed by difficulty in focusing and shifting attention.\nA variety of psychoactive drugs, including alcohol, have notable effects on consciousness. These range from a simple dulling of awareness produced by sedatives, to increases in the intensity of sensory qualities produced by stimulants, cannabis, empathogens\u2013entactogens such as MDMA (\"Ecstasy\"), or most notably by the class of drugs known as psychedelics. LSD, mescaline, psilocybin, dimethyltryptamine, and others in this group can produce major distortions of perception, including hallucinations; some users even describe their drug-induced experiences as mystical or spiritual in quality. The brain mechanisms underlying these effects are not as well understood as those induced by use of alcohol, but there is substantial evidence that alterations in the brain system that uses the chemical neurotransmitter serotonin play an essential role.\nThere has been some research into physiological changes in yogis and people who practise various techniques of meditation. Some research with brain waves during meditation has reported differences between those corresponding to ordinary relaxation and those corresponding to meditation. It has been disputed, however, whether there is enough evidence to count these as physiologically distinct states of consciousness.\nThe most extensive study of the characteristics of altered states of consciousness was made by psychologist Charles Tart in the 1960s and 1970s. Tart analyzed a state of consciousness as made up of a number of component processes, including exteroception (sensing the external world); interoception (sensing the body); input-processing (seeing meaning); emotions; memory; time sense; sense of identity; evaluation and cognitive processing; motor output; and interaction with the environment. Each of these, in his view, could be altered in multiple ways by drugs or other manipulations. The components that Tart identified have not, however, been validated by empirical studies. Research in this area has not yet reached firm conclusions, but a recent questionnaire-based study identified eleven significant factors contributing to drug-induced states of consciousness: experience of unity; spiritual experience; blissful state; insightfulness; disembodiment; impaired control and cognition; anxiety; complex imagery; elementary imagery; audio-visual synesthesia; and changed meaning of percepts.\nMedical aspects.\nThe medical approach to consciousness is scientifically oriented. It derives from a need to treat people whose brain function has been impaired as a result of disease, brain damage, toxins, or drugs. In medicine, conceptual distinctions are considered useful to the degree that they can help to guide treatments. The medical approach mainly focuses on the amount of consciousness a person has: in medicine, consciousness is assessed as a \"level\" ranging from coma and brain death at the low end, to full alertness and purposeful responsiveness at the high end.\nConsciousness is of concern to patients and physicians, especially neurologists and anesthesiologists. Patients may have disorders of consciousness or may need to be anesthetized for a surgical procedure. Physicians may perform consciousness-related interventions such as instructing the patient to sleep, administering general anesthesia, or inducing medical coma. Also, bioethicists may be concerned with the ethical implications of consciousness in medical cases of patients such as the Karen Ann Quinlan case, while neuroscientists may study patients with impaired consciousness in hopes of gaining information about how the brain works.\nAssessment.\nIn medicine, consciousness is examined using a set of procedures known as neuropsychological assessment. There are two commonly used methods for assessing the level of consciousness of a patient: a simple procedure that requires minimal training, and a more complex procedure that requires substantial expertise. The simple procedure begins by asking whether the patient is able to move and react to physical stimuli. If so, the next question is whether the patient can respond meaningfully to questions and commands. If so, the patient is asked for their name, current location, and current day and time. A patient who can answer all of these questions is said to be \"alert and oriented times four\" (sometimes denoted \"A&amp;Ox4\" on a medical chart), and is usually considered fully conscious.\nThe more complex procedure is known as a neurological examination, and is usually carried out by a neurologist in a hospital setting. A formal neurological examination runs through a precisely delineated series of tests, beginning with tests for basic sensorimotor reflexes, and culminating with tests for sophisticated use of language. The outcome may be summarized using the Glasgow Coma Scale, which yields a number in the range 3\u201315, with a score of 3 to 8 indicating coma, and 15 indicating full consciousness. The Glasgow Coma Scale has three subscales, measuring the best motor response (ranging from \"no motor response\" to \"obeys commands\"), the best eye response (ranging from \"no eye opening\" to \"eyes opening spontaneously\") and the best verbal response (ranging from \"no verbal response\" to \"fully oriented\"). There is also a simpler pediatric version of the scale, for children too young to be able to use language.\nIn 2013, an experimental procedure was developed to measure degrees of consciousness, the procedure involving stimulating the brain with a magnetic pulse, measuring resulting waves of electrical activity, and developing a consciousness score based on the complexity of the brain activity.\nDisorders.\nMedical conditions that inhibit consciousness are considered disorders of consciousness. This category generally includes minimally conscious state and persistent vegetative state, but sometimes also includes the less severe locked-in syndrome and more severe chronic coma. Differential diagnosis of these disorders is an active area of biomedical research. Finally, brain death results in possible irreversible disruption of consciousness. While other conditions may cause a moderate deterioration (e.g., dementia and delirium) or transient interruption (e.g., grand mal and petit mal seizures) of consciousness, they are not included in this category.\nMedical experts increasingly view anosognosia as a disorder of consciousness. \"Anosognosia\" is a Greek-derived term meaning \"unawareness of disease\". This is a condition in which patients are disabled in some way, most commonly as a result of a stroke, but either misunderstand the nature of the problem or deny that there is anything wrong with them. The most frequently occurring form is seen in people who have experienced a stroke damaging the parietal lobe in the right hemisphere of the brain, giving rise to a syndrome known as hemispatial neglect, characterized by an inability to direct action or attention toward objects located to the left with respect to their bodies. Patients with hemispatial neglect are often paralyzed on the left side of the body, but sometimes deny being unable to move. When questioned about the obvious problem, the patient may avoid giving a direct answer or an explanation that does not make sense. Patients with hemispatial neglect may also fail to recognize paralyzed parts of their bodies: one frequently mentioned case is of a man who repeatedly tried to throw his own paralyzed right leg out of the bed he was lying in, and when asked what he was doing, complained that somebody had put a dead leg into the bed with him. An even more striking type of anosognosia is Anton\u2013Babinski syndrome, a rarely occurring condition in which patients become blind but claim to be able to see normally, and persist in this claim in spite of all evidence to the contrary.\nOutside human adults.\nIn children.\nOf the eight types of consciousness in the Lycan classification, some are detectable in utero and others develop years after birth. Psychologist and educator William Foulkes studied children's dreams and concluded that prior to the shift in cognitive maturation that humans experience during ages five to seven, children lack the Lockean consciousness that Lycan had labeled \"introspective consciousness\" and that Foulkes labels \"self-reflection\". In a 2020 paper, Katherine Nelson and Robyn Fivush use \"autobiographical consciousness\" to label essentially the same faculty, and agree with Foulkes on the timing of this faculty's acquisition. Nelson and Fivush contend that \"language is the tool by which humans create a new, uniquely human form of consciousness, namely, autobiographical consciousness\". Julian Jaynes had staked out these positions decades earlier. Citing the developmental steps that lead the infant to autobiographical consciousness, Nelson and Fivush point to the acquisition of \"theory of mind\", calling theory of mind \"necessary for autobiographical consciousness\" and defining it as \"understanding differences between one's own mind and others' minds in terms of beliefs, desires, emotions and thoughts\". They write, \"The hallmark of theory of mind, the understanding of false belief, occurs ... at five to six years of age\".\nIn animals.\nThe topic of animal consciousness is beset by a number of difficulties. It poses the problem of other minds in an especially severe form, because non-human animals, lacking the ability to express human language, cannot tell humans about their experiences. Also, it is difficult to reason objectively about the question, because a denial that an animal is conscious is often taken to imply that it does not feel, its life has no value, and that harming it is not morally wrong. Descartes, for example, has sometimes been blamed for mistreatment of animals due to the fact that he believed only humans have a non-physical mind. Most people have a strong intuition that some animals, such as cats and dogs, are conscious, while others, such as insects, are not; but the sources of this intuition are not obvious, and are often based on personal interactions with pets and other animals they have observed.\nPhilosophers who consider subjective experience the essence of consciousness also generally believe, as a correlate, that the existence and nature of animal consciousness can never rigorously be known. Thomas Nagel spelled out this point of view in an influential essay titled \"What Is it Like to Be a Bat?\". He said that an organism is conscious \"if and only if there is something that it is like to be that organism\u2014something it is like \"for\" the organism\"; and he argued that no matter how much we know about an animal's brain and behavior, we can never really put ourselves into the mind of the animal and experience its world in the way it does itself. Other thinkers, such as Douglas Hofstadter, dismiss this argument as incoherent. Several psychologists and ethologists have argued for the existence of animal consciousness by describing a range of behaviors that appear to show animals holding beliefs about things they cannot directly perceive\u2014Donald Griffin's 2001 book \"Animal Minds\" reviews a substantial portion of the evidence.\nOn July 7, 2012, eminent scientists from different branches of neuroscience gathered at the University of Cambridge to celebrate the Francis Crick Memorial Conference, which deals with consciousness in humans and pre-linguistic consciousness in nonhuman animals. After the conference, they signed in the presence of Stephen Hawking, the 'Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness', which summarizes the most important findings of the survey:\n\"We decided to reach a consensus and make a statement directed to the public that is not scientific. It's obvious to everyone in this room that animals have consciousness, but it is not obvious to the rest of the world. It is not obvious to the rest of the Western world or the Far East. It is not obvious to the society.\"\n\"Convergent evidence indicates that non-human animals ..., including all mammals and birds, and other creatures, ... have the necessary neural substrates of consciousness and the capacity to exhibit intentional behaviors.\"\nIn artificial intelligence.\nThe idea of an artifact made conscious is an ancient theme of mythology, appearing for example in the Greek myth of Pygmalion, who carved a statue that was magically brought to life, and in medieval Jewish stories of the Golem, a magically animated homunculus built of clay. However, the possibility of actually constructing a conscious machine was probably first discussed by Ada Lovelace, in a set of notes written in 1842 about the Analytical Engine invented by Charles Babbage, a precursor (never built) to modern electronic computers. Lovelace was essentially dismissive of the idea that a machine such as the Analytical Engine could think in a humanlike way. She wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is desirable to guard against the possibility of exaggerated ideas that might arise as to the powers of the Analytical Engine.\u00a0... The Analytical Engine has no pretensions whatever to \"originate\" anything. It can do whatever we \"know how to order it\" to perform. It can \"follow\" analysis; but it has no power of \"anticipating\" any analytical relations or truths. Its province is to assist us in making \"available\" what we are already acquainted with.\nOne of the most influential contributions to this question was an essay written in 1950 by pioneering computer scientist Alan Turing, titled \"Computing Machinery and Intelligence\". Turing disavowed any interest in terminology, saying that even \"Can machines think?\" is too loaded with spurious connotations to be meaningful; but he proposed to replace all such questions with a specific operational test, which has become known as the Turing test. To pass the test, a computer must be able to imitate a human well enough to fool interrogators. In his essay Turing discussed a variety of possible objections, and presented a counterargument to each of them. The Turing test is commonly cited in discussions of artificial intelligence as a proposed criterion for machine consciousness; it has provoked a great deal of philosophical debate. For example, Daniel Dennett and Douglas Hofstadter argue that anything capable of passing the Turing test is necessarily conscious, while David Chalmers argues that a philosophical zombie could pass the test, yet fail to be conscious. A third group of scholars have argued that with technological growth once machines begin to display any substantial signs of human-like behavior then the dichotomy (of human consciousness compared to human-like consciousness) becomes pass\u00e9 and issues of machine autonomy begin to prevail even as observed in its nascent form within contemporary industry and technology. J\u00fcrgen Schmidhuber argues that consciousness is the result of compression. As an agent sees representation of itself recurring in the environment, the compression of this representation can be called consciousness.\nIn a lively exchange over what has come to be referred to as \"the Chinese room argument\", John Searle sought to refute the claim of proponents of what he calls \"strong artificial intelligence (AI)\" that a computer program can be conscious, though he does agree with advocates of \"weak AI\" that computer programs can be formatted to \"simulate\" conscious states. His own view is that consciousness has subjective, first-person causal powers by being essentially intentional due to the way human brains function biologically; conscious persons can perform computations, but consciousness is not inherently computational the way computer programs are. To make a Turing machine that speaks Chinese, Searle imagines a room with one monolingual English speaker (Searle himself, in fact), a book that designates a combination of Chinese symbols to be output paired with Chinese symbol input, and boxes filled with Chinese symbols. In this case, the English speaker is acting as a computer and the rulebook as a program. Searle argues that with such a machine, he would be able to process the inputs to outputs perfectly without having any understanding of Chinese, nor having any idea what the questions and answers could possibly mean. If the experiment were done in English, since Searle knows English, he would be able to take questions and give answers without any algorithms for English questions, and he would be effectively aware of what was being said and the purposes it might serve. Searle would pass the Turing test of answering the questions in both languages, but he is only conscious of what he is doing when he speaks English. Another way of putting the argument is to say that computer programs can pass the Turing test for processing the syntax of a language, but that the syntax cannot lead to semantic meaning in the way strong AI advocates hoped.\nIn the literature concerning artificial intelligence, Searle's essay has been second only to Turing's in the volume of debate it has generated. Searle himself was vague about what extra ingredients it would take to make a machine conscious: all he proposed was that what was needed was \"causal powers\" of the sort that the brain has and that computers lack. But other thinkers sympathetic to his basic argument have suggested that the necessary (though perhaps still not sufficient) extra conditions may include the ability to pass not just the verbal version of the Turing test, but the robotic version, which requires grounding the robot's words in the robot's sensorimotor capacity to categorize and interact with the things in the world that its words are about, Turing-indistinguishably from a real person. Turing-scale robotics is an empirical branch of research on embodied cognition and situated cognition.\nIn 2014, Victor Argonov has suggested a non-Turing test for machine consciousness based on a machine's ability to produce philosophical judgments. He argues that a deterministic machine must be regarded as conscious if it is able to produce judgments on all problematic properties of consciousness (such as qualia or binding) having no innate (preloaded) philosophical knowledge on these issues, no philosophical discussions while learning, and no informational models of other creatures in its memory (such models may implicitly or explicitly contain knowledge about these creatures' consciousness). However, this test can be used only to detect, but not refute the existence of consciousness. A positive result proves that a machine is conscious but a negative result proves nothing. For example, absence of philosophical judgments may be caused by lack of the machine's intellect, not by absence of consciousness.\nNick Bostrom has argued in 2023 that, being very sure that large language models (LLMs) are not conscious, would require unwarranted confidence; in which consciousness theory is correct and how it applies to machines. He views consciousness as a matter of degree, and argued that machines could in theory be much more conscious than humans.\nStream of consciousness.\nWilliam James is usually credited with popularizing the idea that human consciousness flows like a stream, in his \"Principles of Psychology\" of 1890.\nAccording to James, the \"stream of thought\" is governed by five characteristics:\nA similar concept appears in Buddhist philosophy, expressed by the Sanskrit term \"Citta-sa\u1e43t\u0101na\", which is usually translated as mindstream or \"mental continuum\". Buddhist teachings describe that consciousness manifests moment to moment as sense impressions and mental phenomena that are continuously changing. The teachings list six triggers that can result in the generation of different mental events. These triggers are input from the five senses (seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting or touch sensations), or a thought (relating to the past, present or the future) that happen to arise in the mind. The mental events generated as a result of these triggers are: feelings, perceptions and intentions/behaviour. The moment-by-moment manifestation of the mind-stream is said to happen in every person all the time. It even happens in a scientist who analyzes various phenomena in the world, or analyzes the material body including the organ brain. The manifestation of the mindstream is also described as being influenced by physical laws, biological laws, psychological laws, volitional laws, and universal laws. The purpose of the Buddhist practice of mindfulness is to understand the inherent nature of the consciousness and its characteristics.\nNarrative form.\nIn the West, the primary impact of the idea has been on literature rather than science: \"stream of consciousness as a narrative mode\" means writing in a way that attempts to portray the moment-to-moment thoughts and experiences of a character. This technique perhaps had its beginnings in the monologues of Shakespeare's plays and reached its fullest development in the novels of James Joyce and Virginia Woolf, although it has also been used by many other noted writers.\nHere, for example, is a passage from Joyce's \"Ulysses\" about the thoughts of Molly Bloom:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Yes because he never did a thing like that before as ask to get his breakfast in bed with a couple of eggs since the City Arms hotel when he used to be pretending to be laid up with a sick voice doing his highness to make himself interesting for that old faggot Mrs Riordan that he thought he had a great leg of and she never left us a farthing all for masses for herself and her soul greatest miser ever was actually afraid to lay out 4d for her methylated spirit telling me all her ailments she had too much old chat in her about politics and earthquakes and the end of the world let us have a bit of fun first God help the world if all the women were her sort down on bathingsuits and lownecks of course nobody wanted her to wear them I suppose she was pious because no man would look at her twice I hope Ill never be like her a wonder she didnt want us to cover our faces but she was a well-educated woman certainly and her gabby talk about Mr Riordan here and Mr Riordan there I suppose he was glad to get shut of her.\nSpiritual approaches.\nThe Upanishads hold the oldest recorded map of consciousness, as explored by sages through meditation.\nThe Canadian psychiatrist Richard Maurice Bucke, author of the 1901 book \"Cosmic Consciousness: A Study in the Evolution of the Human Mind\", distinguished between three types of consciousness: 'Simple Consciousness', awareness of the body, possessed by many animals; 'Self Consciousness', awareness of being aware, possessed only by humans; and 'Cosmic Consciousness', awareness of the life and order of the universe, possessed only by humans who have attained \"intellectual enlightenment or illumination\".\nAnother thorough account of the spiritual approach is Ken Wilber's 1977 book \"The Spectrum of Consciousness\", a comparison of western and eastern ways of thinking about the mind. Wilber described consciousness as a spectrum with ordinary awareness at one end, and more profound types of awareness at higher levels.\nOther examples include the various levels of spiritual consciousness presented by Prem Saran Satsangi and Stuart Hameroff.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
