{"id": "8778", "revid": "144047", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8778", "title": "Daniel Ortega", "text": "Dictator of Nicaragua (1985\u20131990; since 2007)\n \nJos\u00e9 Daniel Ortega Saavedra ( , ; born 11 November 1945) is a Nicaraguan politician who has been the co-president of Nicaragua since 18 February 2025, alongside his wife Rosario Murillo. He was the president of Nicaragua from 1985 to 1990 and from 2007 to 2025. He previously led Nicaragua as the first coordinator of the Junta of National Reconstruction from 1979 to 1985. Ortega leads an authoritarian government, and has been regularly described as a dictator by the international community.\nOrtega came to prominence with the overthrow and exile of US-backed dictator Anastasio Somoza Debayle in 1979 during the Nicaraguan Revolution. As a leader in the Sandinista National Liberation Front (, FSLN) Ortega became leader of the ruling Junta of National Reconstruction. A Marxist\u2013Leninist, Ortega pursued a program of nationalization, land reform, wealth redistribution, and literacy programs during his first period in office. Ortega's government was responsible for the forced displacement of 10,000 indigenous people. In 1984, Ortega won Nicaragua's presidential election with over 60% of the vote as the FSLN's candidate. During his first term, he implemented policies to achieve leftist reforms across Nicaragua. Throughout the 1980s, Ortega's government faced a rebellion by US-backed rebels, known as the Contras. After a presidency marred by conflict and economic collapse, Ortega was defeated in the 1990 Nicaraguan general election by Violeta Chamorro.\nOrtega was an unsuccessful presidential candidate in 1996 and 2001 but won the 2006 Nicaraguan general election. In office, he allied with fellow Latin American socialists. In contrast to his previous political career, his second administration abandoned most of his earlier leftist principles, alienating many of his former revolutionary allies. Under his tenure, Nicaragua has experienced democratic backsliding. In June 2018, organizations such as Amnesty International and the Organization of American States reported that Ortega had engaged in a violent oppression campaign against anti-government protests. The violent crackdown and subsequent constriction of civil liberties have led to waves of emigration to neighboring Costa Rica, with more than 30,000 Nicaraguans filing for asylum in that country.\nHis government jailed many potential rival candidates in the 2021 Nicaraguan general election, including Cristiana Chamorro Barrios. Ortega's government also imprisoned other opponents, such as former allies Dora Mar\u00eda T\u00e9llez and Hugo Torres Jim\u00e9nez. In August 2021, Nicaragua cancelled the operating permits of six US and European NGOs. Many critics of the Ortega government, including opposition leaders, journalists and members of civil society, fled the country in mid-2021. In his fourth term, Ortega ordered the closure of several NGOs, universities, and newspapers, and resumed his repression of the Catholic Church after a brief rapprochement, imprisoning prelate Rolando Jos\u00e9 \u00c1lvarez Lagos.\nEarly life.\nEarly childhood.\nOrtega was born in La Libertad in Chontales Department, into a working-class family. His parents, Daniel Ortega Cerda and Lidia Saavedra, were opposed to the regime of Anastasio Somoza Debayle. Ortega's mother was imprisoned by Somoza's National Guard for being in possession of \"love letters\", which police said were coded political missives. Ortega and his two brothers grew up to become revolutionaries. His late brother Humberto Ortega was a former general, military leader, and published writer, and the third brother Camilo Ortega died fighting the Somoza regime in 1978. They had a sister, Germania, who died.\nJuigalpa and Managua.\nSeeking stable employment, the family migrated from La Libertad to the provincial capital of Juigalpa, and then to a middle-class neighborhood in Managua. In Managua, Ortega and his brother studied at the upper-middle class high school, the LaSalle Institute, where Ortega was classmates with Arnoldo Aleman, who would go on to be mayor of Managua (1990\u20131995) and later President of Nicaragua (1997\u20132002). Ortega's father Daniel Ortega Cedra detested US military intervention in Nicaragua and Washington's support for the Somoza government. He imparted this anti-American sentiment to his sons.\nEarly political activity.\nFrom an early age, Ortega opposed Nicaragua's president Anastasio Somoza Debayle, and became involved in the underground movement against his government. Ortega and his brother Humberto formed the Insurrectionist, or Tercerista (Third Way) faction, culminating in the Nicaraguan Revolution. After the overthrow and exile of Somoza Debayle's government, Ortega became leader of the ruling multi-partisan Junta of National Reconstruction.\nOrtega was first arrested for political activities at the age of 15, and quickly joined the then-underground Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) in 1963. In 1964, Ortega travelled to Guatemala, where the police arrested him and turned him over to the Nicaraguan National Guard. After his release from detainment, Ortega arranged the assassination of his torturer, Guardsman Gonzalo Lacayo, in August 1967.\nImprisonment.\nHe was imprisoned in 1967 for taking part in armed robbery of a branch of the Bank of America. Ortega was released in late 1974, along with other Sandinista prisoners, in exchange for Somocista hostages. While imprisoned at the El Modelo jail, just outside Managua, Ortega wrote poems, one of which he titled \"I Never Saw Managua When Miniskirts Were in Fashion\". During his imprisonment, Ortega was tortured. While he was incarcerated at El Modelo, his mother helped stage protests and hunger strikes for political prisoners; this resulted in improving the treatment of incarcerated Sandinistas.\nExile in Cuba.\nUpon release in 1974, Ortega was exiled to Cuba. There he received training in guerrilla warfare from Fidel Castro's Marxist\u2013Leninist government. He later returned secretly to Nicaragua.\nSectional division within the FSLN.\nIn the late 1970s, divisions over the FSLN's campaign against Somoza led Ortega and his brother Humberto to form the Insurrectionist, or \"Tercerista\" (Third Way) faction. The Terceristas sought to combine the distinct guerrilla war strategies of the two other factions, Tom\u00e1s Borge's \"Guerra Prolongada Popular\" (GPP, or Prolonged People's War), and Jaime Wheelock's \"Proletarian Tendency\". The Ortega brothers forged alliances with a wide array of anti-Somoza forces, including Catholic and Protestant activists, and other non-Marxist civil society groups. The Terceristas became the most effective faction in wielding political and military strength, and their push for FSLN solidarity received the support of revolutionary leaders such as Fidel Castro.\nMarriage and family.\nOrtega married Rosario Murillo in 1979 in a secret ceremony. They moved to Costa Rica with her three children from a previous marriage. Ortega remarried Murillo in 2005 in order to have the marriage recognized by the Catholic Church, as part of his effort to reconcile with the church. The couple has eight children, three of them together. Murillo serves as the Ortega government's spokeswoman and a government minister, among other positions. Ortega adopted stepdaughter Zoilam\u00e9rica Ortega Murillo in 1986, through a court case. In 1998, she accused him of sexually abusing her as a child.\nSandinista revolution and first presidency (1979\u20131990).\nWhen Somoza was overthrown by the FSLN in July 1979, Ortega became a member of the five-person Junta of National Reconstruction, which included Sandinista militant Mois\u00e9s Hassan, novelist Sergio Ram\u00edrez, businessman Alfonso Robelo, and Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, the widow of a murdered journalist. In September 1979, United States President Carter hosted Ortega at the White House, and warned him against arming other Central American leftist guerrilla movements. At the time, Ortega spoke truthfully when he denied Sandinista involvement in neighboring countries. When Ortega questioned the Americans about CIA support for anti-Sandinista groups, Carter and Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher said the reports were false. After the meeting, Carter asked Congress for $75 million in aid to Nicaragua, contingent on the Sandinista government's promise not to aid other guerrillas.\nThe FSLN came to dominate the junta, Robelo and Chamorro resigned, and in 1981 Ortega became the coordinator of the Junta. As the only member of the FSLN National Directorate in the Junta, he was the effective leader of the country. After attaining power, the FSLN embarked upon an ambitious programme of social reform. They arranged to redistribute of land to about 100,000 families; launched a literacy drive, and made health care improvements that ended polio through mass vaccinations, and reduced the frequency of other treatable diseases. The Sandinista nationalization efforts affected mostly banks and industries owned by the extended Somoza family. More than half of all farms, businesses, and industries remained in private hands. The revolutionary government wanted to preserve a mixed economy and support private sector investment. The Superior Council of Private Enterprise (COSEP) opposed the Sandinistas' economic reform. The main organization of Nicaraguan big business was composed of prosperous families from the Pacific coast cities, who dominated commerce and banking. Ortega took a very hard line against opposition to his policies: On 21 February 1981, the Sandinista army killed 7 Miskito Indians and wounded 17.\nOrtega's administration forced displacement of many of the indigenous population: 10,000 individuals had been moved by 1982. Thousands of Indians fled to take refuge across the border in Honduras, and Ortega's government imprisoned 14,000 in Nicaragua. Anthropologist Gilles Bataillon termed this \"politics of ethnocide\" in Nicaragua. The Indians formed two rebel groups \u2013 the Misura and Misurasata. They were joined in the north by Nicaraguan Democratic Force (FDN) and in the south by former Sandinistas and peasantry who, under the leadership of Ed\u00e9n Pastora, were resisting forced collectivization.\nIn 1980 the Sandinista government launched the massive Nicaraguan Literacy Campaign and said the illiteracy rate fell from 50% to 13% in the span of five months. Robert F. Arnove said the figures were excessive because many \"unteachable\" illiterates were omitted from the statistics, and many people declared literate were found to be unable to read or write a simple sentence. Richard Kraft said that even if the figures were exaggerated, the \"accomplishment is without precedent in educational history\". In 1980, UNESCO awarded Nicaragua the Nadezhda K. Krupskaya prize in recognition of its efforts. The FSLN also focused on improving the Nicaraguan health system, particularly through vaccination campaigns and the construction of public hospitals. These actions reduced child mortality by half, to 40 deaths per thousand. By 1982, the World Health Organization deemed Nicaragua a model for primary health care. During this period, Nicaragua won the UNESCO prize for exceptional health progress.\nIn 1981, United States President Ronald Reagan accused the FSLN of joining with Soviet-backed Cuba in supporting Marxist revolutionary movements in other Latin American countries, such as El Salvador. People within the Reagan administration authorized the CIA to begin financing, arming and training rebels as anti-Sandinista guerrillas, some of whom were former officers from Somoza's National Guard. These were known collectively as the Contras. This resulted in one of the largest political scandals in US history, (the Iran\u2013Contra affair). Oliver North and several members of the Reagan administration defied the Boland Amendment, selling arms to Iran and using the proceeds in order to secretly fund the Contras.\nThe Contra war claimed 30,000 lives in Nicaragua. The tactics used by the Sandinista government to fight the Contras have been widely condemned for their suppression of civil rights. On 15 March 1982, the junta declared a state of siege, which allowed it to close independent radio stations, suspend the right of association, and limit the freedom of trade unions. Nicaragua's Permanent Commission on Human Rights condemned Sandinista human rights violations, accusing them of killing and forcibly disappearing thousands of persons in the first few years of the war.\nAt the 1984 general election Ortega won the presidency with 67% of the vote and took office on 10 January 1985. In the early phases of the campaign, Ortega enjoyed many institutional advantages, and used the full power of the press, police, and Supreme Electoral Council against the fractured opposition. In the weeks before the November election, Ortega gave a U.N. speech denouncing talks held in Rio de Janeiro on electoral reform. But by 22 October, the Sandinistas signed an accord with opposition parties to reform electoral and campaign laws, making the process more fair and transparent. While campaigning, Ortega promoted the Sandinistas' achievements, and at a rally said that \"Democracy is literacy, democracy is land reform, democracy is education and public health.\" International observers judged the election to be the first free election held in the country in more than half a century. A report by an Irish governmentary delegation stated: \"The electoral process was carried out with total integrity. The seven parties participating in the elections represented a broad spectrum of political ideologies.\" The general counsel of New York's Human Rights Commission described the election as \"free, fair and hotly contested\". A study by the US Latin American Studies Association (LASA) concluded that the FSLN (Sandinista Front) \"did little more to take advantage of its incumbency than incumbent parties everywhere (including the U.S.) routinely do\". However, the Reagan administration described the elections as \"a Soviet-style sham\", and contemporary North-American press coverage tended to cast doubt on the election's legitimacy.\nThirty-three per cent of the Nicaraguan voters cast ballots for one of six opposition parties\u2014three to the right of the Sandinistas, three to the left\u2014which had campaigned with the aid of government funds and free TV and radio time. Two conservative parties captured a combined 23% of the vote. They held rallies across the country (a few of which were disrupted by FSLN supporters) and blasted the Sandinistas in harsh terms. Most foreign and independent observers noted this pluralism in debunking the Reagan administration charge\u2014ubiquitous in the US media\u2014that it was a \"Soviet-style sham\" election. Some opposition parties boycotted the election, allegedly under pressure from US embassy officials, and so it was denounced as being unfair by the Reagan administration. Reagan thus maintained that he was justified to continue supporting what he referred to as the Contras' \"democratic resistance\".\nThe illegal intervention of the Contras continued (albeit covertly) after Ortega's democratic election. Peace talks between five Central American heads of state in July 1987 led to the signing of the Central American Peace Accords, and the beginning of a roadmap to the end of the conflict. In 1988, the Contras first entered into peace talks with the Sandinista government, although the violence continued, as did their US support. Despite US opposition, disarmament of the Contras began in 1989.\nIn opposition (1990\u20132007).\nIn the 1990 presidential election, Ortega lost his reelection bid to Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, his former colleague in the junta. Chamorro was supported by the US and a 14-party anti-Sandinista alliance known as the National Opposition Union (Uni\u00f3n Nacional Oppositora, UNO), an alliance that ranged from conservatives and liberals to communists. She ran an effective campaign, presenting herself as the peace candidate and promising to end the US-funded Contra War if she won. Ortega campaigned on the slogan, \"Everything Will Be Better\", and promised that, with the Contra war over, he could focus on the nation's recovery. Contrary to what most observers expected, Chamorro shocked Ortega and won the election. Chamorro's UNO coalition garnered 54% of the vote, and won 51 of the 92 seats in the National Assembly. Immediately after the loss, the Sandinistas tried to maintain unity around their revolutionary posture. In Ortega's concession speech the following day he vowed to keep \"ruling from below\" a reference to the power that the FSLN still wielded in various sectors. He also stressed his belief that the Sandinistas had the goal of bringing \"dignity\" to Latin America, and not necessarily to hold on to government posts. In 1991, Ortega said elections were \"an instrument to reaffirm\" the FSLN's \"political and ideological positions\", and also \"confront capitalism\". However, the electoral loss led to pronounced divisions in the FSLN. Some members adopted more pragmatic positions, and sought to transform the FSLN into a modern social democratic party engaged in national reconciliation and class cooperation. Ortega and other party insiders found common ground with the radicals, who still promoted anti-imperialism and class conflict to achieve social change.\nPossible explanations for his loss include that the Nicaraguan people were disenchanted with the Ortega government as well as the fact that already in November 1989, the White House had announced that the economic embargo against Nicaragua would continue unless Violeta Chamorro won. Also, there had been reports of intimidation from the side of the contras, with a Canadian observer mission stating that 42 people were killed by the contras in \"election violence\" in October 1989. This led many commentators to assume that Nicaraguans voted against the Sandinistas out of fear of a continuation of the contra war and economic deprivation.\nFrom 19 to 21 July 1991, the FSLN held a National Congress to mend the rifts between members and form a new overarching political program. The effort failed to unite the party, and intense debates over the internal governance of the FSLN continued. The pragmatists, led by the former vice president Sergio Ramirez, formed the basis of a \"renovating\" faction, and supported collaboration with other political forces to preserve the rule of law in Nicaragua. Under the leadership of Ortega and Tom\u00e1s Borge, the radicals regrouped into the \"principled\" faction, and branded themselves the Izquierda Democratica (ID), or Democratic Left (DL). The DL fought the Chamorro government with disruptive labor strikes and demonstrations, and renewed calls for the revolutionary reconstruction of Nicaraguan society. During the 20\u201323 May 1994, extraordinary congress, Ortega ran against a fellow National Directorate member, Henry Ruiz, for the position of party secretary-general. Ortega was elected with 287 to Ruiz's 147 votes, and the DL secured the most dominant role in the FSLN.\nOn 9 September 1994, Ortega gained more power after taking over Sergio Ramirez's seat in the Asamblea Sandinista (Sandinista Assembly). Ramirez had been chief of the FSLN's parliamentary caucus since 1990, but Ortega came to oppose his actions in the National Assembly, setting the stage for Ramirez's removal. Historic leaders, such as Ernesto Cardenal, a former minister of culture in the Sandinista government, rejected Ortega's consolidation of power: \"My resignation from the FSLN has been caused by the kidnapping of the party carried out by Daniel Ortega and the group he heads.\" The party formally split on 8 January 1995, when Ramirez and a number of prominent Sandinista officials quit.\nOrtega ran for election again, in October 1996 and November 2001, but lost on both occasions to Arnoldo Alem\u00e1n and Enrique Bola\u00f1os, respectively. In these elections, a key issue was the allegation of corruption. In Ortega's last days as president, through a series of legislative acts known as \"The Pi\u00f1ata\", estates that had been seized by the Sandinista government (some valued at millions and even billions of US dollars) became the private property of various FSLN officials, including Ortega himself.\nIn the 1996 campaign, Ortega faced the Liberal Alliance (Alianza Liberal), headed by Arnoldo Aleman Lacayo, a former mayor of Managua. The Sandinistas softened their anti-imperialist rhetoric, with Ortega calling the US \"our great neighbor\", and vowing to cooperate \"within a framework of respect, equality, and justice\". The image change failed, as Aleman's Liberal Alliance came first with 51.03% of the vote, while Ortega's FSLN secured 37.75%.\nOrtega's policies became more moderate during his time in opposition, and he gradually changed much of his former Marxist\u2013Leninist stance in favor of an agenda of democratic socialism. His Roman Catholic faith has become more public in recent years as well, leading Ortega to embrace a variety of socially conservative policies; in 2006 the FSLN endorsed a strict law banning all abortions in Nicaragua. In the run-up to the 2006 elections, Ortega displayed his ties to the Catholic Church by renewing his marriage vows before Cardinal Miguel Obando y Bravo.\nOrtega was instrumental in creating the controversial strategic pact between the FSLN and the Constitutional Liberal Party (Partido Liberal Constitucionalista, PLC). The controversial alliance of Nicaragua's two major parties is aimed at distributing power between the PLC and FSLN, and preventing other parties from rising. After sealing the agreement in January 2000, the two parties controlled the three key institutions of the state: the Comptroller General of the Republic, the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Electoral Council. \"\"El Pacto\",\" as it is known in Nicaragua, is said to have personally benefited former presidents Ortega and Alem\u00e1n greatly, while constraining then-president Bola\u00f1os. One of the key accords of the pact was to lower the ratio necessary to win a presidential election in the first round from 45% to 35%, a change in electoral law that would become decisive in Ortega's favor in the 2006 elections.\nAt the Fourth Ordinary Congress of the FSLN, held 17\u201318 March 2002, Ortega eliminated the National Directorate (DN). Once the main collective leadership body of the party, with nine members, the DN no longer met routinely, and only three historic members remained. Instead, the body just supported decisions already made by the secretary-general. Ortega sidelined party officials and other members while empowering his own informal circle, known as the ring of iron.\n2001 presidential election.\nIn the November 2001 general elections, Ortega lost his third successive presidential election, this time to Enrique Bola\u00f1os of the Constitutionalist Liberal Party.\nUnder Ortega's direction, the FSLN formed the broad National Convergence (Convergencia Nacional) coalition in opposition to the PLC. Ortega abandoned the revolutionary tone of the past, and infused his campaign with religious imagery, giving thanks in speeches to \"God and the Revolution\" for the post-1990 democracy, and said a Sandinista victory would enable the Nicaraguan people to \"pass through the sea and reach the Promised Land\". The US opposed Ortega's candidacy from the beginning. The US ambassador even appeared with the PLC's Enrique Bola\u00f1os while distributing food aid. The 11 September 2001, terrorist attacks doomed Ortega's chances, as the threat of a US invasion became an issue. Bolanos convinced many Nicaraguans that the renewed US hostility towards terrorism would endanger their country if the openly anti-US Ortega prevailed. Bolanos ended up with 56.3% of the vote, and Ortega won 42.3%.\n2006 presidential election.\nIn 2006, Daniel Ortega was elected president with 38% of the vote. This occurred despite the fact that the breakaway Sandinista Renovation Movement (MRS) continued to oppose the FSLN, running former Mayor of Managua, Herty Lewites as its candidate for president. Ortega personally attacked Lewites' Jewish background, compared him to Judas, and warned he \"could end up hanged.\" However, Lewites died several months before the elections.\nOrtega emphasized peace and reconciliation in his campaign, and selected a former Contra leader, Jaime Morales Carazo, as his running mate. The FSLN also won 38 seats in the congressional elections, becoming the party with the largest representation in parliament. The split in the Constitutionalist Liberal Party helped allow the FSLN to become the largest party in Congress; however, the Sandinista vote had a minuscule split between the FSLN and MRS, and that the liberal party combined is larger than the Frente Faction. In 2010, several liberal congressmen accused the FSLN of attempting to buy votes to pass constitutional reforms that would allow Ortega to run for office for the 6th time since 1984.\nSecond presidency (2007\u2013present).\nAccording to Tim Rogers, writing in \"The Atlantic\", during his second term as president, Ortega took \"full control of all four branches of government, state institutions, the military, and police\", and in the process dismantled \"Nicaragua's institutional democracy\". Frances Robles wrote that Ortega took control \"every aspect of government ... the National Assembly, the Supreme Court, the armed forces, the judiciary, the police and the prosecutor's office\". In its 2019 World Report, Human Rights Watch wrote that Ortega \"aggressively dismantled all institutional checks on presidential power\". Many journalists and governments criticize Ortega and label him a dictator.\n2008 elections.\nIn June 2008, the Nicaraguan Supreme Court disqualified the MRS and the Conservative Party from participation in municipal elections. In November 2008, the Supreme Electoral Council received national and international criticism following irregularities in municipal elections, but agreed to review results for Managua only, while the opposition demanded a nationwide review. For the first time since 1990, the Council decided not to allow national or international observers to witness the election. Instances of intimidation, violence, and harassment of opposition political party members and NGO representatives have been recorded. Official results show Sandinista candidates winning 94 of the 146 municipal mayoralties, compared to 46 for the main opposition Liberal Constitutional Party (PLC). The opposition claimed that marked ballots were dumped and destroyed, that party members were refused access to some of the vote counts and that tallies from many polling places were altered. As a result of the fraud allegations, the European Union suspended $70m of aid, and the US$64m.\nWith the late-2000s recession, Ortega in 2011 characterised capitalism as in its \"death throes\" and portrayed the Bolivarian Alternative for the People of Our America (ALBA) was the most advanced, most Christian and fairest project. He also said God was punishing the United States with the financial crisis for trying to impose its economic principles on poor countries. \"It's incredible that in the most powerful country in the world, which spends billions of dollars on brutal wars ... people do not have enough money to stay in their homes.\"\nBefore the National Sandinista Council held in September 2009, Lenin Cerna, the secretary of the party organization, called for diversifying its political strategies. He declared the FSLN's future depended on implementing new plans, \"so that the party can advance via new routes and in new ways, always under Ortega's leadership\". Ortega gained power over the selection of candidates, allowing him to personally choose all candidates for public office.\nDuring an interview with David Frost for the Al Jazeera English programme \"Frost Over the World\" in March 2009, Ortega suggested that he would like to change the constitution to allow him to run again for president. In Judicial Decision 504, issued on 19 October 2009, the Supreme Court of Justice of Nicaragua declared portions of Articles 147 and 178 of the Constitution of Nicaragua inapplicable; these provisions concerned the eligibility of candidates for president, vice-president, mayor, and vice-mayor\u2014a decision that had the effect of allowing Ortega to run for reelection in 2011.\nFor this decision, the Sandinista magistrates formed the required quorum by excluding the opposition magistrates and replacing them with Sandinista substitutes, violating the Nicaraguan constitution. Opposing parties, the church and human rights groups in Nicaragua denounced the decision. Throughout 2010, court rulings gave Ortega greater power over judicial and civil service appointments.\nWhile supporting abortion rights during his presidency during the 1980s, Ortega has since embraced the Catholic Church's position of strong opposition. While non-emergency abortions have long been illegal in Nicaragua, recently even abortions \"in the case where the pregnancy endangers the mother's life\", otherwise known as therapeutic abortions have been made illegal in the days before the 2006 election, with a six-year prison term in such cases, too\u2014a move supported by Ortega.\n2011 election.\nOrtega was re-elected president with a vote on 6 November and confirmation on 16 November 2011. During the election, the Supreme Electoral Council (CSE) blocked both domestic and international poll observers from multiple polling stations. According to the Supreme Electoral Council, Ortega defeated Fabio Gadea, with 63% of the vote.\nIn January 2014 the National Assembly, dominated by the FSLN, approved constitutional amendments that abolished term limits for the presidency and allowed a president to run for an unlimited number of five-year terms. While the FSLN claimed the amendments would assure the stability Nicaragua needed to deal with long-term problems, the opposition claimed they were a threat to democracy. The constitutional reforms also gave Ortega the sole power to appoint military and police commanders.\n2016 elections.\nAs of 2016, Ortega's family owns three of the nine free-to-air television channels in Nicaragua, and controls a fourth (the public Channel 6). Four of the remaining five are controlled by Mexican mogul \u00c1ngel Gonz\u00e1lez, and are generally considered to be aligned with Ortega's ruling FSLN party. There are no government restrictions on Internet use; the Ortega administration attempted to gain complete control over online media in 2015, but failed due to opposition from civil society, political parties, and private organizations. In June 2016, the Nicaraguan supreme court ruled to oust Eduardo Montealegre, the leader of the main opposition party, leaving the main opposition coalition with no means of contesting the November 2016 national elections. In August 2016, Ortega chose his wife, Rosario Murillo, as his vice-presidential running-mate for re-election. According to \"The Washington Post\", figures announced on 7 November 2016, put Daniel Ortega in line for his third consecutive term as president, also being his fourth term overall. The Supreme Electoral Council (CSE) reported Ortega and Murillo won 72.4% of the vote, with 68% turnout. The opposition coalition had called the election a \"farce\" and had called for the boycott of the election. International observers were not allowed to observe the vote. Nevertheless, according to the BBC, Ortega was the most popular candidate by far, possibly due to Nicaragua's stable economic growth and lack of violence compared to its neighbours El Salvador and Honduras in recent years.\nAccording to Tim Rogers, until the 2018 unrest, as president Ortega presided over \"the fastest-growing economy in Central America\" and was a \"poster child for foreign investment and citizen security in a region known for gangs and unrest\". During this time the Ortega government formed an alliance with the Superior Council for Private Enterprise (COSEP), Nicaragua's council of business chambers. However the same unpopular decree which had the effect of \"unilaterally overhauling the social-security tax system\" (mentioned below) and precipitated the unrest in April 2018, also broke Ortega's arrangement with COSEP, and along with US sanctions, brought a sharp economic drop that as of mid-2020 is still \"crippling\" Nicaragua's economy.\nResponse to the COVID-19 pandemic.\nOrtega's government has been the target of criticism for its lack of a response to the pandemic.\nOn 14 March 2020, Ortega's government called a massive demonstration called \"Love in the Time of COVID-19\" as a show of support to him and his government. This occurred in the middle of the COVID-19 pandemic which had only recently been officially declared by the WHO.\nAccording to CNN, as of mid-June 2020, Ortega had \"refused to impose strict, preventive quarantine measures seen in neighboring countries\" to fight the COVID-19 pandemic. \"Public schools remain open, businesses continue to operate, festivals and cultural events are happening on an almost-weekly basis.\" The story stated that from mid-March to mid-June six politicians had died, and, according to witnesses, their remains disposed of at night in \"express burials\" (with police in attendance but \"no Mass, no wake and no funeral arrangements\", no photographs). The Ortega government said reports of \"express burials\" were \"false news\". According to AP News \"the government threatened to ban\" professional baseball players \"who refuse to play baseball ... And everyone is warned to keep quiet.\"\nIn hospitals \"ruling-party activists ensure no information leaks out\", and it quotes a doctor (anesthesiologist Mar\u00eda Nela Escoto) complaining that in the public hospital where she works \"everything is secret. They don't allow suggestions, and you can't question anything because they're watching. It's a very hostile environment.\"\n2018\u20132022 Nicaraguan protests.\nIn April 2018, student protests over a nature reserve fire expanded to cover an unpopular decree that would have cut social security benefits and increased taxpayer contributions. The protesters were violently set upon by the state sponsored Sandinista Youth. Despite attempts by Ortega's government to hide the incident through censorship of all private-owned news outlets, photos and videos of the violence made their way to social media where they sparked outrage and urged more Nicaraguans to join in on the protests. Tensions escalated quickly, as police began using tear gas canisters and rubber bullets, and eventually live ammunition on unarmed protesters. Authorities were also seen arming Sandinista Youth members with weapons to serve as paramilitary forces. Dozens of student protesters were subsequently killed. Despite the withdrawal of the unpopular decree, the protests continue, with most protesters demanding Ortega's and his cabinet's resignations.\nOn 30 May 2018, Nicaragua's Mother's Day, over 300,000 people marched to honor the mothers of students killed in the preceding protests. Despite the attendance of children, mothers and retirees, and lack of any violence by marchers, marchers were attacked in an event dubbed the \"Mother's Day Massacre\". 16 were killed, and 88 injured, as \"police sprayed the crowd with bullets, government sharpshooters positioned on the roof of the national baseball stadium went headhunting with sniper rifles\".\nIn June 2018, Tim Rogers wrote in \"The Atlantic\" magazine:Over the past seven weeks, Ortega's police and paramilitaries have killed more than 120 people, mostly students and other young protesters who are demanding the president's ouster and a return to democracy, according to a human-rights group [CENIDH, Nicaraguan Center for Human Rights]. Police hunt students like enemy combatants. Sandinista Youth paramilitaries, armed and paid by Ortega's party, drive around in pickup trucks attacking protesters. Gangs of masked men loot and burn shops with impunity. Cops wear civilian clothing, and some paramilitaries dress in police uniforms. \"This is starting to look more like Syria than Caracas,\" one Nicaraguan business leader told me.\nBy 3 December 22 people were dead and 565 imprisoned. Professionals involved in the protests (lawyers, engineering majors, radio broadcasters and merchants) had been reduced to lives of \"ever-changing safe houses, encrypted messaging apps and pseudonyms\", with the Ortega government allegedly \"hunting us like deer\", according to one dissident (Roberto Carlos Membre\u00f1o Brice\u00f1o). Human rights organization offices were raided, computers seized and observers expelled. Observers from the Organization of American States were expelled after releasing a critical investigative report of the government's response to the protests. The report found the government had progressed from \"using tear gas to rubber bullets, then real bullets and finally military firepower like assault rifles and grenade launchers\", based on an analysis of videos posted on social media. At least 1,400 people involved in the protests were hurt, although that the number was probably \"far higher because most people were too afraid to go to public hospitals, where doctors were fired for treating wounded protesters\". By July 2019 the international human rights organization Human Rights Watch called on the United States to impose sanctions on Ortega \"and other top\" Nicaraguan officials \"implicated\" in the crackdown on protests.\nTerm extension.\nOn 20 November 2024, Ortega unveiled proposals to amend the Nicaraguan constitution in order to extend his term from five years to six and have his wife and vice president Rosario Murillo declared co-president. The measures passed in a first reading at the National Assembly on 22 November and passed in a second reading on 30 January 2025. The constitutional reform entered into force on 18 February 2025.\nForeign policy.\nSoon after the 2006 election, Ortega paid an official visit to Iran and met Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. Ortega told the press that the \"revolutions of Iran and Nicaragua are almost twin revolutions ... since both revolutions are about justice, liberty, self-determination, and the struggle against imperialism\".\nOn 6 March 2008, following the 2008 Andean diplomatic crisis, Ortega announced that Nicaragua was breaking diplomatic ties with Colombia \"in solidarity with the Ecuadorian people\". Ortega also stated, \"We are not breaking relations with the Colombian people. We are breaking relations with the terrorist policy practiced by \u00c1lvaro Uribe's government\". The relations were restored with the resolution at a Rio Group summit held in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, on 7 March 2008. At the summit Colombia's \u00c1lvaro Uribe, Ecuador's Rafael Correa, Venezuela's Hugo Ch\u00e1vez and Ortega publicly shook hands in a show of good-will. The handshakes, broadcast live throughout Latin America, appeared to signal that a week of military buildups and diplomatic repercussions was over. After the handshakes, Ortega said he would re-establish diplomatic ties with Colombia. Uribe then quipped that he would send him the bill for his ambassador's plane fare.\nOn 25 May 2008, Ortega, upon learning of the death of FARC guerrilla leader Manuel Marulanda in Colombia, expressed condolences to the family of Marulanda and solidarity with the FARC and called Marulanda an extraordinary fighter who battled against profound inequalities in Colombia. The declarations were protested by the Colombian government and criticized in the major Colombian media outlets.\nOn 2 September 2008, during ceremonies for the 29th anniversary of the founding of the Nicaraguan army, Ortega announced that \"Nicaragua recognizes the independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia and fully supports the Russian government's position\". Ortega's decision made Nicaragua the second country (after Russia) to recognize the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia from Georgia.\nUnder Ortega's leadership, Nicaragua joined the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas.\nWhen seeking office, Ortega threatened to cut diplomatic recognition with the Republic of China (Taiwan, formerly Nationalist China) in order to restore relations with the Mainland-based People's Republic of China (as in the period from 1985 to 1990) as the legal government of China. But he did not do so. In 2007 Ortega stated that Nicaragua did not accept the One China Policy of the PRC government and that Nicaragua reserved the right to maintain official diplomatic relations with the ROC. He reassured President Chen Shui Bian in 2007 that Nicaragua would not break diplomatic relations with the ROC. He explained that during the Reagan administration the United States imposed sanctions on Nicaragua. But cutting ties with Taipei was a sad and painful decision because of the friendship between Nicaragua and Taiwan's people and government. Ortega met with the ROC President Ma Ying-jeou in 2009 and both agreed to improve the diplomatic ties between both countries. However, with a trade show from China (PRC) in Managua in 2010, he is attempting a two-track policy to get benefits from both sides. In 2016 Nicaragua and China (ROC) signed an air services agreement and Ortega stated that Nicaragua's free trade deal with the ROC had benefited both nations. The ROC increased its investment in Nicaragua. In December 2021, Nicaragua once again switched recognition with the PRC.\nIn September 2010, after a US report listed Nicaragua as a \"major\" drug-trafficking centre, with Costa Rica and Honduras, Ortega urged the US Congress and Obama administration to allocate more resources to assist the fight against drug trafficking.\nDuring the Libyan Civil War, Ortega was among the very few leaders who spoke out in clear defense of the embattled Muammar Gaddafi. During a telephone conversation between the two, Ortega told Gaddafi that he was \"waging a great battle to defend his nation\" and stated that \"it's at difficult times that loyalty and resolve are put to the test.\"\nOrtega has said that Assad's victory in the 2014 election is an important step to \"attain peace in Syria and a clear cut evidence that the Syrian people trust their president as a national leader and support his policies which aim at maintaining Syria's sovereignty and unity\".\nOrtega attended the swearing-in ceremony of Nicol\u00e1s Maduro for his second term on 10 January 2019.\nIn an interview with Max Blumenthal in August 2019, Ortega stated that he was open to the idea of Bernie Sanders (who had visited him in 1985) winning the US presidency in 2020 and that Sanders's message \"goes in the right direction for the U.S. to become a pole of peace, development, and cooperation\".\nEnvironmental policy.\nIn 2016, Daniel Ortega did not sign the Paris Agreement because he felt the deal did not do enough to protect the climate, although he later changed his mind. Moreover, Nicaragua rejected projects of mining of the Canadian group B2 Gold which could represent a threat to the environment. According to government estimates, Nicaragua has passed from 25% renewable electricity to 52% between 2007 and 2016.\nInternational sanctions.\nUnited States.\nIn November 2021, Joe Biden signed into law the \"Reinforcing Nicaragua's Adherence to Conditions for Electoral Reform Act\" (RENACER Act) which extended US sanctions against Nicaragua and gave Biden the power to exclude Nicaragua from the Dominican Republic-Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR) and to obstruct multilateral loans to Nicaragua. Venezuela and Russia condemned the new law.\nUkraine.\nIn February 2021, Ukraine's parliament, the Verkhovna Rada, approved economic sanctions against Ortega and his government. The sanctions were in response to Ortega sending a delegation to Russian-occupied Crimea in November 2020.\nCriticisms and concerns.\nOrtega's second presidency has been subject to much criticism and accusations of his becoming a strongman. The 2018 protests have been pointed to as being symbolic of these tensions. In 2018, Frances Robles wrote in \"The New York Times\" that the \"many Ortega adult children manage everything from gasoline distribution to television stations\" in Nicaragua.\nIn the months preceding the November 2021 Nicaraguan general election, Ortega's government arrested many prominent opposition members. As of 23 July 26 opposition leaders have been imprisoned.\nOn 24 March 2022, the ambassador Arturo McFields, condemned the Ortega government and requested the release of political prisoners, alluding that the government people were \"tired of dictatorship\" and that it was not easy to denounce it. As a result, he was dismissed.\nThe American lawyer Paul Reichler also left his position as representative due to \"moral conscience\", who felt that the president \"was no longer the Daniel Ortega whom he respected so much and served with so much pride\". Reichler found it inconceivable that someone like Ortega would have mercilessly suppressed peaceful demonstrations and imprisoned his former colleagues in inhumane conditions, and accused him of \"murdering\" a general by withholding medical treatment. Reichler had served as Nicaragua's international legal adviser before the International Court of Justice, when Managua sued the United States for financing the Contras, winning the case.\nThe Ortega administration also ordered the closure of the Nicaraguan Language Academy for failing to register as a \"foreign agent\" ratified by the Sandinista parliament with the favorable vote of 75 deputies of the ruling FSLN.\nSexual abuse allegations.\nIn 1998, Daniel Ortega's adopted stepdaughter Zoilam\u00e9rica Narv\u00e1ez released a 48-page report in which she alleged he had sexually abused her from 1979, when she was 12, until 1990. Ortega and his wife Murillo denied the allegation. The case could not proceed in Nicaraguan courts, which have been consistently allied with Ortega, because he had immunity from prosecution as a member of parliament, and the five-year statute of limitations for sexual abuse and rape charges had expired. Narv\u00e1ez's complaint to the Inter-American Human Rights Commission was ruled admissible on 15 October 2001. On 4 March 2002, the Nicaraguan government accepted the commission's recommendation of a \"friendly agreement\". Narv\u00e1ez withdrew the accusations in 2008. Following the 2016 election, Narv\u00e1ez renewed her accusations and said that she had become an outcast in her family.\nA 2019 documentary film \"Exiliada\" was released which revolves around Zoilam\u00e9rica Narv\u00e1ez and her sexual abuse allegations against Ortega.\nThere is also the case of Elvia Junieth who was allegedly abused by Ortega in 2005, and, according to the family, a girl was born from that relationship that Ortega did not recognize. Ernesto Moncada Lau, another of the assistants to the Sandinista president, appears on the birth certificate as the father of the minor. Her brother died in the Tipitapa Model prison in November 2021.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8779", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8779", "title": "Destroyer", "text": "Type of warship intended to escort other larger ships\nIn naval terminology, a destroyer is a fast, maneuverable, long-endurance warship intended to escort\nlarger vessels in a fleet, convoy, or carrier battle group and defend them against a wide range of general threats. They were conceived in the late 19th century as a defense against torpedo boats, and by the time of the Russo-Japanese War in 1904, these \"torpedo boat destroyers\" (TBDs) were \"large, swift, and powerfully armed torpedo boats designed to destroy other torpedo boats\". Although the term \"destroyer\" had been used interchangeably with \"TBD\" and \"torpedo boat destroyer\" by navies since 1892, the term \"torpedo boat destroyer\" had been generally shortened to simply \"destroyer\" by nearly all navies by the First World War.\nBefore World War II, destroyers were light vessels with little endurance for unattended ocean operations; typically, a number of destroyers and a single destroyer tender operated together. After the war, destroyers grew in size. The American s had a displacement of 2,200 tons, while the has a displacement of up to 9,600 tons, a difference of nearly 340%. Moreover, the advent of guided missiles allowed destroyers to take on the surface-combatant roles previously filled by battleships and cruisers. This resulted in larger and more powerful guided missile destroyers more capable of independent operation.\nAt the start of the 21st century, destroyers are the global standard for surface-combatant ships, with only two nations (the United States and Russia) officially operating the heavier cruisers, with no battleships or true battlecruisers remaining. Modern guided-missile destroyers are equivalent in tonnage but vastly superior in firepower to cruisers of the World War II era, and are capable of carrying nuclear-tipped cruise missiles. At long, a displacement of 9,200\u00a0tons, and with an armament of more than 90 missiles, guided-missile destroyers such as the \"Arleigh Burke\" class are actually larger and more heavily armed than most previous ships classified as guided-missile cruisers. The Chinese Type 055 destroyer has been described as a cruiser in some US Navy reports due to its size and armament.\nMany NATO navies, such as the French, Spanish, Dutch, Danish, and German, use the term \"frigate\" for their destroyers, which leads to some confusion.\nOrigins.\nThe emergence and development of the destroyer was related to the invention of the self-propelled torpedo in the 1860s. A navy now had the potential to destroy a superior enemy battle fleet using steam launches to fire torpedoes. Cheap, fast boats armed with torpedoes, called torpedo boats, were built and became a threat to large capital ships near enemy coasts. The first seagoing vessel designed to launch the self-propelled Whitehead torpedo was the 33-ton in 1876. She was armed with two drop collars to launch these weapons; these were replaced in 1879 by a single torpedo tube in the bow. By the 1880s, the type had evolved into small ships of 50\u2013100 tons, fast enough to evade enemy picket boats.\nAt first, the threat of a torpedo-boat attack to a battle fleet was considered to exist only when at anchor, but as faster and longer-range torpedo boats and torpedoes were developed, the threat extended to cruising at sea. In response to this new threat, more heavily gunned picket boats called \"catchers\" were built, which were used to escort the battle fleet at sea. They needed significant seaworthiness and endurance to operate with the battle fleet, and as they inherently became larger, they became officially designated \"torpedo-boat destroyers\", and by the First World War were largely known as \"destroyers\" in English. The antitorpedo boat origin of this type of ship is retained in its name in other languages, including French (), Italian (), Portuguese (), Czech (), Greek (, ), Dutch () and, up until the Second World War, Polish (, now obsolete).\nOnce destroyers became more than just catchers guarding an anchorage, they were recognized to be also ideal to take over the offensive role of torpedo boats themselves, so they were also fitted with torpedo tubes in addition to their antitorpedo-boat guns. At that time, and even into World War I, the only function of destroyers was to protect their own battle fleet from enemy torpedo attacks and to make such attacks on the battleships of the enemy. The task of escorting merchant convoys was still in the future.\nEarly designs.\nAn important development came with the construction of HMS \"Swift\" in 1884, later redesignated TB 81. This was a large (137 ton) torpedo boat with four 47\u00a0mm quick-firing guns and three torpedo tubes. At , while still not fast enough to engage enemy torpedo boats reliably, the ship at least had the armament to deal with them.\nAnother forerunner of the torpedo-boat destroyer (TBD) was the Japanese torpedo boat (\"Falcon\"), built in 1885. Designed to Japanese specifications and ordered from the Isle of Dogs, London Yarrow shipyard in 1885, she was transported in parts to Japan, where she was assembled and launched in 1887. The long vessel was armed with four 1-pounder (37\u00a0mm) quick-firing guns and six torpedo tubes, reached , and at 203\u00a0tons, was the largest torpedo boat built to date. In her trials in 1889, \"Kotaka\" demonstrated that she could exceed the role of coastal defense, and was capable of accompanying larger warships on the high seas. The Yarrow shipyards, builder of the parts for \"Kotaka\", \"considered Japan to have effectively invented the destroyer\".\nThe German aviso , launched in 1886, was designed as a \"Torpedoj\u00e4ger\" (torpedo hunter), intended to screen the fleet against attacks by torpedo boats. The ship was significantly larger than torpedo boats of the period, displacing some , with an armament of guns and Hotchkiss revolver cannon.\nTorpedo gunboat.\nThe first vessel designed for the explicit purpose of hunting and destroying torpedo boats was the torpedo gunboat. Essentially very small cruisers, torpedo gunboats were equipped with torpedo tubes and an adequate gun armament, intended for hunting down smaller enemy boats. By the end of the 1890s, torpedo gunboats were made obsolete by their more successful contemporaries, the TBDs, which were much faster.\nThe first example of this was , designed by Nathaniel Barnaby in 1885, and commissioned in response to the Russian War scare. The gunboat was armed with torpedoes and designed for hunting and destroying smaller torpedo boats. Exactly long and in beam, she displaced 550 tons. Built of steel, \"Rattlesnake\" was unarmoured with the exception of a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444-inch protective deck. She was armed with a single 4-inch/25-pounder breech-loading gun, six 3-pounder QF guns and four torpedo tubes, arranged with two fixed tubes at the bow and a set of torpedo-dropping carriages on either side. Four torpedo reloads were carried.\nA number of torpedo gunboat classes followed, including the \"Grasshopper\" class, the , the , and the \u2013 all built for the Royal Navy during the 1880s and the 1890s. In the 1880s, the Chilean Navy ordered the construction of two torpedo gunboats from the British shipyard Laird Brothers, which specialized in the construction of this type of vessel. The novelty is that one of these \"Almirante Lynch\"-class torpedo boats managed to sink the ironclad with self-propelled torpedoes in the Battle of Caldera Bay in 1891, thus surpassing its main function of hunting torpedo boats.\nFernando Villaamil, second officer of the Ministry of the Navy of Spain, designed his own torpedo gunboat to combat the threat from the torpedo boat. He asked several British shipyards to submit proposals capable of fulfilling these specifications. In 1885, the Spanish Navy chose the design submitted by the shipyard of James and George Thomson of Clydebank. (\"Destroyer\" in Spanish) was laid down at the end of the year, launched in 1886, and commissioned in 1887. Some authors considered her as the first destroyer ever built.\nShe displaced 348 tons, and was the first warship equipped with twin triple-expansion engines generating , for a maximum speed of , which made her one of the faster ships in the world in 1888. She was armed with one Spanish-designed Hontoria breech-loading gun, four (6-pounder) Nordenfelt guns, two (3-pdr) Hotchkiss cannons and two Schwartzkopff torpedo tubes. The ship carried three torpedoes per tube. She carried a crew of 60.\nIn terms of gunnery, dimensions, the specialised design and speed to chase torpedo boats, and her high-seas capabilities, \"Destructor\" was a highly influential precursor to the TBD.\nDevelopment of the destroyer class.\nThe first classes of ships to bear the formal designation TBD were the of two ships and of two ships of the Royal Navy.\nEarly torpedo gunboat designs lacked the range and speed to keep up with the fleet they were supposed to protect. In 1892, the Third Sea Lord, Rear Admiral John \"Jacky\" Fisher ordered the development of a new type of ships equipped with the then-novel water-tube boilers and quick-firing small-calibre guns. Six ships to the specifications circulated by the admiralty were ordered initially, comprising three different designs each produced by a different shipbuilder: and from John I. Thornycroft &amp; Company, and from Yarrows, and and from Laird, Son &amp; Company.\nThese ships all featured a turtleback (i.e. rounded) forecastle that was characteristic of early British TBDs. and were both built by Thornycroft, displaced 260 tons (287.8 tons full load), and were 185 feet in length. They were armed with one 12-pounder gun and three 6-pounder guns, with one fixed 18-in torpedo tube in the bow plus two more torpedo tubes on a revolving mount abaft the two funnels. Later, the bow torpedo tube was removed and two more 6-pounder guns added, instead. They produced 4,200\u00a0hp from a pair of Thornycroft water-tube boilers, giving them a top speed of 27 knots, giving the range and speed to travel effectively with a battle fleet. In common with subsequent early Thornycroft boats, they had sloping sterns and double rudders.\nThe French navy, an extensive user of torpedo boats, built its first TBD in 1899, with the \"torpilleur d'escadre\". The United States commissioned its first TBD, , Destroyer No. 1, in 1902, and by 1906, 16 destroyers were in service with the US Navy.\nSubsequent improvements.\nTorpedo boat destroyer designs continued to evolve around the turn of the 20th century in several key ways. The first was the introduction of the steam turbine. The spectacular unauthorized demonstration of the turbine-powered at the 1897 Spithead Navy Review, which, significantly, was of torpedo-boat size, prompted the Royal Navy to order a prototype turbine-powered destroyer, of 1899. This was the first turbine warship of any kind, and achieved a remarkable on sea trials. By 1910, the turbine had been widely adopted by all navies for their faster ships.\nThe second development was the replacement of the torpedo boat-style turtleback foredeck by a raised forecastle for the new s built in 1903, which provided better sea-keeping and more space below deck.\nThe first warship to use only fuel oil propulsion was the Royal Navy's TBD , after experiments in 1904, although the obsolescence of coal as a fuel in British warships was delayed by oil's availability. Other navies also adopted oil, for instance the USN with the of 1909.\nIn spite of all this variety, destroyers adopted a largely similar pattern. The hull was long and narrow, with a relatively shallow draft. The bow was either raised in a forecastle or covered under a turtleback; underneath this were the crew spaces, extending &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444 to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 the way along the hull. Aft of the crew spaces was as much engine space as the technology of the time would allow - several boilers and engines or turbines. Above deck, one or more quick-firing guns were mounted in the bows, in front of the bridge; several more were mounted amidships and astern. Two tube mountings (later on, multiple mountings) were generally found amidships.\nBetween 1892 and 1914, destroyers became markedly larger; initially 275\u00a0tons with a length of for the Royal Navy's first of TBDs, up to the First World War with long destroyers displacing 1,000\u00a0tons was not unusual. Construction remained focused on putting the biggest possible engines into a small hull, though, resulting in a somewhat flimsy construction. Often, hulls were built of high-tensile steel only thick.\nBy 1910, the steam-driven displacement (that is, not hydroplaning) torpedo boat had become redundant as a separate type. Germany, nevertheless, continued to build such boats until the end of World War I, although these were effectively small coastal destroyers. In fact, Germany never distinguished between the two types, giving them pennant numbers in the same series and never giving names to destroyers. Ultimately, the term \"torpedo boat\" came to be attached to a quite different vessel \u2013 the very fast-hydroplaning, motor-driven motor torpedo boat.\nEarly use and World War I.\nNavies originally built TBDrs to protect against torpedo boats, but admirals soon appreciated the flexibility of the fast, multipurpose vessels that resulted. Vice-Admiral Sir Baldwin Walker laid down destroyer duties for the Royal Navy:\nEarly destroyers were extremely cramped places to live, being \"without a doubt magnificent fighting vessels... but unable to stand bad weather\". During the Russo-Japanese War in 1904, the commander of the Imperial Japanese Navy TBD \"Akatsuki\" described \"being in command of a destroyer for a long period, especially in wartime... is not very good for the health\". Stating that he had originally been strong and healthy, he continued, \"life on a destroyer in winter, with bad food, no comforts, would sap the powers of the strongest men in the long run. A \"destroyer\" is always more uncomfortable than the others, and rain, snow, and \"sea-water\" combine to make them damp; in fact, in bad weather, there is not a dry spot where one can rest for a moment.\"\nThe Japanese destroyer-commander finished with, \"Yesterday, I looked at myself in a mirror for a long time; I was disagreeably surprised to see my face thin, full of wrinkles, and as old as though I were 50. My clothes (uniform) cover nothing but a skeleton, and my bones are full of rheumatism.\"\nIn 1898, the US Navy officially classified , a long all steel vessel displacing 165 tons, as a torpedo boat, but her commander, LT. John C. Fremont, described her as \"...a compact mass of machinery not meant to keep the sea nor to live in... as five-sevenths of the ship are taken up by machinery and fuel, whilst the remaining two-sevenths, fore and aft, are the crew's quarters; officers forward and the men placed aft. And even in those spaces are placed anchor engines, steering engines, steam pipes, etc. rendering them unbearably hot in tropical regions.\"\nEarly combat.\nThe TBD's first major use in combat came during the Japanese surprise attack on the Russian fleet anchored in Port Arthur at the opening of the Russo-Japanese War on 8 February 1904.\nThree destroyer divisions attacked the Russian fleet in port, firing a total of 18 torpedoes, but only two Russian battleships, and , and a protected cruiser, , were seriously damaged due to the proper deployment of torpedo nets. \"Tsesarevich\", the Russian flagship, had her nets deployed, with at least four enemy torpedoes \"hung up\" in them, and other warships were similarly saved from further damage by their nets.\nWhile capital-ship engagements were scarce in World War I, destroyer units engaged almost continually in raiding and patrol actions. The first shot of the war at sea was fired on 5 August 1914 by , one of the 3rd Destroyer Flotilla, in an engagement with the German auxiliary minelayer .\nDestroyers were involved in the skirmishes that prompted the Battle of Heligoland Bight, and filled a range of roles in the Battle of Gallipoli, acting as troop transports and as fire-support vessels, as well as their fleet-screening role. Over 80 British destroyers and 60 German torpedo boats took part in the Battle of Jutland, which involved pitched small-boat actions between the main fleets, and several foolhardy attacks by unsupported destroyers on capital ships. Jutland also concluded with a messy night action between the German High Seas Fleet and part of the British destroyer screen.\nThe threat evolved by World War I with the development of the submarine, or U-boat. The submarine had the potential to hide from gunfire and close underwater to fire torpedoes. Early-war destroyers had the speed and armament to intercept submarines before they submerged, either by gunfire or by ramming. Destroyers also had a shallow enough draft that they were difficult to hit with torpedoes.\nThe desire to attack submarines under water led to rapid destroyer evolution during the war. They were quickly equipped with strengthened bows for ramming, and depth charges and hydrophones for identifying submarine targets. The first submarine casualty credited to a destroyer was the German , rammed by on 29 October 1914. While \"U-19\" was only damaged, the next month, successfully sank . The first depth-charge sinking was on 4 December 1916, when was sunk by HMS \"Llewellyn\".\nThe submarine threat meant that many destroyers spent their time on antisubmarine patrol. Once Germany adopted unrestricted submarine warfare in January 1917, destroyers were called on to escort merchant convoys. US Navy destroyers were among the first American units to be dispatched upon the American entry to the war, and a squadron of Japanese destroyers even joined Allied patrols in the Mediterranean. Patrol duty was far from safe; of the 67 British destroyers lost in the war, collisions accounted for 18, while 12 were wrecked.\nAt the end of the war, the state-of-the-art was represented by the British W class.\n1918\u20131945.\nThe trend during World War I had been towards larger destroyers with heavier armaments. A number of opportunities to fire at capital ships had been missed during the war, because destroyers had expended all their torpedoes in an initial salvo. The British V and W classes of the late war had sought to address this by mounting six torpedo tubes in two triple mounts, instead of the four or two on earlier models. The V and W classes set the standard of destroyer building well into the 1920s.\nTwo Romanian destroyers and , though, had the greatest firepower of all destroyers in the world throughout the first half of the 1920s. This was largely because, between their commissioning in 1920 and 1926, they retained the armament that they had while serving in the Italian Navy as scout cruisers (\"esploratori\"). When initially ordered by Romania in 1913, the Romanian specifications envisioned three 120\u00a0mm guns, a caliber which would eventually be adopted as the standard for future Italian destroyers. Armed with three 152\u00a0mm and four 76\u00a0mm guns after being completed as scout cruisers, the two warships were officially re-rated as destroyers by the Romanian Navy. The two Romanian warships were thus the destroyers with the greatest firepower in the world throughout much of the interwar period. As of 1939, when the Second World War started, their artillery, although changed, was still close to cruiser standards, amounting to nine heavy naval guns (five of 120\u00a0mm and four of 76\u00a0mm). In addition, they retained their two twin 457\u00a0mm torpedo tubes and two machine guns, plus the capacity to carry up to 50 mines.\nThe next major innovation came with the Japanese or \"special type\", designed in 1923 and delivered in 1928. The design was initially noted for its powerful armament of six 5-inch (127\u00a0mm) guns and three triple torpedo mounts. The second batch of the class gave the guns high-angle turrets for antiaircraft warfare, and the , oxygen-fueled Long Lance Type 93 torpedo. The later of 1931 further improved the torpedo armament by storing its reload torpedoes close at hand in the superstructure, allowing reloading within 15 minutes.\nMost other nations replied with similar larger ships. The US adopted twin 5-inch (127\u00a0mm) guns, and the subsequent and es (the latter of 1934) increased the number of torpedo tubes to 12 and 16, respectively.\nIn the Mediterranean, the Italian Navy's building of very fast light cruisers of the prompted the French to produce exceptional destroyer designs. The French had long been keen on large destroyers, with their of 1922 displacing over 2,000\u00a0tons and carrying 130\u00a0mm guns; a further three similar classes were produced around 1930. The of 1935 carried five guns and nine torpedo tubes, but could achieve speeds of , which remains the record speed for a steamship and for any destroyer. The Italians' own destroyers were almost as swift; most Italian designs of the 1930s were rated at over , while carrying torpedoes and either four or six 120\u00a0mm guns.\nGermany started to build destroyers again during the 1930s as part of Hitler's rearmament program. The Germans were also fond of large destroyers, but while the initial Type 1934 displaced over 3,000\u00a0tons, their armament was equal to smaller vessels. This changed from the Type 1936 onwards, which mounted heavy guns. German destroyers also used innovative high-pressure steam machinery; while this should have helped their efficiency, it more often resulted in mechanical problems.\nOnce German and Japanese rearmament became clear, the British and American navies consciously focused on building destroyers that were smaller, but more numerous than those used by other nations. The British built a series of destroyers (the to ), which were about 1,400\u00a0tons standard displacement, and had four guns and eight torpedo tubes; the American of 1938 was similar in size, but carried five guns and ten torpedo tubes. Realizing the need for heavier gun armament, the British built the of 1936 (sometimes called \"Afridi\" after one of two lead ships). These ships displaced 1,850\u00a0tons and were armed with eight guns in four twin turrets and four torpedo tubes. These were followed by the J-class and L-class destroyers, with six guns in twin turrets and eight torpedo tubes.\nAntisubmarine sensors included sonar (or ASDIC), although training in their use was indifferent. Antisubmarine weapons changed little, and ahead-throwing weapons, a need recognized in World War I, had made no progress.\nLater combat.\nDuring the 1920s and 1930s, destroyers were often deployed to areas of diplomatic tension or humanitarian disaster. British and American destroyers were common on the Chinese coast and rivers, even supplying landing parties to protect colonial interests. By World War II, the threat had evolved once again. Submarines were more effective, and aircraft had become important weapons of naval warfare; once again the early-war fleet destroyers were ill-equipped for combating these new targets. They were fitted with new light antiaircraft guns, radar, and forward-launched ASW weapons, in addition to their existing dual-purpose guns, depth charges, and torpedoes. Increasing size allowed improved internal arrangement of propulsion machinery with compartmentation, so ships were less likely to be sunk by a single hit. In most cases torpedo and/or dual-purpose gun armament was reduced to accommodate new anti-air and anti-submarine weapons. By this time the destroyers had become large, multi-purpose vessels, expensive targets in their own right. As a result, casualties on destroyers were among the highest. In the US Navy, particularly in World War II, destroyers became known as tin cans due to their light armor compared to battleships and cruisers.\nThe need for large numbers of antisubmarine ships led to the introduction of smaller and cheaper specialized antisubmarine warships called corvettes and frigates by the Royal Navy and destroyer escorts by the USN. A similar programme was belatedly started by the Japanese (see ). These ships had the size and displacement of the original TBDs from which the contemporary destroyer had evolved.\nPost-World War II.\nSome conventional destroyers completed in the late 1940s and 1950s were built on wartime experience. These vessels were significantly larger than wartime ships and had fully automatic main guns, unit machinery, radar, sonar, and antisubmarine weapons, such as the squid mortar. Examples include the British , US , and the Soviet s.\nSome World War II\u2013vintage ships were modernized for antisubmarine warfare, and to extend their service lives, to avoid having to build (expensive) brand-new ships. Examples include the US FRAM I programme and the British Type 15 frigates converted from fleet destroyers.\nThe advent of surface-to-air missiles and surface-to-surface missiles, such as the Exocet, in the early 1960s changed naval warfare. Guided missile destroyers (DDG in the US Navy) were developed to carry these weapons and protect the fleet from air, submarine, and surface threats. Examples include the Soviet , the British , and the US .\nThe 21st century destroyers tend to display features such as large, slab sides without complicated corners and crevices to keep the radar cross-section small, vertical launch systems to carry a large number of missiles at high readiness to fire, and helicopter flight decks and hangars.\nDestroyers in preservation.\nMany historic destroyers are preserved as museum ships\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "8780", "revid": "40571816", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8780", "title": "Debian GNU/Hurd", "text": ""}
{"id": "8781", "revid": "5358582", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8781", "title": "Dorothy Parker", "text": "American poet, short story writer, critic and satirist (1893\u20131967)\nDorothy Parker (n\u00e9e Rothschild; August 22, 1893 \u2013 June 7, 1967) was an American poet, literary critic and writer of fiction. Based in New York, she was known for her caustic wisecracks, and eye for 20th-century urban foibles.\nParker rose to acclaim, both for her literary works published in magazines, such as \"The New Yorker\", and for her role as a founding member of the Algonquin Round Table. In the early 1930s, Parker traveled to Hollywood to pursue screenwriting. Her successes there, including two Academy Award nominations, were curtailed when her involvement in left-wing politics resulted in her being placed on the Hollywood blacklist.\nDismissive of her own talents, she deplored her reputation as a \"wisecracker\". Nevertheless, both her literary output and reputation for sharp wit have endured. Some of her works have been set to music.\nEarly life and education.\nAlso known as Dot or Dottie, Parker was born Dorothy Rothschild in 1893 to Jacob Henry Rothschild and his wife Eliza Annie (n\u00e9e Marston) (1851\u20131898) at 732 Ocean Avenue in Long Branch, New Jersey. Parker wrote in her essay \"My Home Town\" that her parents returned from their summer beach cottage there to their Manhattan apartment shortly after Labor Day (September 4) so that she could be called a true New Yorker.\nParker's mother was of Scottish descent. Her father was the son of Sampson Jacob Rothschild (1818\u20131899) and Mary Greissman (b. 1824), both Prussian-born Jews. Sampson Jacob Rothschild was a merchant who immigrated to the United States around 1846, settling in Monroe County, Alabama. Dorothy's father was one of five known siblings: Simon (1854\u20131908); Samuel (b. 1857); Hannah (1860\u20131911), later Mrs. William Henry Theobald; and Martin, born in Manhattan on December 12, 1865, who perished in the sinking of the \"Titanic\" in 1912.\nHer mother died in Manhattan in July 1898, a month before Parker's fifth birthday. Her father remarried in 1900 to Eleanor Frances Lewis (1851\u20131903), a Protestant.\nAuthor Dorothy Herrmann claimed that Parker hated her father, who allegedly physically abused her, and her stepmother, whom she refused to call \"mother\", \"stepmother\", or \"Eleanor\", instead referring to her as \"the housekeeper\". However, her biographer Marion Meade refers to this account as \"largely false\", stating that the atmosphere in which Parker grew up was indulgent, affectionate, supportive and generous.\nParker was raised on the Upper West Side and attended a Roman Catholic elementary school at the Convent of the Blessed Sacrament on West 79th Street with her sister, Helen, and classmate Mercedes de Acosta. Parker once joked that she was asked to leave following her characterization of the Immaculate Conception as \"spontaneous combustion\".\nHer stepmother died in 1903, when Parker was nine. Parker later attended Miss Dana's School, a finishing school in Morristown, New Jersey. She graduated in 1911, at the age of 18, according to Arthur F. Kinney, just before the school closed, although Rhonda Pettit and Marion Meade state she never graduated from high school. Following her father's death in 1913, she played piano at a dancing school to earn a living while she worked on her poetry.\nShe sold her first poem to \"Vanity Fair\" magazine in 1914 and some months later was hired as an editorial assistant for \"Vogue\", another Cond\u00e9 Nast magazine. She moved to \"Vanity Fair\" as a staff writer after two years at \"Vogue\".\nIn 1917, she met a Wall Street stockbroker, Edwin Pond Parker II\n(1893\u20131933) and they married before he left to serve in World War I with the U.S. Army 4th Division.\nAlgonquin Round Table years.\nParker's career took off in 1918 while she was writing theater criticism for \"Vanity Fair\", filling in for the vacationing P. G. Wodehouse. At the magazine, she met Robert Benchley, who became a close friend, and Robert E. Sherwood. The trio lunched at the Algonquin Hotel almost daily. They were founding members of what became known as the Algonquin Round Table. Among its members were newspaper columnists Franklin P. Adams and Alexander Woollcott, as well as the editor Harold Ross, the novelist Edna Ferber, the reporter Heywood Broun, and the comedian Harpo Marx. Through their publication of her lunchtime remarks and short verses, particularly in Adams' column \"The Conning Tower\", Parker began developing a national reputation as a wit.\nEven though many found Parker's caustic theater reviews very entertaining, she was dismissed by \"Vanity Fair\" on January 11, 1920, after her criticisms had too often offended the playwright\u2013producer David Belasco, the actress Billie Burke, the impresario Florenz Ziegfeld, and others. Benchley resigned in protest. (Sherwood is sometimes reported to have done so too, but in fact had been fired in December 1919.) Parker soon started working for \"Ainslee's Magazine\", which had a higher circulation. Her poems and short stories were published widely, \"not only in upscale places like \"Vanity Fair\" (which was happier to publish her than employ her), \"The Smart Set\", and \"The American Mercury\", but also in the popular \"Ladies' Home Journal\", \"Saturday Evening Post\", and \"Life\"\".\nWhen Harold Ross founded \"The New Yorker\" in 1925, Parker and Benchley were part of a board of editors he established to allay the concerns of his investors. Parker's first piece for the magazine was published in its second issue. She became famous for her short, viciously humorous poems, many highlighting ludicrous aspects of her numerous and largely unsuccessful romantic affairs, and others wistfully considering the appeal of suicide.\nThe next 15 years were Parker's period of greatest productivity and success. In the 1920s alone she published some 300 poems and free verses in \"Vanity Fair\", \"Vogue\", \"The Conning Tower\" column, and \"The New Yorker\" as well as in \"Life\", \"McCall's\" and \"The New Republic\". Her poem \"Song in a Minor Key\" was included as part of a candid 1922 interview with N.E.A. writer Josephine Van de Grift.\nParker published her first volume of poetry, \"Enough Rope\", in 1926. It sold 47,000 copies and garnered impressive reviews. \"The Nation\" described her verse as \"caked with a salty humor, rough with splinters of disillusion, and tarred with a bright black authenticity\". \"Enough Rope\" included Parker's two-line poem \"News Item\"\u00a0\u2013 \"Men seldom make passes / At girls who wear glasses\"\u00a0\u2013 that would remain among her most remembered epigrams. She amused readers with poems that had a surprise or trick ending, akin to an O. Henry short story, such as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nWhile some critics, notably \"The New York Times\"' reviewer, dismissed her work as \"flapper verse\", the book helped secure Parker's reputation for sparkling wit. She released two more volumes of verse, \"Sunset Gun\" (1928) and \"Death and Taxes\" (1931), along with the short story collections \"Laments for the Living\" (1930) and \"After Such Pleasures\" (1933). \"Not So Deep as a Well\" (1936) collected much of the material previously published in \"Rope\", \"Gun\", and \"Death\"; and she re-released her fiction with a few new pieces in 1939 as \"Here Lies\".\nIn a 2000 essay, Literature Professor Wendy Martin said of Parker: \"Although her sardonic poetry was extremely popular when it was published and remains readable today, her short stories are her greatest accomplishment.\" Parker's story \"Big Blonde\", published in \"The Bookman\", won the O. Henry Award as the best short story of 1929. Several of her stories were written as soliloquies, where the narrator's voice evokes humor and pathos, such as the opening two paragraphs of \"A Telephone Call\":&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Please, God, let him telephone me now. Dear God, let him call me now. I won't ask anything else of You, truly I won't. It isn't very much to ask. It would be so little to You, God, such a little, little thing. Only let him telephone now. Please, God. Please, please, please.&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;If I didn't think about it, maybe the telephone might ring. Sometimes it does that. If I could think of something else. If I could think of something else. Maybe if I counted five hundred by fives, it might ring by that time. I'll count slowly. I won't cheat. And if it rings when I get to three hundred, I won't stop; I won't answer it until I get to five hundred. Five, ten, fifteen, twenty, twenty-five, thirty, thirty-five, forty, forty-five, fifty\u2026. Oh, please ring. Please.\nParker also tried her hand at writing for the stage. She collaborated with playwright Elmer Rice to create \"Close Harmony\", which ran on Broadway in December 1924. The comedic play was well received in out-of-town previews and favorably reviewed in New York, but it closed after only 24 performances. As \"The Lady Next Door\", it became a successful touring production.\nHer other celebrated writing was published in \"The New Yorker\" in the form of acerbic book reviews under the byline \"Constant Reader\". Her response to the whimsy of A. A. Milne's \"The House at Pooh Corner\" was \"Tonstant Weader fwowed up.\" Her reviews appeared semi-regularly from 1927 to 1933, and were deemed \"immensely popular\". They were posthumously published in 1970 in a collection titled \"Constant Reader\", and then anthologized again in 2024.\nThroughout much of the 1920s, she was separated from her husband Edwin Parker; they eventually divorced in 1928. She had a number of affairs, her lovers including reporter-turned-playwright Charles MacArthur and the publisher Seward Collins. Her relationship with MacArthur resulted in a pregnancy. Parker is alleged to have said, \"how like me, to put all my eggs into one bastard\". She had an abortion, and fell into a depression that culminated in her first attempt at suicide.\nToward the end of this period, Parker became more politically aware and active. What would turn into a lifelong commitment to activism began in 1927, when she grew concerned about the pending executions of Sacco and Vanzetti. Parker traveled to Boston to protest the proceedings. She and fellow Round Tabler Ruth Hale were arrested, and Parker eventually pleaded guilty to a charge of \"loitering and sauntering\", paying a $5 fine.\nHollywood.\nIn February 1932, over a breakup with boyfriend John McClain, Parker attempted suicide by swallowing barbiturates.&lt;ref name=\"nhL/parker-west-hollywood\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nIn 1932, she met Alan Campbell, an actor hoping to become a screenwriter. They married two years later in Raton, New Mexico. Campbell's mixed parentage was the reverse of Parker's: he had a German-Jewish mother and a Scottish father. She learned that he was bisexual and subsequently proclaimed in public that he was \"queer as a billy goat\". The pair moved to Hollywood and signed ten-week contracts with Paramount Pictures, with Campbell (also expected to act) earning $250 per week and Parker earning $1,000 per week. They would eventually earn $2,000 and sometimes more than $5,000 per week as freelancers for various studios. She and Campbell \"[received] writing credit for over 15 films between 1934 and 1941\".\nIn 1933, when informed that famously taciturn former president Calvin Coolidge had died, Parker remarked, \"How could they tell?\"\nIn 1935, Parker contributed lyrics for the song \"I Wished on the Moon\", with music by Ralph Rainger. The song was introduced in \"The Big Broadcast of 1936\" by Bing Crosby.\nWith Campbell and Robert Carson, she wrote the script for the 1937 film \"A Star Is Born\", for which they were nominated for an Academy Award for Best Writing\u2014Screenplay. She wrote additional dialogue for \"The Little Foxes\" (1941), and did an uncredited \"dialogue polish\" of \"It's a Wonderful Life\" (1946). Together with Frank Cavett, she received a \"Writing (Motion Picture Story)\" Oscar nomination for \"Smash-Up, the Story of a Woman\" (1947), starring Susan Hayward.\nAfter the U.S. entered the Second World War, Parker and Alexander Woollcott collaborated to produce an anthology of her work as part of a series published by Viking Press for servicemen overseas. With an introduction by W. Somerset Maugham, \"The Portable Dorothy Parker\" (1944) compiled over two dozen of her short stories, along with selected poems from \"Enough Rope\", \"Sunset Gun\", and \"Death and Taxes\". In 1973, when a revised and enlarged edition of the book was released, the \"Publishers' Note\" stated that of the 75 volumes in the Viking\u00a0Portable Library series, \"Dorothy Parker\" was one of three\u2014along with \"Shakespeare\" and \"The World Bible\"\u2014that \"have remained continuously in print and selling steadily through time and change.\"\nDuring the 1930s and 1940s, Parker became an increasingly vocal advocate of civil liberties and civil rights and a frequent critic of authority figures. During the Great Depression, she was among numerous American intellectuals and artists who became involved in related social movements. She reported in 1937 on the Loyalist cause in Spain for the Communist magazine \"New Masses\". At the behest of Otto Katz, a covert Soviet Comintern agent and operative of German Communist Party agent Willi M\u00fcnzenberg, Parker helped to found the Hollywood Anti-Nazi League in 1936, which the FBI suspected of being a Communist Party front. The League's membership eventually grew to around 4,000. According to David Caute, its often wealthy members were \"able to contribute as much to [Communist] Party funds as the whole American working class\", although they may not have been intending to support the Party cause.\nParker also chaired the Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee's fundraising arm, \"Spanish Refugee Appeal\". She organized Project Rescue Ship to transport Loyalist veterans to Mexico, headed Spanish Children's Relief, and lent her name to many other left-wing causes and organizations. Her former Round Table friends saw less and less of her, and her relationship with Robert Benchley became particularly strained (although they would reconcile). Parker met S. J. Perelman at a party in 1932 and, despite a rocky start (Perelman called it \"a scarifying ordeal\"), they remained friends for the next 35 years. They became neighbors when the Perelmans helped Parker and Campbell buy a run-down farm in Bucks County, Pennsylvania, near New Hope, a popular summer destination among many writers and artists from New York.\nAfter the attack on Pearl Harbor, Parker applied for a passport with plans to become a foreign correspondent, but her application was denied for political reasons. The FBI had compiled a 1,000-page dossier on her, detailing her involvement in leftist activities, which doomed her post-war screenwriting career. It was the time of the Second Red Scare when Senator Joseph McCarthy was raising alarms about communists in government and Hollywood. In 1950, she was identified as a Communist by the anti-Communist publication \"Red Channels\". As a result, movie studio bosses placed her on the Hollywood blacklist. Her final screenplay was \"The Fan\", a 1949 adaptation of Oscar Wilde's \"Lady Windermere's Fan\", directed by Otto Preminger.\nWith only a small income from her book royalties, Parker and Campbell moved into an apartment \"in an unfashionable West Hollywood neighborhood.\" She collected unemployment benefits while listing herself each week as available for work. Her persistent money troubles in Hollywood contributed to her harsh assessment of the place during a 1956 interview in New York:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Hollywood money isn't money. It's congealed snow, melts in your hand, and there you are. I can't talk about Hollywood. It was a horror to me when I was there and it's a horror to look back on. I can't imagine how I did it. When I got away from it I couldn't even refer to the place by name. 'Out there,' I called it.\nHer marriage to Campbell was tempestuous, with tensions exacerbated by her increasing alcohol consumption and by his long-term affair with a married woman in Europe during World War II. Parker and Campbell divorced in 1947, remarried in 1950, and then separated again in 1952 when she moved back to New York. From 1957 to 1962, she wrote book reviews for \"Esquire\". Her writing became increasingly erratic owing to her continued abuse of alcohol. She returned to Hollywood in 1961, reconciled once more with Campbell, and collaborated with him on a number of unproduced projects until Campbell died from a drug overdose in 1963.\nLater life and death.\nFollowing Campbell's death, Parker returned to New York City and the Volney apartments on East 74th Street. In her later years, she denigrated the Algonquin Round Table, although it had brought her such early notoriety:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;These were no giants. Think who was writing in those days\u2014Lardner, Fitzgerald, Faulkner and Hemingway. Those were the real giants. The Round Table was just a lot of people telling jokes and telling each other how good they were. Just a bunch of loudmouths showing off, saving their gags for days, waiting for a chance to spring them\u00a0... There was no truth in anything they said. It was the terrible day of the wisecrack, so there didn't have to be any truth\u00a0...\nParker occasionally participated in radio programs, including \"Information Please\" (as a guest) and \"Author, Author\" (as a regular panelist). She wrote for the \"Columbia Workshop\", and both Ilka Chase and Tallulah Bankhead used her material for radio monologues.\nParker died on June 7, 1967, at age 73, of a heart attack. At the time of her death, she was still residing at the Volney building. In her will, she bequeathed her estate to Martin Luther King Jr., and upon King's death, to the NAACP.\nBurial.\nFollowing her cremation, Parker's ashes were unclaimed for several years. Finally, in 1973, the crematorium sent them to her lawyer's office; by then he had retired, and the ashes remained in his colleague Paul O'Dwyer's filing cabinet for about 17 years. In 1988, O'Dwyer brought this to public attention, with the aid of celebrity columnist Liz Smith; after some discussion, the NAACP claimed Parker's remains and designed a memorial garden for them outside its Baltimore headquarters. The plaque read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Here lie the ashes of Dorothy Parker (1893\u20131967) humorist, writer, critic. Defender of human and civil rights. For her epitaph she suggested, 'Excuse my dust'. This memorial garden is dedicated to her noble spirit which celebrated the oneness of humankind and to the bonds of everlasting friendship between black and Jewish people. Dedicated by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. October 28, 1988.\nIn early 2020, the NAACP moved its headquarters to downtown Baltimore and how this might affect Parker's ashes became the topic of much speculation, especially after the NAACP formally announced it would later move to Washington, D.C.\nThe NAACP restated that Parker's ashes would ultimately be where her family wished. \"It\u2019s important to us that we do this right,\" said the NAACP.\nRelatives called for the ashes to be moved to the family's plot in Woodlawn Cemetery, in the Bronx, where a place had been reserved for Parker by her father. On August 18, 2020, Parker's urn was exhumed. \"Two executives from the N.A.A.C.P. spoke, and a rabbi who had attended her initial burial said Kaddish.\" On August 22, 2020, Parker was re-buried privately in Woodlawn, with the possibility of a more public ceremony later. \"Her legacy means a lot,\" added representatives from the NAACP.\nHonors.\nOn August 22, 1992, the 99th anniversary of Parker's birth, the United States Postal Service issued a 29\u00a2 U.S. commemorative postage stamp in the Literary Arts series. The Algonquin Round Table, as well as the number of other literary and theatrical greats who lodged at the hotel, contributed to the Algonquin Hotel's being designated in 1987 as a New York City Historic Landmark. In 1996, the hotel was designated as a National Literary Landmark by the Friends of Libraries USA, based on the contributions of Parker and other members of the Round Table. The organization's bronze plaque is attached to the front of the hotel. Parker's birthplace at the Jersey Shore was also designated a National Literary Landmark by Friends of Libraries USA in 2005 and a bronze plaque marks the former site of her family house.\nIn 2014, Parker was elected to the New Jersey Hall of Fame.\nIn popular culture.\nParker inspired a number of fictional characters in several plays of her day. These included \"Lily Malone\" in Philip Barry's \"Hotel Universe\" (1932), \"Mary Hilliard\" (played by Ruth Gordon) in George Oppenheimer's \"Here Today\" (1932), \"Paula Wharton\" in Gordon's 1944 play \"Over Twenty-one\" (directed by George S. Kaufman), and \"Julia Glenn\" in the Kaufman\u2013Moss Hart collaboration \"Merrily We Roll Along\" (1934). Kaufman's representation of her in \"Merrily We Roll Along\" led Parker, once his Round Table compatriot, to despise him. She also was portrayed as \"Daisy Lester\" in Charles Brackett's 1934 novel \"Entirely Surrounded\". She is mentioned in the original introductory lyrics in Cole Porter's song \"Just One of Those Things\" from the 1935 Broadway musical \"Jubilee\", which have been retained in the standard interpretation of the song as part of the Great American Songbook. Additionally, she was mentioned in the title and lyrics of Prince's song \"The Ballad Of Dorothy Parker\" on his 1987 album \"Sign o' The Times\".\nParker is a character in the novel \"The Dorothy Parker Murder Case\" by George Baxt (1984), in a series of \"Algonquin Round Table Mysteries\" by J. J. Murphy (2011\u2013 ), and in Ellen Meister's novel \"Farewell, Dorothy Parker\" (2013). She is the main character in \"Love For Miss Dottie\", a short story by Larry N Mayer, which was selected by writer Mary Gaitskill for the collection \"Best New American Voices 2009\" (Harcourt).\nShe has been portrayed on film and television by Dolores Sutton in \"F. Scott Fitzgerald in Hollywood\" (1976), Rosemary Murphy in \"Julia\" (1977), Bebe Neuwirth in \"Dash and Lilly\" (1999), and Jennifer Jason Leigh in \"Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle\" (1994). Neuwirth was nominated for an Emmy Award for her performance, and Leigh received a number of awards and nominations, including a Golden Globe nomination.\nTelevision creator Amy Sherman-Palladino named her production company 'Dorothy Parker Drank Here Productions' in tribute to Parker.\nTucson actress Lesley Abrams wrote and performed the one-woman show \"Dorothy Parker's Last Call\" in 2009 in Tucson, Arizona, presented by the Winding Road Theater Ensemble. She reprised the role at the Live Theatre Workshop in Tucson in 2014. The play was selected to be part of the Capital Fringe Festival in DC in 2010.\nIn 2018, American drag queen Miz Cracker played Parker in the celebrity-impersonation game show episode of the Season 10 of \"Rupaul's Drag Race\".\nIn the 2018 film \"Can You Ever Forgive Me?\" (based on the 2008 memoir of the same name), Melissa McCarthy plays Lee Israel, an author who for a time forged original letters in Dorothy Parker's name.\nIn 2025, in the television show \u201cOnly Murders In The Building,\u201d a character played by Christoph Waltz claims that Dorothy Parker took his virginity.\n2007 Dorothy Parker copyright trial.\nIn \"Silverstein v. Penguin Putnam, Inc\", the plaintiff claimed copyright in certain Parker poems that had been reproduced in Penguin's \"Dorothy Parker: Complete Poems\" after appearing in \"Not Much Fun\", a volume edited by Stuart Y. Silverstein that had been the first collection to include these particular poems.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Second Circuit reversed the district court\u2019s initial award of summary judgment on the copyright claim insofar as it was based on \"Not Much Fun\"'s arrangement of poems and the edits that Silverstein made and the titles he gave to some of the poems. The Second Circuit also vacated the judgment that Silverstein's selection of poems was protectible... After a bench trial, the court held that the plaintiff\u2019s selection of all of the poems lacked creativity and was therefore not copyrightable, ruling in favor of Penguin.\nAdaptations.\nIn 1982, Anni-Frid Lyngstad recorded \"Threnody\", set to music by Per Gessle, for her third solo album \"Something's Going On\", after she offered him a book of poems by Dorothy Parker.\nIn the 2010s some of her poems from the early 20th century have been set to music by the composer Marcus Paus as the operatic song cycle \"Hate Songs for Mezzo-Soprano and Orchestra\" (2014); Paus's \"Hate Songs\" was described by musicologist Ralph P. Locke as \"one of the most engaging works\" in recent years; \"the cycle expresses Parker's favorite theme: how awful human beings are, especially the male of the species\".\nWith the authorization of the NAACP, lyrics taken from her book of poetry \"Not So Deep as a Well\" were used in 2014 by Canadian singer Myriam Gendron to create a folk album of the same title. Also in 2014, Chicago jazz bassist/singer/composer Katie Ernst issued her album \"Little Words\", consisting of her authorized settings of seven of Parker's poems.\nIn 2021 her book \"Men I'm Not Married To\" was adapted as an opera of the same name by composer Lisa DeSpain and librettist Rachel J. Peters. It premiered virtually as part of Operas in Place and Virtual Festival of New Operas commissioned by Baldwin Wallace Conservatory Voice Performance, Cleveland Opera Theater, and On Site Opera on February 18, 2021.\nWorks.\nJournalism.\nBook reviews.\nParker wrote forty-six book reviews and essays for \"The New Yorker\" between 1927 and 1933 under the pseudonym Constant Reader, with most appearing in 1927 and 1928. Some are included in the revised and enlarged edition of \"The Portable Dorothy Parker\" (1973). There are two other collections, both with limitations:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nOnline works\nSerial\nBooks\nPoems\nMetadata"}
{"id": "8783", "revid": "509411", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8783", "title": "Dylan Thomas", "text": "Welsh poet and writer (1914\u20131953)\nDylan Marlais Thomas (27 October 1914\u00a0\u2013 9 November 1953) was a Welsh poet and writer, whose works include the poems \"Do not go gentle into that good night\" and \"And death shall have no dominion\", as well as the \"play for voices\" \"Under Milk Wood\". He also wrote stories and radio broadcasts such as \"A Child's Christmas in Wales\" and \"Portrait of the Artist as a Young Dog\". He became widely popular in his lifetime, and remained so after his death at the age of 39 in New York City. By then, he had acquired a reputation, which he had encouraged, as a \"roistering, drunken and doomed poet\".\nDylan Thomas was born in Swansea in 1914, leaving school in 1932 to become a reporter for the \"South Wales Daily Post\". Many of his works appeared in print while he was still a teenager. In 1934, the publication of \"Light breaks where no sun shines\" caught the attention of the literary world. While living in London, Thomas met Caitlin Macnamara; they married in 1937 and had three children: Llewelyn, Aeronwy, and Colm.\nHe came to be appreciated as a popular poet during his lifetime, though he found earning a living as a writer difficult. He began augmenting his income with reading tours and radio broadcasts. His radio recordings for the BBC during the late 1940s brought him to the public's attention, and he was frequently featured by the BBC as an accessible voice of the literary scene. Thomas first travelled to the United States in the 1950s; his readings there brought him a degree of fame, while his erratic behaviour and drinking worsened. During his fourth trip to New York in 1953, Thomas became gravely ill and fell into a coma. He died on 9 November, and his body was returned to Wales. On 25 November, he was interred at St.\u00a0Martin's churchyard in Laugharne, Carmarthenshire.\nAppraisals of Thomas\u2019s work have noted his original, rhythmic, and ingenious use of words and imagery. Further appraisals following on from new critical editions of his poems have sought to explore in more depth his unique modernist poetic, setting aside the distracting legend of the \"doomed poet\", and seeking thereby to secure his status as a major poet of the 20th century.\nLife and career.\nEarly life.\nDylan Thomas was born on 27 October 1914 in Swansea, the son of Florence Hannah (\"n\u00e9e\" Williams; 1882\u20131958), a seamstress, and David John 'Jack' Thomas (1876\u20131952), a teacher. His father had a first-class honours degree in English from University College, Aberystwyth, and ambitions to rise above his position teaching English literature at the local grammar school. Thomas had one sibling, Nancy Marles (1906\u20131953), who was eight years his senior.\nThe red-brick, semi-detached house at 5 Cwmdonkin Drive (in the Uplands area), in which Thomas was born and lived until he was 23, had been bought by his parents a few months before his birth.\nAt the 1921 census, Nancy and Dylan are noted as speaking both Welsh and English. Their parents were also bilingual in English and Welsh, and Jack Thomas taught Welsh at evening classes. One of their Swansea relations has recalled that, at home, \"Both Auntie Florrie and Uncle Jack always spoke Welsh.\" There are three accounts from the 1940s of Dylan singing Welsh hymns and songs, and of speaking a little Welsh.\nThomas's father chose the name Dylan, which could be translated as \"son of the sea\" after Dylan ail Don, a character in \"The Mabinogion\". His middle name, Marlais, was given in honour of his great-uncle, William Thomas, a Unitarian minister and poet whose bardic name was Gwilym Marles. The name \"Dylan\" being pronounced in Welsh caused his mother to worry that he might be teased as the \"dull one\". When he broadcast on Welsh BBC early in his career, he was introduced using this pronunciation. Thomas later favoured the typical anglicised pronunciation and gave instructions that it should be pronounced that way (the same as \"Dillon\" ).\nChildhood.\nThomas has written a number of accounts of his childhood growing up in Swansea, and there are also accounts available by those who knew him as a young child. Thomas wrote several poems about his childhood and early teenage years, including \"Once it was the colour of saying\" and \"The hunchback in the park\", as well as short stories such as \"The Fight\" and \"A Child's Christmas in Wales\".\nThomas's four grandparents played no part in his childhood. For the first ten years or so of his life, Thomas's Swansea aunts and uncles helped with his upbringing. These were his mother's three siblings, Polly and Bob, who lived in the St Thomas district of Swansea and Theodosia, and her husband, the Rev. David Rees, in Newton, Swansea, where parishioners recall Thomas sometimes staying for a month or so at a time. All four aunts and uncles spoke Welsh and English.\nThomas's childhood also featured regular summer trips to the Llansteffan peninsula, a Welsh-speaking part of Carmarthenshire. In the land between Llangain and Llansteffan, his mother's family, the Williamses and their close relatives, worked a dozen farms with over a thousand acres between them. The memory of Fernhill, a dilapidated 15-acre farm rented by his maternal aunt, Ann Jones, and her husband, Jim Jones, is evoked in the 1945 lyrical poem \"Fern Hill\", but is portrayed more accurately in his short story, \"The Peaches\". Thomas also spent part of his summer holidays with Jim's sister, Rachel Jones, at neighbouring Pentrewyman farm, where he spent his time riding Prince the cart horse, chasing pheasants and fishing for trout.\nAll these relatives were bilingual, and many worshipped at Smyrna chapel in Llangain where the services were always in Welsh, including Sunday School which Thomas sometimes attended. There is also an account of the young Thomas being taught how to swear in Welsh. His schoolboy friends recalled that \"It was all Welsh\u2014and the children played in Welsh...he couldn't speak English when he stopped at Fernhill...in all his surroundings, everybody else spoke Welsh...\" At the 1921 census, 95% of residents in the two parishes around Fernhill were Welsh speakers. Across the whole peninsula, 13%\u2014more than 200 people\u2014spoke only Welsh.\nA few fields south of Fernhill lay Blaencwm, a pair of stone cottages to which his mother's Swansea siblings had retired, and with whom the young Thomas and his sister, Nancy, would sometimes stay. A couple of miles down the road from Blaencwm is the village of Llansteffan, where Thomas used to holiday at Rose Cottage with another Welsh-speaking aunt, Anne Williams, his mother's half-sister who had married into local gentry. Anne's daughter, Doris, married a dentist, Randy Fulleylove. The young Dylan also holidayed with them in Abergavenny, where Fulleylove had his practice.\nThomas's paternal grandparents, Anne and Evan Thomas, lived at The Poplars in Johnstown, just outside Carmarthen. Anne was the daughter of William Lewis, a gardener in the town. She had been born and brought up in Llangadog, as had her father, who is thought to be \"Grandpa\" in Thomas's short story \"A Visit to Grandpa's\", in which Grandpa expresses his determination to be buried not in Llansteffan but in Llangadog.\nEvan worked on the railways and was known as Thomas the Guard. His family had originated in another part of Welsh-speaking Carmarthenshire, in the farms that lay around the villages of Brechfa, Abergorlech, Gwernogle and Llanybydder, and which the young Thomas occasionally visited with his father. His father's side of the family also provided the young Thomas with another kind of experience; many lived in the towns of the South Wales industrial belt, including Port Talbot, Pontarddulais and Cross Hands.\nThomas had bronchitis and asthma in childhood and struggled with these throughout his life. He was indulged by his mother, Florence, and enjoyed being mollycoddled, a trait he carried into adulthood, becoming skilled in gaining attention and sympathy. But Florence would have known that child deaths had been a recurring event in the family's history, and it is said that she herself had lost a child soon after her marriage. If Thomas was protected and spoiled at home, however, the real spoilers were his many aunts and older cousins, those in both Swansea and the Llansteffan countryside. Some of them played an important part in both his upbringing and his later life, as Thomas's wife, Caitlin, has observed: \"He couldn't stand their company for more than five minutes... Yet Dylan couldn't break away from them, either. They were the background from which he had sprung, and he needed that background all his life, like a tree needs roots.\".\nEducation.\nThomas's formal education began at Mrs Hole's dame school, a private school on Mirador Crescent, a few streets away from his home. He described his experience there in \"Reminiscences of Childhood\":\nNever was there such a dame school as ours, so firm and kind and smelling of galoshes, with the sweet and fumbled music of the piano lessons drifting down from upstairs to the lonely schoolroom, where only the sometimes tearful wicked sat over undone sums, or to repent a little crime\u00a0\u2013 the pulling of a girl's hair during geography, the sly shin kick under the table during English literature.\nAlongside dame school, Thomas also took private lessons from Gwen James, an elocution teacher who had studied at drama school in London, winning several major prizes. She also taught \"Dramatic Art\" and \"Voice Production\", and would often help cast members of the Swansea Little Theatre (see below) with the parts they were playing. Thomas's parents' storytelling and dramatic talents, as well as their theatre-going interests, could also have contributed to the young Thomas's interest in performance.\nIn October 1925, Thomas enrolled at Swansea Grammar School for boys, in Mount Pleasant, where his father taught English. There are several accounts by his teachers and fellow pupils of Thomas's time at grammar school. He was an undistinguished pupil who shied away from school, preferring reading and drama activities. In his first year one of his poems was published in the school's magazine, and before he left he became its editor. Thomas's various contributions to the school magazine can be found here:\nDuring his final school years he began writing poetry in notebooks; the first poem, dated 27 April (1930), is entitled \"Osiris, come to Isis\". In June 1928, Thomas won the school's mile race, held at St. Helen's Ground; he carried a newspaper photograph of his victory with him until his death.\nIn 1931, when he was 16, Thomas left school to become a reporter for the \"South Wales Daily Post\", where he remained for some 18 months. After leaving the newspaper, Thomas continued to work as a freelance journalist for several years, during which time he remained at Cwmdonkin Drive and continued to add to his notebooks, amassing 200 poems in five books between 1930 and 1935. Of the 90 poems he published, half were written during these years. The discovery in 2014 of a fifth notebook, compiled between 1934 and August 1935 and containing sixteen poems, had substantial implications for the understanding of Thomas\u2019s poetic development as well as leading to a revision of the hitherto accepted chronology of composition dates for the poems.\nOn the stage.\nThe stage was also an important part of Thomas's life from 1929 to 1934, as an actor, writer, producer and set painter. He took part in productions at Swansea Grammar School, and with the YMCA Junior Players and the Little Theatre, which was based in the Mumbles. It was also a touring company that took part in drama competitions and festivals around South Wales. Between October 1933 and March 1934, for example, Thomas and his fellow actors took part in five productions at the Mumbles theatre, as well as nine touring performances. Thomas continued with acting and production throughout his life, including his time in Laugharne, South Leigh and London (in the theatre and on radio), as well as taking part in nine stage readings of \"Under Milk Wood\". The Shakespearian actor, John Laurie, who had worked with Thomas on both the stage and radio thought that Thomas would \"have loved to have been an actor\" and, had he chosen to do so, would have been \"Our first real poet-dramatist since Shakespeare.\"\nPainting the sets at the Little Theatre was just one aspect of the young Thomas's interest in art. His own drawings and paintings hung in his bedroom in Cwmdonkin Drive, and his early letters reveal a broader interest in art and art theory. Thomas saw writing a poem as an act of construction \"as a sculptor works at stone,\" later advising a student \"to treat words as a craftsman does his wood or stone...hew, carve, mould, coil, polish and plane them...\" Throughout his life, his friends included artists, both in Swansea and in London, as well as in America.\nIn his free time, Thomas visited the cinema in Uplands, took walks along Swansea Bay, and frequented Swansea's pubs, especially the Antelope and the Mermaid Hotels in Mumbles. In the Kardomah Caf\u00e9, close to the newspaper office in Castle Street, he met his creative contemporaries, including his friend the poet Vernon Watkins and the musician and composer, Daniel Jones with whom, as teenagers, Thomas had helped to set up the \"Warmley Broadcasting Corporation\". This group of writers, musicians and artists became known as \"The Kardomah Gang\". This was also the period of his friendship with Bert Trick, a local shopkeeper, left-wing political activist and would-be poet, and with the Rev. Leon Atkin, a Swansea minister, human rights activist and local politician.\nIn 1933, Thomas visited London for probably the first time.\nLondon, 1933\u20131939.\nThomas was a teenager when many of the poems for which he became famous were published: \"And death shall have no dominion\", \"Before I Knocked\" and \"The Force That Through the Green Fuse Drives the Flower\". \"And death shall have no dominion\" appeared in the \"New English Weekly\" in May 1933. In May 1934, Thomas made his first visit to Laugharne, \"the strangest town in Wales\", as he described it in an extended letter to Pamela Hansford Johnson, in which he also writes about the town's estuarine bleakness, and the dismal lives of the women cockle pickers working the shore around him.\nFrom 1933 onwards, poet Victor Neuburg edited a section called \"The Poet's Corner\" in a British newspaper, the \"Sunday Referee\". Here he encouraged new talent by awarding weekly prizes. One prize went to the then-unknown Thomas, and the publisher of the \"Sunday Referee\" sponsored and Neuburg arranged for the publication of Thomas's first book, \"18 Poems\", in December 1934. The anthology was published by Fortune Press, in part a vanity publisher that did not pay its writers and expected them to buy a certain number of copies themselves. \"18 Poems\" was noted for its visionary qualities which led to critic Desmond Hawkins writing that the work was \"the sort of bomb that bursts no more than once in three years\". The volume was critically acclaimed, netting him new admirers from the London poetry world, including Edith Sitwell and Edwin Muir. When \"Light breaks where no sun shines\" appeared in \"The Listener\" in 1934, it caught the attention of three senior figures in literary London, T. S. Eliot, Geoffrey Grigson and Stephen Spender. \nIn December 1935, Thomas contributed the poem \"The Hand That Signed the Paper\" to Issue 18 of the bi-monthly \"New Verse\". In 1936, his next collection \"Twenty-five Poems\", published by J. M. Dent, also received much critical praise. Two years later, in 1938, Thomas won the Oscar Blumenthal Prize for Poetry; it was also the year in which New Directions offered to be his publisher in the United States. In all, he wrote half his poems while living at Cwmdonkin Drive before moving to London. During this time Thomas's reputation for heavy drinking developed.\nBy the late 1930s, Thomas was embraced as the \"poetic herald\" for a group of English poets, the New Apocalyptics. Thomas refused to align himself with them and declined to sign their manifesto. He later stated that he believed they were \"intellectual muckpots leaning on a theory\". Despite this, many of the group, including Henry Treece, modelled their work on Thomas's.\nIn the politically charged atmosphere of the 1930s Thomas's sympathies were very much with the radical left, to the point of his holding close links with the communists; he was also decidedly pacifist and anti-fascist. He was a supporter of the left-wing No More War Movement and boasted about participating in demonstrations against the British Union of Fascists. Bert Trick has provided an extensive account of an Oswald Mosley rally in the Plaza cinema in Swansea in July 1933 that he and Thomas attended.\nMarriage.\nIn early 1936, Thomas met Caitlin Macnamara (1913\u20131994), a 22-year-old dancer of Irish and French Quaker descent. She had run away from home, intent on making a career in dance, and aged 18 joined the chorus line at the London Palladium. Introduced by Augustus John, Caitlin's lover, they met in The Wheatsheaf pub on Rathbone Place in London's West End. Laying his head in her lap, a drunken Thomas proposed. Thomas liked to assert that he and Caitlin were in bed together ten minutes after they first met. Although Caitlin initially continued her relationship with John, she and Thomas began a correspondence, and in the second half of 1936 were courting. They married at the register office in Penzance, Cornwall, on 11 July 1937. \nFor the first months of their relationship and marriage the couple lived at the Macnamara family home in Blashford, Hampshire. In May 1938 they moved to Wales, to the village of Laugharne, Carmarthenshire where they rented a cottage in Gosport Street before moving into 'Sea View', a larger property, a couple of months later. They left Laugharne in July 1940 and then led a peripatetic lifestyle over the next few years, returning to Blashford and subsequently living at Marshfield (1940), Bishopston (1940\u201341), Chelsea, in London (1942\u201343), Talsarn (1942\u201344), East Knoyle, Beaconsfield (1944), Bosham, Sussex (1944), Blaencwm (Llansteffan) (1944 and 1945), New Quay (1944\u201345), and in premises arranged by Margaret Taylor, one of Dylan's benefactors (the wife of the historian A. J. P. Taylor), in the grounds of their Oxford home (1946\u201347) before moving to a property she purchased in the Oxfordshire village of South Leigh (1947\u201349). In May 1949, the Thomas family moved back to Laugharne into The Boat House, purchased by Margaret Taylor on their behalf. In 1951 Taylor purchased a second property in Camden Town, North London on their behalf where they stayed from October 1951 - January 1952.\nDylan and Caitlin Thomas had three children: Llewelyn Edouard (1939\u20132000), Aeronwy Thomas-Ellis (1943\u20132009) and Colm Garan Hart (1949\u20132012). Llewelyn and Aeronwy were privately educated, at the Magdalen College School, Oxford and at the Arts Education School in Tring, Hertfordshire, respectively.\nWartime 1939\u20131945.\nIn 1939, a collection of 16 poems and seven of the 20 short stories published by Thomas in magazines since 1934, appeared as \"The Map of Love\". Ten stories in his next book, \"Portrait of the Artist as a Young Dog\" (1940), were based less on lavish fantasy than those in \"The Map of Love\" and more on real-life romances featuring himself in Wales. Sales of both books were poor, resulting in Thomas living on meagre fees from writing and reviewing. At this time he borrowed heavily from friends and acquaintances. Hounded by creditors, Thomas and his family left Laugharne in July 1940 and moved to the home of critic John Davenport in Marshfield near Chippenham in Gloucestershire. There Thomas collaborated with Davenport on the satire \"The Death of the King's Canary\", though due to fears of libel the work was not published until 1976.\nAt the outset of the Second World War, worried about conscription, Thomas unsuccessfully sought employment in a reserved occupation with the Ministry of Information. However, an \u201cunreliable lung\u201d, as he described his chronic condition \u2013 coughing sometimes confined him to bed, and he had a history of bringing up blood and mucus \u2013 proved to be the grounds for the military authorities to allocate him a C3 category medical exemption which meant that he would be among the last to be called up for service. He would subsequently be recognised as engaged in essential war work through his role in broadcasting for the BBC and documentary film making, work he took up in 1941 after he and Caitlin moved to London, leaving their son with Caitlin\u2019s mother at Blashford. Thomas produced film scripts for the Strand Film Company, work which provided him with a much needed financial mainstay throughout the war years and his first regular source of income since working for the \"South Wales Daily Post\".\nIn February 1941, Swansea was bombed by the Luftwaffe in a \"three nights' blitz\". Castle Street was one of many streets that suffered badly; rows of shops, including the Kardomah Caf\u00e9, were destroyed. Thomas walked through the bombed-out shell of the town centre with his friend Bert Trick. Upset at the sight, he concluded: \"Our Swansea is dead\". Thomas later wrote a feature programme for the radio, \"Return Journey\", which described the caf\u00e9 as being \"razed to the snow\". The programme, produced by Philip Burton, was first broadcast on 15 June 1947. The Kardomah Caf\u00e9 reopened on Portland Street after the war.\nIn early 1943, Thomas began a relationship with Pamela Glendower, one of several affairs he had during his marriage. The affairs either ran out of steam or were halted after Caitlin discovered his infidelity. In March 1943, Caitlin gave birth to a daughter, Aeronwy, in London. They lived in a run-down studio in Chelsea, made up of a single large room with a curtain to separate the kitchen.\nEscaping to Wales.\nThe Thomas family also made several escapes back to Wales. Between 1941 and 1943, they lived intermittently in Plas Gelli, Talsarn, in Cardiganshire. Plas Gelli sits close by the River Aeron, after whom Aeronwy is thought to have been named. Some of Thomas's letters from Gelli can be found in his \"Collected Letters\" whilst an extended account of Thomas's time there can be found in D. N. Thomas's book, \"Dylan Thomas: A Farm, Two Mansions and a Bungalow\" (2000). The Thomases shared the mansion with his childhood friends from Swansea, Vera and Evelyn Phillips. Vera's friendship with the Thomases in nearby New Quay is portrayed in the 2008 film \"The Edge of Love\".\nIn July 1944, with the threat in London of German flying bombs, Thomas moved to the family cottage at Blaencwm near Llangain, Carmarthenshire, where he resumed writing poetry, completing \"Holy Spring\" and \"Vision and Prayer\".\nIn September that year, the Thomas family moved to New Quay in Cardiganshire (Ceredigion), where they rented Majoda, a wood and asbestos bungalow on the cliffs overlooking Cardigan Bay. It was there that Thomas wrote a radio piece about New Quay, \"Quite Early One Morning\", a sketch for his later work, \"Under Milk Wood\". Of the poetry written at this time, of note is \"Fern Hill\", started while living in New Quay, continued at Blaencwm in July and August 1945 and first published in October 1945\nThomas's nine months in New Quay, said first biographer, Constantine FitzGibbon, were \"a second flowering, a period of fertility that recalls the earliest days\u2026[with a] great outpouring of poems\", as well as a good deal of other material. His second biographer, Paul Ferris, agreed: \"On the grounds of output, the bungalow deserves a plaque of its own.\" Thomas's third biographer, George Tremlett, concurred, describing the time in New Quay as \"one of the most creative periods of Thomas's life.\" Walford Davies, who co-edited the 1995 definitive edition of the play, has noted that New Quay \"was crucial in supplementing the gallery of characters Thomas had to hand for writing \"Under Milk Wood\".\"\nWar poetry.\nThomas\u2019s horror of war, foreshadowed in some of his poems of the 1930s and fuelled by his lived experience of the bombing raids and fire storms of the Blitz in London, received further expression in his poems of the war period. These include elegies for an elderly man \u2013 \"Among Those Killed in a Dawn Raid Was a Man Aged a Hundred\" (1941) \u2013 and for child victims of incendiary bombing raids in \"Ceremony After a Fire Raid\" (1944) and \"A Refusal to Mourn the Death, by Fire, of a Child in London\" (1945). They were collected in \"Deaths and Entrances\", the fourth volume of his poetry, published in 1946. The sentiments expressed in his war poems were, according to Walford Davies, representative of \u201cthe real temper of the British people of the time \u2013 the resilience and the guts\u201d.\nMaking films 1941\u20131948.\nFrom September 1941 Thomas worked for the Strand Film Company in London. Strand produced films for the Ministry of Information and Thomas produced film scripts for six such films in 1942: \"This is Colour\" (on aniline dye processing), \"New Towns for Old\", \"Balloon Site 568\" (a recruitment film), \"CEMA\" (on arts organisation), \"Young Farmers\" and \"Battle for Freedom\". He also scripted and produced \"Wales \u2013 Green Mountain, Black Mountain\", a British Council commission and a bi-lingual production. \"These Are The Men\" (1943) was a more ambitious piece in which Thomas's verse accompanies Leni Riefenstahl's footage of an early Nuremberg Rally. \"Conquest of a Germ\" (1944) explored the use of early antibiotics in the fight against pneumonia and tuberculosis. \"Our Country\" (1945) was a romantic tour of Britain set to Thomas's poetry.\nThomas continued to work in the film industry after the war, working on feature film scripts which included: \"No Room at the Inn\" (1948), \"The Three Weird Sisters\" (1948), \"The Doctor and the Devils\" (1944 - not produced until 1985) and \"Rebecca's Daughters\" (1948 \u2013 not produced until 1992). His screenplay for \"The Beach of Fales\u00e1\", not produced as a film, received a BBC Radio 3 production in May 2014. Altogether in his work in the film industry Thomas produced 28 film scripts (not all of which reached production) as well as acting as producer and director in some cases. When recession overtook the film industry in the late 1940s he lost his most reliable source of income. The experience he gained in his film work was a significant factor, according to Walford Davies, in the maturation of \"Under Milk Wood\".\nBroadcasting years 1945\u20131949.\nAlthough Thomas had previously written for the BBC, it was a minor and intermittent source of income. In 1943, he wrote and recorded a 15-minute talk titled \"Reminiscences of Childhood\" for the Welsh BBC. In December 1944, he recorded \"Quite Early One Morning\" (produced by Aneirin Talfan Davies, again for the Welsh BBC) but when Davies offered it for national broadcast BBC London turned it down. On 31 August 1945, the BBC Home Service broadcast \"Quite Early One Morning\" and, in the three years beginning in October 1945, Thomas made over a hundred broadcasts for the corporation. Thomas was employed not only for his poetry readings, but for discussions and critiques.\nIn the second half of 1945, Thomas began reading for the BBC Radio programme, \"Book of Verse\", broadcast weekly to the Far East. This provided Thomas with a regular income and brought him into contact with Louis MacNeice, a congenial drinking companion whose advice Thomas cherished. On 29 September 1946, the BBC began transmitting the Third Programme, a high-culture network which provided opportunities for Thomas. He appeared in the play \"Comus\" for the Third Programme, the day after the network launched, and his rich, sonorous voice led to character parts, including the lead in Aeschylus's \"Agamemnon\" and Satan in an adaptation of \"Paradise Lost\". Thomas remained a popular guest on radio talk shows for the BBC, who regarded him as \"useful should a younger generation poet be needed\". He had an uneasy relationship with BBC management and a staff job was never an option, with drinking cited as the problem. Despite this, Thomas became a familiar radio voice and within Britain was \"in every sense a celebrity\".\nBy late September 1945, the Thomases had left Wales and were living with various friends in London. In December, they moved to Oxford to live in a summerhouse on the banks of the Cherwell. It belonged to the historian, A. J. P. Taylor. His wife, Margaret, would prove to be Thomas's most committed patron.\nThe publication of \"Deaths and Entrances\" in February 1946 was a major turning point for Thomas. Poet and critic Walter J. Turner commented in \"The Spectator\", \"This book alone, in my opinion, ranks him as a major poet\".\nItaly, South Leigh and Prague.\nThe following year, in April 1947, the Thomases travelled to Italy, after Thomas had been awarded a Society of Authors scholarship. They stayed first in villas near Rapallo and then Florence, before moving to a hotel in Rio Marina on the island of Elba. On their return, Thomas and family moved, in September 1947, into the Manor House in South Leigh, just west of Oxford, purchased and rented to Thomas for \u00a31 per week by Margaret Taylor. He continued with his work for the BBC, completed a number of film scripts and worked further on his ideas for \"Under Milk Wood\", including a discussion in late 1947 of \"The Village of the Mad\" (as the play was then called) with the BBC producer Philip Burton. He later recalled that, during the meeting, Thomas had discussed his ideas for having a blind narrator, an organist who played for a dog and two lovers who wrote to each other every day but never met.\nIn March 1949 Thomas travelled to Prague. He had been invited by the Czech government to attend the inauguration of the Czechoslovak Writers' Union. Ji\u0159ina Haukov\u00e1, who had previously published translations of some of Thomas's poems, was his guide and interpreter. In her memoir, Haukov\u00e1 recalls that at a party in Prague, Thomas \"narrated the first version of his radio play \"Under Milk Wood\".\" She describes how he outlined the plot about a town that was declared insane, mentioning the organist who played for sheep and goats and the baker with two wives.\nReturn to Laugharne.\nA month later, in May 1949, Thomas and his family moved to his final home, the Boat House at Laugharne, purchased for him at a cost of \u00a32,500 in April 1949 by Margaret Taylor. Thomas acquired a garage a hundred yards from the house on a cliff ledge which he turned into his writing shed, and where he wrote several of his most acclaimed poems. He also rented \"Pelican House\" opposite his regular drinking den, Brown's Hotel, for his parents who lived there from 1949 until 1953.\nCaitlin gave birth to their third child, a boy named Colm Garan Hart, on 25 July 1949.\nIn October, the New Zealand poet, Allen Curnow, came to visit Thomas at the Boat House, who took him to his writing shed and \"fished out a draft to show me of the unfinished \"Under Milk Wood\"\" that was, says Curnow, titled \"The Town That Was Mad\". This is the first known sighting of the script of the play that was to become \"Under Milk Wood\".\nAmerica, Iran... and \"Under Milk Wood\", 1950\u20131953.\nAmerican poet John Brinnin invited Thomas to New York, where in February 1950 they embarked on a lucrative three-month tour of arts centres and campuses. The tour, which began in front of an audience of a thousand at the Kaufmann Auditorium of the Poetry Centre in New York, took in about 40 venues. During the tour, Thomas was invited to many parties and functions and on several occasions became drunk \u2013 going out of his way to shock people \u2013 and was a difficult guest. Thomas drank before some of his readings, though it is argued he may have pretended to be more affected by it than he actually was. The writer Elizabeth Hardwick recalled how intoxicating a performer he was and how the tension would build before a performance: \"Would he arrive only to break down on the stage? Would some dismaying scene take place at the faculty party? Would he be offensive, violent, obscene?\" Caitlin said in her memoir, \"Nobody ever needed encouragement less, and he was drowned in it.\"\nOn returning to Britain, Thomas began work on two further poems, \"In the white giant's thigh\", which he read on the \"Third Programme\" in September 1950, and the incomplete \"In country heaven\". In October, Thomas sent a draft of the first 39 pages of 'The Town That Was Mad' to the BBC. The task of seeing this work through to production as \"Under Milk Wood\" was assigned to the BBC's Douglas Cleverdon, who had been responsible for casting Thomas in 'Paradise Lost'.\nDespite Cleverdon's urgings, the script slipped from Thomas's priorities and in January 1951 he went to Iran to work on a film for the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, an assignment which Callard has speculated was undertaken on behalf of British intelligence agencies. Thomas toured the country with the film crew, and his letters home vividly express his shock and anger with the poverty he saw around him. He also gave a reading at the British Council and talked with a number of Iranian intellectuals, including Ebrahim Golestan whose account of his meeting with Thomas has been translated and published. The film was never made, with Thomas returning to Wales in February, though his time in Iran allowed him to provide a few minutes of material for a BBC documentary \"Persian Oil\". Thomas' journey through Iran has also been the subject of the 2024 documentary film \"Pouring Water on Troubled Oil\". The film was written and directed by Nariman Massoumi, Department of Film and Television at the University of Bristol, with narration by Michael Sheen.\nLater that year, Thomas published two poems, which have been described as \"unusually blunt.\" They were an ode, in the form of a villanelle, to his dying father, \"Do not go gentle into that good night\", and the ribald \"Lament\".\nAlthough he had a range of wealthy patrons, including Margaret Taylor, Princess Marguerite Caetani and Marged Howard-Stepney, Thomas was still in financial difficulty, and he wrote several begging letters to notable literary figures, including T. S. Eliot. Taylor was not keen on Thomas taking another trip to the United States, and thought that if he had a permanent address in London he would be able to gain steady work there. She bought a property, 54 Delancey Street, in Camden Town, and in late 1951 Thomas and Caitlin lived in the basement flat. Thomas would describe the flat as his \"London house of horror\" and did not return there after his 1952 tour of America.\nSecond tour January 20 to May 16, 1952.\nThomas undertook a second tour of the United States in 1952, this time with Caitlin \u2013 after she had discovered he had been unfaithful on his earlier trip. They drank heavily, and Thomas began to suffer with gout and lung problems. The second tour was the most intensive of the four, taking in 46 engagements. The trip also resulted in Thomas recording his first poetry to vinyl, which Caedmon Records released in America later that year. One of his works recorded during this time, \"A Child's Christmas in Wales\", became his most popular prose work in America. The original 1952 recording of the book was a 2008 selection for the United States National Recording Registry, stating that it is \"credited with launching the audiobook industry in the United States\".\nA shortened version of the first half of \"The Town That Was Mad\" was published in \"Botteghe Oscure\" in May 1952, with the title \"Llareggub. A Piece for Radio Perhaps\". Thomas had been in Laugharne for almost three years, but his half-play had made little progress since his time living in South Leigh. By the summer of 1952, the half-play's title had been changed to \"Under Milk Wood\" because John Brinnin thought the title \"Llareggub\" would not attract American audiences. On 6 November 1952, Thomas wrote to the editor of \"Botteghe Oscure\" to explain why he hadn't been able to \"finish the second half of my piece for you.\" He had failed shamefully, he said, to add to \"my lonely half of a looney maybe-play\".\nOn 10 November 1952 Thomas's last collection \"Collected Poems, 1934\u20131952\", was published by Dent; he was 38. It won the Foyle poetry prize. Reviewing the volume, critic Philip Toynbee declared that \"Thomas is the greatest living poet in the English language\". The winter of 1952/3 brought much personal tragedy: Thomas's father died from pneumonia just before Christmas 1952; and in the Spring of 1953 his sister died from liver cancer, one of his patrons overdosed, three friends died at young ages and Caitlin had an abortion.\nThird tour 21 April to 3 June 1953.\nIn April 1953, Thomas returned alone for a third tour of America. He performed a \"work in progress\" version of \"Under Milk Wood\", solo, for the first time at Harvard University on 3 May. A week later, the work was performed with a full cast at the Poetry Centre in New York. He met the deadline only after being locked in a room by Brinnin's assistant, Liz Reitell, and he was still editing the script on the afternoon of the performance; its last lines were handed to the actors as they were putting on their makeup.\nDuring this penultimate tour, Thomas met the composer Igor Stravinsky who had become an admirer after having been introduced to his poetry by W. H. Auden. They had discussions about collaborating on a \"musical theatrical work\" for which Thomas would provide the libretto on the theme of \"the rediscovery of love and language in what might be left after the world after the bomb.\" The shock of Thomas's death later in the year moved Stravinsky to compose his \"In Memoriam Dylan Thomas\" for tenor, string quartet and four trombones. The first performance in Los Angeles in 1954 was introduced with a tribute to Thomas from Aldous Huxley.\nThomas spent the last nine or ten days of his third tour in New York mostly in the company of Reitell, with whom he had an affair. During this time, Thomas fractured his arm falling down a flight of stairs when drunk. Reitell's doctor, Milton Feltenstein, put his arm in plaster and treated him for gout and gastritis.\nAfter returning home, Thomas worked on \"Under Milk Wood\" in Laugharne. Aeronwy, his daughter, noticed that his health had \"visibly deteriorated...I could hear his racking cough. Every morning he had a prolonged coughing attack...The coughing was nothing new but it seemed worse than before.\" She also noted that the blackouts that Thomas was experiencing were \"a constant source of comment\" amongst his Laugharne friends.\nThomas sent the original manuscript to Douglas Cleverdon on 15 October 1953. It was copied and returned to Thomas, who lost it in a pub in London and required a duplicate to take to America. Thomas flew to the States on 19 October 1953 for what would be his final tour. He died in New York before the BBC could record \"Under Milk Wood\". Richard Burton starred in the first broadcast in 1954, and was joined by Elizabeth Taylor in a subsequent film. In 1954, the play won the Prix Italia for literary or dramatic programmes.\nFinal tour and death in New York.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nAnd death shall have no dominion.\nDead men naked they shall be one\nWith the man in the wind and the west moon;\nWhen their bones are picked clean and the clean bones gone,\nThey shall have stars at elbow and foot;\nThough they go mad they shall be sane,\nThough they sink through the sea they shall rise again\nThough lovers be lost love shall not;\nAnd death shall have no dominion.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nFrom \"And death shall have no dominion\"&lt;br&gt;\"Twenty-five Poems\" (1936)\nThomas left Laugharne on 9 October 1953 on the first leg of his fourth trip to America. He called on his mother, Florence, to say goodbye: \"He always felt that he had to get out from this country because of his chest being so bad.\" Thomas had suffered from chest problems for most of his life, though they began in earnest soon after he moved in May 1949 to the Boat House at Laugharne \u2013 the \"bronchial heronry\", as he called it. Within weeks of moving in, he visited a local doctor, who prescribed medicine for both his chest and throat.\nWhile waiting in London before his flight, Thomas stayed with the comedian Harry Locke and worked on \"Under Milk Wood\". Locke noted that Thomas was having trouble with his chest, \"terrible\" coughing fits that made him go purple in the face. He was also using an inhaler to help his breathing. There were reports, too, that Thomas was also having blackouts. His visit to the BBC producer Philip Burton, a few days before he left for New York, was interrupted by a blackout. On his last night in London, he had another in the company of his fellow poet Louis MacNeice.\nThomas arrived in New York on 20 October 1953 to undertake further performances of \"Under Milk Wood\", organised by John Brinnin, his American agent and Director of the Poetry Centre. Brinnin did not travel to New York but remained in Boston to write. He handed responsibility to his assistant, Liz Reitell. She met Thomas at Idlewild Airport and was shocked at his appearance. He looked pale, delicate and shaky, not his usual robust self: \"He was very ill when he got here.\" After being taken by Reitell to check in at the Chelsea Hotel, Thomas took the first rehearsal of \"Under Milk Wood\". They then went to the White Horse Tavern in Greenwich Village, before returning to the Chelsea Hotel.\nThe next day, Reitell invited him to her apartment, but he declined. They went sightseeing, but Thomas felt unwell and retired to his bed for the rest of the afternoon. Reitell gave him half a grain (32.4 milligrams) of phenobarbitone to help him sleep and spent the night at the hotel with him. Two days later, on 23 October, at the third rehearsal, Thomas said he was too ill to take part, but he struggled on, shivering and burning with fever, before collapsing on the stage.\nThe following day, 24 October, Reitell took Thomas to see her doctor, Milton Feltenstein, who administered cortisone injections and Thomas made it through the first performance that evening, but collapsed immediately afterwards. \"This circus out there,\" he told a friend who had come back-stage, \"has taken the life out of me for now.\" Reitell later said that Feltenstein was \"rather a wild doctor who thought injections would cure anything.\"\nAt the next performance on 25 October, his fellow actors realised that Thomas was very ill: \"He was desperately ill\u2026we didn't think that he would be able to do the last performance because he was so ill\u2026Dylan literally couldn't speak he was so ill\u2026still my greatest memory of it is that he had no voice.\"\nOn the evening of 27 October, Thomas attended his 39th birthday party but felt unwell and returned to his hotel after an hour. The next day, he took part in \"Poetry and the Film\", a recorded symposium at Cinema 16.\nA turning point came on 2 November. Air pollution in New York had risen significantly and exacerbated chest illnesses such as Thomas had. By the end of the month, over 200 New Yorkers had died from the smog.\nOn 3\u00a0November, Thomas spent most of the day in his room, entertaining various friends. He went out in the evening to keep two drink appointments. After returning to the hotel, he went out again for a drink at 2\u00a0am. After drinking at the White Horse, Thomas returned to the Hotel Chelsea, declaring, \"I've had eighteen straight whiskies. I think that's the record!\" The barman and the owner of the pub who served him later commented that Thomas could not have drunk more than half that amount.\nThomas had an appointment at a clam house in New Jersey with Ruthven Todd on 4 November. When Todd telephoned the Chelsea that morning, Thomas said he was feeling ill and postponed the engagement. Todd thought he sounded \"terrible\". The poet, Harvey Breit, was another to phone that morning. He thought that Thomas sounded \"bad\". Thomas's voice, recalled Breit, was \"low and hoarse\". He had wanted to say: \"You sound as though from the tomb\", but instead he told Thomas that he sounded like Louis Armstrong.\nLater, Thomas went drinking with Reitell at the White Horse and, feeling sick again, returned to the hotel. Feltenstein came to see him three times that day, administering the cortisone secretant ACTH by injection (a tropic peptide hormone produced and secreted by the anterior pituitary gland) and, on his third visit, half a grain (32.4 milligrams) of morphine sulphate. This amount was three times more than was medically appropriate and was, by affecting Thomas's breathing and consequently the oxygen supply to his brain, the precipitating cause of his death. After Reitell became increasingly concerned and telephoned Feltenstein for advice he suggested she get male assistance, so she called upon the painter Jack Heliker, who arrived before 11\u00a0pm. At midnight on 5 November, Thomas's breathing became more difficult and his face turned blue. Reitell phoned Feltenstein who arrived at the hotel at about 1\u00a0am, and called for an ambulance. It then took another hour for the ambulance to arrive at St. Vincent's, even though it was only a few blocks from the Chelsea.\nThomas was admitted to the emergency ward at St Vincent's Hospital at 1:58\u00a0am. He was comatose, and his medical notes state that \"the impression upon admission was acute alcoholic encephalopathy damage to the brain by alcohol, for which the patient was treated without response\". Feltenstein then took control of Thomas's care, even though he did not have admitting rights at St. Vincent's. The hospital's senior brain specialist, C.G. Gutierrez-Mahoney, was not called to examine Thomas until the afternoon of 6 November, some 36 hours after Thomas's admission.\nCaitlin, having flown from Britain, arrived at the hospital the following morning, by which time a tracheotomy had been performed. Her first words are reported to have been, \"Is the bloody man dead yet?\" Permitted to see Thomas for a short time, she returned, drunk, in the afternoon and made threats to John Brinnin. Feltenstein had her put into a straitjacket and committed to the River Crest Sanitarium.\nIt is now believed that Thomas had been suffering from bronchitis, pneumonia, emphysema and asthma before his admission to St Vincent's. In their 2004 paper, \"Death by Neglect\", D. N. Thomas and former GP Principal Simon Barton disclose that Thomas was found to have pneumonia when he was admitted to hospital in a coma. Doctors took three hours to restore his breathing, using artificial respiration and oxygen. Summarising their findings, they conclude: \"The medical notes indicate that, on admission, Dylan's bronchial disease was found to be very extensive, affecting upper, mid and lower lung fields, both left and right.\" The forensic pathologist, Bernard Knight, who examined the post-mortem report, concurs: \"death was clearly due to a severe lung infection with extensive advanced bronchopneumonia...the severity of the chest infection, with greyish consolidated areas of well-established pneumonia, suggests that it had started before admission to hospital.\"\nThomas died at noon on 9\u00a0November, having never recovered from his coma. A nurse, and the poet John Berryman, were present with him at the time of death.\nAftermath.\nRumours circulated of a brain haemorrhage, followed by competing reports of a mugging or even that Thomas had drunk himself to death. Later, speculation arose about drugs and diabetes. At the post-mortem, the pathologist found three causes of death\u00a0\u2013 pneumonia, brain swelling and a fatty liver. His liver showed no sign of cirrhosis.\nThe publication of John Brinnin's 1955 biography \"Dylan Thomas in America\" cemented Thomas's reputation as a \"roistering, drunken and doomed poet\"; Brinnin focuses on Thomas's last few years and paints a picture of him as a drunk and a philanderer. Later biographies have criticised Brinnin's view, especially his coverage of Thomas's death. David Thomas in \"Fatal Neglect: Who Killed Dylan Thomas?\" writes that Brinnin, along with Reitell and Feltenstein, were culpable. FitzGibbon's 1965 biography ignores Thomas's heavy drinking and skims over his death, giving just two pages in his detailed book to Thomas's demise. Ferris in his 1989 biography includes Thomas's heavy drinking, but is more critical of those around him in his final days and does not draw the conclusion that he drank himself to death. Many sources have criticised Feltenstein's role and actions, especially his incorrect diagnosis of delirium tremens and the high dose of morphine he administered. Dr C. G. de Gutierrez-Mahoney, the doctor who treated Thomas while at St. Vincents, concluded that Feltenstein's failure to see that Thomas was gravely ill and have him admitted to hospital sooner \"was even more culpable than his use of morphine\".\nCaitlin Thomas's autobiographies, \"Leftover Life to Kill\" (1957) and \"My Life with Dylan Thomas: Double Drink Story\" (1997), describe the effects of alcohol on him and their relationship. \"Ours was not only a love story, it was a drink story, because without alcohol it would never had got on its rocking feet\", she wrote, and \"The bar was our altar.\" Biographer Andrew Lycett ascribed the decline in Thomas's health to an alcoholic co-dependent relationship with his wife, who deeply resented his extramarital affairs. In contrast, Dylan biographers Andrew Sinclair and George Tremlett express the view that Thomas was not an alcoholic. Tremlett argues that many of Thomas's health issues stemmed from undiagnosed diabetes.\nThomas died intestate, with assets worth \u00a3100. His body was brought back to Wales for burial in the village churchyard at Laugharne. Thomas's funeral, which Brinnin did not attend, took place at St Martin's Church in Laugharne on 24 November. Six friends from the village carried Thomas's coffin. Caitlin, without her customary hat, walked behind the coffin, with his childhood friend Daniel Jones at her arm and her mother by her side. The procession to the church was filmed and the wake took place at Brown's Hotel. Thomas's fellow poet and long-time friend Vernon Watkins wrote \"The Times\" obituary.\nThomas's widow, Caitlin, died in 1994 and was buried alongside him. Thomas's father, \"DJ\", died on 16 December 1952 and his mother Florence in August 1958. Thomas's elder son, Llewelyn, died in 2000, his daughter, Aeronwy in 2009, and his younger son, Colm, in 2012.\nPoetry.\nPoetic style and influences.\nThomas's refusal to align with any literary group or movement has made him and his work difficult to categorise. However the formative influence of the modernist symbolist and surrealist movements has been discerned throughout his poetic output and as especially evident in his poetry of the 1930s, the period in which he forged a unique modernist poetic which rejected the referential, discursive and often propagandist voice of his contemporaries for a relish of exuberant word-play and language itself.\nThomas took his major theme as the unity of all life in which the turmoil of sexuality and death linked the generations, envisaging men and women locked in cycles of growth, love, procreation, new growth, death, and new life. Thomas derived his imagery from sources which include the new scientific accounts of physiology and sexuality, the Bible, Welsh folklore, and Sigmund Freud as well as from the established literary canon.\nWhereas earlier appraisals of his work have found an impasse in its obscurity \n more recent accounts have given readings which have explored in depth the complexity of Thomas\u2019s allusions, accepting that obscurity, paradox and ambiguity are integral to his work. As Thomas wrote in a letter to Glyn Jones: \"My own obscurity is quite an unfashionable one, based, as it is, on a preconceived symbolism derived (I'm afraid all this sounds wooly and pretentious) from the cosmic significance of the human anatomy\u201d. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nWho once were a bloom of wayside brides in the hawed house\nAnd heard the lewd, wooed field flow to the coming frost,\nThe scurrying, furred small friars squeal in the dowse\nOf day, in the thistle aisles, till the white owl crossed\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nFrom \"In the white giant's thigh\" (1950)\nDistinguishing features of Thomas's early poetry include its verbal density, use of alliteration, sprung rhythm and internal rhyme, with some critics detecting the influence of the English poet Gerard Manley Hopkins. Walford Davies suggests there is little else than \u201ca coincidence of poetic temperament.\u201d Thomas himself wrote to Henry Treece, who had compared the two, denying any significant influence. Thomas also employed fixed verse form, such as in the villanelle \"Do not go gentle into that good night\".\nThomas greatly admired Thomas Hardy, who is regarded as an influence. When Thomas travelled in America, he recited some of Hardy's work in his readings. Other poets from whom critics believe Thomas drew influence include James Joyce, Arthur Rimbaud and D. H. Lawrence. William York Tindall, in his 1962 study, \"A Reader's Guide to Dylan Thomas\", finds comparison between Thomas's and Joyce's wordplay, while he notes the themes of rebirth and nature are common to the works of Lawrence and Thomas. Although Thomas described himself as the \"Rimbaud of Cwmdonkin Drive\", he stated that the phrase \"Swansea's Rimbaud\" was coined by poet Roy Campbell. Critics have explored the origins of Thomas's mythological pasts in his works such as \"The Orchards\", which Ann Elizabeth Mayer believes reflects the Welsh myths of the \"Mabinogion\".\nThomas's poetry is notable for its musicality, most clear in \"Fern Hill\", \"In Country Sleep\", \"Ballad of the Long-legged Bait\" and \"In the White Giant's Thigh\".\nIn 1951, in response to an American student's question, Thomas alluded to the formative influence of the nursery rhymes which his parents taught him when he was a child:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I should say I wanted to write poetry in the beginning because I had fallen in love with words. The first poems I knew were nursery rhymes and before I could read them for myself I had come to love the words of them. The words alone. What the words stood for was of a very secondary importance... I fell in love, that is the only expression I can think of, at once, and am still at the mercy of words, though sometimes now, knowing a little of their behaviour very well, I think I can influence them slightly and have even learned to beat them now and then, which they appear to enjoy. I tumbled for words at once. And, when I began to read the nursery rhymes for myself, and, later, to read other verses and ballads, I knew that I had discovered the most important things, to me, that could be ever.\nThomas became an accomplished writer of prose poetry, with collections such as \"Portrait of the Artist as a Young Dog\" (1940) and \"Quite Early One Morning\" (1954) showing he was capable of writing moving short stories. His first published prose work, \"After the Fair\", appeared in \"The New English Weekly\" on 15 March 1934. Jacob Korg believes that one can classify Thomas's fiction work into two main bodies: vigorous fantasies in a poetic style and, after 1939, more straightforward narratives. Korg surmises that Thomas approached his prose writing as an alternate poetic form, which allowed him to produce complex, involuted narratives that do not allow the reader to rest.\nWelsh poet.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nNot for the proud man apart\nFrom the raging moon, I write\nOn these spindrift pages\nNor for the towering dead\nWith their nightingales and psalms\nBut for the lovers, their arms\nRound the griefs of the ages,\nWho pay no praise or wages\nNor heed my craft or art.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nFrom \"In my craft or sullen art\" \"Deaths and Entrances\", 1946\n Thomas disliked being regarded as a provincial poet and decried any notion of 'Welshness' in his poetry. When he wrote to Stephen Spender in 1952, thanking him for a review of his \"Collected Poems\", he added \"Oh, &amp; I forgot. I'm not influenced by Welsh bardic poetry. I can't read Welsh.\" Despite this his work was rooted in the geography of Wales. Thomas acknowledged that he returned to Wales when he had difficulty writing, and John Ackerman argues that \"His inspiration and imagination were rooted in his Welsh background\". Caitlin Thomas wrote that he worked \"in a fanatically narrow groove, although there was nothing narrow about the depth and understanding of his feelings. The groove of direct hereditary descent in the land of his birth, which he never in thought, and hardly in body, moved out of.\"\nHead of Programmes Wales at the BBC, Aneirin Talfan Davies, who commissioned several of Thomas's early radio talks, believed that the poet's \"whole attitude is that of the medieval bards.\" Kenneth O. Morgan counter-argues that it is a 'difficult enterprise' to find traces of \"cynghanedd\" (consonant harmony) or \"cerdd dafod\" (tongue-craft) in Thomas's poetry. Instead he believes his work, especially his earlier more autobiographical poems, are rooted in a changing country which echoes the Welshness of the past and the Anglicisation of the new industrial nation: \"rural and urban, chapel-going and profane, Welsh and English, Unforgiving and deeply compassionate.\" Fellow poet and critic Glyn Jones believed that any traces of \"cynghanedd\" in Thomas's work were accidental, although he felt Thomas consciously employed one element of Welsh metrics; that of counting syllables per line instead of feet. Constantine Fitzgibbon, who was his first in-depth biographer, wrote \"No major English poet has ever been as Welsh as Dylan\".\nAlthough Thomas had a deep connection with Wales, he disliked Welsh nationalism. He once wrote, \"Land of my fathers, and my fathers can keep it\". While often attributed to Thomas himself, this line actually comes from the character Owen Morgan-Vaughan, in the screenplay Thomas wrote for the 1948 British melodrama \"The Three Weird Sisters\". Robert Pocock, a friend from the BBC, recalled \"I only once heard Dylan express an opinion on Welsh Nationalism. He used three words. Two of them were Welsh Nationalism.\" Although not expressed as strongly, Glyn Jones believed that he and Thomas's friendship cooled in the later years as he had not 'rejected enough' of the elements that Thomas disliked\u00a0\u2013 \"Welsh nationalism and a sort of hill farm morality\". Apologetically, in a letter to Keidrych Rhys, editor of the literary magazine \"Wales\", Thomas's father wrote that he was \"afraid Dylan isn't much of a Welshman\". Though FitzGibbon asserts that Thomas's negativity towards Welsh nationalism was fostered by his father's hostility towards the Welsh language.\nCritical reception.\nThomas's work and stature as a poet have been much debated by critics and biographers since his death. Critical studies have been clouded by Thomas's personality and mythology, especially his drunken persona and death in New York. When Seamus Heaney gave an Oxford lecture on the poet he opened by addressing the assembly, \"Dylan Thomas is now as much a case history as a chapter in the history of poetry\", querying how \"Thomas the Poet\" is one of his forgotten attributes. The Poetry Archive notes that \"Dylan Thomas's detractors accuse him of being drunk on language as well as whiskey, but whilst there's no doubt that the sound of language is central to his style, he was also a disciplined writer who re-drafted obsessively\". David Holbrook, who has written three books about Thomas, stated in his 1962 publication \"Llareggub Revisited\", \"the strangest feature of Dylan Thomas's notoriety\u2014not that he is bogus, but that attitudes to poetry attached themselves to him which not only threaten the prestige, effectiveness and accessibility to English poetry but also destroyed his true voice and, at last, him.\" Holbrook\u2019s negative evaluation of Thomas\u2019s work, based on an \"ad hominem\" psychoanalytic reading, is rejected by Rhian Barfoot as reductive and outdated viewed in the context of more recent psychoanalytic theory as found in the work of Lacan and Kristeva, where the emphasis on the semiotic and the materiality of language is seen as corresponding to Thomas\u2019s poetic style and thus supportive of a positive critical evaluation of his work.\nMany critics have argued that Thomas's work is too narrow and that he suffers from verbal extravagance. Those that have championed his work have found the criticism baffling. Robert Lowell wrote in 1947: \"Nothing could be more wrongheaded than the English disputes about Dylan Thomas's greatness\u00a0... He is a dazzling obscure writer who can be enjoyed without understanding.\" Kenneth Rexroth said, on reading \"Eighteen Poems\": \"The reeling excitement of a poetry-intoxicated schoolboy smote the Philistine as hard a blow with one small book as Swinburne had with \"Poems and Ballads\".\" Philip Larkin in a letter to Kingsley Amis in 1948, wrote that \"no one can 'stick words into us like pins'...\u00a0like he [Thomas] can\", but followed that by stating that he \"doesn't use his words to any advantage\". Amis was far harsher, finding little of merit in his work, and claiming that he was 'frothing at the mouth with piss.' In 1956, the publication of the anthology \"New Lines\" featuring works by the British collective The Movement, which included Amis and Larkin among its number, set out a vision of modern poetry that was damning towards the poets of the 1940s. Thomas's work in particular was criticised. David Lodge, writing about The Movement in 1981 stated: \"Dylan Thomas was made to stand for everything they detest, verbal obscurity, metaphysical pretentiousness, and romantic rhapsodizing.\"\nDespite criticism by sections of academia, Thomas's work has been embraced by readers more so than many of his contemporaries, and he is one of the few modern poets whose name is recognised by the general public. In 2009, more than 18,000 votes were cast in a BBC poll to find the UK's favourite poet; Thomas was placed 10th. Several of his poems have passed into the cultural mainstream, and his work has been used by authors, musicians and film and television writers. The BBC Radio programme \"Desert Island Discs\", in which guests usually choose their favourite songs, has heard 50 participants select a Dylan Thomas recording. John Goodby states that this popularity with the reading public allows Thomas's work to be classed as vulgar and common. Goodby also cites that, despite a brief period during the 1960s when Thomas was considered a cultural icon, the poet has been marginalized in critical circles due to his exuberance, in both life and work, and his refusal to know his place. Goodby believes that Thomas has been mainly snubbed since the 1970s and has become \"...\u00a0an embarrassment to twentieth-century poetry criticism\", his work failing to fit standard narratives and thus being ignored rather than studied. In June 2022, Thomas was the subject of BBC Radio 4's \"In Our Time\".\nMemorials.\nIn Swansea's maritime quarter are the Dylan Thomas Theatre, home of the Swansea Little Theatre of which Thomas was once a member, and the former Guildhall, built in 1825 and now occupied by the Dylan Thomas Centre, a literature centre, where exhibitions and lectures are held and setting for the annual Dylan Thomas Festival.\nOutside the centre stands a bronze statue of Thomas, by John Doubleday. Another monument to Thomas stands in Cwmdonkin Park, one of his favourite childhood haunts, close to his birthplace. The memorial is a small rock in an enclosed garden within the park cut by and inscribed by the late sculptor Ronald Cour with the closing lines from \"Fern Hill\".\n&lt;poem&gt;\nOh as I was young and easy in the mercy of his means\nTime held me green and dying\nThough I sang in my chains like the sea.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nThomas's home in Laugharne, the Boathouse, is a museum run by Carmarthenshire County Council. His writing shed is also preserved. In 2004, the Dylan Thomas Prize was created in his honour, awarded to the best published writer in English under the age of 30. In 2005, the Dylan Thomas Screenplay Award was established. The prize, administered by the Dylan Thomas Centre, is awarded at the annual Swansea Bay Film Festival. In 1982 a plaque was unveiled in Poets' Corner, Westminster Abbey. The plaque is also inscribed with the last two lines of \"Fern Hill\".\nIn 2014, the Royal Patron of The Dylan Thomas 100 Festival was Charles, Prince of Wales, who in 2013 made a recording of \"Fern Hill\" for National Poetry Day.\nIn 2014, to celebrate the centenary of Thomas's birth, the British Council Wales undertook a year-long programme of cultural and educational works. Highlights included a touring replica of Thomas's work shed, Sir Peter Blake's exhibition of illustrations based on \"Under Milk Wood\" and a 36-hour marathon of readings, which included Michael Sheen and Sir Ian McKellen performing Thomas's work. The same year, Thomas was among the ten people commemorated on a UK postage stamp issued by the Royal Mail in their \"Remarkable Lives\" issue.\n Vol I: 1931\u20131939 \n Vol II: 1939\u20131953\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8785", "revid": "1314610970", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8785", "title": "Fern Hill", "text": "Poem by Dylan Thomas\n\"Fern Hill\" (1945) is a poem by the Welsh poet Dylan Thomas, first published in \"Horizon\" magazine in October 1945, with its first book publication in 1946 as the last poem in \"Deaths and Entrances\".\nCreation.\nThomas had started writing \"Fern Hill\" in New Quay, Cardiganshire, where he lived from 4 September 1944 to July 1945. Further work was done on the poem in July and August 1945 at Blaencwm, the family cottage in Carmarthenshire. A draft was sent to a friend in late August, and then the completed poem to his publisher on 18 September 1945.\nThe house Fernhill is a Grade 2 listed residence just outside Llangain in Carmarthenshire. In Thomas's day, it had an orchard and fifteen acres of farmland, most of it of poor quality. Thomas had extended stays here in the 1920s with his aunt Annie and her husband, Jim Jones. They had lived at Fernhill from about 1908 to 1928, renting it from the daughter of Robert Ricketts Evans (also known as Robert Anderson Evans), an occasional hangman and public executioner who once lived in Fernhill. Thomas's own notes about Fernhill confirm that he knew the various stories about Evans the Hangman.\nThomas wrote about Fernhill (calling it Gorsehill) in his short story, \"The Peaches\", in which he describes it as a ramshackle house of hollow fear. Fernhill's dilapidated farmyard and buildings are also described in \"The Peaches\". Jim Jones had shown little interest in farming, as his neighbours had noticed: there was \"no work in him...left Fernhill farm to ruins.\" Jim had sold most of his farming machinery, implements and livestock before moving to Fernhill. He had also been convicted for allowing decomposing animal carcasses to lie around his fields.\nFernhill, said an official survey, had an outside earth closet, water was carried in from a well in the farmyard, washing oneself was done in the kitchen, whilst meals were cooked on an open fire. Its two living rooms were lit by candles and paraffin lamps. The house, said the survey, had \"extreme rising dampness\" and smelt, wrote Thomas in \"The Peaches\", \"of rotten wood and damp and animals\".\nThomas's holidays here have been recalled in interviews with his schoolboy friends and with Annie and Jim's neighbours. A further account describes both Thomas's childhood and later years on the family farms between Llangain and Llansteffan, as well as suggesting that the poem \"Fern Hill\" was inspired not just by the house Fernhill but by another farm as well.\nLinguistic considerations.\nThe poem starts as a straightforward evocation of his childhood visits to his Aunt Annie's farm:\nNow as I was young and easy under the apple boughs\nAbout the lilting house and happy as the grass was green,\nThe night above the dingle starry,\nIn the middle section, the idyllic scene is expanded upon, reinforced by the lilting rhythm of the poem, the dreamlike, pastoral metaphors and allusion to Eden. \nAll the sun long it was running, it was lovely, the hay\nFields high as the house, the tunes from the chimneys, it was air...\nWith the dew, come back, the cock on his shoulder: it was all\nShining, it was Adam and maiden,\nBy the end, the poet's older voice has taken over, mourning his lost youth with echoes of the opening:\nOh as I was young and easy in the mercy of his means,\nTime held me green and dying\nThough I sang in my chains like the sea.\nThe poem uses internal half rhyme and full rhyme as well as end rhyme. Thomas was very conscious of the effect of spoken or intoned verse and explored the potentialities of sound and rhythm, in a manner reminiscent of Gerard Manley Hopkins. He always denied having conscious knowledge of Welsh, but \"his lines chime with internal consonantal correspondence, or \"cynghanedd\", a prescribed feature of Welsh versification\".\nLegacy.\nIn 1960, American composer John Corigliano set \"Fern Hill\" to music as part of \"A\" \"Dylan Thomas Trilogy\" (1960\u20131976), a trilogy of choral symphony. The poem is also quoted in the title of the 1973 drama film \"Happy as the Grass Was Green\" and in the lyrics of the 2022 song \"Blacktop\" by Yeah Yeah Yeahs."}
{"id": "8786", "revid": "28066471", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8786", "title": "David Bowie", "text": "English musician and actor (1947\u20132016)\nDavid Robert Jones (8 January 1947\u00a0\u2013 10 January 2016), known as David Bowie, was an English singer, songwriter and actor. Regarded as among the most influential musicians of the 20th century, Bowie received particular acclaim for his work in the 1970s. His career was marked by reinvention and visual presentation, and his music and stagecraft have had a great impact on popular music.\nBowie studied art, music and design before embarking on a music career in 1963. He released a string of unsuccessful singles with local bands and a self-titled solo album (1967) before achieving his first top-five entry on the UK singles chart with \"Space Oddity\" (1969). After a period of experimentation, he re-emerged in 1972 during the glam rock era with the alter ego Ziggy Stardust. The single \"Starman\" and its album \"The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars\" (1972) won him widespread popularity. In 1975, Bowie's style shifted towards a sound he characterised as \"plastic soul\", initially alienating many of his UK fans but garnering his first major US crossover success with the number-one single \"Fame\" and the album \"Young Americans\" (1975). In 1976, Bowie starred in the cult film \"The Man Who Fell to Earth\" and released \"Station to Station\". In 1977, he again changed direction with the electronic-inflected album \"Low\", the first of three collaborations with Brian Eno that came to be known as the Berlin Trilogy. \"Heroes\" (1977) and \"Lodger\" (1979) followed; each album reached the UK top-five and received critical praise.\nAfter uneven commercial success in the late 1970s, Bowie had three number-one hits: the 1980 single \"Ashes to Ashes\", its album \"Scary Monsters (and Super Creeps)\" and \"Under Pressure\" (a 1981 collaboration with Queen). He achieved his greatest commercial success in the 1980s with \"Let's Dance\" (1983). Between 1988 and 1992, he fronted the hard rock band Tin Machine. Throughout the 1990s and 2000s, Bowie continued to experiment with musical styles, including industrial and jungle. He also continued acting; his films included \"Merry Christmas, Mr. Lawrence\" (1983), \"Labyrinth\" (1986), \"\" (1992), \"Basquiat\" (1996), and \"The Prestige\" (2006). He retired from touring in 2004 and his last live performance was at a charity event in 2006. He returned from a decade-long recording hiatus in 2013 with \"The Next Day\". His death in 2016 came two days after the release of his final studio album, \"Blackstar\".\nDuring his lifetime, his record sales, estimated at over 100 million worldwide, made him one of the best-selling musicians of all time. He is the recipient of numerous accolades, including six Grammy Awards and four Brit Awards. Often dubbed the \"chameleon of rock\" due to his continual musical reinventions, he was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1996. \"Rolling Stone\" ranked him among the greatest singers, songwriters and artists of all time. As of 2022, Bowie was the best-selling vinyl artist of the 21st century.\nEarly life.\nDavid Robert Jones was born on 8\u00a0January 1947 in Brixton, London. His mother, Margaret Mary \"Peggy\" (n\u00e9e Burns), was born at Shorncliffe Army Camp near Cheriton, Kent. She was a waitress at a cinema in Royal Tunbridge Wells. His father, Haywood Stenton \"John\" Jones, was from Doncaster, Yorkshire, and was a promotions officer for the children's charity Barnardo's. The family lived at 40 Stansfield Road, on the boundary between Brixton and Stockwell in the south London borough of Lambeth. Bowie attended Stockwell Infants School until he was six, acquiring a reputation as a gifted and single-minded child\u2014and a defiant brawler.\nFrom 1953, Bowie moved with his family to Bickley and then Bromley Common, before settling in Sundridge Park in 1955 where he attended Burnt Ash Junior School. His voice was considered \"adequate\" by the school choir, and he demonstrated above-average ability on the recorder. At the age of nine, his dancing was strikingly imaginative: teachers called his interpretations \"vividly artistic\" and his poise \"astonishing\" for a child. The same year, his father brought home a collection of American 45s by artists including the Teenagers, the Platters, Fats Domino, Elvis Presley and Little Richard. Upon listening to Little Richard's song \"Tutti Frutti\", Bowie later said that he had \"heard God\".\nBowie was first impressed with Presley when he saw his cousin Kristina dance to \"Hound Dog\" soon after its release in 1956. According to Kristina, she and David \"danced like possessed elves\" to records of various artists. By the end of the following year, Bowie had taken up the ukulele and tea-chest bass, begun to participate in skiffle sessions with friends, and had started to play the piano; his stage presentation of numbers by both Presley and Chuck Berry\u2014complete with gyrations in tribute to the original artists\u2014to his local Wolf Cub group was described as \"mesmerizing\u00a0... like someone from another planet\". Having encouraged his son to follow his dreams of being an entertainer since he was a toddler, in the late 1950s David's father took him to meet performers preparing for the Royal Variety Performance, introducing him to Alma Cogan and Tommy Steele. After taking his eleven-plus exam, Bowie went to Bromley Technical High School. It was an unusual technical school, as biographer Christopher Sandford wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Despite its status it was, by the time David arrived in 1958, as rich in arcane ritual as any [English] public school. There were houses named after eighteenth-century statesmen like Pitt and Wilberforce. There was a uniform and an elaborate system of rewards and punishments. There was also an accent on languages, science and particularly design, where a collegiate atmosphere flourished under the tutorship of Owen Frampton. In David's account, Frampton led through force of personality, not intellect; his colleagues at Bromley Tech were famous for neither and yielded the school's most gifted pupils to the arts, a regime so liberal that Frampton actively encouraged his own son, Peter, to pursue a musical career with David, a partnership briefly intact thirty years later.\nBowie's maternal half-brother, Terry Burns, was a substantial influence on his early life. Burns, who was 10 years older than him, had schizophrenia and seizures, and lived alternately at home and in psychiatric wards. While living with Bowie, he introduced the younger man to many of his lifelong influences, such as modern jazz, Buddhism, Beat poetry and the occult. In addition to Burns, a significant proportion of Bowie's extended family members had schizophrenia spectrum disorders, including an aunt who was institutionalised and another who underwent a lobotomy; this has been labelled as an influence on his early work.\nBowie studied art, music and design. After Burns introduced him to modern jazz, his enthusiasm for players like Charles Mingus and John Coltrane led his mother to give him a Grafton saxophone in 1961. He was soon receiving lessons from baritone saxophonist Ronnie Ross.\nHe received a serious injury at school in 1962 when his friend George Underwood punched him in the left eye during a fight over a girl. After a series of operations during a four-month hospitalisation, the damage could not be fully repaired and Bowie was left with faulty depth perception and anisocoria (a permanently dilated pupil); his eye later became one of Bowie's most recognisable features. Despite their altercation, Bowie remained on good terms with Underwood, who went on to create the artwork for Bowie's early albums.\nIn 1961 he met Peter Frampton, who was three years younger. They were schoolmates at Bromley Technical School where Frampton's father Owen was their art teacher. Frampton's band the Little Ravens played on the same bill at school as Bowie's band, George and the Dragons. Peter and David would spend lunch breaks together, playing Buddy Holly songs.\nMusic career.\n1962\u20131967: Early career to debut album.\nBowie formed his first band, the Konrads, in 1962 at the age of 15. Playing guitar-based rock and roll at local youth gatherings and weddings, the Konrads had a varying line-up of between four and eight members, Underwood among them. When Bowie left the technical school the following year, he informed his parents of his intention to become a pop star. His mother arranged his employment as an electrician's mate. Frustrated by his bandmates' limited aspirations, Bowie left the Konrads and joined another band, the King Bees. He wrote to entrepreneur John Bloom inviting him to \"do for us what Brian Epstein has done for the Beatles\u2014and make another million.\" Bloom did not respond to the offer, but his referral to Dick James's partner Leslie Conn led to Bowie's first personal management contract.\nConn quickly began to promote Bowie. His debut single, \"Liza Jane\", credited to Davie Jones with the King Bees, was not commercially successful. Dissatisfied with the King Bees and their repertoire of Howlin' Wolf and Willie Dixon covers, Bowie quit the band less than a month later to join the Manish Boys, another blues outfit, who incorporated folk and soul\u2014\"I used to dream of being their Mick Jagger\", he recalled. Their cover of Bobby Bland's \"I Pity the Fool\" was no more successful than \"Liza Jane\", and Bowie soon moved on again to join the Lower Third, a blues trio strongly influenced by the Who. \"You've Got a Habit of Leaving\" fared no better, signalling the end of Conn's contract. Declaring that he would exit the pop music world \"to study mime at Sadler's Wells\", Bowie nevertheless remained with the Lower Third. His new manager, Ralph Horton, later instrumental in his transition to solo artist, helped secure him a contract with Pye Records. Publicist Tony Hatch signed Bowie on the basis that he wrote his own songs. Dissatisfied with Davy (and Davie) Jones, which in the mid-1960s invited confusion with Davy Jones of the Monkees, he took on the stage name David Bowie after the 19th-century American pioneer James Bowie and the knife he had popularised. His first release under the name was the January 1966 single \"Can't Help Thinking About Me\", recorded with the Lower Third. It flopped like its predecessors.\nBowie departed the Lower Third after the single's release, partly due to Horton's influence, and released two more singles for Pye, \"Do Anything You Say\" and \"I Dig Everything\", both of which featured a new band called the Buzz, before signing with Deram Records. Around this time Bowie also joined the Riot Squad; their recordings, which included one of Bowie's original songs and material by the Velvet Underground, went unreleased. Kenneth Pitt, introduced by Horton, took over as Bowie's manager. His April 1967 solo single, \"The Laughing Gnome\", on which speeded-up and high-pitched vocals were used to portray the gnome, failed to chart. Released six weeks later, his album debut, \"David Bowie\", an amalgam of pop, psychedelia and music hall, met the same fate. It was his last release for two years. In September, Bowie recorded \"Let Me Sleep Beside You\" and \"Karma Man\", both rejected by Deram and left unreleased until 1970. The tracks marked the beginning of Bowie's working relationship with producer Tony Visconti which, with large gaps, lasted for the rest of Bowie's career.\n1968\u20131971: \"Space Oddity\" to \"Hunky Dory\".\nStudying the dramatic arts under Lindsay Kemp, from avant-garde theatre and mime to commedia dell'arte, Bowie became immersed in the creation of personae to present to the world. Satirising life in a British prison, his composition \"Over the Wall We Go\" became a 1967 single for Oscar; another Bowie song, \"Silly Boy Blue\", was released by Billy Fury the following year. Playing acoustic guitar, Hermione Farthingale formed a group with Bowie and guitarist John Hutchinson named Feathers; between September 1968 and early 1969 the trio gave a few concerts combining folk, Merseybeat, poetry and mime.\nAfter the break-up with Farthingale, Bowie moved in with Mary Finnigan as her lodger. In February and March 1969, he undertook a short tour with Marc Bolan's duo Tyrannosaurus Rex, as third on the bill, performing a mime act. Continuing the divergence from rock and roll and blues begun by his work with Farthingale, Bowie joined forces with Finnigan, Christina Ostrom and Barrie Jackson to run a folk club on Sunday nights at the Three Tuns pub in Beckenham High Street. The club was influenced by the Arts Lab movement, developing into the Beckenham Arts Lab and became extremely popular. The Arts Lab hosted a free festival in a local park, the subject of his song \"Memory of a Free Festival\".\nPitt attempted to introduce Bowie to a larger audience with the \"Love You till Tuesday\" film, which went unreleased until 1984. Feeling alienated over his unsuccessful career and deeply affected by his break-up, Bowie wrote \"Space Oddity\", a tale about a fictional astronaut named Major Tom. The song earned him a contract with Mercury Records and its UK subsidiary Philips, who issued \"Space Oddity\" as a single on 11\u00a0July 1969, five days ahead of the Apollo 11 launch. Reaching the top five in the UK, it was his first and last hit for three years. Bowie's second album followed in November. Originally issued in the UK as \"David Bowie\", it caused some confusion with its predecessor of the same name, and the US release was instead titled \"Man of Words/Man of Music\"; it was reissued internationally in 1972 by RCA Records as \"Space Oddity\". Featuring philosophical post-hippie lyrics on peace, love and morality, its acoustic folk rock occasionally fortified by harder rock, the album was not a commercial success at the time.\nBowie met Angela Barnett in April 1969. They married within a year. Her impact on him was immediate\u2014he wrote his 1970 single \"The Prettiest Star\" for her\u2014and her involvement in his career was far-reaching, leaving Pitt with limited influence which he found frustrating. Having established himself as a solo artist with \"Space Oddity\", Bowie desired a full-time band he could record with and could relate to personally. The band Bowie assembled comprised John Cambridge, a drummer Bowie met at the Arts Lab, Visconti on bass and Mick Ronson on electric guitar. Known as Hype, the bandmates created characters for themselves and wore elaborate costumes that prefigured the glam style of the Spiders from Mars. After a disastrous opening gig at the London Roundhouse, they reverted to a configuration presenting Bowie as a solo artist. Their initial studio work was marred by a heated disagreement between Bowie and Cambridge over the latter's drumming style, leading to his replacement by Mick Woodmansey. Not long after, Bowie fired his manager and replaced him with Tony Defries. This resulted in years of litigation that concluded with Bowie having to pay Pitt compensation.\nThe studio sessions continued and resulted in Bowie's third album, \"The Man Who Sold the World\" (1970), which contained references to schizophrenia, paranoia and delusion. It represented a departure from the acoustic guitar and folk rock style established by his second album, to a more hard rock sound. Mercury financed a coast-to-coast publicity tour across the US in which Bowie, between January and February 1971, was interviewed by media. Exploiting his androgynous appearance, the original cover of the UK version unveiled two months later depicted Bowie wearing a dress. He took the dress with him and wore it during interviews, to the approval of critics\u00a0\u2013 including \"Rolling Stone\"'s John Mendelsohn, who described him as \"ravishing, almost disconcertingly reminiscent of Lauren Bacall\".\nDuring the tour, Bowie's observation of two seminal American proto-punk artists led him to develop a concept that eventually found form in the Ziggy Stardust character: a melding of the persona of Iggy Pop with the music of Lou Reed, producing \"the ultimate pop idol\". Bowie later stated, \"It's not who does it first, it's who does it second.\" A girlfriend recalled his \"scrawling notes on a cocktail napkin about a crazy rock star named Iggy or Ziggy\", and on his return to England he declared his intention to create a character \"who looks like he's landed from Mars\". The \"Stardust\" surname was a tribute to the \"Legendary Stardust Cowboy\", whose record he was given during the tour. Bowie later covered \"I Took a Trip on a Gemini Space Ship\" on 2002's \"Heathen\".\n\"Hunky Dory\" (1971) found Visconti supplanted in both roles by Ken Scott producing and Trevor Bolder on bass. It again featured a stylistic shift towards art pop and melodic pop rock, with light fare tracks such as \"Kooks\", a song written for his son, Duncan Zowie Haywood Jones, born on 30\u00a0May. Elsewhere, the album explored more serious subjects, and found Bowie paying unusually direct homage to his influences with \"Song for Bob Dylan\", \"Andy Warhol\" and \"Queen Bitch\", the latter a Velvet Underground pastiche. His first release through RCA, it was a commercial failure, partly due lack of promotion from the label. Peter Noone of Herman's Hermits covered the album's track \"Oh! You Pretty Things\", which reached number 12 in the UK.\n1972\u20131974: Glam rock era.\nDressed in a striking costume, his hair dyed reddish-brown, Bowie launched his Ziggy Stardust stage show with the Spiders from Mars\u2014Ronson, Bolder, and Woodmansey\u2014at the Toby Jug pub in Tolworth in Kingston upon Thames on 10\u00a0February 1972. The show was hugely popular, catapulting him to stardom as he toured the UK over the next six months and creating, as described by David Buckley, a \"cult of Bowie\" that was \"unique\u2014its influence lasted longer and has been more creative than perhaps almost any other force within pop fandom.\" \"The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars\" (1972), combining the hard rock elements of \"The Man Who Sold the World\" with the lighter experimental rock and pop of \"Hunky Dory\", was released in June and was considered one of the defining albums of glam rock. \"Starman\", issued as an April single ahead of the album, was to cement Bowie's UK breakthrough: both single and album charted rapidly following his July \"Top of the Pops\" performance of the song. The album, which remained in the chart for two years, was soon joined there by the six-month-old \"Hunky Dory\". At the same time, the non-album single \"John, I'm Only Dancing\" and \"All the Young Dudes\", a song he wrote and produced for Mott the Hoople, were successful in the UK. The Ziggy Stardust Tour continued to the United States.\nBowie contributed backing vocals, keyboards and guitar to Reed's 1972 solo breakthrough \"Transformer\", co-producing the album with Ronson. The following year, Bowie co-produced and mixed the Stooges' album \"Raw Power\" alongside Iggy Pop. His own \"Aladdin Sane\" (1973) was his first UK number-one album. Described by Bowie as \"Ziggy goes to America\", it contained songs he wrote while travelling to and across the US during the earlier part of the Ziggy tour, which now continued to Japan to promote the new album. \"Aladdin Sane\" spawned the UK top five singles \"The Jean Genie\" and \"Drive-In Saturday\".\nBowie's love of acting led to his total immersion in the characters he created for his music. \"Offstage I'm a robot. Onstage I achieve emotion. It's probably why I prefer dressing up as Ziggy to being David.\" With satisfaction came severe personal difficulties: acting the same role over an extended period, it became impossible for him to separate Ziggy Stardust\u2014and later, the Thin White Duke\u2014from his own character offstage. Ziggy, Bowie said, \"wouldn't leave me alone for years. That was when it all started to go sour\u00a0... My whole personality was affected. It became very dangerous. I really did have doubts about my sanity.\" His later Ziggy shows, which included songs from both \"Ziggy Stardust\" and \"Aladdin Sane\", were ultra-theatrical affairs filled with shocking stage moments, such as Bowie stripping down to a sumo wrestling loincloth or simulating oral sex with Ronson's guitar. Bowie toured and gave press conferences as Ziggy before a dramatic and abrupt on-stage \"retirement\" at London's Hammersmith Odeon on 3\u00a0July 1973. Footage from the final show was incorporated for the film \"Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars\", which premiered in 1979 and commercially released in 1983.\nAfter breaking up the Spiders, Bowie attempted to move on from his Ziggy persona. His back catalogue was now highly sought after: \"The Man Who Sold the World\" had been re-released in 1972 along with \"Space Oddity\". \"Hunky Dory\"'s \"Life on Mars?\" was released in June 1973 and peaked at number three on the UK Singles Chart. Entering the same chart in September, his 1967 novelty record \"The Laughing Gnome\" reached number six. \"Pin Ups\", a collection of covers of his 1960s favourites, followed in October, producing a UK number three hit in his version of the McCoys's \"Sorrow\" and itself peaking at number one, making Bowie the best-selling act of 1973 in the UK. It brought the total number of Bowie albums concurrently on the UK chart to six.\n1974\u20131976: \"Plastic soul\" and the Thin White Duke.\nBowie moved to the US in 1974, initially staying in New York City before settling in Los Angeles. \"Diamond Dogs\" (1974), parts of which found him heading towards soul and funk, was the product of two distinct ideas: a musical based on a wild future in a post-apocalyptic city, and setting George Orwell's \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" to music. The album went to number one in the UK, spawning the hits \"Rebel Rebel\" and \"Diamond Dogs\", and number five in the US. The supporting Diamond Dogs Tour visited cities in North America between June and December 1974. Choreographed by Toni Basil, and lavishly produced with theatrical special effects, the high-budget stage production was filmed by Alan Yentob. The resulting documentary, \"Cracked Actor\", featured a pasty and emaciated Bowie: the tour coincided with his slide from heavy cocaine use into addiction, producing severe physical debilitation, paranoia and emotional problems. He later commented that the accompanying live album, \"David Live\", ought to have been titled \"David Bowie Is Alive and Well and Living Only in Theory\". \"David Live\" nevertheless solidified Bowie's status as a superstar, charting at number two in the UK and number eight in the US. It also spawned a UK number ten hit in a cover of Eddie Floyd's \"Knock on Wood\". After a break in Philadelphia, where Bowie recorded new material, the tour resumed with a new emphasis on soul.\nThe fruit of the Philadelphia recording sessions was \"Young Americans\" (1975). Sandford writes, \"Over the years, most British rockers had tried, one way or another, to become black-by-extension. Few had succeeded as Bowie did now.\" The album's sound, which Bowie identified as \"plastic soul\", constituted a radical shift in style that initially alienated many of his UK devotees. \"Young Americans\" was a commercial success in both the US and the UK and yielded Bowie's first US number one, \"Fame\", a collaboration with John Lennon. A re-issue of the 1969 single \"Space Oddity\" became Bowie's first number-one hit in the UK a few months after \"Fame\" achieved the same in the US. He mimed \"Fame\" and his November single \"Golden Years\" on the US variety show \"Soul Train\", earning him the distinction of being one of the first white artists to appear on the programme. The same year, Bowie fired Defries as his manager. At the culmination of the ensuing months-long legal dispute, he watched, as described by Sandford, \"millions of dollars of his future earnings being surrendered\" in what were \"uniquely generous terms for Defries\", then \"shut himself up in West 20th Street, where for a week his howls could be heard through the locked attic door.\" Michael Lippman, Bowie's lawyer during the negotiations, became his new manager, but was fired the following year.\n\"Station to Station\" (1976), produced by Bowie and Harry Maslin, introduced a new Bowie persona, the Thin White Duke of its title track. Visually, the character was an extension of Thomas Jerome Newton, the extraterrestrial being he portrayed in the film \"The Man Who Fell to Earth\" the same year. Developing the funk and soul of \"Young Americans\", \"Station to Station\"'s synthesiser-heavy arrangements were influenced by electronic and German krautrock. Bowie's cocaine addiction during this period was at its peak; he often did not sleep for three to four days at a time during \"Station to Station\"'s recording sessions and later said he remembered \"only flashes\" of its making. His sanity\u2014by his own later admission\u2014had become twisted from cocaine; he referenced the drug directly in the album's ten-minute title track. The album's release was followed by a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+1\u20442-month-long concert tour, the Isolar Tour, of Europe and North America. The core band that coalesced to record the album and tour\u2014rhythm guitarist Carlos Alomar, bassist George Murray and drummer Dennis Davis\u2014continued as a stable unit for the remainder of the 1970s. Bowie performed on stage as the Thin White Duke.\nThe tour was highly successful but mired in political controversy. Bowie was quoted as saying that \"Britain could benefit from a Fascist leader\", and was detained by customs on the Russian/Polish border for possessing Nazi paraphernalia. Matters came to a head in London in May in what became known as the \"Victoria Station incident\". Arriving in an open-top Mercedes convertible, Bowie waved to the crowd in a gesture that some alleged was a Nazi salute, which was captured on camera and published in \"NME\". Bowie said the photographer caught him in mid-wave. He later blamed his pro-fascism comments and his behaviour during the period on his cocaine addiction, the character of the Thin White Duke and his life in Los Angeles, a city he later said \"should be wiped off the face of the Earth\". He later apologised for these statements, and throughout the 1980s and 1990s criticised racism in European politics and the American music industry. Nevertheless, his comments on fascism, as well as Eric Clapton's alcohol-fuelled denunciations of Pakistani immigrants in 1976, led to the establishment of Rock Against Racism.\n1976\u20131979: Berlin era.\nIn August 1976, Bowie moved to West Berlin with his old friend Iggy Pop to rid themselves of their drug addictions and escape the spotlight. Bowie's interest in German krautrock and the ambient works of multi-instrumentalist Brian Eno culminated in the first of three albums, co-produced with Visconti, that became known as the Berlin Trilogy. The album, \"Low\" (1977), was recorded in France and took influence from krautrock and experimental music and featured both short song-fragments and ambient instrumentals. Before its recording, Bowie produced Iggy Pop's debut solo album \"The Idiot\", described by Pegg as \"a stepping stone between \"Station to Station\" and \"Low\"\". \"Low\" was completed in November, but left unreleased for three months. RCA did not see the album as commercially viable and was expecting another success following \"Young Americans\" and \"Station to Station\". Bowie's former manager Tony Defries, who maintained a significant financial interest in Bowie's affairs, had tried to prevent the album from being released. Upon its release in January 1977, \"Low\" yielded the UK number three single \"Sound and Vision\", and its own performance surpassed that of \"Station to Station\" in the UK chart, where it reached number two. Bowie himself did not promote it, instead touring with Pop as his keyboardist throughout March and April before recording Pop's follow-up, \"Lust for Life\".\nEchoing \"Low\"'s minimalist, instrumental approach, the second of the trilogy, \"Heroes\" (1977), incorporated pop and rock to a greater extent, seeing Bowie joined by guitarist Robert Fripp. It was the only album of the trilogy recorded entirely in Berlin. Incorporating ambient sounds from a variety of sources including white noise generators, synthesisers and koto, the album was another hit, reaching number three in the UK. Its title track was released in both German and French and, though only reaching number 24 in the UK singles chart, later became one of his best-known tracks. In contrast to \"Low\", Bowie promoted \"Heroes\" extensively, performing the title track on Marc Bolan's television show \"Marc\", and again two days later for Bing Crosby's final CBS television Christmas special, when he joined Crosby in \"Peace on Earth/Little Drummer Boy\", a version of \"The Little Drummer Boy\" with a new, contrapuntal verse. RCA belatedly released the recording as a single five years later in 1982, charting in the UK at number three.\nAfter completing \"Low\" and \"Heroes\", Bowie spent much of 1978 on the Isolar II world tour, bringing the music of the first two Berlin Trilogy albums to almost a million people during 70 concerts in 12 countries. By now he had broken his drug addiction; Buckley writes that Isolar II was \"Bowie's first tour for five years in which he had probably not anaesthetised himself with copious quantities of cocaine before taking the stage.\u00a0... Without the oblivion that drugs had brought, he was now in a healthy enough mental condition to want to make friends.\" Recordings from the tour made up the live album \"Stage\", released the same year. Bowie also recorded narration for an adaptation of Sergei Prokofiev's classical composition \"Peter and the Wolf\", which was released as an album in May 1978.\nThe final piece in what Bowie called his \"triptych\", \"Lodger\" (1979), eschewed the minimalist, ambient nature of its two predecessors, making a partial return to the drum- and guitar-based rock and pop of his pre-Berlin era. The result was a complex mixture of new wave and world music, in places incorporating Hijaz non-Western scales. Some tracks were composed using Eno's Oblique Strategies cards: \"Boys Keep Swinging\" entailed band members swapping instruments, \"Move On\" used the chords from Bowie's early composition \"All the Young Dudes\" played backwards, and \"Red Money\" took backing tracks from \"The Idiot\"'s \"Sister Midnight\". The album was recorded in Switzerland and New York City. Ahead of its release, RCA's Mel Ilberman described it as \"a concept album that portrays the Lodger as a homeless wanderer, shunned and victimized by life's pressures and technology.\" \"Lodger\" reached number four in the UK and number 20 in the US, and yielded the UK hit singles \"Boys Keep Swinging\" and \"DJ\". Towards the end of the year, Bowie and Angie initiated divorce proceedings, and after months of court battles the marriage was ended in early 1980. The three albums were later adapted into classical music symphonies by American composer Philip Glass for his first, fourth and twelfth symphonies in 1992, 1997 and 2019, respectively. Glass praised Bowie's gift for creating \"fairly complex pieces of music, masquerading as simple pieces\".\n1980\u20131988: New Romantic and pop era.\n\"Scary Monsters (and Super Creeps)\" (1980) produced the number one single \"Ashes to Ashes\", featuring the textural guitar-synthesiser work of Chuck Hammer and revisiting the character of Major Tom from \"Space Oddity\". The song gave international exposure to the underground New Romantic movement when Bowie visited the London club \"Blitz\"\u2014the main New Romantic hangout\u2014to recruit several of the regulars (including Steve Strange of the band Visage) to act in the accompanying video, renowned as one of the most innovative of all time. While \"Scary Monsters\" used principles established by the Berlin albums, it was considered by critics to be far more direct musically and lyrically. The album's hard rock edge included conspicuous guitar contributions from Fripp and Pete Townshend. Topping the UK Albums Chart for the first time since \"Diamond Dogs\", Buckley writes that with \"Scary Monsters\", Bowie achieved \"the perfect balance\" of creativity and mainstream success.\nBowie paired with Queen in 1981 for a one-off single release, \"Under Pressure\". The duet was a hit, becoming Bowie's third UK number-one single. Bowie was given the lead role in the BBC's 1982 televised adaptation of Bertolt Brecht's play \"Baal\". Coinciding with its transmission, a five-track EP of songs from the play was released as \"Baal\". In March 1982, Bowie's title song for Paul Schrader's film \"Cat People\" was released as a single. A collaboration with Giorgio Moroder, it became a minor US hit and charted in the UK top 30. The same year, he departed RCA, having grown increasingly dissatisfied with them, and signed a new contract with EMI America Records for a reported $17\u00a0million. His 1975 severance settlement with Defries also ended in September.\nBowie reached his peak of popularity and commercial success in 1983 with \"Let's Dance\". Co-produced by Chic's Nile Rodgers, the album went platinum in both the UK and the US. Its three singles became top 20 hits in both countries, where its title track reached number one. \"Modern Love\" and \"China Girl\" each made number two in the UK, accompanied by a pair of \"absorbing\" music videos that Buckley said activated key archetypes in the pop world ... 'Let's Dance', with its little narrative surrounding the young Aboriginal couple, targeted 'youth', and 'China Girl', with its bare-bummed (and later partially censored) beach lovemaking scene ... was sufficiently sexually provocative to guarantee heavy rotation on MTV. Then-unknown Texas blues guitarist Stevie Ray Vaughan guested on the album, featuring prominently on the title track. \"Let's Dance\" was followed by the six-month Serious Moonlight Tour, which was extremely successful. At the 1984 MTV Video Music Awards Bowie received two awards including the inaugural Video Vanguard Award.\n\"Tonight\" (1984), another dance-oriented album, found Bowie collaborating with Pop and Tina Turner. Co-produced by Hugh Padgham, it included a number of cover songs, including three Pop covers and the 1966 Beach Boys hit \"God Only Knows\". The album bore the transatlantic top 10 hit \"Blue Jean\", itself the inspiration for the Julien Temple-directed short film \"Jazzin' for Blue Jean\", in which Bowie played the dual roles of romantic protagonist Vic and arrogant rock star Screaming Lord Byron. The short won Bowie his only non-posthumous Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video. In early 1985, Bowie's collaboration with the Pat Metheny Group, \"This Is Not America\", for the soundtrack of \"The Falcon and the Snowman\", was released as a single and became a top 40 hit in the UK and US. In July that year, Bowie performed at Wembley Stadium for Live Aid, a multi-venue benefit concert for Ethiopian famine relief. Bowie and Mick Jagger duetted on a cover of Martha and the Vandellas' \"Dancing in the Street\" as a fundraising single, which went to number one in the UK and number seven in the US; its video premiered during Live Aid.\nBowie took an acting role in the 1986 film \"Absolute Beginners\", and his title song rose to number two in the UK charts. He also worked with composer Trevor Jones and wrote five original songs for the 1986 film \"Labyrinth\", which he starred in. His final solo album of the decade was 1987's \"Never Let Me Down\", where he ditched the light sound of his previous two albums, instead combining pop rock with a harder rock sound. Peaking at number six in the UK, the album yielded the hits \"Day-In Day-Out\", \"Time Will Crawl\" and \"Never Let Me Down\". Bowie later described it as his \"nadir\", calling it \"an awful album\". He supported the album on the 86-concert Glass Spider Tour. The backing band included Peter Frampton on lead guitar. Contemporary critics maligned the tour as overproduced, saying it pandered to the current stadium rock trends in its special effects and dancing, although in later years critics acknowledged the tour's strengths and influence on concert tours by other artists, such as Prince, Madonna and U2.\n1989\u20131991: Tin Machine.\nWanting to completely rejuvenate himself following the critical failures of \"Tonight\" and \"Never Let Me Down\", Bowie placed his solo career on hold after meeting guitarist Reeves Gabrels and formed the hard rock quartet Tin Machine. The line-up was completed by bassist and drummer Tony and Hunt Sales, who had played with Bowie on Iggy Pop's \"Lust for Life\" in 1977. Although he intended Tin Machine to operate as a democracy, Bowie dominated, both in songwriting and in decision-making. The band's 1989 self-titled debut album received mixed reviews and, according to author Paul Trynka, was quickly dismissed as \"pompous, dogmatic and dull\". EMI complained of \"lyrics that preach\" as well as \"repetitive tunes\" and \"minimalist or no production\". It reached number three in the UK and was supported by a twelve-date tour.\nThe tour was a commercial success, but there was growing reluctance\u2014among fans and critics alike\u2014to accept Bowie's presentation as merely a band member. A series of Tin Machine singles failed to chart, and Bowie, after a disagreement with EMI, left the label. Like his audience and his critics, Bowie himself became increasingly disaffected with his role as just one member of a band. Tin Machine began work on a second album, but recording halted while Bowie conducted the seven-month Sound+Vision Tour, which brought him commercial success and acclaim.\nIn October 1990, Bowie and supermodel Iman were introduced by a mutual friend. He recalled, \"I was naming the children the night we met\u00a0... it was absolutely immediate.\" They married in 1992. Tin Machine resumed work the same month, but their audience and critics, ultimately left disappointed by the first album, showed little interest in a second. \"Tin Machine II\" (1991) was Bowie's first album to miss the UK top 20 in nearly twenty years, and was controversial for its cover art. Depicting four ancient nude Kouroi statues, the new record label, Victory, deemed the cover \"a show of wrong, obscene images\" and airbrushed the statues' genitalia for the American release. Tin Machine toured again, but after the live album \"\" (1992) failed commercially, Bowie dissolved the band and resumed his solo career. He continued to collaborate with Gabrels for the rest of the 1990s.\n1992\u20131998: Electronic period.\nOn 20\u00a0April 1992, Bowie appeared at The Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert, following the Queen singer's death the previous year. As well as performing \"'Heroes'\" and \"All the Young Dudes\", he was joined on \"Under Pressure\" by Annie Lennox, who took Mercury's vocal part; during his appearance, Bowie knelt and recited the Lord's Prayer at Wembley Stadium. Four days later, Bowie and Iman married in Switzerland. Intending to move to Los Angeles, they flew in to search for a suitable property, but found themselves confined to their hotel: the 1992 Los Angeles riots began the day they arrived. They settled in New York instead.\nIn 1993, Bowie released his first solo offering since his Tin Machine departure, the soul, jazz and hip-hop influenced \"Black Tie White Noise\". Making prominent use of electronic instruments, the album, which reunited Bowie with \"Let's Dance\" producer Nile Rodgers, confirmed Bowie's return to popularity, topping the UK chart and spawning three top 40 hits, including the top 10 single \"Jump They Say\". Bowie explored new directions on \"The Buddha of Suburbia\" (1993), which began as a soundtrack album for the BBC television adaptation of Hanif Kureishi's novel \"The Buddha of Suburbia\" before turning into a full album; only the title track \"The Buddha of Suburbia\" was used in the programme. Referencing his 1970s works with pop, jazz, ambient and experimental material, it received a low-key release, had almost no promotion and flopped commercially, reaching number 87 in the UK. Nevertheless, it later received critical praise as Bowie's \"lost great album\".\nReuniting Bowie with Eno, the quasi-industrial \"Outside\" (1995) was originally conceived as the first volume in a non-linear narrative of art and murder. Featuring characters from a short story written by Bowie, the album achieved UK and US chart success and yielded three top 40 UK singles. In a move that provoked mixed reactions from both fans and critics, Bowie chose Nine Inch Nails as his tour partner for the Outside Tour. Visiting cities in Europe and North America between September 1995 and February 1996, the tour saw the return of Gabrels as Bowie's guitarist. On 7\u00a0January 1997, Bowie celebrated his half century with a 50th birthday concert at Madison Square Garden at which he was joined in playing his songs and those of his guests, Lou Reed, Dave Grohl and the Foo Fighters, Robert Smith of the Cure, Billy Corgan of the Smashing Pumpkins, Black Francis of the Pixies, and Sonic Youth.\nIncorporating experiments in jungle and drum 'n' bass, \"Earthling\" (1997) was a critical and commercial success in the UK and the US, and two singles from the album\u2014\"Little Wonder\" and \"Dead Man Walking\"\u2014became UK top 40 hits. The song \"I'm Afraid of Americans\" from the Paul Verhoeven film \"Showgirls\" was re-recorded for the album, and remixed by Trent Reznor for a single release. The heavy rotation of the accompanying video, also featuring Reznor, contributed to the song's 16-week stay in the US \"Billboard\" Hot 100. Bowie received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on 12\u00a0February 1997. The Earthling Tour took place in Europe and North America between June and November. In November, Bowie performed on the BBC's Children in Need charity single \"Perfect Day\", which reached number one in the UK. Bowie reunited with Visconti in 1998 to record \"(Safe in This) Sky Life\" for \"The Rugrats Movie\". Although the track was edited out of the final cut, it was later re-recorded and released as \"Safe\" on the B-side of Bowie's 2002 single \"Everyone Says 'Hi'\". The reunion led to other collaborations with his old producer, including a limited-edition single release version of Placebo's track \"Without You I'm Nothing\" with Bowie's harmonised vocal added to the original recording.\n1999\u20132012: Neoclassicist era.\nBowie, with Gabrels, created the soundtrack for \"\", a 1999 computer game in which he and Iman also voiced characters based on their likenesses. Released the same year and containing re-recorded tracks from \"Omikron\", his album \"Hours\" featured a song with lyrics by the winner of his \"Cyber Song Contest\" Internet competition, Alex Grant. Making extensive use of live instruments, the album was Bowie's exit from heavy electronica. \"Hours\" and a performance on \"VH1 Storytellers\" in mid-1999 represented the end of Gabrels' association with Bowie as a performer and songwriter. Sessions for \"Toy\", a planned collection of remakes of tracks from Bowie's 1960s period, commenced in 2000, but was shelved due to EMI/Virgin's lack of faith in its commercial appeal. Bowie and Visconti continued their collaboration, producing a new album of completely original songs instead: the result of the sessions was the 2002 album \"Heathen\".\nOn 25\u00a0June 2000, Bowie made his second appearance at the Glastonbury Festival in England, playing almost 30 years after his first. The performance was released as a live album in November 2018. On 27\u00a0June, he performed a concert at the BBC Radio Theatre in London, which was released on the compilation album \"Bowie at the Beeb\"; this also featured BBC recording sessions from 1968 to 1972. Bowie and Iman's daughter, Alexandra, was born on 15\u00a0August. His interest in Buddhism led him to support the Tibetan cause by performing at the February 2001 and February 2003 concerts to support Tibet House US at Carnegie Hall in New York.\nIn October 2001, Bowie opened the Concert for New York City, a charity event to benefit the victims of the September 11 attacks, with a minimalist performance of Simon &amp; Garfunkel's \"America\", followed by a full band performance of \"'Heroes'\". 2002 saw the release of \"Heathen\", and, during the second half of the year, the Heathen Tour. Taking place in Europe and North America, the tour opened at London's annual \"Meltdown\" festival, for which Bowie was that year appointed artistic director. Among the acts he selected for the festival were Philip Glass, Television and the Dandy Warhols. As well as songs from the new album, the tour featured material from Bowie's \"Low\" era. \"Reality\" (2003) followed, and its accompanying world tour, the A Reality Tour, with an estimated attendance of 722,000, grossed more than any other in 2004. On 13\u00a0June, Bowie headlined the last night of the Isle of Wight Festival 2004. On 25\u00a0June, he experienced chest pain while performing at the Hurricane Festival in Schee\u00dfel, Germany. Originally thought to be a pinched nerve in his shoulder, the pain was later diagnosed as an acutely blocked coronary artery, requiring an emergency angioplasty in Hamburg. The remaining fourteen dates of the tour were cancelled.\nIn the years following his recuperation from the heart attack, Bowie reduced his musical output, making only one-off appearances on stage and in the studio. He sang in a duet of his 1971 song \"Changes\" with Butterfly Boucher for the 2004 animated film \"Shrek 2\". During a relatively quiet 2005, he recorded the vocals for the song \"(She Can) Do That\", co-written with Brian Transeau, for the film \"Stealth\". He returned to the stage on 8\u00a0September 2005, appearing with Arcade Fire for the US nationally televised event Fashion Rocks, and performed with the Canadian band for the second time a week later during the CMJ Music Marathon. He contributed backing vocals on TV on the Radio's song \"Province\" for their album \"Return to Cookie Mountain\", and joined with Lou Reed on Danish alt-rockers Kashmir's 2005 album \"No Balance Palace\".\nBowie was awarded the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award on 8\u00a0February 2006. In April, he announced, \"I'm taking a year off\u2014no touring, no albums.\" He made a surprise guest appearance at David Gilmour's 29\u00a0May concert at the Royal Albert Hall in London. The event was recorded, and a selection of songs on which he had contributed joint vocals were subsequently released. He performed again in November, alongside Alicia Keys, at the Black Ball, a benefit event for Keep a Child Alive at the Hammerstein Ballroom in New York. The performance marked the last time Bowie performed his music on stage.\nBowie was chosen to curate the 2007 High Line Festival. The musicians and artists he selected for the Manhattan event included electronic pop duo AIR, surrealist photographer Claude Cahun and English comedian Ricky Gervais. Bowie performed on Scarlett Johansson's 2008 album of Tom Waits covers, \"Anywhere I Lay My Head\". In June 2008, a live album was released of a Ziggy Stardust-era concert from 1972. On the 40th anniversary of the July 1969 Moon landing\u2014and Bowie's accompanying commercial breakthrough with \"Space Oddity\"\u2014EMI released the individual tracks from the original eight-track studio recording of the song, in a 2009 contest inviting members of the public to create a remix. A live album from the A Reality Tour was released in January 2010.\nIn late March 2011, \"Toy\", Bowie's previously unreleased album from 2001, was leaked onto the internet, containing material used for \"Heathen\" and most of its single B-sides, as well as unheard new versions of his early back catalogue.\n2013\u20132016: Final years.\nOn 8\u00a0January 2013, his 66th birthday, his website announced a new studio album\u2014his first in a decade\u2014to be titled \"The Next Day\" and scheduled for release in March; the announcement was accompanied by the immediate release of the single \"Where Are We Now?\". A music video for the single was released onto Vimeo the same day, directed by New York artist Tony Oursler. The single topped the UK iTunes Chart within hours, and debuted in the UK Singles Chart at number six, his first single to enter the Top 10 for two decades (since \"Jump They Say\" in 1993). A second single and video, \"The Stars (Are Out Tonight)\", were released at the end of February. Directed by Floria Sigismondi, it stars Bowie and Tilda Swinton as a married couple.\nRecorded in secret between 2011 and 2012, 29 songs were recorded during the album's sessions, of which 22 saw official release in 2013, including fourteen on the standard album. Three bonus tracks were later packaged with seven outtakes and remixes on \"The Next Day Extra\", released in November. On 1\u00a0March, the album was made available to stream for free through iTunes. Debuting at number one on the UK Albums Chart, \"The Next Day\" was his first album to top the chart since \"Black Tie White Noise\", and was the fastest-selling album of 2013 at the time. The music video for the song \"The Next Day\" created some controversy due to its Christian themes and messages. According to \"The Times\", Bowie ruled out ever giving an interview again. Later in 2013, he was featured in a cameo vocal in the Arcade Fire song \"Reflektor\". The success of \"The Next Day\" saw Bowie become the oldest ever recipient of a Brit Award when he won the award for British Male Solo Artist at the 2014 Brit Awards, which was collected on his behalf by Kate Moss.\nIn mid-2014, Bowie was diagnosed with liver cancer, which he kept private. A new compilation album, \"Nothing Has Changed\", was released in November. The album featured rare tracks and old material from his catalogue in addition to a new song, \"Sue (Or in a Season of Crime)\". Bowie continued working throughout 2015, secretly recording his final album \"Blackstar\" in New York between January and May. In August, it was announced that he was writing songs for a Broadway musical based on the \"SpongeBob SquarePants\" cartoon series; the final production included a retooled version of \"No Control\" from \"Outside\". September saw the release of the box set \"Five Years (1969\u20131973)\", the first in a series of retrospective releases compiling his albums from 1969 to 1973, and a look to his \"transition from folk artist to glam-rock legend\". He also wrote and recorded the opening title song to the television series \"The Last Panthers\", which aired in November. The theme that was used for \"The Last Panthers\" was also the title track for \"Blackstar\". On 7\u00a0December, Bowie's musical \"Lazarus\" debuted in New York; he made his final public appearance at its opening night.\n\"Blackstar\" was released on 8\u00a0January 2016, Bowie's 69th birthday, and was met with critical acclaim. He died two days later, after which Visconti revealed that Bowie had planned the album to be his swan song, and a \"parting gift\" for his fans before his death. Several reporters and critics subsequently noted that most of the lyrics on the album seem to revolve around his impending death, with CNN noting that the album \"reveals a man who appears to be grappling with his own mortality\". Visconti also said that he had been planning a follow-up album, and had written and recorded demos of five songs in his final weeks, suggesting he believed he had a few months left. The day following his death, online viewing of Bowie's music skyrocketed, breaking the record for Vevo's most viewed artist in a single day. \"Blackstar\" debuted at number one on the UK Albums Chart; nineteen of his albums were in the UK Top 100 Albums Chart, and thirteen singles were in the UK Top 100 Singles Chart. \"Blackstar\" also debuted at number one on album charts around the world, including Australia, France, Germany, Italy, New Zealand and the US \"Billboard\" 200.\nPosthumous releases.\nAfter his death, \"Newsweek\" reported that Bowie had left \"a long list of unscheduled musical releases planned\", divided into eras. The first of these releases was the second retrospective box set \"Who Can I Be Now? (1974\u20131976)\", released in September 2016, and covering Bowie's mid-1970s soul period; it included \"The Gouster\", a previously unreleased 1974 album that evolved into \"Young Americans\". An EP, \"No Plan\", was released on 8\u00a0January 2017, which would have been Bowie's 70th birthday. Apart from \"Lazarus\", the EP includes three songs that Bowie recorded during the \"Blackstar\" sessions, but were left off the album and appeared on the soundtrack album for the \"Lazarus\" musical in October 2016. A music video for the title track was also released.\nIn 2017, a third retrospective box set, \"A New Career in a New Town (1977\u20131982)\", was released, comprising his \"Berlin\" era. Through the following year, a series of posthumous live albums, \"Cracked Actor (Live Los Angeles '74)\", \"Live Nassau Coliseum '76\" and \"Welcome to the Blackout (Live London '78)\". In the two years following his death, five million Bowie records were sold in the UK alone. In their top 10 list for the Global Recording Artist of the Year, the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry named Bowie the second-bestselling artist worldwide in 2016, behind Drake.\nAt the 59th Annual Grammy Awards in 2017, Bowie won all five nominated awards: Best Rock Performance; Best Alternative Music Album; Best Engineered Album, Non-Classical; Best Recording Package; and Best Rock Song. They were Bowie's first Grammy wins in musical categories. In September 2018, \"Loving the Alien (1983\u20131988)\", the fourth retrospective box set comprising his releases during the 1980s, was released. On 8\u00a0January 2020, on what would have been Bowie's 73rd birthday, a previously unreleased version of \"The Man Who Sold the World\" was released and two releases were announced: a streaming-only EP, \"Is It Any Wonder?\", and an album, \"ChangesNowBowie\", released in November 2020 for Record Store Day. In August, another series of live shows were released, including sets from Dallas in 1995 and Paris in 1999. These and other shows, part of a series of live concerts spanning his tours from 1995 to 1999, was released in late 2020 and early 2021 as part of the box set \"Brilliant Live Adventures\".\nIn September 2021, Bowie's estate signed a distribution deal with Warner Music Group, beginning in 2023, covering Bowie's recordings from 2000 through 2016. That November, the fifth retrospective box set, \"Brilliant Adventure (1992\u20132001)\", was released, comprising his albums from the decade of 1990, and the official release of his album \"Toy\". The latter, which was recorded in 2000, was released separately on what would have been Bowie's 75th birthday. On 3\u00a0January 2022, \"Variety\" reported that Bowie's estate had sold his publishing catalogue to Warner Chappell Music, \"for a price upwards of $250 million\". The sixth and final retrospective box set, \"I Can't Give Everything Away (2002\u20132016)\", is set to be released in September 2025. It comprises Bowie's studio records from \"Heathen\" to \"Blackstar\", and live material from the Heathen and A Reality tours.\nActing career.\nIn addition to music, Bowie took acting roles throughout his career, appearing in over 30 films, television shows and theatrical productions. His acting career was \"productively selective\", largely eschewing starring roles for cameos and supporting parts; he once described his film career as \"splashing in the kids' pool\". He mostly chose projects with arthouse directors that he felt were outside the Hollywood mainstream, commenting in 2000: \"One cameo for Scorsese to me brings so much more satisfaction than, say, a James Bond.\" Critics have believed that, had he not chosen to pursue music, he could have found great success as an actor. Others have felt that, while his screen presence was singular, his best contributions to film were the use of his songs in films such as \"Lost Highway\", \"A Knight's Tale\", \"The Life Aquatic with Steve Zissou\" and \"Inglourious Basterds\".\n1960s and 1970s.\nBowie's acting career predated his commercial breakthrough as a musician. His first film was a short fourteen-minute black-and-white film called \"The Image\", shot in September 1967. Concerning a ghostly boy who emerges from a troubled artist's painting to haunt him, Bowie later called the film \"awful\". From December 1967 to March 1968, Bowie acted in mime Lindsay Kemp's theatrical production \"Pierrot in Turquoise\", during which he performed several songs from his self-titled debut album. The production was later adapted into the 1970 television film \"The Looking Glass Murders\". In late January 1968, Bowie filmed a walk-on role for the BBC drama series \"Theatre 625\" that aired in May. He also appeared as a walk-on extra in the 1969 film adaptation of Leslie Thomas's 1966 comic novel \"The Virgin Soldiers\".\nBowie's first major film role was in Nicolas Roeg's \"The Man Who Fell to Earth\", in which he portrayed Thomas Jerome Newton, an alien from a dying planet. The actor's severe cocaine addiction at the time left him in such a fragile state of mind that he barely understood the film; he later said in 1993: \"My one snapshot of that film is not having to act. Just being me as I was, was perfectly adequate for the role. I wasn't of this earth at that particular time.\" Bowie's role was particularly singled out for praise by film critics both on release and in later decades; Pegg argues it stands as Bowie's most significant role. In 1978, Bowie had a starring role in \"Just a Gigolo\", directed by David Hemmings, portraying Prussian officer Paul von Przygodski, who, returning from World War I, discovers life has changed and becomes a gigolo employed by a Baroness, playing by Marlene Dietrich. The film was a critical and commercial failure, and Bowie expressed disappointment in the finished product.\n1980s.\nFrom July 1980 to January 1981, Bowie played Joseph Merrick in the Broadway theatre production \"The Elephant Man\", which he undertook wearing no stage make-up, earning critical praise for his performance. \"Christiane F.\", a 1981 biographical film focusing on a young girl's drug addiction in West Berlin, featured Bowie in a cameo appearance as himself at a concert in Germany. Its soundtrack album, \"Christiane F.\" (1981), featured much material from his Berlin albums. The following year, he starred in the titular role in a BBC adaptation of the Bertolt Brecht play \"Baal\".\nBowie made three on-screen appearances in 1983, the first as a vampire in Tony Scott's erotic horror film \"The Hunger\", with Catherine Deneuve and Susan Sarandon. Bowie later said that he felt \"very uncomfortable\" with the role, but was happy to work with Scott. The second was in Nagisa \u014cshima's \"Merry Christmas, Mr. Lawrence\", based on Laurens van der Post's novel \"The Seed and the Sower\", in which he played Major Jack Celliers, a prisoner of war in a Japanese internment camp. While the film itself received mixed reviews, Bowie's performance was praised. Pegg places it among his finest acting performances. Bowie's third role in 1983 was a small cameo in Mel Damski's pirate comedy \"Yellowbeard\", heralded by several members of the Monty Python group. Bowie also filmed a 30-second introduction to the animated film \"The Snowman\", based on Raymond Briggs's book \"The Snowman\".\nIn 1985, Bowie had a supporting role as hitman Colin in John Landis's \"Into the Night\". He declined to play the villain Max Zorin in the James Bond film \"A View to a Kill\" (1985). Bowie reteamed with Julien Temple for \"Absolute Beginners\", a rock musical film adapted from Colin MacInnes's novel \"Absolute Beginners\" about life in late 1950s London, in a supporting role as ad man Vendice Partners. The same year, Jim Henson's dark musical fantasy \"Labyrinth\" cast him as Jareth, the villainous Goblin King. Despite initially performing poorly, the film grew in popularity and became a cult film. Two years later, he played Pontius Pilate in Martin Scorsese's critically acclaimed biblical epic \"The Last Temptation of Christ\" (1988). Despite only appearing for a three-minute sequence, Pegg writes that Bowie \"acquits himself well with a thoughtful, unshowy performance.\"\n1990s.\nIn 1991, Bowie reteamed with Landis for an episode of the HBO sitcom \"Dream On\" and played a disgruntled restaurant employee opposite Rosanna Arquette in \"The Linguini Incident\". Bowie portrayed the mysterious FBI agent Phillip Jeffries in David Lynch's ' (1992). The prequel to the television series was poorly received at the time of its release, but has since been critically reevaluated. He took a small but pivotal role as his friend Andy Warhol in \"Basquiat\", artist/director Julian Schnabel's 1996 biopic of Jean-Michel Basquiat, another artist he considered a friend and colleague. Bowie co-starred in Giovanni Veronesi's Spaghetti Western \"Il Mio West\" (1998, released as \"Gunslinger's Revenge\" in the US in 2005) as the most feared gunfighter in the region. He played the ageing gangster Bernie in Andrew Goth's \"Everybody Loves Sunshine\" (1999, released in the US as \"B.U.S.T.E.D.\"), and appeared as the host in the second season of the television horror anthology series \"The Hunger\". In 1999, Bowie voiced two characters in the Dreamcast game ', his only appearance in a video game.\n2000s and posthumous notes.\nIn \"Mr. Rice's Secret\" (2000), Bowie played the title role as the neighbour of a terminally ill 12-year-old boy. Bowie appeared as himself in the 2001 Ben Stiller comedy \"Zoolander\", judging a \"walk-off\" between rival male models, and in Eric Idle's 2002 mockumentary \"\". In 2005, he filmed a commercial with Snoop Dogg for XM Satellite Radio. Bowie portrayed a fictionalised version of the inventor Nikola Tesla in Christopher Nolan's film \"The Prestige\" (2006), which was about the bitter rivalry between two magicians in the late 19th century. Nolan later claimed that Bowie was his only preference to play Tesla, and that he personally appealed to Bowie to take the role after he initially passed. In the same year, he voice-acted in Luc Besson's animated film \"Arthur and the Invisibles\" as the powerful villain Maltazard, and appeared as himself in an episode of the television series \"Extras\". In 2007, he voiced the character Lord Royal Highness in the \"SpongeBob's Atlantis SquarePantis\" television film. In the 2008 film \"August\", directed by Austin Chick, he played a supporting role as Ogilvie, a \"ruthless venture capitalist\". Bowie's final film appearance was a cameo as himself in the 2009 teen comedy \"Bandslam\".\nIn a 2017 interview with \"Consequence of Sound\", the director Denis Villeneuve revealed his intention to cast Bowie in \"Blade Runner 2049\" as the main villain; following his death, Villeneuve was forced to look for talent with similar \"rock star\" qualities, eventually casting Jared Leto. Talking about the casting process, Villeneuve said: \"Our first thought had been David Bowie, who had influenced \"Blade Runner\" in many ways ... He [Bowie] embodied the \"Blade Runner\" spirit.\" David Lynch also hoped to have Bowie reprise his \"Fire Walk With Me\" character for \"\" but Bowie's illness prevented this. His character was portrayed via archival footage. At Bowie's request, Lynch overdubbed Bowie's original dialogue with a different actor's voice, as Bowie was unhappy with his Cajun accent in the original film.\nOther works.\nPainter and art collector.\nBowie was a painter and artist. He moved to Switzerland in 1976, purchasing a chalet in the hills north of Lake Geneva. In the new environment, his cocaine use decreased, and he devoted more time to his painting, producing a number of post-modernist pieces. When on tour, he took to sketching in a notebook, and photographing scenes for later reference. Visiting galleries in Geneva and the Br\u00fccke Museum in Berlin, Bowie became, in the words of Sandford, \"a prolific producer and collector of contemporary art.\u00a0... Not only did he become a well-known patron of expressionist art: locked in Clos des M\u00e9sanges he began an intensive self-improvement course in classical music and literature, and started work on an autobiography.\"\nOne of Bowie's paintings sold at auction in late 1990 for $500, and the cover for his 1995 album \"Outside\" is a close-up of a self-portrait he painted that year. His first solo show, titled \"New Afro/Pagan and Work: 1975\u20131995\", was in 1995 at The Gallery in Cork Street, London. In 1997, he founded the publishing company 21 Publishing, whose first title was \"Blimey! \u2013 From Bohemia to Britpop: London Art World from Francis Bacon to Damien Hirst\" by Matthew Collings. A year later, Bowie was invited to join the editorial board of the journal \"Modern Painters\", and participated in the Nat Tate art hoax later that year. The same year, during an interview with Michael Kimmelman for \"The New York Times\", he said \"Art was, seriously, the only thing I'd ever wanted to own.\" Subsequently, in a 1999 interview for the BBC, he said \"The only thing I buy obsessively and addictively is art\". His art collection, which included works by Damien Hirst, Derek Boshier, Frank Auerbach, Henry Moore, and Jean-Michel Basquiat among others, was valued at over \u00a310\u00a0million in mid-2016.\nAfter his death, his family decided to sell most of the collection because they \"didn't have the space\" to store it. On 10 and 11\u00a0November, three auctions were held at Sotheby's in London. Exhibition of the works in the auction attracted 51,470 visitors; the auction was attended by 1,750 bidders, with over 1,000 more bidding online. The auction's overall sale total was \u00a332.9\u00a0million (app. $41.5\u00a0million), while the highest-selling item, Basquiat's graffiti-inspired painting \"Air Power\", sold for \u00a37.09\u00a0million.\nWritings.\nOutside of music, Bowie dabbled in several forms of writings during his life. In the late 1990s, Bowie was commissioned for writings of various media, including an essay on Jean-Michel Basquiat for the 2001 anthology book \"Writers on Artists\" and forewords to Jo Levin's 2001 publication \"GQ Cool\", Mick Rock's 2001 photography portfolio \"Blood and Glitter\", his wife Iman's 2001 book \"I Am Iman\", \"Q\" magazine's 2002 special \"The 100 Greatest Rock 'n' Roll Photographs\" and Jonathan Barnbrook's artwork portfolio \"Barnbrook Bible: The Graphic Design of Jonathan Barnbrook\". He also heavily contributed to the 2002 Genesis Publications memoir of the Ziggy Stardust years, \"Moonage Daydream\", which was rereleased in 2022.\nBowie also wrote liner notes for several albums, including \"Too Many Fish in the Sea\" by Robin Clark, the wife of his guitarist Carlos Alomar, Stevie Ray Vaughan's posthumous \"Live at Montreux 1982 &amp; 1985\" (2002), the Spinners' compilation \"The Chrome Collection\" (2003), the tenth anniversary reissue of Placebo's debut album (2006) and Neu!'s \"Vinyl Box\" (2010). Bowie also wrote an appreciation piece in \"Rolling Stone\" for Nine Inch Nails in 2005 and an essay for the booklet accompanying Iggy Pop's \"\" the same year.\nBowie Bonds.\n\"Bowie Bonds\", the first modern example of celebrity bonds, were asset-backed securities of current and future revenues of the 25 albums that Bowie recorded before 1990. Issued in 1997, the bonds were bought for US$55\u00a0million by the Prudential Insurance Company of America. Royalties from the 25 albums generated the cash flow that secured the bonds' interest payments. By forfeiting 10 years of royalties, Bowie received a payment of US$55\u00a0million up front. Bowie used this income to buy songs owned by Defries. The bonds liquidated in 2007 and the rights to the income from the songs reverted to Bowie.\nWebsites.\nBowie launched two personal websites during his lifetime. The first, an Internet service provider titled BowieNet, was developed in conjunction with Robert Goodale and Ron Roy and launched in September 1998. Subscribers to the dial-up service were offered exclusive content as well as a BowieNet email address and Internet access. The service was closed by 2006. The second, www.bowieart.com, allowed fans to purchase selected paintings, prints and sculptures from his private collection. The service, which ran from 2000 to 2008, also offered a showcase for young art students, in Bowie's words, \"to show and sell their work without having to go through a dealer. Therefore, they really make the money they deserve for their paintings.\"\nPhilanthropy.\nBowie was involved in philanthropic efforts for HIV/AIDS research in Africa, as well as other humanitarian projects helping disadvantaged children and developing nations, ending poverty and hunger, promoting human rights, and providing education and health care to children affected by war. A portion of the proceeds from the pay-per-view showing of Bowie's 50th birthday concert in 1997 was donated to Save the Children.\nMusicianship.\nFrom the time of his earliest recordings in the 1960s, Bowie employed a wide variety of musical styles. His early compositions and performances were strongly influenced by rock and roll singers like Little Richard and Elvis Presley, and also the wider world of show business. He particularly strove to emulate the British musical theatre singer-songwriter and actor Anthony Newley, whose vocal style he frequently adopted, and made prominent use of for his 1967 debut release, \"David Bowie\" (to the disgust of Newley himself, who destroyed the copy he received from Bowie's publisher). Bowie's fascination with music hall continued to surface sporadically alongside such diverse styles as hard rock and heavy metal, soul, psychedelic folk and pop.\nThe musicologist James E. Perone observes Bowie's use of octave switches for different repetitions of the same melody, exemplified in \"Space Oddity\", and later in \"'Heroes'\" to dramatic effect; the author writes that \"in the lowest part of his vocal register\u00a0... his voice has an almost crooner-like richness\". The voice instructor Jo Thompson describes Bowie's vocal vibrato technique as \"particularly deliberate and distinctive\". The authors Scott Schinder and Andy Schwartz call him \"a vocalist of extraordinary technical ability, able to pitch his singing to particular effect.\" Here, too, as in his stagecraft and songwriting, Bowie's roleplaying is evident: the historiographer Michael Campbell says that Bowie's lyrics \"arrest our ear, without question. But Bowie continually shifts from person to person as he delivers them\u00a0... His voice changes dramatically from section to section.\" In addition to the guitar, Bowie also played a variety of keyboards, including piano, Mellotron, Chamberlin, and synthesisers; harmonica; alto and baritone saxophones; stylophone; viola; cello; koto; thumb piano; drums; and various percussion instruments.\nPersonal life.\nFamily.\nBowie married his first wife, Mary Angela Barnett, on 19\u00a0March 1970 at Bromley Register Office in Bromley, London. Their son Duncan, born on 30\u00a0May 1971, was at first known as Zowie. Angie later described her and David's union as a marriage of convenience. \"We got married so that I could [get a permit to] work. I didn't think it would last and David said, before we got married, 'I'm not really in love with you' and I thought that's probably a good thing,\" she said. Bowie said about Angie that \"living with her is like living with a blow torch\". The couple divorced on 8\u00a0February 1980; David received custody of Duncan. After the expiration of the gag order that was part of their divorce agreement, Angie wrote a memoir of their turbulent marriage, titled \"Backstage Passes: Life on the Wild Side with David Bowie\".\nDavid met Somali-American model Iman in Los Angeles following the Sound+Vision Tour in October 1990. They married in a private ceremony in Lausanne on 24\u00a0April 1992. The wedding was solemnised on 6\u00a0June in Florence. The couple's marriage influenced the content of \"Black Tie White Noise\", particularly on tracks such as \"The Wedding\"/\"The Wedding Song\" and \"Miracle Goodnight\". They had one daughter, Alexandria \"Lexi\" Zahra Jones, born on 15\u00a0August 2000. The couple resided primarily in New York City and London and owned an apartment in Sydney's Elizabeth Bay and Britannia Bay House on the island of Mustique. Following Bowie's death, Iman expressed gratitude that the two were able to maintain separate identities during their marriage.\nOther relationships.\nBowie began a personal and professional relationship with the singer Dana Gillespie in 1964 when he was 17 and she was 14. Their relationship lasted a decade; Bowie wrote the song \"Andy Warhol\" for her, Gillespie sang backing vocals on \"Ziggy Stardust\", and Bowie and Mick Ronson produced her 1973 album \"Weren't Born a Man\". Bowie ended contact with Gillespie following his split from Angie. Gillespie looked back on her time with Bowie fondly.\nBowie met the dancer Lindsay Kemp in 1967 and enrolled in his dance class at the London Dance Centre. They became lovers and Kemp would be critical in Bowie's artistic development. Kemp later said: \"I taught him ... to express himself through his body ... how to touch a public ... just as important was the stillness and to make every movement count.\" Commenting in 1972, Bowie said that meeting Kemp was when his interest in image \"really blossomed\": and that Kemp \"lived on his emotions, he was a wonderful influence. His day-to-day life was the most theatrical thing I had ever seen, ever. It was everything I thought Bohemia probably was. I joined the circus.\" In January 1968, Kemp choreographed a dance scene for a BBC play, \"The Pistol Shot\", and used Bowie with a dancer, Hermione Farthingale; the pair began dating and moved into a London flat together. Bowie and Farthingale broke up in early 1969 when she went to Norway to take part in a film, \"Song of Norway\"; this affected him, and several songs, such as \"Letter to Hermione\" and \"An Occasional Dream\", reference her; and, for the video accompanying \"Where Are We Now?\", he wore a T-shirt with the words \"m/s Song of Norway\". Bowie blamed himself for their break-up, saying in 2002 that he \"was totally unfaithful and couldn't for the life of me keep it zipped\". Farthingale, who spoke of deep affection for him in an interview with Pegg, said they last saw each other in 1970.\nDavid and Angie had an open marriage and dated other people during it: David had relationships with the models Cyrinda Foxe, Lulu, Bebe Buell and the \"Young Americans\" backing singer Ava Cherry; Angie had encounters with the Stooges' members Ron Asheton and James Williamson, the Ziggy Stardust Tour bodyguard Anton Jones, and the drummer Roy Martin, which inspired the song \"Breaking Glass\".\nIn 1983, Bowie briefly dated the New Zealand model Geeling Ng, who starred in the video for \"China Girl\". While filming \"The Hunger\" the same year, Bowie had a sexual relationship with his co-star Susan Sarandon, who stated in 2014 \"He's worth idolising. He's extraordinary.\" Between 1987 and 1990, Bowie dated the Glass Spider Tour dancer Melissa Hurley. The two began their relationship at the end of the tour when she was 22 years old. Bowie's Tin Machine collaborator Kevin Armstrong remembered her as \"a genuinely kind, sweet person\". She inspired the song \"Amazing\" on \"Tin Machine\" (1989). They announced their engagement in May 1989 but never married; Bowie broke the relationship off during the latter half of the Sound+Vision Tour, primarily due to the age difference\u2014he was 43 at the time. He later spoke of Hurley as \"such a wonderful, lovely, vibrant girl\".\nCoco Schwab.\nCorinne \"Coco\" Schwab was Bowie's personal assistant for 43 years, from 1973 until his death in 2016. Originally a receptionist at the London office of MainMan, Schwab assisted in extracting Bowie from MainMan's financial grip, after which he invited her to be his personal assistant. Bowie referred to Schwab as his best friend and credited her for saving his life in the 1970s by helping him quit his drug addiction; he dedicated the 1987 song \"Never Let Me Down\" to her. Schwab maintained close guard of him and did not get along with Angie, who later blamed Schwab for the downfall of her and Bowie's marriage. Bowie left $2\u00a0million to Schwab in his will.\nSexuality.\nBowie's sexuality has been the subject of debate. While married to Angie, he famously declared himself gay in a 1972 interview with \"Melody Maker\" journalist Michael Watts, which generated publicity in both Britain and America; Bowie was adopted as a gay icon in both countries. According to Buckley, \"If Ziggy confused both his creator and his audience, a big part of that confusion centred on the topic of sexuality.\" He affirmed his stance in a 1976 interview with \"Playboy\", stating: \"It's true\u2014I am a bisexual. But I can't deny that I've used that fact very well. I suppose it's the best thing that ever happened to me.\" His claim of bisexuality has been supported by Angie.\nIn 1983, Bowie told \"Rolling Stone\" writer Kurt Loder that his public declaration of bisexuality was \"the biggest mistake I ever made\" and \"I was always a closet heterosexual\". On other occasions, he said his interest in homosexual and bisexual culture had been more a product of the times and the situation in which he found himself than of his own feelings. \"Blender\" asked Bowie in 2002 whether he still believed his public declaration was his biggest mistake. After a long pause, he said, \"I don't think it was a mistake in Europe, but it was a lot tougher in America. I had no problem with people knowing I was bisexual. But I had no inclination to hold any banners nor be a representative of any group of people.\" Bowie said he wanted to be a songwriter and performer rather than a headline for his bisexuality, and in \"puritanical\" America, \"I think it stood in the way of so much I wanted to do.\"\nBuckley wrote that Bowie \"mined sexual intrigue for its ability to shock\". According to Mary Finnigan\u2014a brief girlfriend of Bowie's in 1969\u2014David and Angie \"created their bisexual fantasy\". Sandford wrote that David \"made a positive fetish of repeating the quip that he and his wife had met while 'fucking the same bloke'\u00a0... Gay sex was always an anecdotal and laughing matter\". The BBC's Mark Easton stated in 2016 that \"Britain has become far more tolerant of difference\", and that gay rights and gender equality would not have \"enjoyed the broad support they do today without Bowie's androgynous challenge all those years ago\".\nSpirituality and religion.\nBeginning in 1967 from the influence of his half-brother, Bowie became interested in Buddhism and, with commercial success eluding him, he considered becoming a Buddhist monk. Biographer Marc Spitz states that Buddhism reminded Bowie that other goals in life existed outside fame and material gain and one can learn about themselves through meditation and chanting. After a few months' study at Tibet House in London, he was told by his Lama, Chime Rinpoche, \"You don't want to be Buddhist... You should follow music.\" By 1975, Bowie admitted, \"I felt totally, absolutely alone. And I probably was alone because I pretty much had abandoned God.\"\nAfter Bowie married Iman in a private ceremony in 1992, he said they knew that their \"real marriage, sanctified by God, had to happen in a church in Florence\". Earlier that year, he knelt on stage at The Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert and recited the Lord's Prayer before a television audience. In 1993, Bowie said he had an \"undying\" belief in the \"unquestionable\" existence of God. In a separate 1993 interview, while describing the genesis of the music for his album \"Black Tie White Noise\", he said \"it was important for me to find something [musically] that also had no sort of representation of institutionalized and organized religion, of which I'm not a believer, I must make that clear.\" Interviewed in 2005, Bowie said whether God exists \"is not a question that can be answered... I'm not quite an atheist and it worries me. There's that little bit that holds on: 'Well, I'm \"almost\" an atheist. Give me a couple of months... I've nearly got it right.'\" He had a tattoo of the Serenity Prayer in Japanese on his calf.\nBowie stated that \"questioning [his] spiritual life [was] always\u00a0... germane\" to his songwriting. The song \"Station to Station\" is \"very much concerned with the Stations of the Cross\"; the song also specifically references Kabbalah. Bowie called the album \"extremely dark... the nearest album to a magick treatise that I've written\". \"Earthling\" showed \"the abiding need in me to vacillate between atheism or a kind of gnosticism... What I need is to find a balance, spiritually, with the way I live and my demise.\" \"Hours\" boasted overtly Christian themes, with its artwork inspired by the Piet\u00e0. \"Blackstar\"'s \"Lazarus\" began with the words, \"Look up here, I'm in Heaven\" while the rest of the album deals with other matters of mysticism and mortality.\nPolitical views.\nIn his first ever television interview, Bowie, under the name Davie Jones, spoke out about prejudice against long-haired men after he and his then-band the Manish Boys were asked to cut their hair before a BBC television appearance. He and the Manish Boys were interviewed on the network's 12\u00a0November 1964 instalment of \"Tonight\" to champion their cause, where Bowie claimed to be a spokesperson for the nonexistent Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Long-Haired Men. He stated on the programme, \"I think we all like long hair and we don't see why other people should persecute us because of it.\"\nIn 1976, speaking as the Thin White Duke persona and \"at least partially tongue-in-cheek\", he made statements that expressed support for fascism and perceived admiration for Adolf Hitler in interviews with \"Playboy\", \"NME\" and a Swedish publication. Bowie was quoted as saying: \"Britain is ready for a fascist leader\u00a0... I think Britain could benefit from a fascist leader. After all, fascism is really nationalism ... I believe very strongly in fascism, people have always responded with greater efficiency under a regimental leadership.\" He was also quoted as saying: \"Adolf Hitler was one of the first rock stars\" and \"You've got to have an extreme right front come up and sweep everything off its feet and tidy everything up.\" These comments, along with Eric Clapton's comments in support of Enoch Powell at that time, have been named as an inspiration for the formation of the Rock Against Racism movement. Bowie retracted his comments in an interview with \"Melody Maker\" in October 1977, blaming them on mental instability caused by his drug problems, saying: \"I was out of my mind, totally, completely crazed.\" In the same interview, Bowie described himself as \"apolitical\", stating: the more I travel and the less sure I am about exactly which political philosophies are commendable. The more government systems I see, the less enticed I am to give my allegiance to any set of people, so it would be disastrous for me to adopt a definitive point of view, or to adopt a party of people and say 'these are my people'.\nIn the 1980s and 1990s, Bowie's public statements shifted sharply towards anti-racism and anti-fascism. In an interview with MTV anchor Mark Goodman in 1983, Bowie criticised the channel for not providing enough coverage of Black musicians, becoming visibly uncomfortable when Goodman suggested that the network's fear of backlash from the American Midwest was one reason for such a lack of coverage. The music videos for \"China Girl\" and \"Let's Dance\" were described by Bowie as a \"very simple, very direct\" statement against racism. The album \"Tin Machine\" took a more direct stance against fascism and neo-Nazism, and was criticised for being too preachy. In 1993 he released the single \"Black Tie White Noise\" which dealt with the 1992 Los Angeles riots. In 2007 Bowie donated $10,000 to the defence fund for the Jena Six saying, \"there is clearly a separate and unequal judicial process going on in the town of Jena\".\nWhen Bowie won the British Male Solo Artist award at the 2014 Brit Awards, he referenced the forthcoming Scottish independence referendum by saying, \"Scotland, stay with us.\" This garnered a significant reaction throughout the UK on social media.\nDeath.\nBowie died of liver cancer in his New York City apartment on 10\u00a0January 2016. He had been diagnosed 18 months earlier, but he had not made his condition public.\nTony Visconti wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He always did what he wanted to do. And he wanted to do it his way and he wanted to do it the best way. His death was no different from his life \u2013 a work of art. He made \"Blackstar\" for us, his parting gift. I knew for a year this was the way it would be. I wasn't, however, prepared for it. He was an extraordinary man, full of love and life. He will always be with us. For now, it is appropriate to cry.\nFollowing Bowie's death, fans gathered at impromptu street shrines. At the mural of Bowie in his birthplace of Brixton, South London, fans laid flowers and sang his songs. Other memorial sites included Berlin, Los Angeles, and outside his apartment in New York. After his death, sales of his albums and singles soared. Bowie had insisted that he did not want a funeral, and according to his death certificate he was cremated. As he wished in his will, his ashes were scattered in a Buddhist ceremony in Bali.\nBowie left an estate of around $100 million to his wife, Iman, and his two children. He left $2 million to his long-standing assistant, Corinne Schwab, and $1 million to his friend, Marion Skene, the nanny to his eldest child, Duncan. To his daughter Alexandria, he left a 25% share in the estate and a property on Little Tonshi Mountain in New York. His son Duncan also received 25%. His other properties and the remaining 50% of the estate went to Iman.\nLegacy.\nBowie is generally regarded as one of the most influential musicians ever. According to Alexis Petridis of \"The Guardian\", by 1980 he was \"the most important and influential artist since the Beatles\". His influence was wide-reaching due to constant reinvention, leading him to be dubbed the \"chameleon of rock\". \"Billboard\"'s Joe Lynch argued Bowie \"influenced more musical genres than any other rock star\", from glam rock, folk rock and hard rock, to electronic, industrial rock and synth-pop, to even hip hop and indie rock. In \"The New York Times\", Jon Pareles said Bowie \"transcended music, art and fashion\", and introduced his audiences to Philadelphia funk, Japanese fashion, German electronica and drum-and-bass dance music. The biographer Thomas Forget said in 2002: \"Because he succeeded in so many different styles of music, it is almost impossible to find a popular artist today that has not been influenced by David Bowie.\" Neil McCormick of \"The Daily Telegraph\" stated that Bowie had \"one of the supreme careers in popular music, art and culture of the 20th century\" and \"he was too inventive, too mercurial, too strange for all but his most devoted fans to keep up with\".\nBowie's songs and stagecraft brought a new dimension to popular music in the early 1970s. Perone credited Bowie with having \"brought sophistication to rock music\", and critical reviews frequently acknowledged the intellectual depth of his work and influence. The BBC's arts editor Will Gompertz likened Bowie to Pablo Picasso, writing that he was \"an innovative, visionary, restless artist who synthesised complex avant garde concepts into beautifully coherent works that touched the hearts and minds of millions\". Schinder and Schwartz credited Bowie and Marc Bolan as the founders of the glam rock genre. He also inspired the punk rock movement and explored grunge and alternative rock with the band Tin Machine before those styles became popular.\nBroadcaster John Peel contrasted Bowie with his progressive rock contemporaries, arguing that he was \"an interesting kind of fringe figure\u00a0... on the outskirts of things\". He said he \"liked the idea of him reinventing himself\u00a0... Before Bowie came along, people didn't want too much change\"; then Bowie \"subverted the whole notion of what it was to be a rock star\". Buckley called Bowie \"both star and icon. [His] vast body of work\u00a0... has created perhaps the biggest cult in popular culture.\u00a0... His influence has been unique in popular culture\u2014he has permeated and altered more lives than any comparable figure.\"\nThe BBC's Mark Easton argued that Bowie provided fuel for \"the creative powerhouse that Britain has become\" by challenging future generations \"to aim high, to be ambitious and provocative, to take risks\", concluding that he had \"changed the way the world sees Britain. And the way Britain sees itself\". In 2006, Bowie was voted the fourth greatest living British icon in a poll held by the BBC's \"Culture Show\". Annie Zaleski wrote, \"Every band or solo artist who's decided to rip up their playbook and start again owes a debt to Bowie\".\nNumerous figures from the music industry whose careers Bowie had influenced paid tribute to him following his death; panegyrics on Twitter (tweets about him peaked at 20,000 a minute an hour after the announcement of his death) also came from outside the entertainment industry, such as those from Cardinal Gianfranco Ravasi, and the German Federal Foreign Office, which thanked Bowie for his part in the fall of the Berlin Wall.\nOn 7\u00a0January 2017, the BBC broadcast the documentary \"\". A day later, which would have been Bowie's 70th birthday, a charity concert in Brixton was hosted by close friend and actor Gary Oldman. A David Bowie walking tour through Brixton was launched, and concerts were held in New York, Los Angeles, Sydney, and Tokyo.\n\"David Bowie Is\".\nAn exhibition of Bowie artefacts, called \"David Bowie Is\", debuted at the Victoria and Albert Museum in 2013. It was visited by over 300,000 people, making it one of the most successful exhibitions ever staged at the museum. Later that year the exhibition began a world tour which started in Toronto and included stops throughout Europe, Asia and North America before the exhibit ended in 2018 at the Brooklyn Museum. The exhibition hosted around 2,000,000 visitors over its run.\n\"Stardust\" biopic.\nThe biopic \"Stardust\" was announced on 31\u00a0January 2019, with Johnny Flynn as Bowie. Written by Christopher Bell and directed by Gabriel Range, the film follows Bowie on his first trip to the US in 1971. Bowie's son Duncan Jones spoke out against the film, saying he was not consulted and that the film would not have permission to use Bowie's music. The film was set to premiere at the 2020 Tribeca Film Festival, but the festival was postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Critics were generally unfavourable.\n\"Moonage Daydream\".\nA film based on Bowie's musical journey throughout his career was announced on 23\u00a0May 2022. Titled \"Moonage Daydream\", after the song \"Moonage Daydream\", the film is written and directed by Brett Morgen and features never-before-seen footage, performances and music framed by Bowie's own narration. The documentary is the first posthumous film about Bowie to be approved by his estate. After five years in production, the film premiered at the 2022 Cannes Film Festival, and was released theatrically in the US. It received positive reviews.\nDavid Bowie Centre.\nOn 13 September 2025, the David Bowie Centre opened at the V&amp;A East Storehouse in Stratford, London. The centre will host rotating exhibitions and houses Bowie's archive. The archive contains over 90,000 items Bowie collected over the course of his life including clothing, photographs and handwritten lyrics. The first exhibit guest curated by Bowie-collaborator, Nile Rodgers, and Brit Award-winning indie rock band, The Last Dinner Party.\nAwards and achievements.\nBowie's 1969 commercial breakthrough, \"Space Oddity\", won him an Ivor Novello Special Award For Originality. For his performance in \"The Man Who Fell to Earth\", he won the Saturn Award for Best Actor. In the ensuing decades he received six Grammy Awards and four Brit Awards, including Best British Male Artist twice; the award for Outstanding Contribution to Music in 1996; and the Brits Icon award for his \"lasting impact on British culture\", given posthumously in 2016.\nIn 1999, Bowie was made a Commander of the by the French government, and received an honorary doctorate from Berklee College of Music. He declined the royal honour of Commander of the Order of the British Empire in 2000, and turned down a knighthood in 2003. Bowie later stated \"I would never have any intention of accepting anything like that. I seriously don't know what it's for. It's not what I spent my life working for.\"\nDuring his lifetime, Bowie sold over 100\u00a0million records worldwide, making him one of the best-selling music artists. In the UK, he was awarded nine platinum, eleven gold and eight silver albums, and in the US, five platinum and nine gold. Since 2015, Parlophone has remastered Bowie's catalogue through the \"Era\" box set series, starting with \"Five Years (1969\u20131973)\". Bowie was announced as the best-selling vinyl artist of the 21st century in 2022.\nThe 2020 revision of \"Rolling Stone\"'s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time list includes \"The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars\" at number 40, \"Station to Station\" at 52, \"Hunky Dory\" at 88, \"Low\" at 206, and \"Scary Monsters\" at 443. On the 2021 revision of the same magazine's 500 Greatest Songs of All Time list, Bowie's songs include \"'Heroes'\" at number 23, \"Life on Mars?\" at 105, \"Space Oddity\" at 189, \"Changes\" at 200, \"Young Americans\" at 204, \"Station to Station\" at 400, and \"Under Pressure\" at 429. Four of his songs are included in The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame's 500 Songs that Shaped Rock and Roll.\nIn the BBC's 2002 poll of the 100 Greatest Britons, Bowie was ranked 29. In 2004, \"Rolling Stone\" magazine ranked him 39th on their list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time. Bowie was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1996, the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 2005, and the Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame in 2013. A poll by \"BBC History\" in 2013 named Bowie the best-dressed Briton in history. Days after Bowie's death, \"Rolling Stone\" contributor Rob Sheffield proclaimed him \"the greatest rock star ever\". The magazine also listed him as the 39th greatest songwriter of all time. In 2022, Sky Arts ranked him the most influential artist in Britain of the last 50 years. He ranked 32nd on the 2023 \"Rolling Stone\" list of the 200 Greatest Singers of All Time.\nDiscography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSelected filmography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTours.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "8788", "revid": "11487052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8788", "title": "Daisy cutter", "text": "Daisy cutter may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "8791", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8791", "title": "Dennis Hopper", "text": "American actor, filmmaker and artist (1936\u20132010)\nDennis Lee Hopper (May 17, 1936 \u2013 May 29, 2010) was an American actor, filmmaker, photographer and visual artist. He was considered one of the key figures of New Hollywood. He earned prizes from the Cannes Film Festival and Venice International Film Festival as well as nominations for two Academy Awards, a Primetime Emmy Award and two Golden Globe Awards.\nHopper studied acting at the Old Globe Theatre in San Diego and the Actors Studio in New York. He made his first television appearance in 1954, and soon after appeared in two of the films that made James Dean famous, \"Rebel Without a Cause\" (1955) and \"Giant\" (1956). He then played supporting roles in films such as \"Gunfight at the O.K. Corral\" (1957), \"The Sons of Katie Elder\" (1965), \"Cool Hand Luke\" (1967), \"Hang 'Em High\" (1968) and \"True Grit\" (1969). Hopper made his directorial film debut with \"Easy Rider\" (1969), which he and co-star Peter Fonda wrote with Terry Southern. The film earned Hopper a Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Debut, and an Academy Award nomination for Best Original Screenplay. He also began a prolific and acclaimed photography career in the 1960s.\nHe became frequently typecast as mentally disturbed outsiders and rebels in such films as \"Mad Dog Morgan\" (1976), \"The American Friend\" (1977), \"Apocalypse Now\" (1979), \"Rumble Fish\" (1983), and \"Blue Velvet\" (1986). He received an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor nomination for his role in \"Hoosiers\" (1986). His later film roles included \"True Romance\" (1993), \"Speed\" (1994), \"Waterworld\" (1995) and \"Elegy\" (2009). He appeared posthumously in the long-delayed \"The Other Side of the Wind\" (2018), which had previously been filmed in the early 1970s.\nOther directorial credits for Hopper include \"The Last Movie\" (1971), \"Out of the Blue\" (1980), \"Colors\" (1988), and \"The Hot Spot\" (1990). He received Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Limited Series or Movie nomination for his role in \"Paris Trout\" (1991). His other television roles include in the HBO film \"Doublecrossed\" (1991), \"24\" (2002), the NBC series \"E-Ring\" (2005\u20132006), and the Starz series \"Crash\" (2008\u20132009).\nEarly life and education.\nDennis Lee Hopper was born on May 17, 1936, in Dodge City, Kansas, to Marjorie Mae (n\u00e9e Davis; July 12, 1917 \u2013 January 12, 2007) and Jay Millard Hopper (June 23, 1916 \u2013 August 7, 1982). He had Scottish ancestors. Hopper had two younger brothers, Marvin and David.\nAfter World War II, the family moved to Kansas City, Missouri, where the young Hopper attended Saturday art classes at the Kansas City Art Institute. When he was 13, Hopper and his family moved to San Diego, where his mother worked as a lifeguard instructor and his father was a post office manager, having previously served in the Office of Strategic Services, the precursor to the Central Intelligence Agency, in World War II in the China Burma India Theater. Hopper was voted most likely to succeed at Helix High School, where he was active in the drama club, speech and choir. It was there that he developed an interest in acting, studying at the Old Globe Theatre in San Diego, and the Actors Studio in New York City (he studied with Lee Strasberg for five years). Hopper struck up a friendship with actor Vincent Price, whose passion for art influenced Hopper's interest in art. He was especially fond of the plays of William Shakespeare.\nCareer.\n1954\u20131966: Early roles.\nHopper was reported to have had an uncredited role in \"Johnny Guitar\" in 1954, but he was quoted as saying he was not in Hollywood when the film was made. Hopper made his debut on film in two roles with James Dean (whom he admired immensely) in \"Rebel Without a Cause\" (1955) and \"Giant\" (1956). Dean's death in a car accident in September 1955 affected the young Hopper deeply and it was shortly afterward that he got into a confrontation with veteran director Henry Hathaway on the film \"From Hell to Texas\" (1958). Hopper reportedly forced Hathaway to shoot more than 80 takes of a scene over several days before he acquiesced to Hathaway's direction. After filming was finally completed, Hathaway allegedly told Hopper that his career in Hollywood was finished.\nIn his book \"Last Train to Memphis\", American popular music historian Peter Guralnick says that in 1956, when Elvis Presley was making his first film in Hollywood, Hopper was roommates with fellow actor Nick Adams and the three became friends and socialized together. In 1959, Hopper moved to New York to study Method acting under Lee Strasberg at the Actors Studio. In 1961, Hopper played his first lead role in \"Night Tide\", an atmospheric supernatural thriller involving a mermaid in an amusement park. In a December 1994 interview on the \"Charlie Rose Show\", Hopper credited John Wayne with saving his career, as Hopper acknowledged that because of his insolent behavior, he could not find work in Hollywood for seven years. Hopper stated that, because of his marriage to Brooke Hayward, he was the son-in-law of actress Margaret Sullavan, a friend of John Wayne, and Wayne hired Hopper for a role in \"The Sons of Katie Elder\" (1965), also directed by Hathaway, which enabled Hopper to restart his film career.\nHopper debuted in an episode of the Richard Boone television series \"Medic\" in 1955, portraying a young epileptic. He appeared in the first episode of the TV series \"The Rifleman\" (1958\u20131963) as the troubled orphan protagonist Vernon Tippet who is exploited by his greedy uncle. The series starred Chuck Connors and the premiere episode \"The Sharpshooter\" was written by Sam Peckinpah. Hopper subsequently appeared in over 140 episodes of television shows such as \"Gunsmoke\", \"Bonanza\", \"Petticoat Junction\", \"The Twilight Zone\", \"The Barbara Stanwyck Show\", \"The Defenders\", \"The Investigators\", \"The Legend of Jesse James\", \"Entourage\", \"The Big Valley\", \"The Time Tunnel\", and \"Combat!\".\n1967\u20131986: Breakthrough and acclaim.\nHopper had a supporting role as the bet-taker, \"Babalugats\", in \"Cool Hand Luke\" (1967). In 1968, Hopper teamed with Peter Fonda, Terry Southern and Jack Nicholson to make \"Easy Rider\", which premiered in July 1969. With the release of \"True Grit\" a month earlier, Hopper had starring roles in two major box-office films that summer. Hopper won wide acclaim as the director for his improvisational methods and innovative editing for \"Easy Rider\". The production was plagued by creative differences and personal acrimony between Fonda and Hopper, the dissolution of Hopper's marriage to Brooke Hayward, his unwillingness to leave the editor's desk and his accelerating abuse of drugs and alcohol. Hopper said of \"Easy Rider\": \"The cocaine problem in the United States is really because of me. There was no cocaine before \"Easy Rider\" on the street. After \"Easy Rider\", it was everywhere\".\nBesides showing drug use on film, it was one of the first films to portray the hippie lifestyle. Hopper became a role model for some male youths who rejected traditional jobs and traditional American culture, partly exemplified by Fonda's long sideburns and Hopper wearing shoulder-length hair and a long mustache. They were denied rooms in motels and proper service in restaurants as a result of their radical looks. Their long hair became a point of contention in various scenes during the film. Journalist Ann Hornaday wrote: \"With its portrait of counterculture heroes raising their middle fingers to the uptight middle-class hypocrisies, \"Easy Rider\" became the cinematic symbol of the 1960s, a celluloid anthem to freedom, macho bravado and anti-establishment rebellion\". Film critic Matthew Hays wrote \"no other persona better signifies the lost idealism of the 1960s than that of Dennis Hopper\".\nHopper was unable to capitalize on his \"Easy Rider\" success for several years. In 1970 he filmed \"The Last Movie\", cowritten by Stewart Stern and photographed by L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Kov\u00e1cs in Peru, and completed production in 1971. It won the prestigious CIDALC Award at that year's Venice Film Festival, but Universal Studios leaders expected a blockbuster like \"Easy Rider\", and did not like the film or give it an enthusiastic release, while American film audiences found it confounding \u2013 as convoluted as an abstract painting. On viewing the first release print, fresh from the lab, in his screening room at Universal, MCA founder Jules C. Stein rose from his chair and said, \"I just don't understand this younger generation.\" During the tumultuous editing process, Hopper ensconced himself at the Mabel Dodge Luhan House in Taos, New Mexico, which he had purchased in 1970, for almost an entire year. In between contesting Fonda's rights to the majority of the residual profits from \"Easy Rider\", he married singer Michelle Phillips of The Mamas and the Papas on Halloween of 1970. The marriage lasted eight days.\nHopper acted in another John Wayne film, \"True Grit\" (1969), and during its production, he became well acquainted with Wayne. In both of the films with Wayne, Hopper's character is killed in the presence of Wayne's character, to whom he utters his dying words. On September 30, 1970, Hopper appeared on the second episode of season 2 of \"The Johnny Cash Show\" where he sang a duet with Cash entitled \"Goin' Up Goin' Down\". Cash said the song was written by Kris Kristofferson about Hopper. Hopper added that Kristofferson had written some songs for his Peruvian-shot movie \"The Last Movie\", in which Kristofferson appeared in his debut role with Julie Adams. Hopper also recited Rudyard Kipling's famous poem If\u2014 during his appearance. Hopper was able to sustain his lifestyle and a measure of celebrity by acting in numerous low budget and European films throughout the 1970s as the archetypal \"tormented maniac\", including \"Mad Dog Morgan\" (1976), \"Tracks\" (1976), and \"The American Friend\" (1977). With Francis Ford Coppola's blockbuster \"Apocalypse Now\" (1979), Hopper returned to prominence as a hyper-manic Vietnam-era photojournalist. Stepping in for an overwhelmed director, Hopper won praise in 1980 for his directing and acting in \"Out of the Blue\". Immediately thereafter, Hopper starred as an addled short-order cook \"Cracker\" in the Neil Young/Dean Stockwell low-budget collaboration \"Human Highway\". Production was reportedly often delayed by his unreliable behavior. Peter Biskind states in the New Hollywood history \"Easy Riders, Raging Bulls\" that Hopper's cocaine intake had reached three grams a day by this time, complemented by 30 beers, and some marijuana and Cuba libres.\nAfter staging a \"suicide attempt\" (really more of a daredevil act) in a coffin using 17 sticks of dynamite during an \"art happening\" at the Rice University Media Center (filmed by professor and documentary filmmaker Brian Huberman), and later disappearing into the Mexican desert during a particularly extravagant bender, Hopper entered a drug rehabilitation program in 1983.\nThough Hopper gave critically acclaimed performances in Coppola's \"Rumble Fish\" (1983) and Sam Peckinpah's \"The Osterman Weekend\" (1983), it was not until he portrayed the gas-huffing, obscenity-screaming villain Frank Booth in David Lynch's \"Blue Velvet\" (1986) that his career truly revived. On reading the script Hopper said to Lynch: \"You have to let me play Frank Booth. Because I am Frank Booth!\" He won critical acclaim and several awards for this role, and in the same year received an Oscar nomination for Best Supporting Actor for his role as an alcoholic assistant basketball coach in \"Hoosiers\". Also in 1986, Hopper portrayed Lt. Enright in the comedy horror \"The Texas Chainsaw Massacre 2\".\n1987\u20132010: Later work and final roles.\nIn 1987 he acted in the neo-noir thriller \"Black Widow\" alongside Debra Winger, the action comedy \"Straight to Hell\", the adventure film \"Running Out of Luck\" starring Mick Jagger and the romantic comedy \"The Pick-up Artist\" starring Molly Ringwald and Robert Downey Jr. In 1988, he directed \"Colors\", a critically acclaimed police procedural about gang violence in Los Angeles starring Sean Penn and Robert Duvall. Hopper plays an aging hippie prankster in the 1990 comedy \"Flashback\", fleeing in a \"Furthur\"-like old bus to the tune of Steppenwolf's \"Born to Be Wild\". Hopper teamed with Nike in the early 1990s to make a series of television commercials. He appeared as a \"crazed referee\" in those ads. Hopper appeared on the final two episodes of the cult 1991 television show \"Fishing with John\" with host John Lurie. He was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie for the 1991 HBO film \"Paris Trout\". Shortly thereafter, he played drug smuggler and DEA informant Barry Seal in the HBO film \"Doublecrossed\".\nHe starred as King Koopa in \"Super Mario Bros.\", a 1993 critical and commercial failure loosely based on the video game of the same name, although the film and his role would eventually find a cult following. In 1993, he played Clifford Worley in \"True Romance\". He co-starred in the 1994 blockbuster \"Speed\" with Keanu Reeves and Sandra Bullock, and as magic-phobic H.P. Lovecraft in the television movie \"Witch Hunt\". In 1995, Hopper played a greedy television self-help guru, Dr. Luther Waxling in \"Search and Destroy\". The same year, he starred as Deacon, the one-eyed nemesis of Kevin Costner in \"Waterworld\". And in 1996 he starred in the science fiction comedy \"Space Truckers\" directed by Stuart Gordon. Also in 1996 he appeared as art dealer Bruno Bischofberger in \"Basquiat\". Hopper was originally cast as Christof in the 1998 Peter Weir film, \"The Truman Show\", but left during the filming due to \"creative differences\"; he was replaced by Ed Harris. In 1999, he starred in \"The Prophet's Game\" (a dark thriller), directed by David Worth and also starring Stephanie Zimbalist, Robert Yocum, Sondra Locke, Joe Penny and Tracey Birdsall. In 2003, Hopper was in the running for the dual lead in the indie horror drama \"Firecracker\", but was ousted at the last minute in favor of Mike Patton.\nIn 2005, Hopper played Paul Kaufman in George A. Romero's \"Land of the Dead\". He portrayed villain Victor Drazen in the first season of the action drama \"24\". Hopper starred as a U.S. Army colonel in the 2005 television series \"E-Ring\", a drama set at The Pentagon, but the series was canceled after 14 episodes aired. Hopper appeared in all 22 episodes that were filmed. He also played the part of record producer Ben Cendars in the Starz television series \"Crash\", which lasted two seasons (26 episodes).\nIn 2008, Hopper starred in \"An American Carol\". In 2008 he also played The Death in Wim Wenders' \"Palermo Shooting\". His last major feature film appearance was in the 2008 film \"Elegy\" with Ben Kingsley, Pen\u00e9lope Cruz and Debbie Harry. For his last performance, he was the voice of Tony, the alpha-male of the Eastern wolf pack in the 2010 animated film \"Alpha and Omega\". He died before the movie was released. This brought the directors to dedicate the film to his memory at the beginning of the movie credits. Hopper filmed scenes for \"The Other Side of the Wind\" in 1971, appearing as himself; after decades of legal, financial and technical delays, the film was finally released on Netflix in 2018.\nPhotography and art.\nHopper had several artistic pursuits beyond film. He was a prolific photographer, painter, and sculptor.\nHopper's fascination with art began with painting lessons at the Nelson-Atkins Museum while still a child in Kansas City, Missouri. Early in his career, he painted and wrote poetry, though many of his works were destroyed in the 1961 Bel Air Fire, which burned hundreds of homes, including his and his wife's, on Stone Canyon Road in Bel Air. His painting style ranges from abstract impressionism to photorealism and often includes references to his cinematic work and to other artists.\nOstracized by the Hollywood film studios due to his reputation for being a \"difficult\" actor, Hopper turned to photography in 1961 with a camera bought for him by his first wife Brooke Hayward. During this period he created the cover art for the Ike &amp; Tina Turner album \"River Deep \u2013 Mountain High\" (released in 1966). He became a prolific photographer, and noted writer Terry Southern profiled Hopper in \"Better Homes and Gardens\" as an up-and-coming photographer \"to watch\" in the mid-1960s. Hopper's early photography is known for portraits from the 1960s, and he began shooting portraits for \"Vogue\" and other magazines. His photographs of Martin Luther King, Jr.'s 1963 March on Washington and the 1965 civil-rights march in Selma, Alabama, were published. His intimate and unguarded images of Andy Warhol, Jane Fonda, The Byrds, Paul Newman, Jasper Johns, Claes Oldenburg, Robert Rauschenberg, James Brown, Peter Fonda, Ed Ruscha, the Grateful Dead, Michael McClure, and Timothy Leary, among others, became the subject of gallery and museum shows and were collected in several books, including \"1712 North Crescent Heights\". The book, whose title refers to the house where he lived with Hayward in the Hollywood Hills in the 1960s, was edited by his daughter Marin Hopper. From 1960 to 1967, before the making of \"Easy Rider\", Hopper created 18,000 images that chronicled the remarkable artists, musicians, actors, places, happenings, demonstrations, and concerts of that period. \"Dennis Hopper: Photographs 1961\u20131967\" was published in February 2011, by Taschen. German film director Wim Wenders said of Hopper that if \"he'd only been a photographer, he'd be one of the great photographers of the twentieth century.\" In \"The New Yorker\", Hopper, as photographer, was described as \"a compelling, important, and weirdly omnipresent chronicler of his times.\"\nHopper began working as a painter and a poet as well as a collector of art in the 1960s as well, particularly Pop Art. Over his lifetime he amassed a formidable array of 20th- and 21st-century art, including many of Julian Schnabel's works (such as a shattered-plate portrait of Hopper); numerous works from his early cohorts, such as Ed Ruscha, Edward Kienholz, Roy Lichtenstein (\"Sinking Sun\", 1964), and Warhol (\"Double Mona Lisa\", 1963); and pieces by contemporary artists such as Damien Hirst and Robin Rhode. He was involved in L.A.'s Ferus and Virginia Dwan galleries in the 1960s, and he was a longtime friend and supporter to New York dealer Tony Shafrazi. One of the first art works Hopper owned was an early print of Andy Warhol's Campbell's Soup Cans bought for US$75. Hopper also once owned Warhol's \"Mao\", which he shot one evening in a fit of paranoia, the two bullet holes possibly adding to the print's value. The print sold at Christie's, New York, for US$302,500 in January 2011.\nDuring his lifetime, Hopper's own work as well as his collection was shown in monographic and group exhibitions around the world including the Corcoran Gallery of Art, Washington D.C.; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota; the Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; the State Hermitage Museum, St. Petersburg; MAK Vienna: Austrian Museum of Applied Arts/Contemporary Art, Vienna; the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; and the Cin\u00e9math\u00e8que Fran\u00e7aise, Paris, and the Australian Centre for the Moving Image, Melbourne. In March 2010, it was announced that Hopper was on the \"short list\" for Jeffrey Deitch's inaugural show at the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles (MOCA). In April 2010, Deitch confirmed that Hopper's work, curated by Julian Schnabel, will indeed be the focus of his debut at MOCA. The title of the exhibition, \"Double Standard\", was taken from Hopper's iconic 1961 photograph of the two Standard Oil signs seen through an automobile windshield at the intersection of Santa Monica Boulevard, Melrose Avenue, and North Doheny Drive on historic Route\u00a066 in Los Angeles. The image was reproduced on the invitation for Ed Ruscha's second solo exhibition at Ferus Gallery in 1964.\nIn 2011, Barricade Books published film historian Peter L. Winkler's biography, \"Dennis Hopper: The Wild Ride of a Hollywood Rebel\". In 2013, HarperCollins published \"Hopper: A Journey into the American Dream\", a biography by American writer Tom Folsom.\nOn the Gorillaz album \"Demon Days\", Hopper narrates the song \"Fire Coming Out of the Monkey's Head\".\nHopper is also the subject of The Waterboys album released on 4 April 2025 titled \"Life, Death and Dennis Hopper\". Written by singer songwriter Mike Scott, the album contains twenty five compositions dedicated to the actor and includes contributions from Bruce Springsteen, Fiona Apple, and Steve Earle amongst others.\nIn the late 1980s, Hopper purchased a trio of nearly identical two-story, loft-style condominiums at 330 Indiana Avenue in Venice Beach, California \u2013 one made of concrete, one of plywood, and one of green roofing shingles \u2013 built by Frank Gehry and two artist friends of Hopper's, Chuck Arnoldi and Laddie John Dill, in 1981. In 1987, he commissioned an industrial-style main residence, with a corrugated metal exterior designed by Brian Murphy, as a place to display his artwork.\nPersonal life.\nAccording to \"Rolling Stone\" magazine, Hopper was \"one of Hollywood's most notorious drug addicts\" for 20 years. He spent much of the 1970s and early 1980s living as an \"outcast\" in Taos, New Mexico, after the success of \"Easy Rider\". Hopper was also \"notorious for his troubled relationships with women\", including Michelle Phillips, who divorced him after eight days of marriage. Hopper was married five times:\nHopper has been widely reported to be the godfather of actress Amber Tamblyn; in a 2009 interview with \"Parade\", Tamblyn explained that \"godfather\" was \"just a loose term\" for Hopper, Dean Stockwell and Neil Young, three famous friends of her father Russ Tamblyn, who were always around the house when she was growing up, and who were big influences on her life.\nIn 1994, Rip Torn filed a defamation lawsuit against Hopper over a story Hopper told on \"The Tonight Show with Jay Leno\". Hopper claimed that Torn pulled a knife on him during pre-production of the film \"Easy Rider\". According to Hopper, Torn was originally cast in the film but was replaced with Jack Nicholson after the incident. According to Torn's suit, it was actually Hopper who pulled the knife on him. A judge ruled in Torn's favor and Hopper was ordered to pay US$475,000 in damages. Hopper then appealed but the judge again ruled in Torn's favor and Hopper was required to pay another US$475,000 in punitive damages.\nAccording to Newsmeat, Hopper donated US$2,000 to the Republican National Committee in 2004 and an equal amount in 2005. Hopper donated $600 to Irish political party Sinn F\u00e9in.\nHopper was honored with the rank of commander of France's National Order of Arts and Letters, at a ceremony in Paris.\nDespite being a Republican, Hopper supported Barack Obama in the 2008 presidential election. Hopper confirmed this in an election day appearance on the ABC daytime show \"The View\". He said his reason for not voting Republican was the selection of Sarah Palin as the Republican vice presidential candidate.\nHopper was a longtime friend of actress Sally Kirkland, who admitted in a 2021 Reelz documentary that they had a one-night stand early on in their friendship.\nDivorce from Victoria Duffy.\nOn January 14, 2010, Hopper filed for divorce from his fifth wife Victoria Duffy. After citing her \"outrageous conduct\" and stating she was \"insane\", \"inhuman\" and \"volatile\", Hopper was granted a restraining order against her on February 11, and as a result, she was forbidden to come within of him or contact him. On March 9, Duffy refused to move out of the Hopper home, despite the court's order that she do so by March 15.\nOn April 5, a court ruled that Duffy could continue living on Hopper's property, and that he must pay US$12,000 per month spousal and child support for their daughter Galen. Hopper did not attend the hearing. On May 12, a hearing was held before Judge Amy Pellman in downtown Los Angeles Superior Court. Though Hopper died two weeks later, Duffy insisted at the hearing that he was well enough to be deposed. The hearing also dealt with who would be the beneficiary on Hopper's life insurance policy, which listed his wife as a beneficiary. A very ill Hopper did not appear in court though his estranged wife did. Despite Duffy's bid to be named the sole beneficiary of Hopper's million-dollar policy, the judge ruled against her and limited her claim to one-quarter of the policy. The remaining US$750,000 was to go to his estate.\nIllness and death.\nOn September 28, 2009, Hopper, then 73, was reportedly taken by ambulance to an unidentified Manhattan hospital wearing an oxygen mask and \"with numerous tubes visible\". On October 2, he was discharged after receiving treatment for dehydration.\nOn October 29, 2009, Hopper's manager Sam Maydew reported that he had been diagnosed with advanced prostate cancer. In January 2010, it was reported that Hopper's cancer had metastasized to his bones.\nOn March 18, 2010, he was honored with the 2,403rd star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in front of Grauman's Egyptian Theatre on Hollywood Boulevard. Surrounded by family, fans, and friends\u2014including Jack Nicholson, Viggo Mortensen, David Lynch, and Michael Madsen\u2014he attended its addition to the sidewalk six days later.\nBy March 2010, Hopper reportedly weighed only and was unable to carry on long conversations. According to papers filed in his divorce court case, Hopper was terminally ill and was unable to undergo chemotherapy to treat his prostate cancer.\nHopper died at his home in the coastal Venice district of Los Angeles, on May 29, 2010, at age 74. His funeral took place on June 3, 2010, at San Francisco de Asis Mission Church in Ranchos de Taos, New Mexico. His body was buried at the Jesus Nazareno Cemetery in Ranchos de Taos.\nThe film \"Alpha and Omega\", which was among his last film roles, was dedicated to him, as was the 2011 film \"Restless\", which starred his son Henry Hopper.\nFilmography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nArchive.\nThe moving image collection of Dennis Hopper is held at the Academy Film Archive. The Dennis Hopper Trust Collection represents Hopper's directorial efforts.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8792", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8792", "title": "Dennis Hopper/Filmography", "text": ""}
{"id": "8793", "revid": "3888311", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8793", "title": "Dolichocephalic", "text": ""}
{"id": "8795", "revid": "37576545", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8795", "title": "Detroit Red Wings", "text": "National Hockey League team in Michigan\nThe Detroit Red Wings (colloquially referred to as the Wings) are a professional ice hockey team based in Detroit. The Red Wings compete in the National Hockey League (NHL) as a member of the Atlantic Division in the Eastern Conference. The franchise is one of the so called Original Six teams of the league. Founded in 1926, the team was known as the Detroit Cougars until 1930. For the next two seasons, the team was named the Detroit Falcons, before changing their name to the Red Wings in 1932.\nThe Red Wings have won the most Stanley Cup championships of any NHL franchise based in the United States (11), and are third overall amongst active teams in total Stanley Cup championships, behind the Montreal Canadiens (24) and Toronto Maple Leafs (13). The Wings played their home games at Joe Louis Arena from 1979 until 2017, after playing for 52 years at Olympia Stadium. They moved into Little Caesars Arena beginning with the 2017\u201318 season. The Red Wings are one of the most popular and successful franchises in the NHL; fans and sports commentators refer to the Detroit area as \"Hockeytown\", which has been a registered trademark owned by the franchise since 1996.\nBetween the 1931\u201332 and 1965\u201366 seasons, the Red Wings missed the playoffs only four times. They struggled between the 1966\u201367 and 1982\u201383 seasons, only making the playoffs twice in that stretch. After that, however, from 1983\u201384 to 2015\u201316, they made the playoffs 30 times in 32 seasons, including 25 straight from 1990\u201391 to 2015\u201316 (not including the canceled 2004\u201305 season); in 2006, this became the longest active streak of postseason appearances in all of North American professional sports and finished tied for the third-longest streak in NHL history. Since 1983\u201384, the Red Wings have tallied six regular season first-place finishes and have won the Stanley Cup four times (1997, 1998, 2002, and 2008).\nHistory.\nEarly years (1926\u20131949).\nFollowing the 1926 Stanley Cup playoffs, during which the Western Hockey League (WHL) was widely reported to be on the verge of folding, the NHL held a meeting on April 17 to consider applications for expansion franchises, at which it was reported that five different groups sought a team for Detroit. During a subsequent meeting on May 15, 1926, the NHL owners voted, 6 to 2, to approve a franchise to the Townsend-Seyburn group of Detroit and named Charles A. Hughes as governor. WHL owners Frank and Lester Patrick made a deal to sell the league's players to the NHL and cease league operations. The new Detroit franchise purchased the players of the WHL's Victoria Cougars, who had won the Stanley Cup in 1925 and had made the 1926 Stanley Cup Final, to play for the team. The new Detroit franchise also adopted the Cougars' nickname in honor of the folded franchise.\nSince no arena in Detroit was ready at the time, the Cougars played their first season at the Border Cities Arena in Windsor, Ontario. For the 1927\u201328 season, the Cougars moved into the new Detroit Olympia, which would be their home rink until December 15, 1979. This was also the first season behind the bench for Jack Adams, who would be the face of the franchise for the next 36 years as either coach or general manager.\nThe Cougars made the Stanley Cup playoffs for the first time in 1929, with Carson Cooper leading the team in scoring. The Cougars were outscored 7\u20132 in the two-game series with the Toronto Maple Leafs. In 1930, the Cougars were renamed the Falcons, but their woes continued, as they usually finished near the bottom of the standings, even though they made the playoffs again in 1932.\nIn 1932, the NHL let grain merchant James E. Norris, who had made two previous unsuccessful bids to buy an NHL team, purchase the Falcons. Norris' first act was to rename the team; earlier in the century, Norris had been a member of the Montreal Amateur Athletic Association (MAAA), a multi-sport club whose winged-wheel emblem derived from its cycling roots, and whose hockey team won the first Stanley Cup in 1893. Norris decided that a red version of the MAAA \"Winged Wheelers\" logo would be perfect for a team playing in the \"Motor City\", and on October 5, 1932, the club was renamed the Detroit Red Wings. Norris also placed coach Jack Adams on a one-year probation for the 1932\u201333 NHL season. Adams managed to pass his probationary period by leading the Red Wings to their first-ever playoff series victory, over the Montreal Maroons. The team then lost in the semifinals to the New York Rangers.\nIn 1934, the Red Wings made the Stanley Cup Final for the first time, with John Sorrell scoring 21 goals over 47 games and Larry Aurie leading the team in scoring. However, the Chicago Black Hawks defeated the Red Wings in the Stanley Cup Final, winning the best-of-five series in four games to claim their first title. Two seasons later, the Red Wings won their first Stanley Cup in 1936, defeating Toronto in four games. Detroit repeated as Stanley Cup champions in 1937, winning over the Rangers in the full five games. In 1938, the Montreal Canadiens and the Red Wings became the first NHL teams to play in Europe, playing in Paris and London. The Wings played nine games against the Canadiens and went 3\u20135\u20131. They did not play in Europe again until the preseason and start of the 2009\u201310 NHL season, in Sweden, against the St. Louis Blues.\nThe Red Wings made the Stanley Cup Final in three consecutive years during the early 1940s. In 1941, they were swept by the Boston Bruins, and in 1942, they lost a seven-game series to Toronto after winning the first three games. However, in 1943, with Mud Bruneteau and Syd Howe scoring 23 and 20 goals, respectively, Detroit won their third Stanley Cup by sweeping the Bruins. Through the rest of the decade, the team made the playoffs every year, and reached the Stanley Cup Final three more times.\nIn 1946, one of the greatest players in hockey history came into the NHL with the Red Wings. Gordie Howe, a right winger from Floral, Saskatchewan, only scored seven goals and 15 assists in his first season, and would not reach his prime for a few more years. It was also the last season as head coach for Adams, who stepped down after the season to concentrate on his duties as general manager and was succeeded by minor league coach Tommy Ivan. By his second season, Howe was paired with Sid Abel and Ted Lindsay to form what would become one of the great lines in NHL history: the \"Production Line\". Lindsay's 33 goals propelled the Red Wings to the 1948 Stanley Cup Final, where they were swept by the Maple Leafs. Detroit reached the Stanley Cup Final again the following season, only to be swept again by Toronto.\nGordie Howe era (1950\u20131966).\nDuring the 1950 semifinals, Leo Reise Jr. scored the winning goal in overtime, which prevented the Maple Leafs from winning four straight championships. In the 1950 Stanley Cup Final, the Red Wings defeated the New York Rangers in seven games. In game 7, Pete Babando scored the game winner in double overtime. After the game, Lindsay skated around the Olympia ice with the Stanley Cup.\nAfter being upset by the Montreal Canadiens in the 1951 semifinals, Detroit won its fifth Stanley Cup in 1952, sweeping both the Maple Leafs and the Canadiens, with the Production Line of Howe, Abel and Lindsay joined by second-year goaltender Terry Sawchuk. Detroit became the first team in 17 years to go undefeated in the playoffs. They also scored 24 playoff goals, compared to Toronto and Montreal's combined total of 5. Abel left the Red Wings for Chicago during the off-season, and his spot on the roster was replaced by Alex Delvecchio. In December 1952, James E. Norris died. He was succeeded as team president by his daughter, Marguerite, which made her the first woman to head an NHL franchise.\nFollowing another playoff upset in 1953 at the hands of the Bruins, the Red Wings won back-to-back Stanley Cups, beating the rival powerhouse Montreal Canadiens. Both of the Stanley Cup Final series played between the two teams were decided in seven games. The seventh game during the 1954 Stanley Cup Final was won with one of the oddest cup winning goals ever, when the 5'7\" left winger Tony Leswick, known more for his relentless checking than scoring prowess, shot a puck towards the Montreal goal from the middle of the ice. Habs defenseman Doug Harvey tried to gain control of the wobbly puck with his glove but instead redirected it past Montreal goalie Gerry McNeil. The repeat of the series the season after was closely contested, as all seven games were won by the home team, with Detroit taking the seventh game. Montreal was sorely lacking its all-star Maurice Richard, who was suspended after hitting a linesman during the regular season, and the Red Wings' stars carried their team, as Lindsay scored four goals in a single game and Howe scored 20 points during the playoffs, 12 of which during the Stanley Cup Final series, all new records in the league.\nThe 1954\u201355 season ended a run of seven straight regular season titles, an NHL record. During the 1955 off-season, Marguerite Norris lost an intra-family power struggle, and was forced to turn over the Red Wings to her younger brother Bruce. Detroit and Montreal once again met, in the 1956 Stanley Cup Final, but this time the Canadiens won the Stanley Cup, their first of five in a row. In 1957, Lindsay, who had scored 30 goals and led the league in assists with 55, teamed up with Harvey to help start the National Hockey League Players' Association (NHLPA). As a result, he and goaltender Glenn Hall were promptly traded to Chicago.\nIn 1958\u201359, the Red Wings missed the playoffs for the first time in 21 years. However, within a couple of years, the franchise was able to rejuvenate itself. The Red Wings made the Stanley Cup Final four times between 1960\u201361 and 1965\u201366 seasons. However, they came away empty-handed.\n\"Dead Wings\" era (1967\u20131982).\nOnly a year after making the 1966 Stanley Cup Final, the Red Wings finished a distant fifth, 24 points out of the playoffs. It was the beginning of a slump that they would not emerge from in almost 20 years. This period is derisively known as the \"Dead Wings\" era.\nOne factor in the Red Wings' decline was the end of the old development system. Another factor was Ned Harkness, who was hired as coach in 1970 and was promoted to general manager midway through the season. A successful college hockey coach, Harkness tried to force his two-way style of play on a veteran Red Wings team resistant to change. They chafed under his rule in which he demanded short hair and no smoking, and put other rules in place regarding drinking and phone calls. Harkness was forced to resign in 1974, ending the period colloquially referred to as \"Darkness with Harkness\".\nDuring the expansion season of 1967\u201368, the Red Wings acquired longtime star left-winger Frank Mahovlich from the defending Cup champions in Toronto. Mahovlich would go on a line with Howe and Delvecchio, and in 1968\u201369, he scored a career-high 49 goals and had two All-Star seasons in Detroit. However, Mahovlich was traded to Montreal in 1971, while Howe announced his retirement the same year. Throughout the decade, the Red Wings were hampered due to a number of factors.\nOn December 27, 1979, during the 1979\u201380 season, the Red Wings officially began playing at the Joe Louis Arena after leaving the Olympia, where they had played since 1927. In 1982, after 50 years of family ownership, Bruce Norris sold the Red Wings to Mike Ilitch, founder of the pizza chain Little Caesars.\nSteve Yzerman era (1983\u20132006).\nIn 1983, the Red Wings drafted Steve Yzerman, a center from the Peterborough Petes, with their first-round pick. He led the team in scoring in his rookie year. That season, with John Ogrodnick, Ivan Boldirev, Ron Duguay, and Brad Park, Detroit made the playoffs for the first time in six years, with Park ended up winning the Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy. He was later asked to coach the Red Wings after they fired Harry Neale 35 games into the 1985\u201386 season, however, he was fired on June 3, 1986, after they finished last place with a 17\u201357\u20136 record for only 40 points, the worst record in the league. This was the same year that the Red Wings added enforcer Bob Probert, one of the most familiar faces of the team during the 1980s and 1990s.\nIn the 1986\u201387 season, with Yzerman, now the captain following the departure of Danny Gare, joined by Petr Klima, Adam Oates, Gerard Gallant, defenseman Darren Veitch, and new head coach Jacques Demers, the Red Wings won a playoff series for only the second time in the modern era. They made it all the way to the conference finals against the powerful Edmonton Oilers, but lost to the eventual Stanley Cup champions in five games. In 1988, they won their first division title in 23 years. They did so, however, in a relatively weak division, as no other team in the Norris finished above .500. As was the case in the previous season, they made it to the conference finals only to lose again to the eventual Stanley Cup champion Oilers in five games.\nIn 1989, Yzerman scored a career-best 65 goals, but Detroit was upset in the first round by the Chicago Blackhawks. The following season, Yzerman scored 62 goals, but the team missed the playoffs.\nAfter the season, Demers was fired and was replaced by Bryan Murray as the new head coach. Murray was unable to get them back over .500, but they returned to the playoffs. Yzerman was joined by Sergei Fedorov, who would be an award-winner and frequent all-star for the team during the 1990s. In 1991, the team signed free agent Ray Sheppard, who would score a career-best 52 goals three years later. In 1993, the Red Wings acquired top defenseman Paul Coffey. Also joining the Red Wings around this time were draft picks Vladimir Konstantinov, Nicklas Lidstrom, Vyacheslav Kozlov, Darren McCarty, and Chris Osgood.\nThe Russian Five and back-to-back Stanley Cups (1994\u20131998).\nIn 1993, former Montreal Canadiens coach Scotty Bowman was hired as the new head coach. In his second season, the lockout-shortened 1994\u201395 NHL season, Bowman guided Detroit to its first Stanley Cup Final appearance in 29 years, only to be swept by the New Jersey Devils.\nDuring the 1995\u201396 season, the Red Wings won a then NHL record 62 games. However, after defeating the St. Louis Blues in seven games, they would fall in the conference finals to the eventual Stanley Cup champions, the Colorado Avalanche.\nThe following season, the Red Wings acquired Brendan Shanahan and Larry Murphy. In the playoffs, they would defeat the St. Louis Blues, the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim and the Avalanche in the first three rounds. In the 1997 Stanley Cup Final, the Red Wings swept the Philadelphia Flyers. It was their first Stanley Cup since 1955, breaking the longest drought (42 years long) in the league at that time. Mike Vernon was awarded the Conn Smythe Trophy.\nMisfortune befell the Red Wings six days after their championship; defenseman Vladimir Konstantinov, one of the members of the \"Russian Five\", suffered a brain injury in a limousine accident, and his career came to an abrupt end. As a result, the team dedicated the 1997\u201398 season to him. The Red Wings won the Stanley Cup in four games, this time over the Washington Capitals, and Konstantinov was brought onto the ice in his wheelchair so he could touch it.\nSuperstar acquisitions and more success (1999\u20132006).\nThe following season, the Red Wings appeared to be poised to win a third consecutive Stanley Cup when they acquired three-time Norris Trophy winner Chris Chelios from his hometown Chicago Blackhawks in March 1999. Also acquired at the trade deadline were defenseman Ulf Samuelsson, winger Wendel Clark, and goaltender Bill Ranford. Despite high aspirations, however, Detroit would end up losing in the conference semifinals to Colorado in six games. In 2000, the Red Wings would finish second in the Central Division. Just like the previous season, however, they would lose to the Avalanche in the Western Conference semifinals.\nIn 2001, Detroit, the NHL's second-best team in the regular season, were upset in the playoffs by the Los Angeles Kings. During the ensuing off-season, the team acquired goaltender Dominik Hasek (the defending Vezina Trophy winner) and forwards Luc Robitaille and Brett Hull. Russian prospect Pavel Datsyuk also joined the team. Strengthened by the additions, the Red Wings posted the league's best record in the 2001\u201302 regular season and defeated Colorado in seven games in the conference finals after beating the Vancouver Canucks and St. Louis Blues in rounds one and two. The Red Wings then went on to capture another Stanley Cup, in five games, over the Carolina Hurricanes, with Nicklas Lidstrom winning the Conn Smythe Trophy as the playoffs' MVP. Bowman and Hasek both retired after the season.\nThe 2002 off-season saw the Red Wings promote associate coach Dave Lewis to the head coach position after Bowman's retirement. In the market for a new starting goaltender after Hasek's retirement, they signed Curtis Joseph from the Toronto Maple Leafs to a three-year, $24\u00a0million deal. Also new to the lineup was highly touted Swedish prospect Henrik Zetterberg. The Red Wings finished the season second in the Western Conference, which pitted them in the 2003 playoffs against the seventh-seeded Mighty Ducks of Anaheim. The Mighty Ducks shocked the ice hockey world when they swept the Red Wings in four games en route to a Stanley Cup Final appearance.\nIn the off-season, long time Red Wing Fedorov signed with the Mighty Ducks as a free agent. Additionally, Hasek opted to come out of retirement and join the Red Wings for the 2003\u201304 season. Joseph, despite being one of the highest-paid players in the NHL, spent part of the season in the minor leagues. Hasek himself would be sidelined with a groin injury. Notwithstanding, the Red Wings would finish atop of the Central Division and the NHL standings. The Red Wings eliminated the Nashville Predators in six games in the first round of the 2004 playoffs, which led to a second round match-up with the Calgary Flames. The teams split the first four games, and headed to Detroit for a pivotal game 5, which the Red Wings lost 1\u20130. They were then eliminated two nights later in Calgary by the same score in overtime. The Red Wings did not play in the 2004\u201305 season due to the lockout, which canceled the entire NHL season.\nOn July 15, 2005, Mike Babcock, former head coach in Anaheim, became the new head coach for the Red Wings. On November 21, 2005, defenseman Jiri Fischer went into cardiac arrest and collapsed on the bench during a game against the Nashville Predators. The game was canceled because of his injury and was made up on January 23, 2006. This was the first time in NHL history a game had been postponed due to an injury. While the game was played for the full 60 minutes, the Predators were allowed to maintain their 1\u20130 lead from the original game and won 3\u20132. The Red Wings won the Presidents' Trophy with a 58\u201316\u20138 record, earning them 124 points and secured home ice advantage for the entire playoffs. They opened the 2006 playoffs against the Edmonton Oilers with a 3\u20132 overtime victory at Joe Louis Arena, but the Oilers won four of the next five games to take the series.\nContinuing the shakeup of the Red Wings roster, the off-season saw the departure of Brendan Shanahan, the return of Dominik Hasek and the retirement of Steve Yzerman. Yzerman retired with the distinction of having been the longest-serving team captain in NHL history.\nThe \"Euro-Twins\" era (2006\u20132017).\nThe Red Wings opened the 2006\u201307 season with Nicklas Lidstrom as the new captain. The team retired Yzerman's jersey number 19 on January 2, 2007. The Red Wings finished first in the Western Conference and tied for first in the NHL with the Buffalo Sabres, but the Sabres were awarded the Presidents' Trophy because they had more wins. Detroit advanced to the third round of the 2007 playoffs after defeating Calgary and the San Jose Sharks both in six games, coming back to win three-straight after the Sharks had a 2\u20131 series lead. The Red Wings would then lose to the eventual Stanley Cup champion Anaheim Ducks in the conference finals in six games.\nTo start the 2007\u201308 campaign, Zetterberg recorded at least a point in each of Detroit's first 17 games, setting a club record. The Wings cruised to the playoffs, where they faced the Nashville Predators. After goaltender Dominik Hasek played poorly in games 3 and 4 of the series, both losses, head coach Mike Babcock replaced him with Chris Osgood. Osgood never left the net for the remainder of the playoffs, as the Red Wings came back in that series in six games. In the second round, they swept the Colorado Avalanche in four games. They then went on to the Stanley Cup Final after defeating the Dallas Stars in six games in the conference finals. The Red Wings won the Stanley Cup against the Pittsburgh Penguins in game 6 on June 4, 2008, by the score of 3\u20132. This was the Red Wings' fourth Stanley Cup in 11 years and their 11th overall in franchise history. Zetterberg scored the winning goal in the decisive game, and was also named the winner of the Conn Smythe Trophy as the most valuable player of the playoffs. Lidstrom became the first non-North American player to captain a Stanley Cup-winning team.\nOn July 2, 2008, the Red Wings announced the signing of Marian Hossa. On January 1, 2009, the Red Wings played the Chicago Blackhawks in the second NHL Winter Classic at Chicago's Wrigley Field, defeating them 6\u20134. Although they finished second in the conference to the San Jose Sharks, the Wings became the first team in NHL history to top 100 points in nine straight seasons. In the playoffs, the Red Wings swept the Columbus Blue Jackets, then defeated the eighth-seeded Anaheim Ducks in a hard-fought seven-game series. They took on the vastly improved Chicago Blackhawks in the conference finals, winning in five games. The Red Wings would face the Pittsburgh Penguins in the Stanley Cup Final for a second consecutive year, but this series would feature a different outcome as the Penguins defeated the Red Wings in seven games. The Red Wings became only the second NHL team to lose the Stanley Cup at home in game 7.\nThe Red Wings began the 2009\u201310 NHL season in Stockholm, losing both games to the St. Louis Blues 4\u20133 and 5\u20133, respectively. They were plagued by injuries throughout the season and lost the second most man games to injury, with only the last place Edmonton Oilers losing more. The beginning of the season was a struggle for the Red Wings, with key players out of the lineup, including Zetterberg, Tomas Holmstrom, Johan Franzen, Valtteri Filppula and Niklas Kronwall. After the Olympic break, Detroit posted a record of 13\u20133\u20132 and earned 28 points, the most by any team in the NHL. This run helped them secure the fifth playoff seed in the Western Conference. This, however, was the first time the Red Wings did not have home ice advantage in a playoff series in ten seasons. Detroit won their first-round playoff series over the Phoenix Coyotes in seven games. In the second round, they would be defeated by the San Jose Sharks in five games.\nA healthier Red Wings team finished the 2010\u201311 NHL season with a 47\u201325\u201310 record and 104 points to win the Central Division title. They once again faced the Phoenix Coyotes in the first round of the playoffs, this time sweeping them 4\u20130. The Red Wings then went on to face the Sharks in round two. After losing the first three games of the series, the Red Wings won three consecutive games to force a game 7, becoming just the eighth team in NHL history to accomplish the feat. The Red Wings lost game 7 to the Sharks by a score of 3\u20132 and were eliminated.\nDuring the 2011 off-season, Red Wings defenseman Brian Rafalski retired. Detroit soon signed free agent defenseman Ian White to take his place. Long-time Red Wings Chris Osgood and Kris Draper also announced their retirement from hockey, with both soon taking positions within the club. Detroit signed goaltender Ty Conklin for his second stint with the team. Tragedy struck the organization and the rest of the NHL with the 2011 Lokomotiv Yaroslavl plane crash, which killed former Red Wings assistant coach Brad McCrimmon and defenseman Ruslan Salei, who had joined the KHL team during the summer. Stefan Liv, a former Red Wings goaltending prospect, was also among the fatalities. The Red Wings then added a patch to the left arm of their uniforms with the trio's initials.\nDuring the season, the Red Wings won an NHL-record 23 consecutive home games. The Red Wings also made the NHL playoffs, extending their streak of 21-straight playoff appearances, as the fifth seed. They were defeated in five games by their opening round opponent, the Nashville Predators. On May 31, 2012, Nicklas Lidstrom retired.\nZetterberg was named successor to Lidstrom as team captain. On July 1, 2012, the first day of the NHL free agency period, the Red Wings signed Swiss forward Damien Brunner to a one-year, entry-level contract; forward Jordin Tootoo to a three-year, $5.7\u00a0million contract; and goaltender Jonas Gustavsson to a two-year, $3\u00a0million deal.\nThe team won their final four games of the 2012\u201313 season to earn the seventh seed of the playoffs. The Red Wings' 3\u20130 victory over the Dallas Stars on April 27, 2013, preserved their streak of 22 consecutive playoff appearances. As the seventh seed in the 2013 playoffs, the Red Wings faced the second-seeded Anaheim Ducks. They survived a fierce battle that included four overtime games, winning the series 4\u20133 after a 3\u20132 game 7 victory in Anaheim. The next round pitted the Red Wings against the top-seeded Chicago Blackhawks. Despite jumping out to a 3\u20131 series lead, the Red Wings would ultimately lose to the eventual Stanley Cup champions in seven games.\nOn July 5, 2013, the Red Wings signed long time Ottawa Senators captain Daniel Alfredsson to a one-year contract and long time Florida Panther Stephen Weiss to a five-year contract. In the 2013\u201314 season, the Red Wings moved to the Atlantic Division of the Eastern Conference as part of the NHL's realignment. The move to the Eastern Conference allowed them to play a majority of their games against teams in the Eastern Time Zone. On April 9, 2014, the Red Wings clinched their 23rd consecutive playoff appearance. They would be eliminated in the first round by the Boston Bruins.\nOn April 9, 2015, the Red Wings clinched their 24th consecutive playoff appearance, thus extending their streak. The team was eliminated in the first round by the Tampa Bay Lightning. Petr Mrazek had earned the starting goaltender role from Jimmy Howard, and Kronwall was suspended for game 7 as Tampa Bay erased a 3\u20132 deficit to win the series. Mike Babcock, concluding the final year of his contract, left the Red Wings to become the new head coach of the Toronto Maple Leafs. Jeff Blashill, head coach of the Red Wings' top minor league affiliate, the Grand Rapids Griffins, was named his successor on June 9.\nOn April 9, 2016, despite the Red Wings losing 3\u20132 to the New York Rangers, the Ottawa Senators defeated the Boston Bruins 6\u20131 as the Red Wings narrowly made the playoffs and extended their streak to a 25th season. They would lose in the first round to the Lightning again, this time in five games.\nDuring the off-season, Datsyuk decided to return to Russia. On February 10, 2017, club owner Mike Ilitch died. The Red Wings' playoff streak ended after 25 seasons in the 2016\u201317 season. The Red Wings won their last game at Joe Louis Arena 4\u20131 on April 9, 2017, against the New Jersey Devils.\nThe opening of Little Caesars Arena and rebuilding (2017\u2013present).\nThe Red Wings played their first regular season game at Little Caesars Arena on October 5, 2017, winning 4\u20132 over the Minnesota Wild. The Red Wings finished the 2017\u201318 season with a 30\u201339\u201313 record. They missed the playoffs for the second season in a row, marking the first time since the early 1980s the team missed the playoffs in consecutive years. The Red Wings finished the 2018\u201319 season with a 32\u201340\u201310 record, missing the playoffs for a third consecutive season.\nOn April 19, 2019, the Red Wings announced that Steve Yzerman rejoined the team as general manager and executive vice president. On February 21, 2020, the Red Wings became the first team to be eliminated from playoff contention before the trade deadline since the 2003\u201304 Pittsburgh Penguins. On March 10, 2020, the Red Wings clinched the worst overall record in NHL for the first time since the 1985\u201386 season. On March 12, the 2019\u201320 season was suspended by the NHL due to the COVID-19 pandemic. On May 26, 2020, the NHL announced that the rest of the season was over for the seven teams that did not qualify for the 24-team Stanley Cup playoffs, which included the Red Wings. With a record of 17\u201349\u20135, this was the first time since the 1985\u201386 season that the Red Wings finished with fewer than 20 wins. The Red Wings also became the second team since the 2004\u201305 NHL lockout, and the subsequent start of the salary cap era, to finish with a sub-.300 points percentage, along with the 2016\u201317 Colorado Avalanche. Their .275 points percentage was the worst for an NHL team since the 1999\u20132000 Atlanta Thrashers.\nDylan Larkin was named the Red Wings captain on January 13, 2021, who succeeded Henrik Zetterberg following his retirement in 2018. On April 26, the Red Wings were eliminated from playoff contention for the fifth consecutive season. They would ultimately finish with a 19\u201327\u201310 record. The Red Wings finished the 2021\u201322 season at 32\u201340\u201310. They missed the playoff for the sixth consecutive season. On April 30, 2022, Jeff Blashill was fired as head coach. They then hired Derek Lalonde as their head coach on June 30, 2022. During 2022\u201323 season, the Red Wings would re-sign Dylan Larkin to an eight-year contract extension. The Red Wings finished the season at 35\u201337\u201310. They missed the playoffs for the seventh consecutive season. The Red Wings finished the 2023\u201324 season with a 41\u201332\u20139 record. However, they were eliminated from playoff contention for the eighth consecutive season via tiebreaker on April 16, 2024, after the Washington Capitals' 2\u20131 win over the Philadelphia Flyers.\nOn December 26, 2024, after a slow start to the 2024\u201325 season, the Red Wings fired head coach Lalonde and assistant head coach Bob Boughner. Todd McLellan was hired as their new head coach, with Trent Yawney as an assistant head coach. On April 12, 2025, the Red Wings were eliminated from playoff contention for the ninth consecutive season after the Montreal Canadiens lost in overtime to the Toronto Maple Leafs. This extended their longest playoff drought in franchise history. They finished the season with a 39\u201335\u20138 record.\nTeam information.\nLogo and uniforms.\nThe Red Wings' jerseys (traditionally known in hockey as \"sweaters\") have been more or less the same since the 1930s \u2013 a white or red base with red or white piping. The only significant changes have been the replacement of the word \"Detroit\" with the \"winged wheel\" logo in 1932, and vertical arch lettering for the players' names and block letters in 1983. The Red Wings wear the vertical arched letters in the regular season and playoffs, but use straight serifed nameplates during the preseason.\n\"The Hockey News\" voted the Red Wings' \"winged wheel\" logo the second best in the league in 2008. The Red Wings, like all NHL teams, updated their jerseys to the new standard for the 2007\u201308 NHL season. The Red Wings kept their design as close to original as possible, the exceptions being: On the road (white) jersey, there was more red on the sleeves as the color panel began closer to the shoulder, and the letters of the captain and alternate captains were moved to the right shoulder.\nWhen Adidas became the uniform outfitter starting with the 2017\u201318 season, the Red Wings kept the same basic look.\nThe Red Wings have rarely used any alternate logos or uniforms since the trend became popular in the 1990s, the sole exceptions were select games of the 1991\u201392 season commemorating the league's 75th anniversary, and for a commemorative game on January 27, 1994, at Chicago Stadium. Those jerseys were based on the uniforms worn by the team (then the Detroit Cougars) in 1927\u201328. The throwbacks are primarily white with five red horizontal stripes on the body, the broadest middle stripe bearing \"Detroit\" in bold letters, and three red stripes on the sleeves. This jersey served as the basis for the uniforms worn by Wayne Gretzky's team of NHLPA All-Stars, nicknamed the \"99ers\", for their exhibition tour in Europe during the 1994\u201395 NHL lockout.\nThe Red Wings wore alternative \"retro\" jerseys for the 2009 Winter Classic in Chicago. The jerseys were based on the uniforms worn by the Detroit Cougars during their inaugural season of 1926\u201327. These jerseys were white, with a single bold red stripe on the sleeves and chest, and a uniquely styled white Old English \"D\" centered on the chest stripe. These jerseys were also worn for their final 2009 regular season home game, again against the Chicago Blackhawks. The Red Wings again used an alternate jersey mimicking throwback jerseys for the 2014 Winter Classic against the Toronto Maple Leafs at Michigan Stadium.\nThe Red Wings wore a specially designed one-time-only jersey for their Stadium Series game in Denver against the Colorado Avalanche on February 27, 2016. The majority of this jersey was the traditional red, decorated with a thick diagonal white stripe running from the player's right shoulder across the front towards the left hip. The bottom of each sleeve featured a thick white stripe from wrist to elbow. The crest on the front of the jersey was a stylized red \"D\". The words \"Red Wings\" were printed in all capital letters on the left side of the collar, and the phrase \"EST. 1926\" was printed inside the back of the collar. These jerseys featured the current Red Wings logo on the left shoulder cap. The names and numbers were printed larger than traditional NHL jerseys to increase visibility and player identification for fans watching the game at Coors Field, a stadium traditionally used for Major League Baseball.\nThe Red Wings unveiled a uniform patch on September 27, 2016, to honor Gordie Howe, who died on June 10, 2016. The patch was a depiction of Howe's jersey number 9 and was worn by the team above the logo on the front of the jersey on the left side of the chest for all 82 regular season games during the 2016\u201317 season.\nThe Red Wings wore a specially designed one-time-only jersey for the Centennial Classic in Toronto against the Toronto Maple Leafs on January 1, 2017. It was a white jersey that had four stripes on the arms. Three of the stripes were red, while the fourth was silver. On the silver stripes were the years the Red Wings won the Stanley Cup. The logo and numbers were outlined in silver.\nFor the 2020\u201321 season, the Red Wings wore special \"Reverse Retro\" alternate jerseys designed by Adidas. The uniform featured a white base and white sleeves inspired by the Red Wings' road uniforms of the Original Six era. Silver stripes replaced red stripes in commemoration of the team's 11 Stanley Cup championships and the 2017 Centennial Classic. A second \"Reverse Retro\" uniform was unveiled in the 2022\u201323 season, using the 1991\u201392 throwback uniform based on the original Cougars' uniforms but with a red base and black stripes.\nThe Red Wings' logo received significant media attention in August 2017 when it was discovered that a white supremacist group used a modified version of it, in which the wheel's spokes consisted of the occult SS symbol Black Sun; it was the aegis of their shields during the Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville, Virginia. As a result, the Red Wings condemned the group for the usage of the logo and threatened legal action.\nOn February 29, 2024, the Red Wings announced their first ever jersey patch advertisement with Priority, a local waste management company.\nFor the Red Wings' appearance in the 2025 Stadium Series, they wore white uniforms with a script \"Detroit\" lettering in red. The lower sleeves and socks were predominantly red, and the trademark \"winged wheel\" logo is on the left shoulder. The \"Hockeytown\" slogan was placed on the right leg. The uniforms were generally inspired by Detroit's automotive industry and hockey culture.\nOn September 15, 2025, the Red Wings unveiled their commemorative red and vintage white centennial season uniform, featuring visual nods from Detroit Cougars and Falcons designs, lace-up collars, and an original chain-stitched version of the \"Winged Wheel\" crest.\nFan traditions.\nThe \"Legend of the Octopus\" is a sports tradition during Detroit Red Wings playoff games, in which an octopus is thrown onto the ice surface for good luck. During the playoffs, Joe Louis Arena was generally adorned with a giant octopus with red eyes, nicknamed \"Al\" after former head ice manager Al Sobotka.\nThe 1952 playoffs featured the start of the octopus throw. The owner of a local fish market, Peter Cusimano, threw one from the stands onto the ice. The eight legs are symbolic of the eight wins it took to win the Stanley Cup at the time. The Red Wings went on to sweep both of their opponents that year en route to a Stanley Cup championship. The NHL has, at various times, tried to eliminate this tradition but it continues to this day.\nSobotka was responsible for removing the thrown creatures from the ice. When the Red Wings played at Joe Louis Arena, he was known for swinging the tossed octopuses above his head when walking off the ice. On April 19, 2008, the NHL sent a memo to the Red Wings that forbade this; they said that violating the mandate would result in a $10,000 fine. Instead, it was to up to the linesmen to remove the octopuses. In an email to the \"Detroit Free Press\", NHL spokesman Frank Brown justified the ban because matter flew off the octopus and got on the ice when Sobotka swung it above his head. This ban was later loosened to allow for the octopus twirling to take place at the Zamboni entrance.\nTypically during the last minute or two of games that the Red Wings are winning, especially around the end of the season and during the playoffs, fans are known to start singing along to Journey's \"Don't Stop Believin'\". The song is played over the PA system and continues until it is muted while the crowd sings the words \"Born and raised in South Detroit,\" then the song resumes over the speakers in the arena.\nBroadcasters.\nThe Red Wings' flagship radio station is WXYT-FM 97.1. If there is a conflict with Detroit Tigers baseball or Detroit Lions football, games are carried on WWJ 950. There are several affiliate stations throughout Michigan.\nThe Red Wings' exclusive local television rights are held by FanDuel Sports Network Detroit.\nAnnouncers:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHonored broadcasters.\nFour members of the Red Wings organization have received the Foster Hewitt Memorial Award:\nLynch called the first locally televised game at Olympia for the original WWJ-TV in 1949. He remained with the organization for 63 years, serving as director of publicity from 1975 to 1982, and was the public address announcer from 1982 until his death in 2012. From 2008 to 2012, a second PA announcer was added to work alongside him, first John Fossen, then Erich Freiny. Freiny took over as the sole PA announcer following Lynch's death.\nSeason-by-season record.\n\"This is a partial list of the last five seasons completed by the Detroit Red Wings. For the full season-by-season history, see List of Detroit Red Wings seasons\".\n\"Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, OTL = Overtime losses, ROW = Regulation + OT wins, Pts = Points, GF = Goals for, GA = Goals against\"\nPlayers and personnel.\nCurrent roster.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Navbar-header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHall of Fame.\nThe Detroit Red Wings acknowledge an affiliation with many inductees to the Hockey Hall of Fame, including 68 former players and 12 builders of the sport. The 12 individuals recognized as builders by the Hall of Fame include former Red Wings executives, general managers, head coaches, and owners. In addition to players and builders, several broadcasters have been awarded the Foster Hewitt Memorial Award from the Hockey Hall of Fame. Budd Lynch, a radio play-by-play announcer, was the first Red Wings broadcaster to be awarded the Foster Hewitt Memorial Award. Lynch also served as Detroit's public address announcer from 1985 until his death in 2012. In addition to Lynch, Bruce Martyn, Mickey Redmond, and Dave Strader have also won the award.\nPlayers\nBuilders\nRetired numbers.\nThe Red Wings have retired eight numbers. The first number the Red Wings retired was No. 9 in 1972 in honor of Gordie Howe, who played right wing for the team from 1946 to 1971. Howe won both the Art Ross Trophy and the Hart Memorial Trophy six times each and won the Stanley Cup as a Red Wing four times. In 2007, the Red Wings retired Steve Yzerman's No. 19. During Yzerman's career, he won the Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy, the Conn Smythe Trophy, the Frank J. Selke Trophy, the Lester Patrick Trophy, and the Ted Lindsay Award. Yzerman served as Detroit's captain for 19 seasons, an NHL record, and won the Stanley Cup three times as a player with the Red Wings. The most recent retired number is Red Kelly's No. 4, which was retired on February 1, 2019. During Kelly's 13-year career with the Red Wings, he won four Stanley Cups, the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy three times, and the James Norris Memorial Trophy once. The franchise will retire Sergei Fedorov's No. 91 on January 12, 2026. During his 13-year career with the Red Wings, Fedorov won the Frank J. Selke Trophy twice, the Hart Memorial Trophy and Ted Lindsay Award once, and the Stanley Cup three times.\nThe Red Wings have also made the number 6 of Larry Aurie and the number 16 of Vladimir Konstantinov no longer available for issue. However, the numbers are not considered to be officially retired. Although Aurie's number was retired in 1938 by James E. Norris, current team owners do not consider the number to be retired. Konstantinov's number has not been issued to any player since he was permanently disabled in a vehicle accident after the 1997 Stanley Cup Final. Number 99 is also unavailable as it was retired by the league in honor of Wayne Gretzky.\nTeam captains.\nAll the players who have served as team captain with the Detroit franchise.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFirst-round draft picks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFranchise records.\nAll-time leading scorers.\nThese players rank in the top ten in franchise history in scoring as of the end of the 2024\u201325 season. Figures are updated after each completed NHL season. \n\"Note: Pos = Position; GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAll-time leading goaltenders.\nThese goaltenders rank in the top ten in franchise history for wins as of the end of the 2024\u201325 season. Figures are updated after each completed NHL season. There is a four-way tie for ninth place in postseason wins, resulting in 12 players listed in that table.\n\"Note: GP = Games played; W = Wins; L = Losses; T = Ties; OT = Overtime losses; SO = Shutouts; GAA = Goals against average\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "8796", "revid": "8059650", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8796", "title": "Demiurge", "text": "Creation spirit in some schools of philosophy\nIn the Platonic, Neopythagorean, Middle Platonic, and Neoplatonic schools of philosophy, the Demiurge () is an artisan-like figure responsible for fashioning and maintaining the physical universe. Various schools of Gnostics adopted the term \"demiurge\". \nAlthough a fashioner, the demiurge is not necessarily the same as the creator figure in the monotheistic sense, because the demiurge itself and the material from which the demiurge fashions the universe are both considered consequences of something else. Depending on the system, they may be considered either uncreated and eternal or the product of some other entity. Some of these systems are monotheistic, while others are henotheistic or polytheistic.\nThe word \"demiurge\" is an English word derived from \"demiurgus\", a Latinised form of the Greek () . It was originally a common noun meaning \"craftsman\" or \"artisan\", but gradually came to mean \"producer\", and eventually \"creator.\" The philosophical usage and the proper noun derive from Plato's \"Timaeus\", written c.\u00a0360 BC, where the demiurge is presented as the creator of the universe. The demiurge is also described as a creator in the Platonic (c.\u00a0310\u201390 BC) and Middle Platonic (c.\u00a090 BC\u2013AD 300) philosophical traditions. In the various branches of the Neoplatonic school (third century onwards), the demiurge is the fashioner of the real, perceptible world after the model of the Ideas, but (in most Neoplatonic systems) is still not itself \"the One\".\nWithin the vast spectrum of Gnostic traditions, views of the Demiurge range dramatically. It is generally understood and agreed upon to be a lesser divinity who governs the material universe. However, the nature of its rule over the material realm differs from school to school. Sethian Gnostics portrays the Demiurge as an oppressive, ignorant ruler, intentionally binding spirits in an inherently corrupt material realm. In contrast, Valentinian Gnostics see the Demiurge as a well-meaning but limited figure whose rule reflects ignorance rather than malice.\nPlato and the \"Timaeus\".\nPlato, as the speaker Timaeus, refers to the Demiurge frequently in the Socratic dialogue \"Timaeus\" (28a ff.), c.\u00a0360 BC. The main character refers to the Demiurge as the entity who \"fashioned and shaped\" the material world. Timaeus describes the Demiurge as unreservedly benevolent, and so it desires a world as good as possible. The result of his work is a universe as a living god with lesser gods, such as the stars, planets, and gods of traditional religion, inside it. Plato argues that the cosmos needed a Demiurge because the cosmos needed a cause that makes Becoming resemble Being. \"Timaeus\" is a philosophical reconciliation of Hesiod's cosmology in his \"Theogony\", syncretically reconciling Hesiod to Homer, though other scholars have argued that Plato's theology 'invokes a broad cultural horizon without committing to any specific poetic or religious tradition'. Moreover, Plato believed that the Demiurge created other, so-called \"lower\" gods who, in turn, created humanity. Some scholars have argued that the lower gods are gods of traditional mythology, such as Zeus and Hera.\nGnosticism.\nGnostics present a distinction between the highest, unknowable God or Supreme Being and the demiurgic \"creator\" of the material, identified in some traditions with Yahweh, the God of the Hebrew Bible. Several systems of Gnostic thought present the Demiurge as antagonistic to the will of the Supreme Being, with his creation initially having the malevolent intention of entrapping aspects of the divine \"in\" materiality. In other systems, the Demiurge is instead portrayed as \"merely\" incompetent or foolish: his creation is an unconscious attempt to replicate the divine world (the pleroma) based on faint recollections, and thus ends up fundamentally flawed. Thus, in such systems, the Demiurge is a proposed solution to the problem of evil: while God, consisting of the Source and his emanations, the Aeons and angels, is omniscient and omnibenevolent, the Demiurge who rules over our own physical world is not.\nPhilo had inferred from the expression \"Let us make man\" of the Book of Genesis that God had used other beings as assistants in the creation of man, and he explains in this way why man is capable of vice as well as virtue, ascribing the origin of the latter to God, of the former to his helpers in the work of creation. The earliest Gnostic sects ascribe the work of creation to angels. So Irenaeus tells of the system of Simon Magus, of the system of Menander, of the system of Saturninus, in which the number of these angels is reckoned as seven, and of the system of Carpocrates. In Basilides's system, he reports, the world was made by the angels who occupy the lowest heaven; but special mention is made of their chief, who is said to have been the God of the Jews, to have led that people out of the land of Egypt, and to have given them their law. The prophecies are ascribed not to the chief but to the other world-making angels.\nThe Latin translation, confirmed by Hippolytus of Rome, makes Irenaeus state that according to Cerinthus (who shows Ebionite influence), creation was made by a power quite separate from the Supreme God and ignorant of him. Theodoret, who here copies Irenaeus, turns this into the plural number \"powers\", and so Epiphanius of Salamis represents Cerinthus as agreeing with Carpocrates in the doctrine that the world was made by angels.\nYaldabaoth.\nIn the Archontic, Sethian, and Ophite systems, which have many affinities with the doctrine of Valentinus, the making of the world is ascribed to a company of seven archons, whose names are given, but still more prominent is their chief, \"Yaldabaoth\" (also known as \"Yaltabaoth\" or \"Ialdabaoth\").\nIn the \"Apocryphon of John\" c.\u00a0AD 120\u2013180, the demiurge declares that he has made the world by himself:\nNow the archon [\"ruler\"] who is weak has three names. The first name is Yaltabaoth, the second is Saklas [\"fool\"], and the third is Samael [\"blind god\"]. And he is impious in his arrogance which is in him. For he said, 'I am God and there is no other God beside me,' for he is ignorant of his strength, the place from which he had come.\nHe is demiurge and maker of man, but as a ray of light from above enters the body of man and gives him a soul, Yaldabaoth is filled with envy; he tries to limit man's knowledge by forbidding him the fruit of knowledge in paradise. At the consummation of all things, all light will return to the Pleroma. But Yaldabaoth, the demiurge, with the material world, will be cast into the lower depths.\nYaldabaoth is frequently called \"the Lion-faced\", \"leontoeides\", and is said to have the body of a serpent. The demiurge is also described as having a fiery nature, applying the words of Moses to him: \"the Lord our God is a burning and consuming fire\". Hippolytus claims that Simon used a similar description.\nIn \"Pistis Sophia\", Yaldabaoth has already sunk from his high estate and resides in Chaos, where, with his forty-nine demons, he tortures wicked souls in boiling rivers of pitch, and with other punishments (pp.\u00a0257, 382). He is an archon with the face of a lion, half flame, and half darkness.\nIn the Nag Hammadi text \"On the Origin of the World\", the three sons of Yaldabaoth are listed as Yao, Eloai, and Astaphaios.\nUnder the name of \"Nebro\" (rebel), Yaldabaoth is called an angel in the apocryphal \"Gospel of Judas\". He is first mentioned in \"The Cosmos, Chaos, and the Underworld\" as one of the twelve angels to come \"into being [to] rule over chaos and the [underworld]\". He comes from heaven, and it is said his \"face flashed with fire and [his] appearance was defiled with blood\". Nebro creates six angels in addition to the angel Saklas to be his assistants. These six, in turn, create another twelve angels \"with each one receiving a portion in the heavens\".\nNames.\nThe etymology of the name \"Yaldabaoth\" has been subject to many speculative theories. Until 1974, etymologies deriving from the unattested Aramaic: \u05d1\u05d4\u05d5\u05ea\u05d0, \"b\u0101h\u016bth\u0101\", supposedly meaning \"chaos\", represented the majority view. Following an analysis by the Jewish historian of religion Gershom Scholem published in 1974, this etymology no longer enjoyed any notable support. His analysis showed the unattested Aramaic term to have been fabulated and attested only in a single corrupted text from 1859, with its claimed translation having been transposed from the reading of an earlier etymology, whose explanation seemingly equated \"darkness\" and \"chaos\" when translating an unattested supposed plural form of .\n\"Samael\" literally means \"Blind God\" or \"God of the Blind\" in Hebrew (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e1\u05de\u05d0\u05dc\u200e). This being is considered not only blind, or ignorant of its own origins, but may, in addition, be evil; its name is also found in Judaism as the Angel of Death and in Christian demonology. This link to Judeo-Christian tradition leads to a further comparison with Satan. Another alternative title for the demiurge is \"Saklas\", Aramaic for \"fool\". In the \"Apocryphon of John\", Yaldabaoth is also known as both Sakla and Samael.\nThe angelic name \"Ariel\" (Hebrew: 'the lion of God') has also been used to refer to the Demiurge and is called his \"perfect\" name; in some Gnostic lore, Ariel has been called an ancient or original name for Ialdabaoth. The name has also been inscribed on amulets as \"Ariel Ialdabaoth\", and the figure of the archon inscribed with \"Aariel\".\nMarcion.\nAccording to Marcion, the title God was given to the Demiurge, who was to be sharply distinguished from the higher Good God. The former was \"d\u00edkaios\", severely just, the latter \"agath\u00f3s\", or loving-kind; the former was the God of the Old Testament, the latter the true God of the New Testament. Christ, in reality, is the Son of the Good God. The true believer in Christ entered into God's kingdom; the unbeliever remained forever the slave of the Demiurge.\nValentinus.\nIt is in the system of Valentinus that the name \"D\u0113miurgos\" is used, which occurs nowhere in Irenaeus except in connection with the Valentinian system. When it is employed by other Gnostics either it is not used in a technical sense, or its use has been borrowed from Valentinus. But it is only the name that can be said to be specially Valentinian; the personage intended by it corresponds more or less closely with the Yaldabaoth of the Ophites, the great Archon of Basilides, the Elohim of Justinus, etc.\nThe Valentinian theory elaborates that from Achamoth (\"he k\u00e1t\u014d soph\u00eda\" or lower wisdom) three kinds of substance take their origin, the spiritual (\"pneumatiko\u00ed\"), the animal (\"psychiko\u00ed\") and the material (\"hyliko\u00ed\"). The Demiurge belongs to the second kind, as he was the offspring of a union of Achamoth with matter. And as Achamoth herself was only the daughter of \"Soph\u00eda\" the last of the thirty Aeons, the Demiurge was distant by many emanations from the Propat\u00f4r, or Supreme God.\nIn creating this world out of Chaos the Demiurge was unconsciously influenced for good; and the universe, to the surprise even of its Maker, became almost perfect. The Demiurge regretted even its slight imperfection, and as he thought himself the Supreme God, he attempted to remedy this by sending a Messiah. To this Messiah, however, was actually united with Jesus the Saviour, Who redeemed men. These are either \"hyliko\u00ed\" or \"pneumatiko\u00ed\".\nThe first, or material men, will return to the grossness of matter and finally be consumed by fire; the second, or animal men, together with the Demiurge, will enter a middle state, neither Pleroma nor \"hyle\"; the purely spiritual men will be completely freed from the influence of the Demiurge and together with the Saviour and Achamoth, his spouse, will enter the Pleroma divested of body (\"hyle\") and soul (\"psych\u00e9\"). In this most common form of Gnosticism the Demiurge had an inferior though not intrinsically evil function in the universe as the head of the animal, or psychic world.\nDevil.\nOpinions on the devil, and his relationship to the Demiurge, vary. The Ophites held that he and his demons constantly oppose and thwart the human race, as it was on their account the devil was cast down into this world. According to one variant of the Valentinian system, the Demiurge is also the maker, out of the appropriate substance, of an order of \"spiritual\" beings, the devil, the prince of this world, and his angels. But the devil, as being a \"spirit\" of wickedness, is able to recognise the higher spiritual world, of which his maker the Demiurge, who is only animal, has no real knowledge. The devil resides in this lower world, of which he is the prince, the Demiurge in the heavens; his mother Sophia in the middle region, above the heavens and below the Pleroma.\nThe Valentinian Heracleon interpreted the devil as the \"principle\" of evil, that of \"hyle\" (matter). As he writes in his commentary on John 4:21,\nThe mountain represents the Devil, or his world, since the Devil was one part of the whole of matter, but the world is the total mountain of evil, a deserted dwelling place of beasts, to which all who lived before the law and all Gentiles render worship. But Jerusalem represents the creation or the Creator whom the Jews worship. ... You then who are spiritual should worship neither the creation nor the Craftsman, but the Father of Truth. \nThis vilification of the creator was held to be inimical to Christianity by the early fathers of the church. In refuting the beliefs of the gnostics, Irenaeus stated that \"Plato is proved to be more religious than these men, for he allowed that the same God was both just and good, having power over all things, and himself executing judgment.\"\nPlatonism.\nMiddle Platonism.\nIn Numenius's Neo-Pythagorean and Middle Platonist cosmogony, the Demiurge is second God as the \"nous\" or thought of intelligibles and sensibles.\nPlotinus.\nThe work of Plotinus and other later Platonists in the 3rd century AD to further clarify the Demiurge is known as Neoplatonism. To Plotinus, the second emanation represents an uncreated second cause (see Pythagoras' Dyad). Plotinus sought to reconcile Aristotle's \"energeia\" with Plato's Demiurge, which, as Demiurge and mind (\"nous\"), is a critical component in the ontological construct of human consciousness used to explain and clarify substance theory within Platonic realism (also called idealism). In order to reconcile Aristotelian with Platonian philosophy, Plotinus metaphorically identified the demiurge (or \"nous\") within the pantheon of the Greek Gods as Zeus.\nHenology.\nThe first and highest aspect of God is described by Plato as the One (\u03a4\u1f78 \u1f1d\u03bd, 'To Hen'), the source, or the Monad. This is the God above the Demiurge, and manifests through the actions of the Demiurge. The Monad emanated the demiurge or \"Nous\" (consciousness) from its \"indeterminate\" vitality due to the monad being so abundant that it overflowed back onto itself, causing self-reflection. This self-reflection of the indeterminate vitality was referred to by Plotinus as the \"Demiurge\" or creator. The second principle is organization in its reflection of the nonsentient force or \"dynamis\", also called the one or the Monad. The dyad is \"energeia\" emanated by the one that is then the work, process or activity called \"nous\", Demiurge, mind, consciousness that organizes the indeterminate vitality into the experience called the material world, universe, cosmos. Plotinus also elucidates the equation of matter with nothing or non-being in \"The Enneads\" which more correctly is to express the concept of idealism or that there is not anything or anywhere outside of the \"mind\" or \"nous\" (cf. pantheism).\nPlotinus' form of Platonic idealism is to treat the Demiurge, \"nous\", as the contemplative faculty (\"ergon\") within man which orders the force (\"dynamis\") into conscious reality. In this, he claimed to reveal Plato's true meaning: a doctrine he learned from Platonic tradition that did not appear outside the academy or in Plato's text. This tradition of creator God as \"nous\" (the manifestation of consciousness) can be validated in the works of pre-Plotinus philosophers such as Numenius, as well as a connection between Hebrew and Platonic cosmology (see also Philo).\nThe Demiurge of Neoplatonism is the \"Nous\" (mind of God), and is one of the three ordering principles:\nBefore Numenius of Apamea and Plotinus' \"Enneads\", no Platonic works ontologically clarified the Demiurge from the allegory in Plato's \"Timaeus\". The idea of Demiurge was, however, addressed before Plotinus in the works of Christian writer Justin Martyr who built his understanding of the Demiurge on the works of Numenius.\nPlotinus' \"Against the Gnostics\".\nGnostic schools of thought attributed falsehood or evil to the concept of the Demiurge or creator, though in some Gnostic traditions the creator is from a fallen, ignorant, or lesser\u2014rather than evil\u2014perspective, such as that of Valentinius. The Neoplatonic philosopher Plotinus addressed within his works the Gnostics' conception of the Demiurge, which he saw as un-Hellenic and blasphemous to the Demiurge or creator of Plato. Plotinus, along with his teacher Ammonius Saccas, was the founder of Neoplatonism. In the ninth tractate of the second of his \"Enneads\", Plotinus criticizes his opponents for their appropriation of ideas from Plato:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;From Plato come their punishments, their rivers of the underworld and the changing from body to body; as for the plurality they assert in the Intellectual Realm\u2014the Authentic Existent, the Intellectual-Principle, \"the Second Creator and the Soul\"\u2014all this is taken over from the Timaeus.\u2014\u200a\nOf note is the remark concerning the second hypostasis or Creator and third hypostasis or World Soul. Plotinus criticizes his opponents for \"all the novelties through which they seek to establish a philosophy of their own\" which, he declares, \"have been picked up outside of the truth\"; they attempt to conceal rather than admit their indebtedness to ancient philosophy, which they have corrupted by their extraneous and misguided embellishments. Thus their understanding of the Demiurge is similarly flawed in comparison to Plato's original intentions.\nWhereas Plato's Demiurge is good wishing good on his creation, Gnostic thought contends that the Demiurge is not only the originator of evil but is evil as well. Hence the title of Plotinus' refutation: \"Against Those That Affirm the Creator of the Kosmos and the Kosmos Itself to be Evil\" (generally quoted as \"Against the Gnostics\"). Plotinus argues of the disconnect or great barrier that is created between the \"nous\" or mind's noumenon (see Heraclitus) and the material world (phenomenon) by believing the material world is evil.\nThe majority of scholars tend to understand Plotinus' opponents as being a Gnostic sect\u2014certainly (specifically Sethian), several such groups were present in Alexandria and elsewhere about the Mediterranean during Plotinus' lifetime. Plotinus specifically points to the Gnostic doctrine of Sophia and her emission of the Demiurge.\nThough the former understanding certainly enjoys the greatest popularity, the identification of Plotinus' opponents as Gnostic is not without some contention. Christos Evangeliou has contended that Plotinus' opponents might be better described as simply \"Christian Gnostics\", arguing that several of Plotinus' criticisms are as applicable to orthodox Christian doctrine as well. Also, considering the evidence from the time, Evangeliou thought the definition of the term \"Gnostics\" was unclear. Of note here is that while Plotinus' student Porphyry names Christianity specifically in Porphyry's own works, and Plotinus is to have been a known associate of the Christian Origen, none of Plotinus' works mention Christ or Christianity\u2014whereas Plotinus specifically addresses his target in the \"Enneads\" as the Gnostics.\nA. H. Armstrong identified the so-called \"Gnostics\" that Plotinus was attacking as Jewish and Pagan, in his introduction to the tract in his translation of the \"Enneads\". Armstrong alluding to Gnostic thought being a Hellenic philosophical heresy of sorts, which later engaged Christianity and Neoplatonism.\nJohn D. Turner, professor of religious studies at the University of Nebraska, and famed translator and editor of the Nag Hammadi library, stated that the text Plotinus and his students read was Sethian Gnosticism, which predates Christianity. It appears that Plotinus attempted to clarify how the philosophers of the academy had not arrived at the same conclusions (such as dystheism or misotheism for the creator God as an answer to the problem of evil) as the targets of his criticism.\nIamblichus.\nLater, the Neoplatonist Iamblichus changed the role of the \"One\", effectively altering the role of the Demiurge as second cause or dyad, which was one of the reasons that Iamblichus and his teacher Porphyry came into conflict.\nThe figure of the Demiurge emerges in the theoretic of Iamblichus, which conjoins the transcendent, incommunicable \u201cOne,\u201d or Source. Here, at the summit of this system, the Source and Demiurge (material realm) coexist via the process of \"henosis\".\nIamblichus describes the One as a monad whose first principle or emanation is intellect (\"nous\"), while among \"the many\" that follow it there is a second, super-existent \"One\" that is the producer of intellect or soul (\"psyche\").\nThe \"One\" is further separated into spheres of intelligence; the first and superior sphere is objects of thought, while the latter sphere is the domain of thought. Thus, a triad is formed of the intelligible \"nous\", the intellective \"nous\", and the \"psyche\" in order to reconcile further the various Hellenistic philosophical schools of Aristotle's \"actus\" and \"potentia\" (actuality and potentiality) of the unmoved mover and Plato's Demiurge.\nThen within this intellectual triad Iamblichus assigns the third rank to the Demiurge, identifying it with the perfect or Divine \"nous\" with the intellectual triad being promoted to a \"hebdomad\" (pure intellect).\nIn the theoretic of Plotinus, \"nous\" produces nature through intellectual mediation, thus the intellectualizing gods are followed by a triad of psychic gods.\nLater representations.\nThe Cathars apparently inherited their idea of Satan as the creator of the evil world from Gnostic thought. Gilles Quispel writes, \"There is a direct link between ancient Gnostic thought and the thoughts of the Cathars. The Cathars held that the creator of the world, Satanael, had usurped the name of God, but that he had subsequently been unmasked and told that he was not really God.\"\nEmil Cioran also wrote his \"Le mauvais d\u00e9miurge\" (\"The Evil Demiurge\"), published in 1969, influenced by Gnostic thought and Schopenhauerian interpretation of Platonic ontology, as well as that of Plotinus.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8798", "revid": "50446187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8798", "title": "Doubravka of Bohemia", "text": "10th-century Bohemian princess and Duchess consort of the Polans\nDoubravka of Bohemia, Dobrawa (, ; ca. 940/45 \u2013 977) was a Bohemian princess of the P\u0159emyslid dynasty and by marriage Duchess of the Polans.\nShe was the daughter of Boleslaus I the Cruel, Duke of Bohemia, whose wife may have been the mysterious Biagota.\nAccording to earlier sources, Doubravka urged her husband Mieszko I of Poland to accept baptism in 966, the year after their marriage. Modern historians believe, however, that the change of religion by Mieszko was one of the points discussed in the Polish-Bohemian agreement concluded soon before his marriage with Doubravka. Her role in his conversion is not considered now to be as important as it is often represented in medieval chronicles.\nEarly life.\nDoubravka's date of birth is not known. The only indication is communicated by the chronicler Cosmas of Prague, who stated that the Bohemian princess at the time of her marriage with Mieszko I was \"an old woman\". The passage is regarded as tendentious and of little reliability, and some researchers believe that the statement was made with malicious intent. It is possible that in the statement about Doubravka's age, Cosmas was making a reference to the age difference between her and her sister Mlada. That would give him a basis for determining Doubravka as \"old.\" (The word \"Mlada\" means \"Young\"). It also found that Cosmas confuses Doubravka with Mieszko I's second wife Oda, who at the time of her marriage was around 19\u201325 years old, a relatively advanced age for a bride according to the customs of the Middle Ages. Some researchers have taken up speculative views, such as Jerzy Strzelczyk, who assumed that \"in the light of contemporary concepts and habits of marriage of that time (when as a rule marriages were contracted with teenage girls) is assumed that Doubravka had passed her early youth, so, it's probable that she was in her late teens or twenties\".\nNothing is known about Doubravka's childhood and youth. In 1895 Oswald Balzer refuted reports that previous to her marriage with Mieszko I, Doubravka was married to Gunther, Margrave of Merseburg and they had a son, Gunzelin. This view is based on the fact that Thietmar of Merseburg in his chronicles named Gunzelin, Gunther's son, \"brother\" of Boles\u0142aw I the Brave, Doubravka's son. Currently, historians believed that Gunzelin and Boles\u0142aw I are in fact cousins or brothers-in-law.\nMarriage and Christianization of Poland.\nIn the second half of 964 an alliance between Boleslav I the Cruel, Duke of Bohemia, and Mieszko I of Poland was concluded. In order to consolidate the agreement, in 965 Boleslav I's daughter Doubravka was married to Mieszko I. The marriage cemented the Polish-Bohemian alliance, which continued even after Doubravka's death.\nTwo independent sources attribute to Doubravka an important role in the conversion to Christianity of Mieszko I and Poland. The first is the chronicles of Thietmar, who was born two years before the death of Doubravka. He wrote that the Bohemian princess tried to persuade her husband to accept Christianity (even at the cost of breaking their marriage and with it the Polish-Bohemian alliance). In the end, she finally obtained the conversion of Mieszko I and with him, of all Poland. In turn, the 12th-century chronicler Gallus Anonymus says that Doubravka came to Poland surrounded by secular and religious dignitaries. She agreed to marry Mieszko I providing that he was baptized. The Polish ruler accepted, and only then was able to marry the Bohemian princess.\nModern historians agree that the baptism of Mieszko I was dictated by political benefits and should not be attributed to any action of Doubravka. She is held to have had virtually no role in the conversion of her husband. Historians note that the narrative of the conversion of Mieszko I thanks to Doubravka formed part of the tradition of the Church which stressed the conversion of Pagan rulers through the influence of women.\nDoubravka did have a significant role in the Christianization of the Poles. In her wedding procession, she arrived in Poland with Christian clergymen, among them possibly Jordan, ordained the first bishop of Poland in 968. Tradition attributes to Doubravka the establishment of the Holy Trinity and St. Wit Churches in Gniezno and the Church of the Virgin Mary in Ostr\u00f3w Tumski, Pozna\u0144.\nChildren.\nDoubravka and Mieszko I had at least one son, Boles\u0142aw the Brave (b. 967 \u2013 d. 17 June 1025). A daughter of Mieszko, that used to be called by historians \u015awi\u0119tos\u0142awa was for long time identified with Sigrid the Haughty, wife first to King Eric the Victorious of Sweden and later King Sweyn Forkbeard of Denmark, by whom she was the mother of Canute the Great. However modern research suggests that this daughter, known in non-Polish sources on her as Gunhilda, was married only to Swyen Forkbeard; while she was believed previously to be a daughter of Doubravka, both timeline of events and her names suggests she was more likely to be a daughter of Mieszko's next wife, Oda of Haldensleben. \nThere is a hypothesis asserting the existence of another daughter of Mieszko I who was married to a Pomeranian Slavic prince. She could have been the daughter of either Doubravka or one of Mieszko's previous pagan wives. Also, a theory has been advanced (apparently recorded by Thietmar of Prague and supported by Oswald Balzer in 1895) that Vladivoj (c. 981 \u2013 January 1003), who ruled as duke of Bohemia from 1002 until 1003, was another son of Doubravka and Mieszko I. Czech historiography has supported the notion of mixed Piast-P\u0159emyslid parentage for Vladivoj.\nDeath and burial.\nDoubravka died in 977. In his study of 1888, J\u00f3zef Ignacy Kraszewski wrote that \"her tomb was discovered in Gniezno Cathedral. It was a simple stone marked with a cross. Purple robes and a weighty gold loincloth were the only objects found in her tomb.\" A similar view of Doubravka's burial place was expressed earlier, in 1843, by Edward Raczy\u0144ski in his study \"Wspomnienia Wielkopolski to jest wojew\u00f3dztw pozna\u0144skiego, kaliskiego i gnie\u017anie\u0144skiego\" (Memories of the Greater Poland districts of Pozna\u0144, Kalisz and Gniezno). However, the burial place of the Bohemian princess is now considered to be unknown.\nDoubravka's death weakened the Polish-Bohemian alliance, which finally collapsed in the mid-980s.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8799", "revid": "4490355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8799", "title": "D. B. Cooper", "text": "Unidentified airplane hijacker in 1971\nDan Cooper was the alias of an unidentified man who hijacked Northwest Orient Airlines Flight 305, a Boeing 727 aircraft, on November 24, 1971, bound from Portland, Oregon, to Seattle, Washington. Cooper told the flight crew he had a bomb, and demanded $200,000 in ransom () and four parachutes upon landing in Seattle. After releasing the passengers in Seattle, Cooper directed the crew to refuel the aircraft and begin a second flight to Mexico City, with a refueling stop in Reno, Nevada. After taking off from Seattle, Cooper opened the aircraft's aft door, deployed the airstair, and parachuted to an uncertain fate over a remote, heavily wooded area of southwestern Washington. Because of a reporter's error, the hijacker became known as D. B. Cooper. The hijacker's true identity and fate remain unknown. \nIn 1980, a small portion of the ransom money ($5,800) was found along the riverbanks of the Columbia River near Vancouver, Washington. The discovery of the money renewed public interest in the crime, but yielded no additional information, and the remaining money was never recovered. For forty-five years after the hijacking, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) maintained an active investigation and built an extensive case file, but did not reach any definitive conclusions about Cooper's identity. Agents investigating the case had mixed opinions about whether he survived his jump. \nIn 2016, the FBI officially suspended active investigation of the case, although reporters, enthusiasts, professional investigators, and amateur sleuths continue to pursue numerous theories for Cooper's identity and fate. The crime is the only documented unsolved case of air piracy in the history of commercial aviation. \nCooper's hijacking\u2014and several imitators in the year after\u2014prompted immediate and major upgrades to security measures for airports and commercial aviation. Metal detectors were installed at airports, baggage inspection became mandatory, and passengers who paid cash for tickets on the day of departure were selected for additional scrutiny. Boeing 727s were retrofitted with eponymous \"Cooper vanes\", designed to prevent the aft staircase from being lowered in-flight. By 1973, aircraft hijacking incidents had decreased, as the new security measures dissuaded would-be hijackers whose only motive was money.\nHijacking.\nOn Thanksgiving Eve, November 24, 1971, a man carrying a black attach\u00e9 case approached the flight counter for Northwest Orient Airlines at Portland International Airport. Using cash, the man bought a one-way ticket on Flight 305, a thirty-minute trip north to Seattle\u2013Tacoma International Airport (Sea-Tac). On his ticket, the man listed his name as \"Dan Cooper\". Eyewitnesses described Cooper as a white male in his mid-40s, with dark hair and brown eyes, wearing a black or brown business suit, a white shirt, a thin black tie, a black raincoat and brown shoes.294 Carrying a briefcase and a brown paper bag,294 Cooper boarded Flight 305, a Boeing 727-100 (FAA registration N467US). Cooper took seat 18-E in the last row and ordered a drink, a bourbon and 7-Up from a flight attendant.\nWith a crew of six (consisting of Captain William A. Scott, First Officer William \"Bill\" J. Rataczak, Flight Engineer Harold E. Anderson and flight attendants Alice Hancock, Tina Mucklow and Florence Schaffner) and thirty-six passengers aboard, including Cooper, Flight 305 left Portland on-schedule at 2:50\u00a0pm PST. Shortly after takeoff, Cooper handed a note to flight attendant Schaffner, who was sitting in the jump seat at the rear of the airplane,159 directly behind Cooper. Assuming the note was a lonely businessman's telephone number, Schaffner dropped the note unopened into her purse. Cooper then leaned toward her and whispered, \"Miss, you'd better look at that note. I have a bomb.\"\nSchaffner opened the note. In neat, all-capital letters printed with a felt-tip pen, Cooper had written, \"Miss\u2014I have a bomb in my briefcase and want you to sit by me.\" Schaffner returned the note to Cooper, sat down as he requested, and asked quietly to see the bomb. He opened his briefcase, and she saw two rows of four red cylinders, which she assumed were dynamite. Attached to the cylinders were a wire and a large, cylindrical battery, which resembled a bomb.\nCooper closed the briefcase and told Schaffner his demands. She wrote a note with Cooper's demands, brought it to the cockpit and informed the flight crew of the situation. Captain Scott directed her to remain in the cockpit for the remainder of the flight and take notes of events as they happened. He then relayed to Northwest flight operations in Minnesota the hijacker's demands: \"[Cooper] requests $200,000 in a knapsack by 5:00 pm. He wants two front parachutes, two back parachutes. He wants the money in negotiable American currency.\" By requesting two sets of parachutes, Cooper implied he planned to take a hostage with him, thereby discouraging authorities from supplying non-functional equipment.\nWith Schaffner in the cockpit, flight attendant Mucklow sat next to Cooper to act as a liaison between him and the flight crew.160 Cooper then made additional demands: upon landing at Sea-Tac, fuel trucks were to meet the plane and all passengers were to remain seated while Mucklow brought the money aboard. He said he would release the passengers after he had the money. The last items brought aboard would be the four parachutes.160\nScott informed Sea\u2013Tac air traffic control of the situation, who contacted the Seattle Police Department (SPD) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). The passengers were told their arrival in Seattle would be delayed because of a \"minor mechanical difficulty\". Donald Nyrop, the president of Northwest at the time, authorized payment of the ransom and ordered all employees to cooperate with the hijacker and comply with his demands. For approximately two hours, Flight 305 circled Puget Sound to give the SPD and the FBI sufficient time to assemble Cooper's ransom money and parachutes, and to mobilize emergency personnel.\nDuring the flight from Portland to Seattle, Cooper demanded Mucklow remain by his side at all times.150 She later said Cooper appeared familiar with the local terrain; while looking out the window, he remarked, \"Looks like Tacoma down there\", as the aircraft flew above it. When told the parachutes were coming from McChord Air Force Base, Cooper correctly noted McChord was only a twenty-minute drive from Sea-Tac.156 She later described the hijacker's demeanor: \"[Cooper] was not nervous. He seemed rather nice and he was not cruel or nasty.\"174\nWhile the airplane circled Seattle, Mucklow chatted with Cooper and asked why he chose Northwest Airlines to hijack. He laughed and replied, \"It's not because I have a grudge against your airlines, it's just because I have a grudge,\" then explained the flight simply suited his needs.161 He asked where she was from; she answered she was originally from Pennsylvania, but was living in Minneapolis at the time. Cooper responded that Minnesota was \"very nice country.\"161 She asked where he was from, but he became upset and refused to answer.160 He asked if she smoked and offered her a cigarette. She replied she had quit, but accepted the cigarette.161\nFBI records note Cooper spoke briefly to an unidentified passenger while the airplane maintained its holding pattern over Seattle. In his interview with FBI agents, passenger George Labissoniere stated he visited the restroom directly behind Cooper on several occasions. After one visit, Labissoniere said the path to his seat was blocked by a passenger wearing a cowboy hat, questioning Mucklow about the supposed mechanical problem delaying them. Labissoniere said Cooper was initially amused by the interaction, then became irritated and told the man to return to his seat, but \"the cowboy\" ignored Cooper and continued to question Mucklow. Labissoniere claimed he eventually persuaded \"the cowboy\" to return to his seat.170\nMucklow's version of the interaction differed from Labissoniere's. She said a passenger approached her and asked for a sports magazine to read because he was bored. She and the passenger moved to an area directly behind Cooper, where they both looked for magazines. The passenger took a copy of \"The New Yorker\" and returned to his seat. When Mucklow returned to sit with Cooper, he said, \"If that is a sky marshal, I don't want any more of that\", but she reassured him there were no sky marshals on the flight.161 Despite his brief interaction with Cooper, \"the cowboy\" was not interviewed by the FBI and was never identified.\nThe $200,000 ransom was received from Seattle First National Bank in a bag weighing approximately .123 The money\u201410,000 unmarked $20 bills, most of which had serial numbers beginning with \"L\" (indicating issuance by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco)\u2014was photographed on microfilm by the FBI.101 Seattle police obtained the two front (reserve) parachutes from a local skydiving school and the two back (main) parachutes from a local stunt pilot.\nPassengers released.\nAround 5:24 PST, Scott was informed the parachutes had been delivered to Sea-Tac and notified Cooper they would be landing soon. At 5:46 PST, Flight 305 landed at Sea-Tac.163 With Cooper's permission, Scott parked the aircraft on a partially-lit runway, away from the main terminal.163 Cooper demanded only one representative of the airline approach the plane with the parachutes and money, and the only entrance and exit would be through the aircraft's front door via mobile stairs.15\nNorthwest's Seattle operations manager, Al Lee, was designated to be the courier. To avoid the possibility Cooper might mistake Lee's airline uniform for a law enforcement officer, he changed into civilian clothes for the task. With the passengers remaining seated, a ground crew attached a mobile stair. Per Cooper's directive, Mucklow exited the aircraft through the front door and retrieved the ransom money. When she returned, she carried the money bag past the seated passengers to Cooper in the last row.163\nCooper then agreed to release the passengers. As they disembarked, Cooper inspected the money. In an attempt to break the tension, Mucklow jokingly asked Cooper if she could have some of it. Cooper readily agreed and handed her a packet of bills, but she immediately returned the money and explained accepting gratuities was against company policy. She said Cooper had tried to tip her and the other two flight attendants earlier in the flight with money from his pocket, but they had each declined, citing the policy.152\nWith the passengers safely disembarked, only Cooper and the six crew members remained aboard.153 In accordance with Cooper's demands, Mucklow made three trips outside the aircraft to retrieve the parachutes, which she brought to him in the rear of the plane. While Mucklow brought aboard the parachutes, Schaffner asked Cooper if she could retrieve her purse, stored in a compartment behind his seat. Cooper agreed and told her, \"I won't bite you.\" Flight attendant Hancock then asked Cooper if the flight attendants could leave, to which he replied, \"Whatever you girls would like,\"163 so Hancock and Schaffner disembarked. When Mucklow brought the final parachute to Cooper, she gave him printed instructions for using the parachutes, but Cooper said he didn't need them.163\nA problem with the refueling process caused a delay, so a second truck and then a third were brought to the aircraft to complete the refueling. During the delay, Mucklow said Cooper complained the money was delivered in a cloth bag instead of a knapsack as he had directed, and he now had to improvise a new way to transport the money.163 Using a pocket knife, he cut the canopy from one of the reserve parachutes, and stuffed some of the money into the empty parachute bag.155\nAn FAA official requested a face-to-face meeting with Cooper aboard the aircraft, but Cooper denied the request. Cooper became impatient, saying, \"This shouldn't take so long,\" and, \"Let's get this show on the road.\" He then gave the cockpit crew his flight plan and directives: a southeast course toward Mexico City at the minimum airspeed possible without stalling the aircraft\u2014approximately \u2014at a maximum altitude. Cooper also specified the landing gear must remain deployed, the wing flaps must be lowered 15 degrees and the cabin must remain unpressurized.\nFirst Officer Rataczak informed Cooper that the configuration limited the aircraft's range to about , so a second refueling would be necessary before entering Mexico. Cooper and the crew discussed options, and agreed on Reno\u2013Tahoe International Airport as the refueling stop. Cooper further directed the aircraft take off with the rear exit door open and its airstair extended. Northwest officials objected for reasons of safety, but Cooper countered by saying, \"It can be done, do it,\" but then did not insist and said he would lower the staircase once they were airborne. Cooper demanded Mucklow remain aboard to assist the operation.153\nBack in the air.\nAround 7:40\u00a0pm, Flight 305 took off, with only Cooper, Mucklow, Scott, Rataczak and Flight Engineer Anderson aboard. Two F-106 fighters from McChord Air Force Base and a Lockheed T-33 trainer\u2014diverted from an unrelated Air National Guard mission\u2014followed the 727. All three jets maintained \"S\" flight patterns to stay behind the slow-moving 727,141 and out of Cooper's view. After takeoff, Cooper told Mucklow to lower the aft staircase. She told him and the flight crew she feared being sucked out of the aircraft.156 The flight crew suggested she come to the cockpit and retrieve an emergency rope with which she could tie herself to a seat. Cooper rejected the suggestion, stating he did not want her going up front or the flight crew coming back to the cabin.164 She continued to express her fear to him, and asked him to cut some cord from one of the parachutes to create a safety line for her. He said he would lower the stairs himself,164 instructed her to go to the cockpit, close the curtain partition between the Coach and First Class sections and not return.156\nBefore she left, Mucklow begged Cooper, \"Please, please take the bomb with you.\" Cooper responded that he would either disarm it or take it with him.164 As she walked to the cockpit and turned to close the curtain partition, she saw Cooper standing in the aisle tying what appeared to be the money bag around his waist.164 From takeoff to when Mucklow entered the cockpit, four to five minutes had elapsed. For the rest of the flight to Reno, Mucklow remained in the cockpit,164 and was the last person to see Cooper. Around 8:00\u00a0pm, a cockpit warning light flashed, indicating the aft staircase had been deployed. Scott and Rataczak used the plane's intercom to ask Cooper if he needed assistance, but Cooper declined. The crew's ears popped from the drop in air pressure from the stairs being opened. At approximately 8:13\u00a0p.m., the aircraft's tail section suddenly pitched upward, forcing the pilots to trim and return the aircraft to level flight. In his interview with the FBI, Rataczak said the sudden upward pitch occurred while the flight was near the suburbs north of Portland.322\nWith the aft cabin door open and the staircase deployed, the flight crew remained in the cockpit, unsure if Cooper was still aboard. Mucklow used the intercom to inform Cooper they were approaching Reno and that he needed to raise the stairs so the airplane could land safely. She repeated her requests as the pilots made the final approach to land, but neither Mucklow nor the flight crew received a reply from Cooper.164 At 11:02\u00a0pm, with the aft staircase still deployed, Flight 305 landed at Reno\u2013Tahoe International Airport. FBI agents, state troopers, sheriff's deputies and Reno police established a perimeter around the aircraft but, fearing the hijacker and the bomb were still aboard, did not approach the plane. Scott searched the cabin, confirmed Cooper was no longer aboard and, after a thirty-minute search, an FBI bomb squad declared the cabin safe.\nInvestigation.\nIn addition to sixty-six latent fingerprints aboard the plane, FBI agents recovered Cooper's black clip-on tie, tie clip and two of the four parachutes, one of which had been opened and had three shroud lines cut from the canopy. FBI agents interviewed eyewitnesses in Portland, Seattle and Reno, and developed a series of composite sketches.\nLocal police and FBI agents immediately began questioning possible suspects. In a rush to meet a deadline, reporter James Long of \"The Oregon Journal\" recorded the name \"Dan Cooper\" as \"D. B. Cooper\". United Press International wire service reporter Clyde Jabin republished Long's error, and as other media sources repeated the error, the name \"D. B. Cooper\" stuck. Acting on the possibility the hijacker may have used his real name (or the same alias in a previous crime), Portland police discovered and interviewed a Portland citizen named D. B. Cooper. The Portland Cooper had a minor police record, but was quickly eliminated as a suspect.\nDue to the number of variables and parameters, precisely defining the area to search was difficult. The jet's airspeed estimates varied, the environmental conditions along the flight path varied with the aircraft's location and altitude,300 and only Cooper knew how long he remained in free-fall before pulling his ripcord. The F-106 pilots neither saw anyone jumping from the airliner, nor did their radar detect a deployed parachute. A black-clad man jumping into the moonless night would be difficult to see, especially given the limited visibility, cloud cover and lack of ground lighting. The T-33 pilots did not make visual contact with the 727.\nOn December 6, 1971, after the incident, FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover approved the use of an Air Force SR-71 Blackbird to retrace and photograph Flight 305's flightpath, and attempt to locate the items Cooper carried during his jump.340 The SR-71 made five flights to retrace Flight 305's route, but due to poor visibility, the photography attempts were unsuccessful.340\nIn an experimental recreation, flying the same aircraft used in the hijacking in the same flight configuration, FBI agents pushed a sled out of the open airstair and were able to reproduce the upward motion of the tail section and brief change in cabin pressure described by the flight crew at 8:13\u00a0pm. Initial extrapolations placed Cooper's landing zone within an area on the southernmost outreach of Mount St. Helens, a few miles southeast of Ariel, Washington, near Lake Merwin, an artificial lake formed by a dam on the Lewis River. Search efforts concentrated on Clark and Cowlitz counties, encompassing the terrain immediately south and north of the Lewis River in southwest Washington. FBI agents and sheriff's deputies searched large areas of the largely forested terrain on foot and by helicopter. Door-to-door searches of local farmhouses were also performed. Other search parties ran patrol boats along Lake Merwin and Yale Lake, the reservoir immediately to its east. Neither Cooper nor any of the equipment he presumably carried were found.\nUsing fixed-wing aircraft and helicopters from the Oregon Army National Guard, the FBI coordinated an aerial search along the entire flight path (known as Victor 23 in U.S. aviation terminology, and as \"Vector 23\" in most Cooper from Seattle to Reno. Although numerous broken treetops and several pieces of plastic and other objects resembling parachute canopies were sighted and investigated, nothing relevant to the hijacking was found.\nSoon after the spring thaw in early 1972, teams of FBI agents aided by some 200 soldiers from Fort Lewis, along with United States Air Force personnel, National Guardsmen, and civilian volunteers, conducted another thorough ground search of Clark and Cowlitz Counties for 18 days in March, and then another 18 days in April. Electronic Explorations Company, a marine-salvage firm, used a submarine to search the depths of Lake Merwin. Two local women stumbled upon a skeleton in an abandoned structure in Clark County; it was later identified as the remains of Barbara Ann Derry, a teenaged girl believed to have been abducted and murdered several weeks earlier by Warren Forrest, a suspected serial killer.79 Ultimately, the extensive search and recovery operation uncovered no significant material evidence related to the hijacking.\nBased on early computer projections produced for the FBI, Cooper's drop zone was first estimated to be between Ariel dam to the north and the town of Battle Ground, Washington, to the south. In March 1972, after a joint investigation with Northwest Orient Airlines and the Air Force, the FBI determined Cooper probably jumped over the town of La Center, Washington.\nIn 2019, the FBI released a report detailing the burglary of a grocery store, about three hours after Cooper jumped, near Heisson, Washington. Heisson, an unincorporated community, was within the calculated drop zone Northwest Airlines presented to the FBI. In the report, the FBI noted the burglar took only survival items, such as beef jerky and gloves. However, the report notes that the burglar wore \"military type boots with a corregated [\"sic\"] sole\", while Cooper was described as wearing slip-on shoes.12469\nSearch for ransom money.\nA month after the hijacking, the FBI distributed lists of the ransom serial numbers to financial institutions, casinos, racetracks, businesses with routine transactions involving large amounts of cash, and to law-enforcement agencies around the world. Northwest Orient offered a reward of 15% of the recovered money, to a maximum of $25,000. In early 1972, U.S. Attorney General John N. Mitchell released the serial numbers to the general public. Two men used counterfeit $20 bills printed with Cooper serial numbers to swindle $30,000 from a \"Newsweek\" reporter named Karl Fleming in exchange for an interview with a man they falsely claimed was the hijacker.\nIn early 1973, with the ransom money still missing, \"The Oregon Journal\" republished the serial numbers and offered $1,000 () to the first person to turn in a ransom bill to the newspaper or any FBI field office. In Seattle, the \"Post-Intelligencer\" made a similar offer with a $5,000 reward. The offers remained in effect until Thanksgiving 1974 although, despite several near matches reported, no genuine bills were found. In 1975, Northwest Orient's insurer, Global Indemnity Co., complied with an order from the Minnesota Supreme Court and paid the airline's $180,000 () claim on the ransom money.\nLater developments.\nAnalysis of the flight data indicated the first estimated location of Cooper's landing zone was inaccurate. Captain Scott\u2014who was flying the aircraft manually because of Cooper's speed and altitude demands\u2014determined the flight path was farther east than initially reported. Additional data provided by Continental Airlines pilot Tom Bohan\u2014who was flying four minutes behind Flight 305\u2014led the FBI to recalculate their estimates for Cooper's drop zone. Bohan noted the FBI's calculations for Cooper's drop zone were based on incorrectly-recorded wind direction, and therefore the FBI's estimates were inaccurate.\nBased on Bohan's data and subsequent recalculations of the flight path, the FBI determined Cooper's drop zone was probably over the Washougal River watershed. In 1986, FBI Agent Ralph Himmelsbach wrote, \"I have to confess, if I were going to look for Cooper... I would head for the Washougal.\" The Washougal Valley and the surrounding areas have been repeatedly searched but no discoveries traceable to the hijacking have been reported, and the FBI believes any remaining physical clues were probably destroyed in the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens.\nInvestigation suspended.\nOn July 8, 2016, the FBI announced active investigation of the Cooper case was suspended, citing the need to deploy investigative resources and manpower on issues of greater and more urgent priority. Local field offices would continue to accept any legitimate physical evidence, related specifically to the parachutes or to the ransom money. The 66-volume case file compiled during the 45-year course of the investigation is preserved for historical purposes at FBI headquarters in Washington, D.C., and on the FBI website. All of the evidence is open to the public. The crime remains the only documented unsolved case of air piracy in commercial aviation history.\nPhysical evidence.\nDuring their forensic search of the aircraft, FBI agents found four major pieces of evidence, each with a direct physical link to Cooper: a black clip-on tie, a mother-of-pearl tie clip, a hair from Cooper's headrest, and eight filter-tipped Raleigh cigarette butts from the armrest ashtray.\nClip-on necktie.\nFBI agents found a black clip-on necktie in seat 18-E, where Cooper had been seated. Attached to the tie was a gold tie-clip with a circular mother-of-pearl setting in the center of the clip.124 The FBI determined the tie had been sold exclusively at JCPenney department stores but had been discontinued in 1968.\nBy late 2007, the FBI had built a partial DNA profile from samples found on Cooper's tie in 2001. However, the FBI also acknowledged no evidence linked Cooper to the source of the DNA sample. FBI Special Agent Fred Gutt said, \"The tie had two small DNA samples, and one large sample\u00a0... it's difficult to draw firm conclusions from these samples.\" The FBI also made public a file of previously unreleased evidence, including Cooper's airplane ticket, composite sketches, fact sheets, and posted a request for information about Cooper's identification.\nIn March 2009, a group of \"citizen sleuths\" using GPS, satellite imagery, and other technologies unavailable in 1971, began reinvestigating components of the case. Known as the Cooper Research Team (CRT), the group included paleontologist Tom Kaye from the Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture in Seattle, scientific illustrator Carol Abraczinskas, computer scientist Sean Christo, and metallurgist Alan Stone. Although the CRT obtained little new information about the buried ransom money or Cooper's landing zone, they found, analyzed, and identified hundreds of organic and metallic particles on Cooper's tie.\nUsing electron microscopy, the CRT identified \"Lycopodium\" spores, the source of which was likely pharmaceutical. The team also found minute particles of unalloyed titanium on the tie, along with particles of bismuth, antimony, cerium, strontium sulfide, aluminum, and titanium-antimony alloys. The metal and rare-earth particles suggested Cooper may have worked for Boeing or another aeronautical engineering company, at a chemical manufacturing plant, or at a metal fabrication and production facility.\nThe material with the most significance, explained Kaye, was the unalloyed titanium. During the 1970s, the use of pure titanium was extremely rare and specialized, and would only be used in aircraft fabrication facilities, or at chemical companies combining titanium and aluminum to store extremely corrosive substances. The cerium and strontium sulfide were used by Boeing's supersonic transport development project, and by Portland factories in which cathode-ray tubes were manufactured, such as Teledyne and Tektronix. Cooper researcher Eric Ulis has speculated that the titanium-antimony alloys are linked to Rem-Cru Titanium Inc., a metals manufacturer and Boeing contractor.\nHair samples.\nFBI agents found two hair samples in Cooper's seat: a single strand of limb hair on the seat, and a single strand of brown Caucasian head hair on the headrest. The limb hair was destroyed after the FBI Crime Laboratory determined the sample lacked enough unique microscopic characteristics to be useful.233 However, the FBI Crime Laboratory determined the head hair was suitable for future comparison, and preserved the hair on a microscope slide.233 During their attempts to build Cooper's DNA profile in 2002, the FBI discovered the hair sample had been lost.62\nCigarette butts.\nIn the armrest ashtray of seat 18-E, FBI agents found eight Raleigh filter-tipped cigarette butts. The butts were sent to the FBI Crime Laboratory,43 but investigators were unable to find fingerprints and returned the butts to the Las Vegas field office.228 In 1998, the FBI sought to extract DNA from the cigarette butts, but discovered the butts had been destroyed while in the custody of the Las Vegas field office.\nRecovered ransom money.\nOn February 10, 1980, eight-year-old Brian Ingram was vacationing with his family on the Columbia River at a beachfront known as Tina (or Tena) Bar, about downstream from Vancouver, Washington, and southwest of Ariel. As he raked the sandy riverbank to build a campfire, he uncovered three packets of the ransom cash, totaling about $5,800. The bills had disintegrated from lengthy exposure to the elements, but were still bundled in rubber bands. FBI technicians confirmed the money was indeed a portion of the ransom: two packets of 100 twenty-dollar bills each, and a third packet of 90, all arranged in the same order as when given to Cooper.10\u201312\nThe discovery caused new conjecture, and ultimately raised more questions than it answered. Initial statements by investigators and scientific consultants were founded on the assumption the bundled bills washed freely into the Columbia River from one of its many connecting tributaries. An Army Corps of Engineers hydrologist noted the bills had disintegrated in a \"rounded\" fashion and were \"matted together\", indicating they \"had been deposited by river action\", as opposed to having been buried deliberately. The finding supported the hypothesis Cooper had landed near the Washougal River, which merges with the Columbia upstream from the discovery site, and not in or near Lake Merwin, the Lewis River, or any of its tributaries feeding the Columbia River downstream from Tina Bar.\nThe \"free-floating\" hypothesis neither explained the ten bills missing from one packet, nor explained how the three packets remained together after separating from the rest of the money. Physical evidence was incompatible with geological evidence; Himmelsbach wrote free-floating bundles would have washed up on the bank \"within a couple of years\" of the hijacking; otherwise, the rubber bands would have long since deteriorated.15 Geological evidence suggested the bills arrived at Tina Bar after 1974, when the Army Corps of Engineers performed a dredging operation on a nearby section of the river. Geologist Leonard Palmer of Portland State University found two distinct layers of sand and sediment between the clay deposited on the riverbank by the dredge and the sand layer in which the bills were buried, indicating the bills arrived long after dredging had been completed.\nIn late 2020, analysis of diatoms found on the bills suggests the bundles found at Tina Bar were not submerged in the river or buried dry at the time of the hijacking in November 1971. Only diatoms that bloom during springtime were found, indicating the money had entered the water at least several months after the hijacking.\nIn 1986, after protracted negotiations, the recovered bills were divided equally between Brian Ingram and Northwest Orient's insurer Royal Globe Insurance; the FBI retained 14 examples as evidence. Ingram sold fifteen of his bills at auction in 2008 for about $37,000 ().\nThe Columbia River ransom money remains the only confirmed physical evidence from the hijacking found outside the aircraft.\nParachutes.\nDuring the hijacking, Cooper demanded and received two main parachutes and two reserve parachutes. The two reserve (front) parachutes were supplied by a local skydiving school and the two main (back) parachutes were supplied by a local pilot, Norman Hayden.124 Earl Cossey, the parachute rigger who packed all four parachutes brought to Cooper, described the two main parachutes as emergency bailout parachutes (as opposed to sporting parachutes used by skydivers). Cossey further described the main parachutes as being like military parachutes because they were rigged to open immediately upon the ripcord being pulled and were incapable of being steered.95124 When the airplane landed in Reno, FBI agents discovered two parachutes Cooper left behind: one reserve (front) parachute and one main (back) parachute. The reserve parachute had been opened and three shroud lines had been cut out, but the main parachute left behind was still intact.129292 The unused main parachute was described by FBI agents as a Model NB6 (Navy Backpack 6) and is on display at the Washington State Historical Society Museum.130\nOne of the two reserve (front) parachutes Cooper was given was an unusable training parachute intended to only be used for classroom demonstrations.124 According to Cossey, the reserve parachute's internal canopy was sewn together so skydiving students could get the feel of pulling a ripcord on a packed parachute without the canopy actually deploying.110 This non-functional reserve parachute was not found in the aircraft when it landed in Reno, causing FBI agents to speculate Cooper was not an experienced parachutist because someone with experience would have realized this reserve parachute was a \"dummy parachute\". However, within days of the hijacking, the FBI revealed that neither of the parachute harnesses Cooper was given had the necessary D-rings required to attach reserve parachutes.31 Although Cooper lacked the ability to attach this \"dummy\" parachute to his main harness as a reserve parachute, it was not found in the airplane, so what he did with it is unknown. Cossey speculated Cooper removed the sewn-together canopy and used the empty reserve container as an extra money bag.202 Tina Mucklow's testimony was in line with Cossey's speculation, stating she recalled Cooper attempting to pack money inside a parachute container.155\nIn November 1978, a deer hunter found a 727's instruction placard for lowering the aft airstair. The placard was found near a logging road about east of Castle Rock, Washington, north of Lake Merwin, but within Flight 305's basic flight path.\nTheories, hypotheses and conjecture.\nDuring the 45-year span of its active investigation, the FBI periodically made public some of its working hypotheses and tentative conclusions, based on witness testimony and the scarce physical evidence.\nSketches.\nDuring the first year of the investigation, the FBI used eyewitness testimony from the passengers and flight crew to develop sketches of Cooper. The first sketch, officially titled Composite A, was completed a few days after the hijacking and was released on November 28, 1971.296 According to witnesses, the Composite A sketch\u2014jokingly known as \"Bing Crosby\"\u2014was not an accurate likeness of Cooper. The Composite A sketch, said witnesses, showed a young man with a narrow face, and did not resemble Cooper284 or capture his disinterested, \"let's get this over with\" look.284 Flight attendant Florence Schaffner repeatedly told the FBI the Composite A sketch was a very poor likeness of Cooper.264\nAfter multiple eyewitnesses said Composite A was not an accurate rendering, FBI artists developed a second composite sketch. Completed in late 1972, the second Composite B sketch was intended to depict more accurately Cooper's age, skin tone, and face shape.215 Eyewitnesses to whom Composite B was shown said the sketch was more accurate, but the Composite B Cooper looked too \"angry\" or \"nasty\". One flight attendant said the Composite B sketch looked like a \"hoodlum\" and remembered Cooper as \"more refined in appearance\".233 Moreover, said witnesses, the Composite B sketch depicted a man older than Cooper, with a lighter complexion.\nUsing the criticisms of Composite B, FBI artists made adjustments and improvements to the Composite B sketch. On January 2, 1973, the FBI finalized revised Composite B, their third sketch of Cooper. Of the new sketch, one flight attendant said revised Composite B was, \"a very close resemblance\" to the hijacker.212 Opined another flight attendant, \"the hijacker would be easily recognized from this sketch.\"284\nIn April 1973, the FBI concluded the revised Composite B sketch was the best likeness of Cooper they could develop, and should be considered the definitive sketch of Cooper.210\nSuspect profiling.\nFlight attendants Schaffner and Mucklow, who spent the most time interacting with Cooper, were interviewed on the same night in separate cities and gave nearly identical descriptions: a man in his mid-40s, approximately to tall and , with olive-toned skin, brown eyes, short combed-back black hair, and no discernible accent.294 University of Oregon student Bill Mitchell, who sat across from Cooper during the three-hour flight, gave the FBI several interviews and provided detailed descriptions of Cooper for what subsequently became Composite Sketch B.227\nMitchell's descriptions of Cooper were similar to those provided by the flight attendants, except Mitchell described Cooper as to . Since Mitchell was tall, he described himself as \"way bigger\" than Cooper and referred to Cooper as \"slight\".176 Robert Gregory, one of the only other passengers besides Mitchell who provided the FBI with a full description of Cooper, also described Cooper as tall. Gregory stated he believed Cooper to be of Mexican-American or Native American descent.183\nIn May 1973, the FBI internally released an eight-page suspect profile of Cooper.282 The profile suggested Cooper was a military-trained parachutist and not a sports skydiver: in addition to his familiarity with the military parachutes with which he was provided, Cooper's age would have made him an outlier in the sport-skydiving community and would have increased the likelihood of being recognized by a club member.292 Multiple eyewitnesses noted Cooper's athletic build, so the FBI profile suggested Cooper probably exercised regularly despite his age.290\nFBI profilers suspected Cooper was an Air Force veteran familiar with Seattle and the surrounding areas. Cooper recognized Tacoma as the jet circled Puget Sound, and in his conversation with Mucklow, Cooper correctly noted McChord AFB's proximity to Seattle-Tacoma Airport, a detail with which most civilians would be unfamiliar.\nCooper's mannerisms\u2014such as his vocabulary, planning, his thorough retrieval of evidence, and his use of aviation terminology\u2014led the FBI to conclude Cooper was not a common criminal: Cooper was clearly intelligent, not impulsive or easily rattled, a careful and procedure-oriented planner, adept at anticipating contingencies and adaptive strategies, with meticulous and methodical tendencies. Profilers also noted Cooper's ability to quickly and competently adapt to various situations as they arose indicated he probably preferred to work independently, and neither needed nor wanted an accomplice.290\nCooper's financial situation was probably desperate. According to retired FBI chief investigator Ralph Himmelsbach, extortionists and other criminals who steal large amounts of money nearly always do so because they need it urgently; otherwise, the crime is not worth the considerable risk. The FBI considered\u2014but ultimately dismissed\u2014the possibility Cooper was a \"thrill seeker\" who made the jump \"just to prove it could be done\".\nBecause Cooper spilled the only drink he was served and never requested another, the FBI theorized Cooper was neither a heavy drinker nor an alcoholic. Moreover, an alcoholic would likely have been incapable of refusing further alcoholic beverages throughout the stressful and lengthy hijacking.290 By calculating the number of cigarettes Cooper smoked throughout the hijacking, the FBI believed Cooper smoked about one pack of cigarettes a day.290\nSome theorized Cooper's alias was taken from the adventure hero Dan Cooper, a fictional Royal Canadian Air Force test pilot and the main character of a popular French-language Belgian comic book series, one cover of which depicted Dan Cooper skydiving. Because the Dan Cooper comics were neither translated to English nor imported to the United States, some speculated the hijacker encountered them during a European tour of duty, and spoke fluent French.\nKnowledge and planning.\nBased on the evidence and Cooper's tactics, the FBI speculated Cooper planned the hijacking carefully using detailed, specific knowledge of aviation, the local terrain, and the 727's capabilities. Cooper chose a seat in the last row of the rear cabin for three reasons: to observe and respond to any action in front of him, to minimize the possibility of being approached or attacked by someone behind him, and to make himself less conspicuous to the rest of the passengers. To ensure he would not be deliberately supplied with sabotaged equipment, Cooper demanded four parachutes to force the assumption he might compel one or more hostages to jump with him. FBI agent Ralph Himmelsbach noted Cooper's choice of a bomb\u2014instead of other weapons previously used by hijackers\u2014thwarted any multidirectional attempts to rush him.\nCooper was careful to avoid leaving evidence. Before he jumped, Cooper demanded Mucklow return to him all notes either written by him, or on his behalf. Mucklow said she used the last match in his paper matchbook to light one of his cigarettes, and when she attempted to dispose of the empty matchbook, he demanded she return it to him.154 Although Cooper meticulously attempted to retrieve evidence, he left his clip-on tie in his seat.292\nCooper was clearly familiar with the 727's capabilities and confidential features, but the 727's design was the primary reason Cooper chose the aircraft. With its aft airstair and the placement of its three engines, the 727 was one of the only passenger jets from which a parachute jump could be easily made. Mucklow told the FBI Cooper appeared to be familiar with the 727's typical refueling time and procedures.154\nBy specifying a 15\u00b0 flap setting, Cooper displayed specific knowledge of aviation tactics and the 727's capabilities. Unlike most commercial jet airliners, the 727 could remain in slow, low-altitude flight without stalling. The flap setting Cooper specifically requested allowed him to control the 727's airspeed and altitude without entering the cockpit, where he could have been overpowered by the three pilots. First Officer Bill Rataczak, who spoke with Cooper on the intercom during the hijacking, told the FBI, \"[Cooper] displayed a specific knowledge of flying and aircraft in general.\"321\nThe most significant knowledge Cooper displayed was a feature both secret and unique to the 727: the aft airstair could be operated during flight, and the single activation switch in the rear of the cabin could not be overridden from the cockpit. Cooper knew how to operate the aft staircase, and had clearly planned to use it for his escape. The FBI speculated Cooper knew the Central Intelligence Agency was using 727s to drop agents and supplies into enemy territory during the Vietnam War. Since no situation on a passenger flight would necessitate such an operation, civilian crews were neither informed the aft airstair could be lowered midflight, nor were they aware its operation could not be overridden from the cockpit.\nCooper appeared to be familiar with parachutes, although his experience level is unknown. Mucklow said Cooper, \"appeared to be completely familiar with the parachutes which had been furnished to him\",156 and told a journalist, \"Cooper put on [his] parachute as though he did so every day\". Cooper's familiarity with the military-style parachutes he was given has resulted in speculation that Cooper was a military parachutist and not a civilian skydiver.\nLarry Carr, who directed the investigative team from 2006 to 2009, does not believe Cooper was a paratrooper. Instead, Carr speculates Cooper had been an Air Force aircraft cargo loader. An aircraft cargo-loading assignment would provide him with aviation knowledge and experience: cargo loaders have basic jump training, wear emergency parachutes, and know how to dispatch items from planes in flight. As a cargo loader, Cooper would be familiar with parachutes, \"but not necessarily sufficient knowledge to survive the jump he made\".\nCooper's fate.\nFrom the beginning of their investigation, the FBI speculated Cooper did not survive his jump for several reasons and facts: Cooper's apparent lack of skydiving experience, his lack of proper equipment for his jump and survival, the temperature and inclement weather on the night of the hijacking, the wooded terrain into which Cooper jumped, his lack of knowledge of his landing area, and the unused ransom money.\nFirst, Cooper appeared to lack the necessary skydiving knowledge, skills, and experience for the type of jump he attempted. Carr said: \"We originally thought Cooper was an experienced jumper, perhaps even a paratrooper.\" He further said: \"We concluded after a few years this was simply not true. No experienced parachutist would have jumped in the pitch-black night, in the rain, with a wind in his face wearing loafers and a trench coat. It was simply too risky.\" Alternatively, skydiving instructor Earl Cossey, who supplied the parachutes, testified Cooper would not have needed extensive experience to survive the jump and \"anyone who had six or seven practice jumps could accomplish this\".203 However, Cossey also noted jumping at night drastically increased the risk of injury, and without jump boots, Cooper would probably have suffered severe ankle or leg injuries upon landing.203\nSecond, Cooper did not appear to have the equipment necessary for either his jump or his survival in the wilderness. He neither brought nor requested a helmet, and jumped into a 15\u00a0\u00b0F (\u22129\u00a0\u00b0C) wind at 10,000\u00a0feet (3,000\u00a0m) in November over Washington without proper protection against the extreme wind chill. However, what Cooper was wearing at the time of his jump is unknown. In addition to his briefcase, Cooper carried a paper bag witnesses described as approximately four inches tall and slightly smaller (while laying flat) than the width and length of the briefcase. Because Cooper did not use the contents of the bag during any part of the hijacking, the FBI speculated the bag may have contained equipment for his jump, such as boots, gloves, and goggles.270 \nThird, Cooper did not have an accomplice waiting on the ground to help him escape. Such an arrangement would have required both a precisely timed jump and the flight crew's cooperation to follow a predetermined flight path, but Cooper did not give the flight crew a specific path. Moreover, the flight crew proposed\u2014and Cooper agreed\u2014to alter the flight path, and fly from Seattle to Reno for refueling, and Cooper had no way of keeping an accomplice apprised of his changed plans. The low cloud cover and lack of visibility to the ground further complicated Cooper's ability to determine his location, establish a bearing, or see his landing zone.\nFinally, the ransom money was never spent, and the recovered portion was found unused. Carr said: \"Diving into the wilderness without a plan, without the right equipment, in such terrible conditions, he probably never even got his chute open.\" FBI agent Richard Tosaw theorized Cooper landed in the Columbia River, and drowned. \nOther FBI agents believed Cooper survived. A senior FBI agent anonymously opined in a 1976 article in \"The Seattle Times\", \"I think [Cooper] made it. I think he slept in his own bed that night. It was a clear night. A lot of the country is pretty flat... he could have just walked out. Right down the road. Hell, they weren't even looking for him there at the time. They thought he was somewhere else. He could just walk down the road.\" In the months after Cooper's hijacking, five men attempted copycat hijackings, and all five survived their parachute escapes.\nHimmelsbach cited three examples of hijackers who survived jumps in conditions similar to Cooper's escape: Martin McNally, Frederick Hahneman, and Richard LaPoint. Hijacker Martin McNally jumped using only a reserve chute, without protective gear, at night, over Indiana. Unlike Cooper, who appeared to be familiar with parachutes, McNally had to be shown how to put on his parachute.156 Additionally, McNally's pilot increased the airspeed to , nearly twice the airspeed of Flight\u00a0305 at the time of Cooper's jump. The increased windspeed caused a violent jump for McNally: the money bag was immediately torn from him, \"yet he had landed unharmed except for some superficial scratches and bruises\". 49-year-old Frederick Hahneman hijacked a 727 in Pennsylvania and survived after jumping at night into a Honduran jungle. A third copycat, Richard LaPoint, hijacked a 727 in Nevada. Wearing only trousers, a shirt, and cowboy boots, LaPoint jumped into the freezing January wind over northern Colorado and landed in the snow.\nThe survival of the copycats forced FBI lead case agent Ralph Himmelsbach to reevaluate his opinions and theories regarding Cooper's chances for survival. In 2008, Himmelsbach admitted he originally thought Cooper had only a fifty-percent chance of survival, but subsequently revised his assessment, leading some investigators to theorize Cooper survived but lost the ransom during the jump.\nBy 1976, most published legal analyses concurred the impending expiration of the statute of limitations for prosecution of the hijacker would make little difference. Since the statute's interpretation varies from case to case and from court to court, a prosecutor could argue Cooper had forfeited legal immunity on any of several valid technical grounds. In November 1976, a Portland grand jury returned an indictment \"in absentia\" against \"John Doe, \"a.k.a.\" Dan Cooper\" for air piracy and violation of the Hobbs Act. The indictment formally enabled prosecution to be continued, should the hijacker be apprehended at any time in the future.\nSuspects.\nBetween 1971 and 2016, the FBI processed more than a thousand \"serious suspects\", including assorted publicity seekers and deathbed confessors.\nTed Braden.\nTheodore Burdette Braden Jr. (1928\u20132007) was a Special Forces commando during the Vietnam War, a master skydiver, and a convicted felon. He was believed by many within the Special Forces community, both at the time of the hijacking and during subsequent years, to have been Cooper. Born in Ohio, Braden first joined the military at the age of 16 in 1944, serving with the 101st Airborne during World War II. He eventually became one of the military's best parachutists, often representing the Army in international skydiving tournaments, and his military records list him as having made 911 jumps. During the 1960s, Braden was a team leader within the Military Assistance Command, Vietnam \u2013 Studies and Observations Group (MACVSOG), a classified commando unit of Green Berets which performed unconventional warfare operations during the Vietnam War. He also served as a military skydiving instructor, teaching HALO jumping techniques to members of Project Delta. Braden spent 23 months in Vietnam, conducting classified operations within both North and South Vietnam, as well as Laos and Cambodia. In December 1966, Braden deserted his unit in Vietnam and made his way to the Congo to serve as a mercenary, but only served there a brief time before being arrested by CIA agents and taken back to the United States for a court-martial. Despite having committed a capital offense by deserting in wartime, Braden was given an honorable discharge and prohibited from re-enlisting in the military in exchange for his continued secrecy about the MACVSOG program.\nBraden was profiled in the October 1967 issue of \"Ramparts\" magazine, wherein he was described by fellow Special Forces veteran and journalist Don Duncan as being someone with a \"secret death wish\" who \"continually places himself in unnecessary danger but always seems to get away with it\", specifically referring to Braden's disregard for military skydiving safety regulations. Duncan also claimed that during Braden's time in Vietnam, he was \"continuously involved in shady deals to make money\". After his military discharge in 1967, the details of Braden's life are largely unknown, but at the time of the hijacking he was a truck driver for Consolidated Freightways, which was headquartered in Vancouver, Washington, just across the Columbia River from Portland and not far from the suspected dropzone of Ariel, Washington. It is also known that during the early 1970s he was investigated by the FBI for stealing $250,000 during a trucking scam he had allegedly devised, but he was never charged for this supposed crime. In 1980, Braden was indicted by a Federal grand jury for driving an 18-wheeler full of stolen goods from Arizona to Massachusetts, but it is unknown whether there was a conviction in that case. Two years later Braden was arrested in Pennsylvania for driving a stolen vehicle with fictitious plates and for having no driver's license. Braden was eventually sent to Federal prison during the late 1980s, serving time in Pennsylvania, but the precise crime is unknown.\nDespite his ability as a soldier, he was not well liked personally and was described by a family member as \"the perfect combination of high intelligence and criminality\". From his time working covert operations in Vietnam, he likely would have possessed the then-classified knowledge about the ability and proper specifications for jumping from a 727, perhaps having done it himself on MACVSOG missions. Physically, Braden's military records list him at , which is shorter than the height description of at least given by the two flight attendants, but this military measurement would have been taken in his stocking feet and he may have appeared somewhat taller in shoes. However, he possessed a dark complexion from years of outdoor military service, had short dark hair, a medium athletic build, and was 43 years of age at the time of the hijacking, which are features all in line with the descriptions of Cooper.\nKenneth Christiansen.\nIn 2003, Minnesota resident Lyle Christiansen watched a television documentary about the Cooper hijacking and became convinced that his late brother Kenneth (1926\u20131994) was Cooper. After repeated futile attempts to convince the FBI as well as author and movie director Nora Ephron (whom he hoped would make a movie about the case), he contacted private investigator Skipp Porteous in New York City. In 2010, Porteous published a book postulating that Christiansen was the hijacker. The next year, an episode of the History series \"Brad Meltzer's Decoded\" also summarized the circumstantial evidence linking Christiansen to the Cooper case.\nChristiansen enlisted in the Army in 1944 and was trained as a paratrooper. World War II had ended by the time he was deployed in 1945, but he made occasional training jumps while stationed in Japan with occupation forces during the late 1940s. After leaving the Army, he joined Northwest Orient in 1954 as a laborer stationed at Northwest Airlines' Far East stopover on Shemya Island in the Aleutians. He subsequently became a flight attendant, and then a purser, based in Seattle. Christiansen was 45 years old at the time of the hijacking, but he was shorter (5\u00a0ft 8 in or 173\u00a0cm) and thinner (150 pounds or 68\u00a0kg) than eyewitness descriptions of Cooper. Christiansen smoked (as did the hijacker) and displayed a fondness for bourbon (the drink Cooper had requested). Stewardess Florence Schaffner told author Geoffrey Gray that photos of Christiansen fit her memory of the hijacker's appearance more closely than those of the other suspects she had been shown, but added that she could not conclusively identify him.\nDespite the publicity generated by Porteous's book and the 2011 television documentary, the FBI maintains that Christiansen cannot be considered a prime suspect. It cites the poor match to eyewitness physical descriptions and a complete absence of direct incriminating evidence.\nJack Coffelt.\nBryant \"Jack\" Coffelt (1917\u20131975) was a con man, ex-convict, and purported government informant who claimed to have been the chauffeur and confidant of Abraham Lincoln's last undisputed descendant, great-grandson Robert Todd Lincoln Beckwith. In 1972, he began claiming he was Cooper and attempted through an intermediary \u2013 a former cellmate named James Brown \u2013 to sell his story to a Hollywood production company. He said he landed near Mount Hood, about southeast of Ariel, injuring himself and losing the ransom money in the process. Photos of Coffelt bear a resemblance to the composite drawings, although he was in his mid-fifties in 1971. He was reportedly in Portland on the day of the hijacking and sustained leg injuries around that time which were consistent with a skydiving mishap.\nCoffelt's account was reviewed by the FBI, which concluded that it differed in several details from information that had not been made public and was therefore a fabrication. Brown continued peddling the story long after Coffelt died in 1975. Multiple media venues, including the CBS news program \"60 Minutes\", considered and rejected it.\nLynn Cooper.\nLynn Doyle \"L. D.\" Cooper (1931\u20131999), a leather worker and Korean War veteran, was proposed as a suspect in July 2011 by his niece, Marla Cooper. As an eight-year-old, she recalled Cooper and another uncle planning something \"very mischievous\", involving the use of \"expensive walkie-talkies\", at her grandmother's house in Sisters, Oregon, southeast of Portland. The next day Flight 305 was hijacked; and though the uncles ostensibly were turkey hunting, L. D. Cooper came home wearing a bloody shirt\u2014the result, he said, of an auto accident. Later, Marla claimed, her parents came to believe that L. D. was the hijacker. She also recalled that her uncle, who died in 1999, was obsessed with the Canadian comic book hero Dan Cooper and \"had one of his comic books thumbtacked to his wall\"\u2014although he was not a skydiver or paratrooper.\nIn August 2011, \"New York\" magazine published an alternative witness sketch, reportedly based on a description by Flight 305 eyewitness Robert Gregory, depicting horn-rimmed sunglasses, a \"russet\"-colored suit jacket with wide lapels, and marcelled hair. The article observed that L. D. Cooper had wavy hair that looked marcelled (as did Duane Weber, see below). The FBI announced that no fingerprints had been found on a guitar strap made by L. D. Cooper. One week later, they added that his DNA did not match the partial DNA profile obtained from the hijacker's tie, but acknowledged that there is no certainty that the hijacker was the source of the organic material obtained from the tie.\nBarbara Dayton.\nBarbara Dayton (1926\u20132002), a recreational pilot and University of Washington librarian who was named Robert Dayton at birth, served in the U.S. Merchant Marine and then the Army during World War II. After discharge, Dayton worked with explosives for construction work and aspired to a professional airline career, but could not obtain a commercial pilot's license.\nDayton had gender reassignment surgery in 1969, and changed her name to Barbara; she is believed to be the first person to have had this type of surgery in Washington. She claimed to have staged the hijacking two years later, presenting as a man, in order to \"get back\" at the airline industry and the FAA, whose insurmountable rules and conditions had prevented her from becoming an airline pilot. Dayton said that the ransom money was hidden in a cistern near Woodburn, Oregon, a suburban area south of Portland. She eventually recanted the entire story, ostensibly after learning that hijacking charges could still be brought. She also did not match the physical description particularly closely.\nWilliam Gossett.\nWilliam Pratt Gossett (1930\u20132003) was a Marine Corps, Army, and Army Air Forces veteran who had military service in Korea and Vietnam. His military experience included jump training and wilderness survival. Gossett was known to be obsessed with the Cooper hijacking. According to Galen Cook, a lawyer who has collected information related to Gossett for years, he once showed his sons a key to a Vancouver, British Columbia, safe deposit box which, he claimed, contained the long-missing ransom money.\nThe FBI has no direct evidence implicating Gossett and cannot reliably place him in the Pacific Northwest at the time of the hijacking. \"There is not one link to the D. B. Cooper case,\" said Special Agent Carr, \"other than the statements [Gossett] made to someone.\"\nJoe Lakich.\nJoe Lakich (1921\u20132017) was a retired U.S. Army Major and Korean War veteran whose daughter Susan Giffe was killed less than two months before the hijacking, as a consequence of a botched hostage negotiation conducted by the FBI. The events culminating in the death of Lakich's daughter would be studied by hostage negotiators for decades as an example of what not to do during a hostage situation. He and his wife later sued the FBI, and ultimately an Appeals Court ruled in their favor, holding that the FBI acted negligently during the hostage negotiation.\nLakich would become a Cooper suspect in large part due to the revelation that Cooper's tie contained microscopic particles of uncommon metals, such as unalloyed titanium. It is speculated that few people during that era would have contact with such materials, and that Cooper may have worked in a manufacturing environment working on electronics as engineer or manager. When the hijacking occurred, Lakich was working in Nashville as a production supervisor at an electronics capacitor factory and would have likely been exposed to the materials found on the tie. When Cooper was asked by Tina Mucklow why he was committing the hijacking, he replied: \"It's not because I have a grudge against your airlines, it's just because I have a grudge.\"161 It is believed by some that this \"grudge\" was Lakich's anger toward the FBI for their failed efforts at rescuing his daughter less than two months earlier.\nJohn List.\nJohn Emil List (1925\u20132008) was an accountant and war veteran who murdered his wife, three teenage children, and 85-year-old mother in Westfield, New Jersey, fifteen days before the Cooper hijacking, withdrew $200,000 from his mother's bank account, and disappeared. He came to the attention of the Cooper task force due to the timing of his disappearance, multiple matches to the hijacker's description, and the reasoning that \"a fugitive accused of mass murder has nothing to lose\". After his capture in 1989, List denied any involvement in the Cooper hijacking: no substantial evidence implicates him, and the FBI no longer considers him a suspect. List died in prison in 2008.\nTed Mayfield.\nTheodore Ernest Mayfield (1935\u20132015) was a Special Forces veteran, pilot, competitive skydiver, and skydiving instructor. He served prison time in 1994 for negligent homicide after two of his students died when their parachutes failed to open and was later found indirectly responsible for thirteen additional skydiving deaths due to faulty equipment and training. In 2010, he was sentenced to three years' probation for piloting an airplane 26 years after losing his pilot's license and rigging certificates. He was suggested repeatedly as a suspect early in the investigation, according to FBI Agent Ralph Himmelsbach, who knew Mayfield from a prior dispute at a local airport. He was ruled out, based partly on the fact that he telephoned Himmelsbach less than two hours after Flight 305 landed in Reno to volunteer advice on standard skydiving practices and possible landing zones, as well as information on local skydivers.\nRichard McCoy.\nRichard McCoy, Jr. (1942\u20131974) was an Army veteran who served two tours of duty in Vietnam, first as a demolition expert and later with the Green Berets as a helicopter pilot. After his military service, he became a warrant officer in the Utah National Guard and an avid recreational skydiver, with aspirations of becoming a Utah State Trooper.\nOn April 7, 1972, McCoy staged the best-known of the copycat hijackings. He boarded United Airlines' Flight 855 (a Boeing 727 with aft stairs) in Denver, Colorado, and, brandishing what later proved to be a paperweight resembling a hand grenade and an unloaded pistol, he demanded four parachutes and $500,000. After delivery of the money and parachutes at San Francisco International Airport, McCoy ordered the aircraft back into the sky and bailed out over Provo, Utah, leaving behind his handwritten hijacking instructions and his fingerprints on a magazine he had been reading.\nHe was arrested on April 9 with the ransom cash in his possession and, after trial and conviction, received a 45-year sentence. Two years later, he escaped from Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary with several accomplices by crashing a garbage truck through the main gate. Tracked down three months later in Virginia Beach, McCoy was killed in a shootout with FBI agents.\nIn their 1991 book, \"D.B. Cooper: The Real McCoy\", parole officer Bernie Rhodes and former FBI agent Russell Calame asserted that they had identified McCoy as Cooper. They cited obvious similarities in the two hijackings, claims by McCoy's family that the tie and mother-of-pearl tie clip left on the airplane belonged to McCoy, and McCoy's own refusal to admit or deny that he was Cooper. A proponent of their claim was the FBI agent who killed McCoy. \"When I shot Richard McCoy,\" he said, \"I shot D. B. Cooper at the same time.\"\nAlthough there is no reasonable doubt that McCoy committed the Denver hijacking, the FBI does not consider him a suspect in the Cooper case because of mismatches in age and description (e.g., McCoy was 29 years old, with projecting ears),192 skydiving skill much greater than thought to be possessed by the hijacker, and credible evidence that McCoy was in Las Vegas on the day of the Portland hijacking, and at home in Utah the day after, having Thanksgiving dinner with his family.\nIn addition, all three of the stewardesses from the Cooper hijacking were shown photographs of McCoy and agreed that he was not their hijacker. They were even able to point to specific differences in the two men, specifically that Cooper's nose wasn't as broad as McCoy's, that Cooper had more hair than McCoy, and that Cooper's ears did not protrude as much as McCoy's.306 McCoy's photo was also shown to the ticket agent who sold Cooper his ticket, the gate agent, and the passenger seated closest to Cooper (Bill Mitchell), and they too concluded that McCoy and Cooper were not the same.317\nIn 2024, McCoy's two children publicly stated that their father had been D. B. Cooper after a parachute was found by YouTuber Dan Gryder on the property formerly owned by McCoy's mother. Gryder claims to have handed this parachute over to the FBI, though the FBI has not confirmed this.\nSheridan Peterson.\nSheridan Peterson (1926\u20132021) served with the Marine Corps during World War II and was employed later as a technical editor at Boeing, based in Seattle. Investigators became interested in Peterson as a suspect soon after the skyjacking because of his experience as a smokejumper and love of taking physical risks, as well as his similar appearance and age (44) to the Cooper description. His involvement in the civil rights movement and assisting refugees in Vietnam during the Vietnam War could have potentially radicalized him to pursue hijacking.\nPeterson often teased the media about whether he was really Cooper. Entrepreneur Eric Ulis, who spent years investigating the crime, said he was \"98% convinced\" that Peterson was Cooper; when pressed by FBI agents, Peterson insisted he was in Nepal at the time of the hijacking. He died in 2021.\nIn an episode of History Channel's \"History's Greatest Mysteries\", analysis of DNA found on the tie worn by Cooper indicated that Peterson was not a match for Cooper when compared to a DNA sample from one of Peterson's living daughters. Eric Ulis has since withdrawn his allegation that Peterson could have been Cooper.\nRobert Rackstraw.\nRobert Wesley Rackstraw (1943\u20132019) was a retired pilot and ex-convict who served on an Army helicopter crew and other units during the Vietnam War. He came to the attention of the Cooper task force in February 1978, after he was arrested in Iran and deported to the U.S. to face explosives possession and check kiting charges. Several months later, while released on bail, Rackstraw attempted to fake his own death by radioing a false mayday call and telling controllers that he was bailing out of a rented airplane over Monterey Bay. Police later arrested him in Fullerton, California, on an additional charge of forging federal pilot certificates; the airplane he claimed to have ditched was found, repainted, in a nearby hangar. Cooper investigators noted his physical resemblance to Cooper composite sketches even though he was only 28 in 1971, military parachute training, and criminal record but eliminated him as a suspect in 1979 after no direct evidence of his involvement could be found.\nIn 2016, Rackstraw was featured as a suspect by a History channel program, along with a book. On September 8, 2016, Thomas J. Colbert, the author of the book, and attorney Mark Zaid filed a lawsuit to compel the FBI to release its Cooper case file by the Freedom of Information Act. In 2017, Colbert and a group of volunteer investigators uncovered what they believed to be \"a decades-old parachute strap\" at an undisclosed location in the Pacific Northwest. This was followed later in 2017 with a piece of foam, which they suspected was part of Cooper's parachute backpack. In January 2018, Tom and Dawna Colbert reported that they had obtained a confession letter originally written in December 1971 containing codes that matched three units Rackstraw was a part of while in the Army.\nOne of the Flight 305 flight attendants reportedly \"did not find any similarities\" between photos of Rackstraw from the 1970s and her recollection of Cooper's appearance. Rackstraw's attorney termed the renewed allegations \"the stupidest thing I've ever heard\", and Rackstraw himself told \"People\" magazine, \"It's a lot of [expletive], and they know it is\". The FBI declined further comment. Rackstraw stated in a 2017 phone interview that he lost his job over the 2016 investigations. Rackstraw said to Colbert, \"I told everybody I was [the hijacker]\", before explaining the admission was a stunt. He died in 2019.\nWalter Reca.\nWalter R. Reca (1933\u20132014) was a former military paratrooper and intelligence operative. He was proposed as a suspect by his friend Carl Laurin in 2018. In 2008, Reca told Laurin via a recorded telephone call that he was the hijacker. Reca gave Laurin permission in a notarized letter to share his story after his death. He also allowed Laurin to tape their telephone conversations about the crime during a six-week period in late 2008. In over three\u00a0hours of recordings, Reca shared details about his version of the hijacking. He also confessed to his niece, Lisa Story.\nFrom Reca's description of the terrain on his way to the drop zone, Laurin concluded that he landed near Cle\u00a0Elum, Washington. After Reca described an encounter with a dump truck driver at a roadside cafe after he landed, Laurin located Jeff Osiadacz, who was driving his dump truck near Cle\u00a0Elum the night of the hijacking and met a stranger at the Teanaway Junction Caf\u00e9 just outside of town. The man asked Osiadacz to give his friend directions to the caf\u00e9 by telephone, presumably to be picked up, and he complied. Laurin convinced Joe Koenig, a former member of the Michigan State Police, of Reca's guilt. Koenig later published a book on Cooper, titled \"Getting The Truth: I Am D.B. Cooper\".\nThese claims have aroused skepticism. Cle\u00a0Elum is well north and east of Flight 305's known flight path, more than north of the drop zone assumed by most analysts, and even further from Tina Bar, where a portion of the ransom money was found. Reca was a military paratrooper and private skydiver with hundreds of jumps to his credit, in contradiction to the FBI's publicized profile of an amateur skydiver at best. Reca also did not resemble the composite portrait the FBI assembled, which Laurin and Osiadacz used to explain why Osiadacz's suspicions were not aroused at the time. In response to the allegations against Reca, the FBI said that it would be inappropriate to comment on specific tips provided to them, and that no evidence to date had proved the culpability of any suspect beyond a reasonable doubt.\nWilliam Smith.\nIn November 2018, \"The Oregonian\" published an article proposing William J. Smith (1928\u20132018), of Bloomfield, New Jersey, as a suspect. The article was based on research conducted by an Army data analyst who sent his findings to the FBI in mid-2018. Smith, a New Jersey native, was a World War II veteran. After high school, he enlisted with the United States Navy and volunteered for combat air crew training. After his discharge, he worked for the Lehigh Valley Railroad and was affected by the Penn Central Transportation Company's bankruptcy in 1970, the largest bankruptcy in U.S. history at that time. The article proposed that the loss of his pension created a grudge against the corporate establishment and transportation field, as well as a sudden need for money. Smith was 43 at the time of the hijacking. In his high school yearbook, a list of alumni killed in World War II lists an Ira Daniel Cooper, possibly the source for the hijacker's pseudonym. The analyst claimed that Smith's naval aviation experience would have given him knowledge of airplanes and parachutes, and his railroad experience would have helped him find railroad tracks and hop on a train to escape the area after landing.\nAccording to the analyst, aluminum spiral chips found on the clip-on tie could have come from a locomotive maintenance facility. Smith's information about the Seattle area may have come from his close friend Dan Clair, who was stationed at Fort Lewis during the war. The analyst noted that the man who claimed to be Cooper in Max Gunther's 1985 book identified himself as \"Dan LeClair\". Smith and Clair worked together for Conrail at Newark's Oak Island Yard. Smith retired from that facility as a yardmaster. The article noted that a picture of Smith on the Lehigh Valley Railroad website showed a \"remarkable resemblance\" to Cooper FBI sketches. The FBI said that it would be inappropriate to comment on tips related to Smith.\nDuane Weber.\nDuane L. Weber (1924\u20131995) was a World War II Army veteran who served time in at least six prisons from 1945 to 1968 for burglary and forgery. He was proposed as a suspect by his widow, Jo, based primarily on a deathbed confession: three days before he died in 1995, Weber told his wife, \"I am Dan Cooper.\" The name meant nothing to her, she said; but months later, a friend told her of its significance in the hijacking. She went to her local library to research Cooper, found Max Gunther's book, and discovered notations in the margins in her husband's handwriting. Like the hijacker, Weber drank bourbon and chain-smoked. Other circumstantial evidence included a 1979 trip to Seattle and the Columbia River, where his wife remembered him throwing a trash bag just upstream of Tina Bar.\nHimmelsbach said, \"[Weber] does fit the physical description [and] does have the criminal background that I have always felt was associated with the case\", but did not believe Weber was Cooper. The FBI eliminated Weber as an active suspect in July 1998 when his fingerprints did not match any of those processed in the hijacked plane, and no other direct evidence could be found to implicate him. Later, his DNA also failed to match the samples recovered from Cooper's tie.\nSimilar hijackings.\nCooper was among the first to attempt air piracy for personal gain; eleven days before Cooper's hijack, Canadian Paul Joseph Cini had hijacked an Air Canada DC-8 over Montana, but was overpowered by the crew when he put down his shotgun to strap on his parachute. Encouraged by Cooper's apparent success, fifteen similar hijackings\u2014all unsuccessful\u2014were attempted in 1972. Some examples from that year:\nWith the advent of universal luggage searches in 1973 (see Airport security), the general incidence of hijackings dropped dramatically. There were no further notable Cooper imitators until July 11, 1980, when Glenn K. Tripp seized Northwest Orient Flight 608 at Seattle-Tacoma Airport, demanding $600,000 ($100,000 by an independent account), two parachutes, and the assassination of his boss. A quick-thinking flight attendant drugged Tripp's alcoholic drink with Valium. After a ten-hour standoff, during which Tripp reduced his demands to three cheeseburgers and a ground vehicle in which to escape, he was apprehended. Tripp attempted to hijack the same Northwest flight on January 21, 1983, and this time demanded to be flown to Afghanistan. When the airplane landed in Portland, he was shot and killed by FBI agents.\nAftermath.\nAirport security.\nDespite the initiation of the federal Sky Marshal Program the previous year, 31 hijackings were committed in U.S. airspace in 1972; 19 of them were for the specific purpose of extorting money. In 15 of the extortion cases, the hijackers also demanded parachutes. In early 1973, the FAA began requiring airlines to search all passengers and their bags. Amid multiple lawsuits charging that such searches violated Fourth Amendment protections against search and seizure, federal courts ruled that they were acceptable when applied universally and when limited to searches for weapons and explosives. Only two hijackings were attempted in 1973, both by psychiatric patients; one hijacker, Samuel Byck, intended to crash the airliner into the White House to kill President Nixon.\nAircraft modifications.\nDue to multiple \"copycat\" hijackings in 1972, the FAA required that the exterior of all Boeing 727 aircraft be fitted with a spring-loaded device, later dubbed the \"Cooper vane\", that prevents lowering of the aft airstair during flight. The device consists of a flat blade of aluminum mounted on a pivot, which is spring-loaded to stay out of the way of the door when the craft is at rest, but aerodynamically rotates into position to prevent the door from being opened when the airplane is traveling at flight speeds. Operation of the vane is automatic and cannot be overridden from within the aircraft. As a direct result of the hijacking, the installation of peepholes was mandated in all cockpit doors; this enables the cockpit crew to observe passengers without opening the cockpit door.\nSubsequent history of N467US.\nIn 1978, the hijacked 727-100 aircraft was sold by Northwest Orient to Piedmont Airlines, where it was re-registered N838N and continued in domestic carrier service. In 1984, it was purchased by the charter company Key Airlines, re-registered N29KA, and incorporated into the Air Force's civilian charter fleet that shuttled workers between Nellis Air Force Base and the Tonopah Test Range during the F-117 Nighthawk development program. In 1996, the aircraft was scrapped for parts in a Memphis aircraft boneyard.\nEffect on flight crew.\nThe flight crew praised Mucklow for her actions. Mucklow continued to fly for the airline for several years. She lived privately and has only granted a few interviews since 2021.\nIn popular culture.\nHimmelsbach famously termed Cooper a \"rotten sleazy crook\", but his bold and unusual crime inspired a cult following that was expressed in song, movies, and literature. Novelty shops sold t-shirts emblazoned with \"D. B. Cooper, Where Are You?\" Restaurants and bowling alleys in the Pacific Northwest hold regular Cooper-themed promotions and sell tourist souvenirs. A \"Cooper Day\" celebration has been held at the Ariel General Store and Tavern each November since 1974 with the exception of 2015, the year its owner, Dona Elliot, died.\nAn annual convention, known as CooperCon, is held every year in late November in Seattle, Washington. The event, founded by Cooper researcher Eric Ulis in 2018, is a multi-day gathering of Cooper researchers and enthusiasts. Originally held in Vancouver, Washington, it was relocated to Seattle beginning in 2023. CooperCon replaced the annual D. B. Cooper Days, which ended when the owner of the Ariel Store Pub died and the pub was forced to close.\nIn mid-2024, a themed bar named DB Cooper\u2019s opened in Hell's Kitchen, Manhattan. The owners, Irishman Ciaran Willis and partners, designed the venue as an Irish-American sports bar and cocktail lounge, featuring decor inspired by the 1971 hijacking: photos, newspaper clippings, and themed T-shirts. The bar also serves signature cocktails such as the Flight 305 (pear vodka, pear nectar, blackberry, and lemon) and offers a bar drink called Skyjack among its menu. The bar is regularly noted in media coverage for its nods to the DB Cooper mystery and for catering to both locals and tourists.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8803", "revid": "117878", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8803", "title": "Danewerk", "text": ""}
{"id": "8805", "revid": "49652981", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8805", "title": "Distributism", "text": "Economic theory promoting local control\nDistributism is an economic theory asserting that the world's productive assets should be widely owned rather than concentrated. Developed in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, distributism was based upon Catholic social teaching principles, especially those of Pope Leo XIII in his encyclical \"Rerum novarum\" (1891) and Pope Pius XI in \"Quadragesimo anno\" (1931). It has influenced Anglo Christian Democratic movements, and has been recognized as one of many influences on the social market economy.\nDistributism views \"laissez-faire\" capitalism and state socialism as equally flawed and exploitative, due to their extreme concentration of ownership. Instead, it favours small independent craftsmen and producers; or, if that is not possible, economic mechanisms such as cooperatives and member-owned mutual organisations, as well as small to medium enterprises and vigorous anti-trust laws to restrain or eliminate overweening economic power. Christian democratic political parties such as the American Solidarity Party have advocated distributism alongside social market economy in their economic policies and party platform.\nOverview.\nAccording to distributists, the right to property is a fundamental right, and the means of production should be spread as widely as possible rather than being centralised under the control of the state (statocracy), a few individuals (plutocracy), or corporations (corporatocracy). Therefore, distributism advocates a society marked by widespread property ownership. Cooperative economist Race Mathews argues that such a system is key to creating a just social order.\nDistributism has often been described in opposition to both \"laissez-faire\" capitalism and state socialism which distributists see as equally flawed and exploitative. Furthermore, some distributists argue that state capitalism and state socialism are the logical conclusion of capitalism as capitalism's concentrated powers eventually capture the state. Thomas Storck argues: \"Both socialism and capitalism are products of the European Enlightenment and are thus modernising and anti-traditional forces. In contrast, distributism seeks to subordinate economic activity to human life as a whole, to our spiritual life, our intellectual life, our family life.\" A few distributists, including Dorothy Day, were influenced by the economic ideas of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon and his mutualist economic theory. The lesser-known anarchist branch of distributism of Day and the Catholic Worker Movement can be considered a form of free-market libertarian socialism due to their opposition to state capitalism and state socialism.\nSome have seen it more as an aspiration, successfully realised in the short term by the commitment to the principles of subsidiarity and solidarity (built into financially independent local cooperatives and small family businesses). However, proponents also cite such periods as the Middle Ages as examples of the long-term historical viability of distributism. Particularly influential in the development of distributist theory were Catholic authors G. K. Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc, two of distributism's earliest and strongest proponents.\nBackground.\nThe mid-to-late 19th century witnessed an increase in the popularity of political Catholicism across Europe. According to historian Michael A. Riff, a common feature of these movements was opposition to secularism, capitalism, and socialism. In 1891 Pope Leo XIII promulgated \"Rerum novarum\", in which he addressed the \"misery and wretchedness pressing so unjustly on the majority of the working class\" and spoke of how \"a small number of very rich men\" had been able to \"lay upon the teeming masses of the laboring poor a yoke little better than that of slavery itself\". Affirmed in the encyclical was the right of all men to own property, the necessity of a system that allowed \"as many as possible of the people to become owners\", the duty of employers to provide safe working conditions and sufficient wages, and the right of workers to unionise. Common and government property ownership was expressly dismissed as a means of helping the poor.\nAround the start of the 20th century, G. K. Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc drew together the disparate experiences of the various cooperatives and friendly societies in Northern England, Ireland, and Northern Europe into a coherent political theory which specifically advocated widespread private ownership of housing and control of industry through owner-operated small businesses and worker-controlled cooperatives. In the United States in the 1930s, distributism was treated in numerous essays by Chesterton, Belloc and others in \"The American Review\", published and edited by Seward Collins. Pivotal among Belloc's and Chesterton's other works regarding distributism are \"The Servile State\" and \"Outline of Sanity\".\nEconomic theory.\nPrivate property.\nIn \"Rerum novarum\", Leo XIII states that people are likely to work harder and with greater commitment if they possess the land on which they labour, which in turn will benefit them and their families as workers will be able to provide for themselves and their household. He puts forward the idea that when men have the opportunity to possess property and work on it, they will \"learn to love the very soil which yields in response to the labor of their hands, not only food to eat, but an abundance of the good things for themselves and those that are dear to them\". He also states that owning property is beneficial for a person and his family and is, in fact, a right due to God having \"given the earth for the use and enjoyment of the whole human race\".\nG. K. Chesterton presents similar views in his 1910 book, \"What's Wrong with the World\". Chesterton believes that whilst God has limitless capabilities, man has limited abilities in terms of creation. Therefore, man is entitled to own property and treat it as he sees fit, stating: \"Property is merely the art of the democracy. It means that every man should have something that he can shape in his own image, as he is shaped in the image of heaven. But because he is not God, but only a graven image of God, his self-expression must deal with limits; properly with limits that are strict and even small.\"\nAccording to Belloc, the distributive state (the state which has implemented distributism) contains \"an agglomeration of families of varying wealth, but by far the greater number of owners of the means of production\". This broader distribution does not extend to all property but only to productive property; that is, that property which produces wealth, namely, the things needed for man to survive. It includes land, tools, and so on. Distributism allows society to have public goods such as parks and transit systems. Distributists accept that wage labour will remain a small part of the economy, with small business owners hiring employees, usually young, inexperienced people.\nRedistribution of wealth and productive assets.\nDistributism requires either direct or indirect distribution of the means of production (productive assets)\u2060\u2014in some ideological circles including the redistribution of wealth\u2014to a wide portion of society instead of concentrating it in the hands of a minority of wealthy elites (as seen in its criticism of certain varieties of capitalism) or the hands of the state (as seen in its criticism of certain varieties of communism and socialism). More capitalist-oriented supporters support distributism-influenced social capitalism (also known as a social market economy), while more socialist-oriented supporters support distributism-influenced libertarian socialism. Examples of methods of distributism include direct productive property redistribution, taxation of excessive property ownership, and small-business subsidization.\nGuild system.\nDistributists advocate in favour of the return of a guild system to help regulate industries to promote moral standards of professional conduct and economic equality among members of a guild. Such moral standards of professional conduct would typically focus on business conduct, working conditions and other issues in relation to industry specific matters such as workplace training standards.\nBanks.\nDistributism favours cooperative and mutual banking institutions such as credit unions, building societies and mutual banks. This is considered to be the preferred alternative to private banks.\nSocial theory.\nHuman family.\nG. K. Chesterton considered one's home and family the centrepiece of society. He recognized the family unit and home as centrepieces of living and believed that every man should have his property and home to enable him to raise and support his family. Distributists recognize that strengthening and protecting the family requires that society be nurturing.\nSubsidiarity.\nDistributism puts great emphasis on the principle of subsidiarity. This principle holds that no larger unit (whether social, economic, or political) should perform a function that a smaller unit can perform. In \"Quadragesimo anno\", Pope Pius XI provided the classical statement of the principle: \"Just as it is gravely wrong to take from individuals what they can accomplish by their own initiative and industry and give it to the community, so also it is an injustice and at the same time a grave evil and disturbance of right order to assign to a greater and higher association what lesser and subordinate organizations can do\".\nSocial security.\nThe Democratic Labour Party of Australia espouses distributism and does not hold the view of favouring the elimination of social security who, for instance, wish to \"[r]aise the level of student income support payments to the Henderson poverty line\".\nThe American Solidarity Party has a platform of favouring an adequate social security system, stating: \"We advocate for social safety nets that adequately provide for the material needs of the most vulnerable in society\".\nPolitics.\nThe position of distributists, when compared to other political philosophies, is somewhat paradoxical and complicated (see triangulation). Firmly entrenched in an organic but very English Catholicism, advocating culturally traditional and agrarian values, directly challenging the precepts of Whig history\u2014Belloc was nonetheless an MP for the Liberal Party, and Chesterton once stated, \"As much as I ever did, more than I ever did, I believe in Liberalism. But there was a rosy time of innocence when I believed in Liberals\".\nDistributism does not favour one political order over another (political accidentalism). While some distributists such as Dorothy Day have been anarchists, it should be remembered that most Chestertonian distributists are opposed to the mere concept of anarchism. Chesterton thought that distributism would benefit from the discipline that theoretical analysis imposes and that distributism is best seen as a widely encompassing concept inside of which any number of interpretations and perspectives can fit. This concept should fit a political system broadly characterized by widespread ownership of productive property.\nIn the United States, the American Solidarity Party generally adheres to Distributist principles as its economic model. Ross Douthat and Reihan Salam view their \"Grand New Party\", a roadmap for revising the Republican Party in the United States, as \"a book written in the distributist tradition\".\nThe Brazilian political party, Humanist Party of Solidarity, was a distributist party, alongside the National Distributist Party in England, and the Democratic Labour Party in Australia.\nIn the first round of the 2024 Romanian presidential election, candidate C\u0103lin Georgescu, a independent candidate who advocates for a system based on distributism and sovereigntism received 23% of votes and qualified for the second round.\nInfluence.\nE. F. Schumacher.\nDistributism is known to have influenced the economist E. F. Schumacher, a convert to Catholicism.\nMondragon Corporation.\nThe Mondragon Corporation, based in the Basque Country in a region of Spain and France, was founded by a Catholic priest, Father Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Arizmendiarrieta, who seems to have been influenced by the same Catholic social and economic teachings that inspired Belloc, Chesterton, Father Vincent McNabb, and the other founders of distributism.\nGuild of St Joseph and St Dominic.\nDistributist ideas were put into practice by The Guild of St Joseph and St Dominic, a group of artists and craftsmen who established a community in Ditchling, Sussex, England, in 1920, with the motto \"Men rich in virtue studying beautifulness living in peace in their houses\". The guild sought to recreate an idealised medieval lifestyle in the manner of the Arts and Crafts Movement. It survived for almost 70 years until 1989.\nBig Society.\nThe Big Society was the flagship policy idea of the 2010 UK Conservative Party general election manifesto. Some distributists claim that the rhetorical marketing of this policy was influenced by aphorisms of the distributist ideology and promotes distributism. It purportedly formed a part of the legislative programme of the Conservative \u2013 Liberal Democrat Coalition Agreement.\nNotable distributists.\nHistorical.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nContemporary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8807", "revid": "1318304951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8807", "title": "Dehydroepiandrosterone", "text": "Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), also known as androstenolone, is an endogenous steroid hormone precursor. It is one of the most abundant circulating steroids in humans. DHEA is produced in the adrenal glands, the gonads, and the brain. It functions as a metabolic intermediate in the biosynthesis of the androgen and estrogen sex steroids both in the gonads and in various other tissues. However, DHEA also has a variety of potential biological effects in its own right, binding to an array of nuclear and cell surface receptors, and acting as a neurosteroid and modulator of neurotrophic factor receptors.\nIn the United States, DHEA is sold as an over-the-counter supplement, and medication called prasterone.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBiological function.\nAs an androgen.\nDHEA and other adrenal androgens such as androstenedione, although relatively weak androgens, are responsible for the androgenic effects of adrenarche, such as early pubic and axillary hair growth, adult-type body odor, increased oiliness of hair and skin, and mild acne. DHEA is potentiated locally via conversion into testosterone and dihydrotestosterone (DHT) in the skin and hair follicles. Women with complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS), who have a non-functional androgen receptor (AR) and are immune to the androgenic effects of DHEA and other androgens, have absent or only sparse/scanty pubic and axillary hair and body hair in general, demonstrating the role of DHEA and other androgens in body hair development at both adrenarche and pubarche.\nAs an estrogen.\nDHEA is a weak estrogen. In addition, it is transformed into potent estrogens such as estradiol in certain tissues such as the vagina, and thereby produces estrogenic effects in such tissues.\nAs a neurosteroid.\nAs a neurosteroid and neurotrophin, DHEA has important effects in the central nervous system.\nBiological activity.\nHormonal activity.\nAndrogen receptor.\nAlthough it functions as an endogenous precursor to more potent androgens such as testosterone and DHT, DHEA has been found to possess some degree of androgenic activity in its own right, acting as a low affinity (Ki = 1 \u03bcM), weak partial agonist of the androgen receptor (AR). However, its intrinsic activity at the receptor is quite weak, and on account of that, due to competition for binding with full agonists like testosterone, it can actually behave more like an antagonist depending on circulating testosterone and dihydrotestosterone (DHT) levels, and hence, like an antiandrogen. However, its affinity for the receptor is very low, and for that reason, is unlikely to be of much significance under normal circumstances.\nEstrogen receptors.\nIn addition to its affinity for the androgen receptor, DHEA has also been found to bind to (and activate) the ER\u03b1 and ER\u03b2 estrogen receptors with Ki values of 1.1 \u03bcM and 0.5 \u03bcM, respectively, and EC50 values of &gt;1 \u03bcM and 200 nM, respectively. Though it was found to be a partial agonist of the ER\u03b1 with a maximal efficacy of 30\u201370%, the concentrations required for this degree of activation make it unlikely that the activity of DHEA at this receptor is physiologically meaningful. Remarkably however, DHEA acts as a full agonist of the ER\u03b2 with a maximal response similar to or actually slightly greater than that of estradiol, and its levels in circulation and local tissues in the human body are high enough to activate the receptor to the same degree as that seen with circulating estradiol levels at somewhat higher than their maximal, non-ovulatory concentrations; indeed, when combined with estradiol with both at levels equivalent to those of their physiological concentrations, overall activation of the ER\u03b2 was doubled.\nOther nuclear receptors.\nDHEA does not bind to or activate the progesterone, glucocorticoid, or mineralocorticoid receptors. Other nuclear receptor targets of DHEA besides the androgen and estrogen receptors include the PPAR\u03b1, PXR, and CAR. However, whereas DHEA is a ligand of the PPAR\u03b1 and PXR in rodents, it is not in humans. In addition to direct interactions, DHEA is thought to regulate a handful of other proteins via indirect, genomic mechanisms, including the enzymes CYP2C11 and 11\u03b2-HSD1 \u2013 the latter of which is essential for the biosynthesis of the glucocorticoids such as cortisol and has been suggested to be involved in the antiglucocorticoid effects of DHEA \u2013 and the carrier protein IGFBP1.\nNeurosteroid activity.\nNeurotransmitter receptors.\nDHEA has been found to directly act on several neurotransmitter receptors, including acting as a positive allosteric modulator of the NMDA receptor, as a negative allosteric modulator of the GABAA receptor, and as an agonist of the \u03c31 receptor.\nNeurotrophin receptors.\nIn 2011, the surprising discovery was made that DHEA, as well as its sulfate ester, DHEA-S, directly bind to and activate TrkA and p75NTR, receptors of neurotrophins like nerve growth factor (NGF) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), with high affinity. DHEA was subsequently also found to bind to TrkB and TrkC with high affinity, though it only activated TrkC not TrkB. DHEA and DHEA-S bound to these receptors with affinities in the low nanomolar range (around 5\u00a0nM), which were nonetheless approximately two orders of magnitude lower relative to highly potent polypeptide neurotrophins like NGF (0.01\u20130.1\u00a0nM). In any case, DHEA and DHEA-S both circulate at requisite concentrations to activate these receptors and were thus identified as important endogenous neurotrophic factors. They have since been labeled \"steroidal microneurotrophins\", due to their small-molecule and steroidal nature relative to their polypeptide neurotrophin counterparts. Subsequent research has suggested that DHEA and/or DHEA-S may in fact be phylogenetically ancient \"ancestral\" ligands of the neurotrophin receptors from early on in the evolution of the nervous system. The findings that DHEA binds to and potently activates neurotrophin receptors may explain the positive association between decreased circulating DHEA levels with age and age-related neurodegenerative diseases.\nMicrotubule-associated protein 2.\nSimilarly to pregnenolone, its synthetic derivative 3\u03b2-methoxypregnenolone (MAP-4343), and progesterone, DHEA has been found to bind to microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2), specifically the MAP2C subtype (Kd = 27\u00a0\u03bcM). However, it is unclear whether DHEA increases binding of MAP2 to tubulin like pregnenolone.\nADHD.\nSome research has shown that DHEA levels are too low in people with ADHD, and treatment with methylphenidate (NDRI stimulant) or bupropion (NDRI antidepressant) normalizes DHEA levels.\nOther activity.\nG6PDH inhibitor.\nDHEA is an uncompetitive inhibitor of G6PDHTooltip glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (Ki = 17\u00a0\u03bcM; IC50 = 18.7\u00a0\u03bcM), and is able to lower NADPHTooltip nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate levels and reduce NADPH-dependent free radical production. It is thought that this action may possibly be responsible for much of the antiinflammatory, antihyperplastic, chemopreventative, antihyperlipidemic, antidiabetic, and antiobesic, as well as certain immunomodulating activities of DHEA (with some experimental evidence to support this notion available). However, it has also been said that inhibition of G6PDH activity by DHEA \"in vivo\" has not been observed and that the concentrations required for DHEA to inhibit G6PDH \"in vitro\" are very high, thus making the possible contribution of G6PDH inhibition to the effects of DHEA uncertain.\nCancer.\nDHEA supplements have been promoted in supplement form for its claimed cancer prevention properties; there is no scientific evidence to support these claims.\nMiscellaneous.\nDHEA has been found to competitively inhibit TRPV1.\nDHEA in regards to aging.\nDHEA levels peak in early adulthood and gradually decline with age. By supplementing with DHEA, some individuals aim to restore hormone levels, potentially improving energy levels, mood, and libido. DHEA can help improve bone density as it is related to androgens which is important for bone health. DHEA controls the production of osteoblasts and insulin like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) expression which strengthens bone growth through metabolites. This helps delay the risk of osteoporosis in early adults.\nBiochemistry.\nBiosynthesis.\nDHEA is produced in the zona reticularis of the adrenal cortex under the control of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and by the gonads under the control of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). It is also produced in the brain. DHEA is synthesized from cholesterol via the enzymes cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme (CYP11A1; P450scc) and 17\u03b1-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase (CYP17A1), with pregnenolone and 17\u03b1-hydroxypregnenolone as intermediates. It is derived mostly from the adrenal cortex, with only about 10% being secreted from the gonads. Approximately 50 to 70% of circulating DHEA originates from desulfation of DHEA-S in peripheral tissues. DHEA-S itself originates almost exclusively from the adrenal cortex, with 95 to 100% being secreted from the adrenal cortex in women.\nIncreasing endogenous production.\nRegular exercise is known to increase DHEA production in the body. Calorie restriction has also been shown to increase DHEA in primates. Some theorize that the increase in endogenous DHEA brought about by calorie restriction is partially responsible for the longer life expectancy known to be associated with calorie restriction.\nDistribution.\nIn the circulation, DHEA is mainly bound to albumin, with a small amount bound to sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG). The small remainder of DHEA not associated with albumin or SHBG is unbound and free in the circulation.\nDHEA easily crosses the blood\u2013brain barrier into the central nervous system.\nMetabolism.\nDHEA is transformed into DHEA-S by sulfation at the C3\u03b2 position via the sulfotransferase enzymes SULT2A1 and to a lesser extent SULT1E1. This occurs naturally in the adrenal cortex and during first-pass metabolism in the liver and intestines when exogenous DHEA is administered orally. Levels of DHEA-S in circulation are approximately 250 to 300 times those of DHEA. DHEA-S in turn can be converted back into DHEA in peripheral tissues via steroid sulfatase (STS).\nThe terminal half-life of DHEA is short at only 15 to 30\u00a0minutes. In contrast, the terminal half-life of DHEA-S is far longer, at 7 to 10\u00a0hours. As DHEA-S can be converted back into DHEA, it serves as a circulating reservoir for DHEA, thereby extending the duration of DHEA.\nMetabolites of DHEA include DHEA-S, 7\u03b1-hydroxy-DHEA, 7\u03b2-hydroxy-DHEA, 7-keto-DHEA, 7\u03b1-hydroxyepiandrosterone, and 7\u03b2-hydroxyepiandrosterone, as well as androstenediol and androstenedione.\nPregnancy.\nDuring pregnancy, DHEA-S is metabolized into the sulfates of 16\u03b1-hydroxy-DHEA and 15\u03b1-hydroxy-DHEA in the fetal liver as intermediates in the production of the estrogens estriol and estetrol, respectively.\nLevels.\nPrior to puberty in humans, DHEA and DHEA-S levels elevate upon differentiation of the zona reticularis of the adrenal cortex. Peak levels of DHEA and DHEA-S are observed around age 20, which is followed by an age-dependent decline throughout life eventually back to prepubertal concentrations. Plasma levels of DHEA in adult men are 10 to 25\u00a0nM, in premenopausal women are 5 to 30\u00a0nM, and in postmenopausal women are 2 to 20\u00a0nM. Conversely, DHEA-S levels are an order of magnitude higher at 1\u201310\u00a0\u03bcM. Levels of DHEA and DHEA-S decline to the lower nanomolar and micromolar ranges in men and women aged 60 to 80\u00a0years.\nDHEA levels are as follows:\nMeasurement.\nAs almost all DHEA is derived from the adrenal glands, blood measurements of DHEA-S/DHEA are useful to detect excess adrenal activity as seen in adrenal cancer or hyperplasia, including certain forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Women with polycystic ovary syndrome tend to have elevated levels of DHEA-S.\nChemistry.\nDHEA, also known as androst-5-en-3\u03b2-ol-17-one, is a naturally occurring androstane steroid and a 17-ketosteroid. It is closely related structurally to androstenediol (androst-5-ene-3\u03b2,17\u03b2-diol), androstenedione (androst-4-ene-3,17-dione), and testosterone (androst-4-en-17\u03b2-ol-3-one). DHEA is the 5-dehydro analogue of epiandrosterone (5\u03b1-androstan-3\u03b2-ol-17-one) and is also known as 5-dehydroepiandrosterone or as \u03b45-epiandrosterone.\nIsomers.\nThe term \"dehydroepiandrosterone\" is ambiguous chemically because it does not include the specific positions within epiandrosterone at which hydrogen atoms are missing. DHEA itself is 5,6-didehydroepiandrosterone or 5-dehydroepiandrosterone. A number of naturally occurring isomers also exist and may have similar activities. Some isomers of DHEA are 1-dehydroepiandrosterone (1-androsterone) and 4-dehydroepiandrosterone. These isomers are also technically \"DHEA\", since they are dehydroepiandrosterones in which hydrogens are removed from the epiandrosterone skeleton.\nDehydroandrosterone (DHA) is the 3\u03b1-epimer of DHEA and is also an endogenous androgen.\nHistory.\nDHEA was first isolated from human urine in 1934 by Adolf Butenandt and Kurt Tscherning.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8808", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8808", "title": "DHEA", "text": ""}
{"id": "8810", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8810", "title": "Dolphins", "text": ""}
{"id": "8811", "revid": "46977059", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8811", "title": "Discrete Fourier transform", "text": "Function in discrete mathematics\nIn mathematics, the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) is a discrete version of the Fourier transform that converts a finite sequence of equally-spaced samples of a function into a same-length sequence of equally-spaced samples of the discrete-time Fourier transform (DTFT), which is a complex-valued function of frequency. The interval at which the DTFT is sampled is the reciprocal of the duration of the input sequence. An inverse DFT (IDFT) is a Fourier series, using the DTFT samples as coefficients of complex sinusoids at the corresponding DTFT frequencies. It has the same sample-values as the original input sequence. The DFT is therefore said to be a frequency domain representation of the original input sequence. If the original sequence spans all the non-zero values of a function, its DTFT is continuous (and periodic), and the DFT provides discrete samples of one cycle. If the original sequence is one cycle of a periodic function, the DFT provides all the non-zero values of one DTFT cycle.\nThe DFT is used in the Fourier analysis of many practical applications. In digital signal processing, the function is any quantity or signal that varies over time, such as the pressure of a sound wave, a radio signal, or daily temperature readings, sampled over a finite time interval (often defined by a window function). In image processing, the samples can be the values of pixels along a row or column of a raster image. The DFT is also used to efficiently solve partial differential equations, and to perform other operations such as convolutions or multiplying large integers.\nSince it deals with a finite amount of data, it can be implemented in computers by numerical algorithms or even dedicated hardware. These implementations usually employ efficient fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithms; so much so that the terms \"FFT\" and \"DFT\" are often used interchangeably. Prior to its current usage, the \"FFT\" initialism may have also been used for the ambiguous term \"finite Fourier transform\".\nDefinition.\nThe \"discrete Fourier transform\" transforms a sequence of \"N\" complex numbers formula_1 into another sequence of complex numbers, formula_2 which is defined by:\nDiscrete Fourier transform\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Note: this definition omits the sampling interval, so the frequency axis becomes dimensionless and the amplitude is expressed only in relative scale. However, most software libraries, including FFT implementations, use this relative form.\"\nThe transform is sometimes denoted by the symbol formula_3, as in formula_4 or formula_5 or formula_6.\nEq.1 can be interpreted or derived in various ways, for example:Eq.1 can also be evaluated outside the domain formula_7, and that extended sequence is formula_8-periodic. Accordingly, other sequences of formula_8 indices are sometimes used, such as formula_10 (if formula_8 is even) and formula_12 (if formula_8 is odd), which amounts to swapping the left and right halves of the result of the transform.\nThe inverse transform is given by:\nInverse transform\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEq.2. is also formula_8-periodic (in index n). In Eq.2, each formula_15 is a complex number whose polar coordinates are the amplitude and phase of a complex sinusoidal component formula_16 of function formula_17 (see Discrete Fourier series) The sinusoid's frequency is formula_18 cycles per formula_8 samples.\nThe normalization factor multiplying the DFT and IDFT (here 1 and formula_20) and the signs of the exponents are the most common conventions. The only actual requirements of these conventions are that the DFT and IDFT have opposite-sign exponents and that the product of their normalization factors be formula_21 An uncommon normalization of formula_22 for both the DFT and IDFT makes the transform-pair unitary.\nDFT including sampling interval.\nUsing the standard definition of the DFT omits the sampling interval (or sampling distance) formula_23 in cases where the index corresponds to the sampling interval according to formula_24. \nTo express the DFT consistently with the continuous Fourier transform, including the sampling intervals, the sampling interval can be included explicitly as\nformula_25\n\"Note: most software libraries don't use this form but rather use the relative form, including their corresponding FFT implementations.\"\nThe corresponding inverse transform then becomes:\nformula_26\nwhere the frequency spacing is formula_27. \nExample.\nThis example demonstrates how to apply the DFT to a sequence of length formula_28 and the input vector\nformula_29\nCalculating the DFT of formula_30 using Eq.1\nformula_31\nresults in\nformula_32\nProperties.\nLinearity.\nThe DFT is a linear transform, i.e. if formula_33 and formula_34, then for any complex numbers formula_35:\nformula_36\nTime and frequency reversal.\nReversing the time (i.e. replacing formula_37 by formula_38) in formula_39 corresponds to reversing the frequency (i.e. formula_18 by formula_41). Mathematically, if formula_42 represents the vector x then\nif formula_33\nthen formula_44\nConjugation in time.\nIf formula_45 then formula_46.\nReal and imaginary part.\nThis table shows some mathematical operations on formula_39 in the time domain and the corresponding effects on its DFT formula_15 in the frequency domain.\nOrthogonality.\nThe vectors formula_49, for formula_50, form an orthogonal basis over the set of \"N\"-dimensional complex vectors:\nformula_51\nwhere formula_52 is the Kronecker delta. (In the last step, the summation is trivial if formula_53, where it is 1 + 1 + \u22ef = \"N\", and otherwise is a geometric series that can be explicitly summed to obtain zero.) This orthogonality condition can be used to derive the formula for the IDFT from the definition of the DFT, and is equivalent to the unitarity property below.\nThe Plancherel theorem and Parseval's theorem.\nIf formula_15 and formula_55 are the DFTs of formula_39 and formula_57 respectively then Parseval's theorem states:\nformula_58\nwhere the star denotes complex conjugation. The Plancherel theorem is a special case of Parseval's theorem and states:\nformula_59\nThese theorems are also equivalent to the unitary condition below.\nPeriodicity.\nThe periodicity can be shown directly from the definition:\n formula_60\nSimilarly, it can be shown that the IDFT formula leads to a periodic extension of formula_39.\nShift theorem.\nMultiplying formula_39 by a \"linear phase\" formula_63 for some integer \"m\" corresponds to a \"circular shift\" of the output formula_15: formula_15 is replaced by formula_66, where the subscript is interpreted modulo \"N\" (i.e., periodically). Similarly, a circular shift of the input formula_39 corresponds to multiplying the output formula_15 by a linear phase. Mathematically, if formula_42 represents the vector x then\nif formula_33\nthen formula_71\nand formula_72\nCircular convolution theorem and cross-correlation theorem.\nThe convolution theorem for the discrete-time Fourier transform (DTFT) indicates that a convolution of two sequences can be obtained as the inverse transform of the product of the individual transforms. An important simplification occurs when one of sequences is N-periodic, denoted here by formula_73 because formula_74 is non-zero at only discrete frequencies (see ), and therefore so is its product with the continuous function formula_75 That leads to a considerable simplification of the inverse transform.\nformula_76\nwhere formula_77 is a periodic summation of the formula_78 sequence: formula_79\nCustomarily, the DFT and inverse DFT summations are taken over the domain formula_80. Defining those DFTs as formula_81 and formula_82, the result is:\nformula_83\nIn practice, the formula_78 sequence is usually length \"N\" or less, and formula_85 is a periodic extension of an N-length formula_86-sequence, which can also be expressed as a \"circular function\":\nformula_87\nThen the convolution can be written as:\nformula_88\nwhich gives rise to the interpretation as a \"circular\" convolution of formula_78 and formula_90 It is often used to efficiently compute their linear convolution. (see Circular convolution, Fast convolution algorithms, and Overlap-save)\nSimilarly, the cross-correlation of formula_78 and formula_85 is given by:\nformula_93\nUniqueness of the Discrete Fourier Transform.\nAs seen above, the discrete Fourier transform has the fundamental property of carrying convolution into componentwise product. A natural question is whether it is the only one with this ability. It has been shown that any linear transform that turns convolution into pointwise product is the DFT up to a permutation of coefficients. Since the number of permutations of n elements equals n!, there exist exactly n! linear and invertible maps with the same fundamental property as the DFT with respect to convolution.\nConvolution theorem duality.\nIt can also be shown that:\nformula_94\nformula_95 which is the circular convolution of formula_96 and formula_97.\nTrigonometric interpolation polynomial.\nThe trigonometric interpolation polynomial\nformula_98\nwhere the coefficients \"X\"\"k\" are given by the DFT of \"x\"\"n\" above, satisfies the interpolation property formula_99 for formula_100.\nFor even \"N\", notice that the Nyquist component formula_101 is handled specially.\nThis interpolation is \"not unique\": aliasing implies that one could add \"N\" to any of the complex-sinusoid frequencies (e.g. changing formula_102 to formula_103) without changing the interpolation property, but giving \"different\" values in between the formula_39 points. The choice above, however, is typical because it has two useful properties. First, it consists of sinusoids whose frequencies have the smallest possible magnitudes: the interpolation is bandlimited. Second, if the formula_39 are real numbers, then formula_106 is real as well.\nIn contrast, the most obvious trigonometric interpolation polynomial is the one in which the frequencies range from 0 to formula_107 (instead of roughly formula_108 to formula_109 as above), similar to the inverse DFT formula. This interpolation does \"not\" minimize the slope, and is \"not\" generally real-valued for real formula_39; its use is a common mistake.\nThe unitary DFT.\nAnother way of looking at the DFT is to note that in the above discussion, the DFT can be expressed as the DFT matrix, a Vandermonde matrix,\n in 1867,\nformula_111\nwhere formula_112 is a primitive \"N\"th root of unity.\nFor example, in the case when formula_113, formula_114, and\nformula_115\n(which is a Hadamard matrix) or when formula_28 as in the above, formula_117, and\nformula_118\nThe inverse transform is then given by the inverse of the above matrix,\nformula_119\nWith unitary normalization constants formula_120, the DFT becomes a unitary transformation, defined by a unitary matrix:\nformula_121\nwhere formula_122 is the determinant function. The determinant is the product of the eigenvalues, which are always formula_123 or formula_124 as described below. In a real vector space, a unitary transformation can be thought of as simply a rigid rotation of the coordinate system, and all of the properties of a rigid rotation can be found in the unitary DFT.\nThe orthogonality of the DFT is now expressed as an orthonormality condition (which arises in many areas of mathematics as described in root of unity):\nformula_125\nIf X is defined as the unitary DFT of the vector x, then\nformula_126\nand the Parseval's theorem is expressed as\nformula_127\nIf we view the DFT as just a coordinate transformation which simply specifies the components of a vector in a new coordinate system, then the above is just the statement that the dot product of two vectors is preserved under a unitary DFT transformation. For the special case formula_128, this implies that the length of a vector is preserved as well \u2014 this is just Plancherel theorem,\nformula_129\nA consequence of the circular convolution theorem is that the DFT matrix F diagonalizes any circulant matrix.\nExpressing the inverse DFT in terms of the DFT.\nA useful property of the DFT is that the inverse DFT can be easily expressed in terms of the (forward) DFT, via several well-known \"tricks\". (For example, in computations, it is often convenient to only implement a fast Fourier transform corresponding to one transform direction and then to get the other transform direction from the first.)\nFirst, we can compute the inverse DFT by reversing all but one of the inputs (Duhamel \"et al.\", 1988):\nformula_130\nSecond, one can also conjugate the inputs and outputs:\nformula_133\nThird, a variant of this conjugation trick, which is sometimes preferable because it requires no modification of the data values, involves swapping real and imaginary parts (which can be done on a computer simply by modifying pointers). Define formula_134 as formula_39 with its real and imaginary parts swapped\u2014that is, if formula_136 then formula_134 is formula_138. Equivalently, formula_134 equals formula_140. Then\nformula_141\nThat is, the inverse transform is the same as the forward transform with the real and imaginary parts swapped for both input and output, up to a normalization (Duhamel \"et al.\", 1988).\nThe conjugation trick can also be used to define a new transform, closely related to the DFT, that is involutory\u2014that is, which is its own inverse. In particular, formula_142 is clearly its own inverse: formula_143. A closely related involutory transformation (by a factor of formula_144) is formula_145, since the formula_146 factors in formula_147 cancel the 2. For real inputs formula_30, the real part of formula_149 is none other than the discrete Hartley transform, which is also involutory.\nEigenvalues and eigenvectors.\nThe eigenvalues of the DFT matrix are simple and well-known, whereas the eigenvectors are complicated, not unique, and are the subject of ongoing research. Explicit formulas are given with a significant amount of number theory.\nConsider the unitary form formula_150 defined above for the DFT of length \"N\", where\nformula_151\nThis matrix satisfies the matrix polynomial equation:\nformula_152\nThis can be seen from the inverse properties above: operating formula_150 twice gives the original data in reverse order, so operating formula_150 four times gives back the original data and is thus the identity matrix. This means that the eigenvalues formula_155 satisfy the equation:\nformula_156\nTherefore, the eigenvalues of formula_150 are the fourth roots of unity: formula_155 is +1, \u22121, +\"i\", or \u2212\"i\".\nSince there are only four distinct eigenvalues for this formula_159 matrix, they have some multiplicity. The multiplicity gives the number of linearly independent eigenvectors corresponding to each eigenvalue. (There are \"N\" independent eigenvectors; a unitary matrix is never defective.)\nThe problem of their multiplicity was solved by McClellan and Parks (1972), although it was later shown to have been equivalent to a problem solved by Gauss (Dickinson and Steiglitz, 1982). The multiplicity depends on the value of \"N\" modulo 4, and is given by the following table:\nOtherwise stated, the characteristic polynomial of formula_150 is:\nformula_161\nNo simple analytical formula for general eigenvectors is known. Moreover, the eigenvectors are not unique because any linear combination of eigenvectors for the same eigenvalue is also an eigenvector for that eigenvalue. Various researchers have proposed different choices of eigenvectors, selected to satisfy useful properties like orthogonality and to have \"simple\" forms (e.g., McClellan and Parks, 1972; Dickinson and Steiglitz, 1982; Gr\u00fcnbaum, 1982; Candan \"et al.\", 2000; Hanna \"et al.\", 2004; Gurevich and Hadani, 2008).\nOne method to construct DFT eigenvectors to an eigenvalue formula_155 is based on the linear combination of operators:\nformula_163\nFor an arbitrary vector formula_164, vector formula_165 satisfies:\nformula_166\nhence, vector formula_167 is, indeed, the eigenvector of DFT matrix formula_150. Operators formula_169 project vectors onto subspaces which are orthogonal for each value of formula_155. That is, for two eigenvectors, formula_165 and formula_172 we have:\nformula_173\nHowever, in general, projection operator method does not produce orthogonal eigenvectors within one subspace. The operator formula_174 can be seen as a matrix, whose columns are eigenvectors of formula_150, but they are not orthogonal. When a set of vectors formula_176, spanning formula_177-dimensional space (where formula_177 is the multiplicity of eigenvalue formula_155) is chosen to generate the set of eigenvectors formula_180 to eigenvalue formula_155, the mutual orthogonality of formula_182 is not guaranteed. However, the orthogonal set can be obtained by further applying orthogonalization algorithm to the set formula_183, e.g. Gram-Schmidt process.\nA straightforward approach to obtain DFT eigenvectors is to discretize an eigenfunction of the continuous Fourier transform, of which the most famous is the Gaussian function. Since periodic summation of the function means discretizing its frequency spectrum and discretization means periodic summation of the spectrum, the discretized and periodically summed Gaussian function yields an eigenvector of the discrete transform:\nThe closed form expression for the series can be expressed by Jacobi theta functions as\nSeveral other simple closed-form analytical eigenvectors for special DFT period \"N\" were found (Casper-Yakimov, 2024):\nFor DFT period \"N\" = 2\"L\" + 1 = 4\"K\" + 1, where \"K\" is an integer, the following is an eigenvector of DFT:\nFor DFT period \"N\" = 2\"L\" = 4\"K\", where \"K\" is an integer, the following are eigenvectors of DFT:\nFor DFT period \"N\" = 4\"K\" - 1, where \"K\" is an integer, the following are eigenvectors of DFT:\nThe choice of eigenvectors of the DFT matrix has become important in recent years in order to define a discrete analogue of the fractional Fourier transform\u2014the DFT matrix can be taken to fractional powers by exponentiating the eigenvalues. For the continuous Fourier transform, the natural orthogonal eigenfunctions are the Hermite functions, so various discrete analogues of these have been employed as the eigenvectors of the DFT, such as the Kravchuk polynomials. The \"best\" choice of eigenvectors to define a fractional discrete Fourier transform remains an open question, however.\nUncertainty principles.\nProbabilistic uncertainty principle.\nIf the random variable \"X\"\"k\" is constrained by\nformula_191\nthen\nformula_192\nmay be considered to represent a discrete probability mass function of n, with an associated probability mass function constructed from the transformed variable,\nformula_193\nFor the case of continuous functions formula_194 and formula_195, the Heisenberg uncertainty principle states that\nformula_196\nwhere formula_197 and formula_198 are the variances of formula_199 and formula_200 respectively, with the equality attained in the case of a suitably normalized Gaussian distribution. Although the variances may be analogously defined for the DFT, an analogous uncertainty principle is not useful, because the uncertainty will not be shift-invariant. Still, a meaningful uncertainty principle has been introduced by Massar and Spindel.\nHowever, the Hirschman entropic uncertainty will have a useful analog for the case of the DFT. The Hirschman uncertainty principle is expressed in terms of the Shannon entropy of the two probability functions.\nIn the discrete case, the Shannon entropies are defined as\nformula_201\nand\nformula_202\nand the entropic uncertainty principle becomes\nformula_203\nThe equality is obtained for formula_204 equal to translations and modulations of a suitably normalized Kronecker comb of period formula_205 where formula_205 is any exact integer divisor of formula_8. The probability mass function formula_208 will then be proportional to a suitably translated Kronecker comb of period formula_209.\nDeterministic uncertainty principle.\nThere is also a well-known deterministic uncertainty principle that uses signal sparsity (or the number of non-zero coefficients). Let formula_210 and formula_211 be the number of non-zero elements of the time and frequency sequences formula_212 and formula_213, respectively. Then,\nformula_214\nAs an immediate consequence of the inequality of arithmetic and geometric means, one also has formula_215. Both uncertainty principles were shown to be tight for specifically chosen \"picket-fence\" sequences (discrete impulse trains), and find practical use for signal recovery applications.\nAdditive uncertainty principle.\nThe additive uncertainty principles quantify how sparse a signal is in terms of the additive energy of the non-zero elements of the signal's transform. More specifically, if formula_216 and formula_217, then the two additive uncertainty principles states that\nGeneralizations.\nRepresentation theory.\nThe DFT can be interpreted as a complex-valued representation of the finite cyclic group. In other words, a sequence of formula_37 complex numbers can be thought of as an element of formula_37-dimensional complex space formula_221 or equivalently a function formula_222 from the finite cyclic group of order formula_37 to the complex numbers, formula_224. So formula_222 is a class function on the finite cyclic group, and thus can be expressed as a linear combination of the irreducible characters of this group, which are the roots of unity.\nFrom this point of view, one may generalize the DFT to representation theory generally, or more narrowly to the representation theory of finite groups.\nMore narrowly still, one may generalize the DFT by either changing the target (taking values in a field other than the complex numbers), or the domain (a group other than a finite cyclic group), as detailed in the sequel.\nOther fields.\nMany of the properties of the DFT only depend on the fact that formula_226 is a primitive root of unity, sometimes denoted formula_227 or formula_228 (so that formula_229). Such properties include the completeness, orthogonality, Plancherel/Parseval, periodicity, shift, convolution, and unitarity properties above, as well as many FFT algorithms. For this reason, the discrete Fourier transform can be defined by using roots of unity in fields other than the complex numbers, and such generalizations are commonly called \"number-theoretic transforms\" (NTTs) in the case of finite fields. For more information, see number-theoretic transform and discrete Fourier transform (general).\nOther finite groups.\nThe standard DFT acts on a sequence \"x\"0, \"x\"1, ..., \"x\"\"N\"\u22121 of complex numbers, which can be viewed as a function {0, 1, ..., \"N\" \u2212 1} \u2192 C. The multidimensional DFT acts on multidimensional sequences, which can be viewed as functions\nformula_230\nThis suggests the generalization to Fourier transforms on arbitrary finite groups, which act on functions \"G\" \u2192 C where \"G\" is a finite group. In this framework, the standard DFT is seen as the Fourier transform on a cyclic group, while the multidimensional DFT is a Fourier transform on a direct sum of cyclic groups.\nFurther, Fourier transform can be on cosets of a group.\nAlternatives.\n There are various alternatives to the DFT for various applications, prominent among which are wavelets. The analog of the DFT is the discrete wavelet transform (DWT). From the point of view of time\u2013frequency analysis, a key limitation of the Fourier transform is that it does not include \"location\" information, only \"frequency\" information, and thus has difficulty in representing transients. As wavelets have location as well as frequency, they are better able to represent location, at the expense of greater difficulty representing frequency. For details, see comparison of the discrete wavelet transform with the discrete Fourier transform.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8815", "revid": "905811", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8815", "title": "Dual polyhedron", "text": "Polyhedron associated with another by swapping vertices for faces\nIn geometry, every polyhedron is associated with a second dual structure, wherein the vertices of one correspond to the faces of the other and the edges between pairs of vertices of one correspond to the edges between pairs of faces of the other. Such dual figures remain combinatorial or abstract polyhedra, but not all can also be constructed as geometric polyhedra. Starting with any given polyhedron, the dual of its dual is the original polyhedron.\nDuality preserves the symmetries of a polyhedron. Therefore, for many classes of polyhedra defined by their symmetries, the duals belong to a corresponding symmetry class. For example, the regular polyhedra\u00a0\u2013 the (convex) Platonic solids and (star) Kepler\u2013Poinsot polyhedra\u00a0\u2013 form dual pairs, where the regular tetrahedron is self-dual. The dual of an isogonal polyhedron (one in which any two vertices are equivalent under symmetries of the polyhedron) is an isohedral polyhedron (one in which any two faces are equivalent [...]), and vice versa. The dual of an isotoxal polyhedron (one in which any two edges are equivalent [...]) is also isotoxal.\nDuality is closely related to \"polar reciprocity\", a geometric transformation that, when applied to a convex polyhedron, realizes the dual polyhedron as another convex polyhedron.\nKinds of duality.\nThere are many kinds of duality. The kinds most relevant to elementary polyhedra are polar reciprocity and topological or abstract duality.\nPolar reciprocation.\nIn Euclidean space, the dual of a polyhedron formula_1 is often defined in terms of polar reciprocation about a sphere. Here, each vertex (pole) is associated with a face plane (polar plane or just polar) so that the ray from the center to the vertex is perpendicular to the plane, and the product of the distances from the center to each is equal to the square of the radius.\nWhen the sphere has radius formula_2 and is centered at the origin (so that it is defined by the equation formula_3), then the polar dual of a convex polyhedron formula_1 is defined as\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;~q \\cdot p \\leq r^2&lt;/math&gt; for all formula_5 in formula_6\nwhere formula_7 denotes the standard dot product of formula_8 and formula_5.\nTypically when no sphere is specified in the construction of the dual, then the unit sphere is used, meaning formula_10 in the above definitions.\nFor each face plane of formula_1 described by the linear equation\nformula_12\nthe corresponding vertex of the dual polyhedron formula_13 will have coordinates formula_14. Similarly, each vertex of formula_1 corresponds to a face plane of formula_13, and each edge line of formula_1 corresponds to an edge line of formula_13. The correspondence between the vertices, edges, and faces of formula_1 and formula_13 reverses inclusion. For example, if an edge of formula_1 contains a vertex, the corresponding edge of formula_13 will be contained in the corresponding face.\nFor a polyhedron with a center of symmetry, it is common to use a sphere centered on this point, as in the Dorman Luke construction (mentioned below). Failing that, for a polyhedron with a circumscribed sphere, inscribed sphere, or midsphere (one with all edges as tangents), this can be used. However, it is possible to reciprocate a polyhedron about any sphere, and the resulting form of the dual will depend on the size and position of the sphere; as the sphere is varied, so too is the dual form. The choice of center for the sphere is sufficient to define the dual up to similarity.\nIf a polyhedron in Euclidean space has a face plane, edge line, or vertex lying on the center of the sphere, the corresponding element of its dual will go to infinity. Since Euclidean space never reaches infinity, the projective equivalent, called extended Euclidean space, may be formed by adding the required 'plane at infinity'. Some theorists prefer to stick to Euclidean space and say that there is no dual. Meanwhile, found a way to represent these infinite duals, in a manner suitable for making models (of some finite portion).\nThe concept of \"duality\" here is closely related to the duality in projective geometry, where lines and edges are interchanged. Projective polarity works well enough for convex polyhedra. But for non-convex figures such as star polyhedra, when we seek to rigorously define this form of polyhedral duality in terms of projective polarity, various problems appear.\nBecause of the definitional issues for geometric duality of non-convex polyhedra, argues that any proper definition of a non-convex polyhedron should include a notion of a dual polyhedron.\nCanonical duals.\nAny convex polyhedron can be distorted into a canonical form, in which a unit midsphere (or intersphere) exists tangent to every edge, and such that the average position of the points of tangency is the center of the sphere. This form is unique up to congruences.\nIf we reciprocate such a canonical polyhedron about its midsphere, the dual polyhedron will share the same edge-tangency points, and thus will also be canonical. It is the canonical dual, and the two together form a canonical dual compound.\nDorman Luke construction.\nFor a uniform polyhedron, each face of the dual polyhedron may be derived from the original polyhedron's corresponding vertex figure by using the Dorman Luke construction.\nTopological duality.\nEven when a pair of polyhedra cannot be obtained by reciprocation from each other, they may be called duals of each other as long as the vertices of one correspond to the faces of the other, and the edges of one correspond to the edges of the other, in an incidence-preserving way. Such pairs of polyhedra are still topologically or abstractly dual.\nThe vertices and edges of a convex polyhedron form a graph (the 1-skeleton of the polyhedron), embedded on the surface of the polyhedron (a topological sphere). This graph can be projected to form a Schlegel diagram on a flat plane. The graph formed by the vertices and edges of the dual polyhedron is the dual graph of the original graph.\nMore generally, for any polyhedron whose faces form a closed surface, the vertices and edges of the polyhedron form a graph embedded on this surface, and the vertices and edges of the (abstract) dual polyhedron form the dual graph of the original graph.\nAn abstract polyhedron is a certain kind of partially ordered set (poset) of elements, such that incidences, or connections, between elements of the set correspond to incidences between elements (faces, edges, vertices) of a polyhedron. Every such poset has a dual poset, formed by reversing all of the order relations. If the poset is visualized as a Hasse diagram, the dual poset can be visualized simply by turning the Hasse diagram upside down.\nEvery geometric polyhedron corresponds to an abstract polyhedron in this way, and has an abstract dual polyhedron. However, for some types of non-convex geometric polyhedra, the dual polyhedra may not be realizable geometrically.\nSelf-dual polyhedra.\nTopologically, a polyhedron is said to be self-dual if its dual has exactly the same connectivity between vertices, edges, and faces. Abstractly, they have the same Hasse diagram. Geometrically, it is not only topologically self-dual, but its polar reciprocal about a certain point, typically its centroid, is a similar figure. For example, the dual of a regular tetrahedron is another regular tetrahedron, reflected through the origin.\nEvery polygon is topologically self-dual, since it has the same number of vertices as edges, and these are switched by duality. But it is not necessarily self-dual (up to rigid motion, for instance). Every polygon has a regular form which is geometrically self-dual about its intersphere: all angles are congruent, as are all edges, so under duality these congruences swap. Similarly, every topologically self-dual convex polyhedron can be realized by an equivalent geometrically self-dual polyhedron, its canonical polyhedron, reciprocal about the center of the midsphere.\nThere are infinitely many geometrically self-dual polyhedra. The simplest infinite family is the pyramids. Another infinite family, elongated pyramids, consists of polyhedra that can be roughly described as a pyramid sitting on top of a prism (with the same number of sides). Adding a frustum (pyramid with the top cut off) below the prism generates another infinite family, and so on. There are many other convex self-dual polyhedra. For example, there are 6 different ones with 7 vertices and 16 with 8 vertices.\nA self-dual non-convex icosahedron with hexagonal faces was identified by Br\u00fcckner in 1900. Other non-convex self-dual polyhedra have been found, under certain definitions of non-convex polyhedra and their duals.\nDual polytopes and tessellations.\nDuality can be generalized to \"n\"-dimensional space and dual polytopes; in two dimensions these are called dual polygons.\nThe vertices of one polytope correspond to the (\"n\" \u2212 1)-dimensional elements, or facets, of the other, and the \"j\" points that define a (\"j\" \u2212 1)-dimensional element will correspond to \"j\" hyperplanes that intersect to give a (\"n\" \u2212 \"j\")-dimensional element. The dual of an \"n\"-dimensional tessellation or honeycomb can be defined similarly.\nIn general, the facets of a polytope's dual will be the topological duals of the polytope's vertex figures. For the polar reciprocals of the regular and uniform polytopes, the dual facets will be polar reciprocals of the original's vertex figure. For example, in four dimensions, the vertex figure of the 600-cell is the icosahedron; the dual of the 600-cell is the 120-cell, whose facets are dodecahedra, which are the dual of the icosahedron.\nSelf-dual polytopes and tessellations.\nThe primary class of self-dual polytopes are regular polytopes with palindromic Schl\u00e4fli symbols. All regular polygons, {a} are self-dual, polyhedra of the form {a,a}, 4-polytopes of the form {a,b,a}, 5-polytopes of the form {a,b,b,a}, etc.\nThe self-dual regular polytopes are:\nThe self-dual (infinite) regular Euclidean honeycombs are:\nThe self-dual (infinite) regular hyperbolic honeycombs are:\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8816", "revid": "49598191", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8816", "title": "Double bass", "text": "Bowed string instrument\nThe double bass (), also known as the upright bass, the acoustic bass, the bull fiddle, the Bass Fiddle, or simply the bass, is the largest and lowest-pitched chordophone in the modern symphony orchestra (excluding rare additions such as the octobass). It has four or five strings, and its construction is in between that of the gamba and the violin family.\nThe bass is a standard member of the orchestra's string section, along with violins, violas, and cellos, as well as the concert band, and is featured in concertos, solo, and chamber music in Western classical music. The bass is used in a range of other genres, such as jazz, blues, rock and roll, rockabilly, country music, bluegrass, tango, folk music and certain types of film and video game soundtracks.\nThe instrument's exact lineage is still a matter of some debate, with scholars divided on whether the bass is derived from the viol or the violin family.\nBeing a transposing instrument, the bass is typically notated one octave higher than tuned to avoid excessive ledger lines below the staff. The double bass is the only modern bowed string instrument that is tuned in fourths (like a bass guitar, viol, or the lowest-sounding four strings of a standard guitar), rather than fifths, with strings usually tuned to E1, A1, D2 and G2.\nThe double bass is played with a bow (arco), or by plucking the strings (pizzicato), or via a variety of extended techniques. In orchestral repertoire and tango music, both arco and pizzicato are employed. In jazz, blues, and rockabilly, pizzicato is the norm. Classical music and jazz use the natural sound produced acoustically by the instrument, as does traditional bluegrass. In funk, blues, reggae, and related genres, the double bass is often amplified.\nTerminology.\nA person who plays this instrument is called a \"bassist\", \"double bassist\", \"double bass player\", \"contrabassist\", \"contrabass player\" or \"bass player\". The names contrabass and double bass refer (respectively) to the instrument's range, and to its use one octave lower than the cello (i.e. the cello part was the main bass line, and the \"double bass\" originally played a copy of the cello part; only later was it given an independent part). The terms for the instrument among classical performers are contrabass (which comes from the instrument's Italian name, ), string bass (to distinguish it from brass bass instruments in a concert band, such as tubas), or simply bass.\nIn jazz, blues, rockabilly and other genres outside of classical music, this instrument is commonly called the upright bass, standup bass or acoustic bass to distinguish it from the (usually electric) bass guitar. In folk and bluegrass music, the instrument is also referred to as a \"bass fiddle\" or \"bass violin\" (or more rarely as \"doghouse bass\" or \"bull fiddle\"). While not a member of the violin-family of instruments, the construction of the upright bass is quite different from that of the acoustic bass guitar, as the latter is a derivative of the electric bass guitar, and usually built like a larger and sturdier variant of a viola de gamba, its ancestor.\nThe double bass is sometimes confusingly called the violone, bass violin or bass viol.\nDescription.\nA typical double bass stands around from scroll to endpin. Whereas the traditional \"full-size\" (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4\u20444 size) bass stands on average , the more common &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444 size bass (which has become the most widely used size in the modern era, even among orchestral players) stands on average from scroll to endpin. Other sizes are also available, such as a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 size or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444 size, which serve to accommodate a player's height and hand size. These names of the sizes do not reflect the true size relative to a \"full size\" bass; a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 bass is not half the length of a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4\u20444 bass, but is only about 15% smaller.\nDouble basses are typically constructed from several types of wood, including maple for the back, spruce for the top, and ebony for the fingerboard. It is uncertain whether the instrument is a descendant of the viola da gamba or of the violin, but it is traditionally aligned with the violin family. While the double bass is nearly identical in construction to other violin family instruments, it also embodies features found in the older viol family.\nThe standard notes of the open strings are E1, A1, D2, and G2, the same as an acoustic or electric bass guitar. However, the resonance of the wood, combined with the violin-like construction and long scale length gives the double bass a much richer tone than the bass guitar, in addition to the ability to use a bow, while the fretless fingerboard accommodates smooth glissandos and legatos.\nPlaying style.\nLike other violin and viol-family string instruments, the double bass is played either with a bow (arco) or by plucking the strings (pizzicato). When employing a bow, the player can either use it traditionally or strike the wood of the bow against the string. In orchestral repertoire and tango music, both arco and pizzicato are employed. In jazz, blues, and rockabilly, pizzicato is the norm, except for some solos and occasional written parts in modern jazz that call for bowing.\nIn classical pedagogy, almost all of the focus is on performing with the bow and producing a good bowed tone; there is little work done on developing significant pizzicato skills. Bowed notes in the lowest register of the instrument produce a dark, heavy, mighty, or even menacing effect, when played with a fortissimo dynamic; however, the same low pitches played with a delicate pianissimo can create a sonorous, mellow accompaniment line. Classical bass students learn all of the different bow articulations used by other string section players (e.g., violin and cello), such as d\u00e9tach\u00e9, legato, staccato, sforzato, martel\u00e9 (\"hammered\"-style), sul ponticello, sul tasto, tremolo, spiccato and sautill\u00e9. Some of these articulations can be combined; for example, the combination of sul ponticello and tremolo can produce eerie, ghostly sounds. Classical bass players do play pizzicato parts in orchestra, but these parts generally require simple notes (quarter notes, half notes, whole notes), rather than rapid passages.\nClassical players perform both bowed and pizz notes using vibrato, an effect created by rocking or quivering the left hand finger that is contacting the string, which then transfers an undulation in pitch to the tone. Vibrato is used to add expression to string playing. In general, very loud, low-register passages are played with little or no vibrato, as the main goal with low pitches is to provide a clear fundamental bass for the string section. Mid- and higher-register melodies are typically played with more vibrato. The speed and intensity of the vibrato is varied by the performer for an emotional and musical effect.\nIn jazz, rockabilly and other related genres, much or all of the focus is on playing pizzicato. In jazz and jump blues, bassists are required to play rapid pizzicato walking basslines for extended periods. Jazz and rockabilly bassists develop virtuoso pizzicato techniques that enable them to play rapid solos that incorporate fast-moving triplet and sixteenth note figures. Pizzicato basslines performed by leading jazz professionals are much more difficult than the pizzicato basslines that classical bassists encounter in the standard orchestral literature, which are typically whole notes, half notes, quarter notes, and occasional eighth note passages. In jazz and related styles, bassists often add semi-percussive \"ghost notes\" into basslines, to add to the rhythmic feel and to add fills to a bassline.\nThe double bass player stands, or sits on a high stool, and leans the instrument against their body, turned slightly inward to put the strings comfortably in reach. This stance is a key reason for the bass's sloped shoulders, which mark it apart from the other members of the violin family\u2014the narrower shoulders facilitate playing the strings in their higher registers.\nHistory.\nThe double bass is generally regarded as a modern descendant of the violone (It. \u201clarge viol\u201d), a member of the chordophone family that originated in Europe in the 15th century. Before the 20th century many double basses had only three strings, in contrast to the five to six strings typical of instruments in the viol family or the four strings of instruments in the violin family. The double bass's proportions are dissimilar to those of the violin and cello; for example, it is deeper (the distance from front to back is proportionally much greater than the violin). In addition, while the violin has bulging shoulders, most double basses have shoulders carved with a more acute slope, like members of the viol family. Many very old double basses have had their shoulders cut or sloped to aid playing with modern techniques. Before these modifications, the design of their shoulders was closer to instruments of the violin family.\nThe double bass is the only modern bowed string instrument that is tuned in fourths (like a viol), rather than fifths &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;. The instrument's exact lineage is still a matter of some debate, and the supposition that the double bass is a direct descendant of the viol family is one that has not been entirely resolved.\nIn his \"A New History of the Double Bass\", Paul Brun asserts that the double bass has origins as the true bass of the violin family. He states that, while the exterior of the double bass may resemble the viola da gamba, the internal construction of the double bass is nearly identical to instruments in the violin family, and very different from the internal structure of viols.\nDouble bass professor Larry Hurst argues that the \"modern double bass is not a true member of either the violin or viol families\". He says that \"most likely its first general shape was that of a violone, the largest member of the viol family. Some of the earliest basses extant are violones, (including C-shaped sound holes) that have been fitted with modern trappings.\" Some existing instruments, such as those by Gasparo da Sal\u00f2, were converted from 16th-century six-string contrabass violoni.\nDesign.\nThere are two major approaches to the design outline shape of the double bass: the \"violin form\" (shown in the labelled picture in the construction section); and the \"viola da gamba\" form (shown in the header picture of this article). A third less common design, called the \"busetto\" shape, can also be found, as can the even more rare \"guitar\" or \"pear\" shape. The back of the instrument can vary from being a round, carved back similar to that of the violin, to a flat and angled back similar to the viol family.\nThe double bass features many parts that are similar to members of the violin family, including a wooden, carved bridge to support the strings, two f-holes, a tailpiece into which the ball ends of the strings are inserted (with the tailpiece anchored around the endpin mount), an ornamental scroll near the pegbox, a nut with grooves for each string at the junction of the fingerboard and the pegbox and a sturdy, thick sound post, which transmits the vibrations from the top of the instrument to the hollow body and supports the pressure of the string tension. Unlike the rest of the violin family, the double bass still reflects influences, and can be considered partly derived, from the viol family of instruments, in particular the violone, the lowest-pitched and largest bass member of the viol family. For example, the bass is tuned in fourths, like a viol, rather than in fifths, which is the standard in the violin group. Also, notice that the 'shoulders' meet the neck in a curve, rather than the sharp angle seen among violins. As with the other violin and viol family instruments that are played with a bow (and unlike mainly plucked or picked instruments like guitar), the double bass's bridge has an arc-like, curved shape. This is done because with bowed instruments, the player must be able to play individual strings. If the double bass were to have a flat bridge, it would be impossible to bow the A and D strings individually.\nThe double bass also differs from members of the violin family in that the shoulders are typically sloped and the back is often angled (both to allow easier access to the instrument, particularly in the upper range). Machine tuners are always fitted, in contrast to the rest of the violin family, where traditional wooden friction pegs are still the primary means of tuning. Lack of standardization in design means that one double bass can sound and look very different from another.\nConstruction.\nThe double bass is closest in construction to violins, but has some notable similarities to the violone, the largest and lowest-pitched member of the viol family. Unlike the violone, however, the fingerboard of the double bass is unfretted, and the double bass has fewer strings (the violone, like most viols, generally had six strings, although some specimens had five or four). The fingerboard is made of ebony on high-quality instruments; on less expensive student instruments, other woods may be used and then painted or stained black (a process called \"ebonizing\"). The fingerboard is radiused using a curve, for the same reason that the bridge is curved: if the fingerboard and bridge were to be flat, then a bassist would not be able to bow the inner two strings individually. By using a curved bridge and a curved fingerboard, the bassist can align the bow with any of the four strings and play them individually. Unlike the violin and viola, but like the cello, the bass fingerboard is somewhat flattened out underneath the E string (the C string on cello), this is commonly known as a bevel. The vast majority of fingerboards cannot be adjusted by the performer; any adjustments must be made by a luthier. A very small number of expensive basses for professionals have adjustable fingerboards, in which a screw mechanism can be used to raise or lower the fingerboard height.\nAn important distinction between the double bass and other members of the violin family is the construction of the pegbox and the tuning mechanism. While the violin, viola, and cello all use friction pegs for tuning adjustments (tightening and loosening the string tension to raise or lower the string's pitch), the double bass has metal machine heads and gears. One of the challenges with tuning pegs is that the friction between the wood peg and the peg hole may become insufficient to hold the peg in place, particularly if the peg hole become worn and enlarged. The key on the tuning machine of a double bass turns a metal \"worm\", which drives a worm gear that winds the string. Turning the key in one direction tightens the string (thus raising its pitch); turning the key the opposite direction reduces the tension on the string (thus lowering its pitch). While this development makes fine tuners on the tailpiece (important for violin, viola and cello players, as their instruments use friction pegs for major pitch adjustments) unnecessary, a very small number of bassists use them nevertheless. One rationale for using fine tuners on bass is that for instruments with the low C extension, the pulley system for the long string may not effectively transfer turns of the key into changes of string tension/pitch. At the base of the double bass is a metal rod with a spiked or rubberized end called the endpin, which rests on the floor. This endpin is generally thicker and more robust than that of a cello, because of the greater mass of the instrument.\nThe materials most often used in double bass construction for fully carved basses (the type used by professional orchestra bassists and soloists) are maple (back, neck, ribs), spruce (top), and ebony (fingerboard, tailpiece). The tailpiece may be made from other types of wood or non-wood materials. Less expensive basses are typically constructed with laminated (plywood) tops, backs, and ribs, or are hybrid models produced with laminated backs and sides and carved solid wood tops. Some 2010-era lower- to mid-priced basses are made of willow, student models constructed of Fiberglass were produced in the mid-20th century, and some (typically fairly expensive) basses have been constructed of carbon fiber.\nLaminated (plywood) basses, which are widely used in music schools, youth orchestras, and in popular and folk music settings (including rockabilly, psychobilly, blues, etc.), are very resistant to humidity and heat, as well to the physical abuse they are apt to encounter in a school environment (or, for blues and folk musicians, to the hazards of touring and performing in bars). Another option is the hybrid body bass, which has a laminated back and a carved or solid wood top. It is less costly and somewhat less fragile (at least regarding its back) than a fully carved bass.\nThe soundpost and bass bar are components of the internal construction. All the parts of a double bass are glued together, except the soundpost, bridge, and tailpiece, which are held in place by string tension (although the soundpost usually remains in place when the instrument's strings are loosened or removed, as long as the bass is kept on its back. Some luthiers recommend changing only one string at a time to reduce the risk of the soundpost falling). If the soundpost falls, a luthier is needed to put the soundpost back into position, as this must be done with tools inserted into the f-holes; moreover, the exact placement of the soundpost under the bridge is essential for the instrument to sound its best. Basic bridges are carved from a single piece of wood, which is customized to match the shape of the top of each instrument. The least expensive bridges on student instruments may be customized just by sanding the feet to match the shape of the instrument's top. A bridge on a professional bassist's instrument may be ornately carved by a luthier.\nProfessional bassists are more likely to have adjustable bridges, which have a metal screw mechanism. This enables the bassist to raise or lower the height of the strings to accommodate changing humidity or temperature conditions. The metal tuning machines are attached to the sides of the pegbox with metal screws. While tuning mechanisms generally differ from the higher-pitched orchestral stringed instruments, some basses have non-functional, ornamental tuning pegs projecting from the side of the pegbox, in imitation of the tuning pegs on a cello or violin.\nFamous double bass makers come from around the world and often represent varied national characteristics. The most highly sought (and expensive) instruments come from Italy and include basses made by Giovanni Paolo Maggini, Gasparo da Sal\u00f2, the Testore family (Carlo Antonio, Carlo Giuseppe, Gennaro, Giovanni, Paulo Antonio), Celestino Puolotti, and Matteo Goffriller. French and English basses from famous makers are also sought out by players.\nTravel instruments.\nSeveral manufacturers make travel instruments, which are double basses that have features which reduce the size of the instrument so that the instrument will meet airline travel requirements. Travel basses are designed for touring musicians. One type of travel bass has a much smaller body than normal, while still retaining all of the features needed for playing. While these smaller-body instruments appear similar to electric upright basses, the difference is that small-body travel basses still have a fairly large hollow acoustic sound chamber, while many EUBs are solid body, or only have a small hollow chamber. A second type of travel bass has a hinged or removable neck and a regular sized body. The hinged or removable neck makes the instrument smaller when it is packed for transportation.\nStrings.\nThe history of the double bass is tightly coupled to the development of string technology, as it was the advent of overwound gut strings, which first rendered the instrument more generally practicable, as wound or overwound strings attain low notes within a smaller overall string diameter than non-wound strings. Professor Larry Hurst argues that had \"it not been for the appearance of the overwound gut string in the 1650s, the double bass would surely have become extinct\", because thicknesses needed for regular gut strings made the lower-pitched strings almost unplayable and hindered the development of fluid, rapid playing in the lower register.\nPrior to the 20th century, double bass strings were usually made of catgut; however, steel has largely replaced it, because steel strings hold their pitch better and yield more volume when played with the bow. Gut strings are also more vulnerable to changes of humidity and temperature, and break more easily than steel strings.\nGut strings are nowadays mostly used by bassists who perform in baroque ensembles, rockabilly bands, traditional blues bands, and bluegrass bands. In some cases, the low E and A are wound in silver, to give them added mass. Gut strings provide the dark, \"thumpy\" sound heard on 1940s and 1950s recordings. The late Jeff Sarli, a blues upright bassist, said that \"Starting in the 1950s, they began to reset the necks on basses for steel strings.\" Rockabilly and bluegrass bassists also prefer gut because it is much easier to perform the \"slapping\" upright bass style (in which the strings are percussively slapped and clicked against the fingerboard) with gut strings than with steel strings, because gut does not hurt the plucking fingers as much. A less expensive alternative to gut strings is nylon strings; the higher strings are pure nylon, and the lower strings are nylon wrapped in wire, to add more mass to the string, slowing the vibration, and thus facilitating lower pitches.\nThe change from gut to steel has also affected the instrument's playing technique over the last hundred years. Steel strings can be set up closer to the fingerboard and, additionally, strings can be played in higher positions on the lower strings and still produce clear tone. The classic 19th century Franz Simandl method does not use the low E string in higher positions because older gut strings, set up high over the fingerboard, could not produce clear tone in these higher positions. However, with modern steel strings, bassists can play with clear tone in higher positions on the low E and A strings, particularly when they use modern lighter-gauge, lower-tension steel strings.\nBows.\nThe double bass bow comes in two distinct forms (shown below). The \"French\" or \"overhand\" bow is similar in shape and implementation to the bow used on the other members of the orchestral string instrument family, while the \"German\" or \"Butler\" bow is typically broader and shorter, and is held in a \"hand shake\" (or \"hacksaw\") position.\nThese two bows provide different ways of moving the arm and distributing force and weight on the strings. Proponents of the French bow argue that it is more maneuverable, due to the angle at which the player holds the bow. Advocates of the German bow claim that it allows the player to apply more arm weight on the strings. The differences between the two, however, are minute for a proficient player, and modern players in major orchestras use both bows.\nGerman bow.\nThe German bow (sometimes called the Butler bow) is the older of the two designs. The design of the bow and the manner of holding it descend from the older viol instrument family. With older viols, before frogs had screw threads to tighten the bow, players held the bow with two fingers between the stick and the hair to maintain tension of the hair. Proponents of the use of German bow claim that the German bow is easier to use for heavy strokes that require a lot of power.\nCompared to the French bow, the German bow has a taller frog, and the player holds it with the palm angled upwards, as with the upright members of the viol family. When held in the traditionally correct manner, the thumb applies the necessary power to generate the desired sound. The index finger meets the bow at the point where the frog meets the stick. The index finger also applies an upward torque to the frog when tilting the bow. The little finger (or \"pinky\") supports the frog from underneath, while the ring finger and middle finger rest in the space between the hair and the shaft.\nFrench bow.\nThe French bow was not widely popular until its adoption by 19th-century virtuoso Giovanni Bottesini. This style is more similar to the traditional bows of the smaller string family instruments. It is held as if the hand is resting by the side of the performer with the palm facing toward the bass. The thumb rests on the shaft of the bow, next to the frog while the other fingers drape on the other side of the bow. Various styles dictate the curve of the fingers and thumb, as do the style of piece; a more pronounced curve and lighter hold on the bow is used for virtuoso or more delicate pieces, while a flatter curve and sturdier grip on the bow sacrifices some power for easier control in strokes such as detach\u00e9, spiccato, and staccato.\nBow construction and materials.\nDouble bass bows vary in length, ranging from . In general, a bass bow is shorter and heavier than a cello bow. Pernambuco, also known as Brazilwood, is regarded as an excellent quality stick material, but due to its scarcity and expense, other materials are increasingly being used. Inexpensive student bows may be constructed of solid fiberglass, which makes the bow much lighter than a wooden bow (even too light to produce a good tone, in some cases). Student bows may also be made of the less valuable varieties of brazilwood. Snakewood and carbon fiber are also used in bows of a variety of different qualities. The frog of the double bass bow is usually made out of ebony, although snakewood and buffalo horn are used by some luthiers. The frog is movable, as it can be tightened or loosened with a knob (like all violin family bows). The bow is loosened at the end of a practice session or performance. The bow is tightened before playing, until it reaches a tautness that is preferred by the player. The frog on a quality bow is decorated with mother of pearl inlay.\nBows have a leather wrapping on the wooden part of the bow near the frog. Along with the leather wrapping, there is also a wire wrapping, made of silver in quality bows. The hair is usually horsehair. Part of the regular maintenance of a bow is having the bow \"rehaired\" by a luthier with fresh horsehair and having the leather and wire wrapping replaced. The double bass bow is strung with either white or black horsehair, or a combination of the two (known as \"salt and pepper\"), as opposed to the customary white horsehair used on the bows of other string instruments. Some of the lowest-quality, lowest cost student bows are made with synthetic hair. Synthetic hair does not have the tiny \"barbs\" that real horsehair has, so it does not \"grip\" the string well or take rosin well.\nRosin.\nString players apply rosin to the bow hair so it \"grips\" the string and makes it vibrate. Double bass rosin is generally softer and stickier than violin rosin to allow the hair to grab the thicker strings better, but players use a wide variety of rosins that vary from quite hard (like violin rosin) to quite soft, depending on the weather, the humidity, and the preference of the player. The amount used generally depends on the type of music being performed as well as the personal preferences of the player. Bassists may apply more rosin in works for large orchestra (e.g., Brahms symphonies) than for delicate chamber works. Some brands of rosin, such as Wiedoeft or Pop's double bass rosin, are softer and more prone to melting in hot weather. Other brands, such as Carlsson or Nyman Harts double bass rosin, are harder and less prone to melting.\nMechanism of sound production.\nOwing to their relatively small diameters, the strings themselves do not move much air and therefore cannot produce much sound on their own. The vibrational energy of the strings must somehow be transferred to the surrounding air. \nTo do this, the strings vibrate the bridge and this in turn vibrates the top surface. Very small amplitude but relatively large force variations (due to the cyclically varying tension in the vibrating string) at the bridge are transformed to larger amplitude ones by combination of bridge and body of the bass. The bridge transforms the high force, small amplitude vibrations to lower force higher amplitude vibrations on the top of the bass body. The top is connected to the back by means of a sound post, so the back also vibrates. Both the front and back transmit the vibrations to the air and act to match the impedance of the vibrating string to the acoustic impedance of the air.\nSpecific sound and tone production mechanism.\nBecause the acoustic bass is a non-fretted instrument, any string vibration due to plucking or bowing will cause an audible sound due to the strings vibrating against the fingerboard near to the fingered position. This buzzing sound gives the note its character.\nPitch.\nThe lowest note of a double bass is an E1 (on standard four-string basses) at approximately 41\u00a0Hz or a C1 (\u224833\u00a0Hz), or sometimes B0 (\u224831\u00a0Hz), when five strings are used. This is within about an octave above the lowest frequency that the average human ear can perceive as a distinctive pitch. The top of the instrument's fingerboard range is typically near D5, two octaves and a fifth above the open pitch of the G string (G2), as shown in the range illustration found at the head of this article. Playing beyond the end of the fingerboard can be accomplished by pulling the string slightly to the side.\nDouble bass symphony parts sometimes indicate that the performer should play harmonics (also called flageolet tones), in which the bassist lightly touches the string\u2014without pressing it onto the fingerboard in the usual fashion\u2014in the location of a note and then plucks or bows the note. Bowed harmonics are used in contemporary music for their \"glassy\" sound. Both natural harmonics and artificial harmonics, where the thumb stops the note and the octave or other harmonic is activated by lightly touching the string at the relative node point, extend the instrument's range considerably. Natural and artificial harmonics are used in plenty of virtuoso concertos for the double bass.\nOrchestral parts from the standard Classical repertoire rarely demand the double bass exceed a two-octave and a minor third range, from E1 to G3, with occasional A3s appearing in the standard repertoire (an exception to this rule is Orff's \"Carmina Burana\", which calls for three octaves and a perfect fourth). The upper limit of this range is extended a great deal for 20th- and 21st-century orchestral parts (e.g., Prokofiev's \"Lieutenant Kij\u00e9 Suite\" (c.1933) bass solo, which calls for notes as high as D4 and E\u266d4). The upper range a virtuoso solo player can achieve using natural and artificial harmonics is hard to define, as it depends on the skill of the particular player. The high harmonic in the range illustration found at the head of this article may be taken as representative rather than normative.\nFive-string instruments have an additional string, typically tuned to a low B below the E string (B0). On rare occasions, a higher string is added instead, tuned to the C above the G string (C3). Four-string instruments may feature the C extension extending the range of the E string downwards to C1 (sometimes B0).\nTraditionally, the double bass is a transposing instrument. Since much of the double bass's range lies below the standard bass clef, it is notated an octave higher than it sounds to avoid having to use excessive ledger lines below the staff. Thus, when double bass players and cellists are playing from a combined bass-cello part, as used in many Mozart and Haydn symphonies, they will play in octaves, with the basses one octave below the cellos. This transposition applies even when bass players are reading the tenor and treble clef (which are used in solo playing and some orchestral parts). The tenor clef is also used by composers for cello and low brass parts. The use of tenor or treble clef avoids excessive ledger lines above the staff when notating the instrument's upper range. Other notation traditions exist. Italian solo music is typically written at the sounding pitch, and the \"old\" German method sounded an octave below where notation except in the treble clef, where the music was written at pitch.\nTuning.\nRegular tuning.\nThe double bass is generally tuned in fourths, in contrast to other members of the orchestral string family, which are tuned in fifths (for example, the violin's four strings are, from lowest-pitched to highest-pitched: G\u2013D\u2013A\u2013E). The standard tuning (lowest-pitched to highest-pitched) for bass is E\u2013A\u2013D\u2013G, starting from E below second low C (concert pitch). This is the same as the standard tuning of a bass guitar and is one octave lower than the four lowest-pitched strings of standard guitar tuning. Prior to the 19th-century, some double basses had 3 strings for lessened tension allowing for better solo tone and greater projection overall; \"Giovanni Bottesini (1821\u20131889) favored the three-stringed instrument popular in Italy at the time\", because \"the three-stringed instrument [was viewed as] being more sonorous\". Many cobla bands in Catalonia still have players using traditional three-string double basses tuned A\u2013D\u2013G.\nThroughout classical repertoire, there are notes that fall below the range of a standard double bass. Notes below low E appear regularly in the double bass parts found in later arrangements and interpretations of Baroque music. In the Classical era, the double bass typically doubled the cello part an octave below, occasionally requiring descent to C below the E of the four-string double bass. In the Romantic era and the 20th century, composers such as Wagner, Mahler, Busoni and Prokofiev also requested notes below the low E.\nThere are several methods for making these notes available to the player. Players with standard double basses (E\u2013A\u2013D\u2013G) may play the notes below \"E\" an octave higher or if this sounds awkward, the entire passage may be transposed up an octave. The player may tune the low E string down to the lowest note required in the piece: D or C. Four-string basses may be fitted with a \"low-C extension\" (see below). Or the player may employ a five-string instrument, with the additional lower string tuned to C, or (more commonly in modern times) B, three octaves and a semitone below middle C. Several major European orchestras use basses with a fifth string.\nC extension.\nMost professional orchestral players use four-string double basses with a \"C extension\". This is an extra section of fingerboard mounted on the head of the bass. It extends the fingerboard under the lowest string and gives an additional four semitones of downward range. The lowest string is typically tuned down to C1, an octave below the lowest note on the cello (as it is quite common for a bass part to double the cello part an octave lower). More rarely this string may be tuned to a low B0, as a few works in the orchestral repertoire call for such a B, such as Respighi's \"The Pines of Rome\". In rare cases, some players have a low B extension, which has B as its lowest note. There are several varieties of extensions:\nIn the simplest mechanical extensions, there are no mechanical aids attached to the fingerboard extension except a locking nut or \"gate\" for the E note. To play the extension notes, the player reaches back over the area under the scroll to press the string to the fingerboard. The advantage of this \"fingered\" extension is that the player can adjust the intonation of all of the stopped notes on the extension, and there are no mechanical noises from metal keys and levers. The disadvantage of the \"fingered\" extension is that it can be hard to perform rapid alternations between low notes on the extension and notes on the regular fingerboard, such as a bassline that quickly alternates between G1 and D1.\nThe simplest type of mechanical aid is the use of wooden \"fingers\" or \"gates\" that can be closed to press the string down and fret the C\u266f, D, E\u266d, or E notes. This system is particularly useful for basslines that have a repeating pedal point such as a low D because once the note is locked in place with the mechanical finger the lowest string sounds a different note when played open.\nThe most complicated mechanical aid for use with extensions is the mechanical lever system nicknamed the \"machine\". This lever system, which superficially resembles the keying mechanism of reed instruments such as the bassoon, mounts levers beside the regular fingerboard (near the nut, on the E-string side), which remotely activate metal \"fingers\" on the extension fingerboard. The most expensive metal lever systems also give the player the ability to \"lock\" down notes on the extension fingerboard, as with the wooden \"finger\" system. One criticism of these devices is that they may lead to unwanted metallic clicking noises.\nOnce a mechanical \"finger\" of the wooden \"finger\" extension or the metal \"finger\" machine extension is locked down or depressed, it is not easy to make microtonal pitch adjustments or glissando effects, as is possible with a hand-fingered extension.\nFive-string basses, in which the lowest string is normally B0, may use either a two semitone extension, providing a low A, or the very rare low G extension.\nOther tuning variations.\nA small number of bass players tune their strings in fifths, like a cello but an octave lower (C1\u2013G1\u2013D2\u2013A2 low to high). This tuning was used by the jazz player Red Mitchell and is used by some classical players, notably the Canadian bassist Joel Quarrington. Advocates of tuning the bass in fifths point out that all of the other orchestral strings are tuned in fifths (violin, viola, and cello), so this puts the bass in the same tuning approach. Fifth tuning provides a bassist with a wider range of pitch than a standard E\u2013A\u2013D\u2013G bass, as it ranges (without an extension) from C1 to A2. Some players who use fifths tuning who play a five-string bass use an additional high E3 string (thus, from lowest to highest: C\u2013G\u2013D\u2013A\u2013E). Some fifth tuning bassists who only have a four string instrument and who are mainly performing soloistic works use the G\u2013D\u2013A\u2013E tuning, thus omitting the low C string but gaining a high E. Some fifth tuning bassists who use a five-string use a smaller scale instrument, thus making fingering somewhat easier. The Berlioz\u2013Strauss Treatise on Instrumentation (first published in 1844) states that \"A good orchestra should have several four-string double-basses, some of them tuned in fifths and thirds.\" The book then shows a tuning of E1\u2013G1\u2013D2\u2013A2) from bottom to top string. \"Together with the other double-basses tuned in fourths, a combination of open strings would be available, which would greatly increase the sonority of the orchestra.\"\nIn classical solo playing the double bass is usually tuned a whole tone higher (F\u266f1\u2013B1\u2013E2\u2013A2). This higher tuning is called \"solo tuning\", whereas the regular tuning is known as \"orchestral tuning\". Modern solo tuning strings are generally thinner than regular strings. String tension differs so much between solo and orchestral tuning that a different set of strings is often employed that has a lighter gauge. Strings are almost always labelled for either solo or orchestral tuning today, previously solo tuning was intended for any string as it originates from how the standard gut strings of the era would respond to the extra tension, providing more warmth and projection. Published solo music is arranged for either solo or orchestral tuning with some more specialized tuning such as a tuning used by Bottesini that goes up a minor third rather than a whole step. Some popular solos and concerti, such as the \"Koussevitsky Concerto\" are available in both solo and orchestral tuning arrangements. Solo tuning strings can be tuned down a tone to play in orchestra pitch, but the strings often lack projection in orchestral tuning and their pitch may be unstable, wheras modern gut strings will respond properly to either given proper care when re-tuning.\nSome contemporary composers specify highly specialized scordatura (intentionally changing the tuning of the open strings). Changing the pitch of the open strings makes different notes available as pedal points and harmonics. Berio, for example, asks the player to tune their strings E1\u2013G\u266f1\u2013D2\u2013G2 in \"Sequenza XIVb\" and Scelsi asks for both F1\u2013A1\u2013D2\u2013E2 and F1\u2013A1\u2013F2\u2013E2 in \"Nuits\".\nA variant and much less-commonly used form of solo tuning used in some Eastern European countries is (A1\u2013D2\u2013G2\u2013C3), which omits the low E string from orchestral tuning and then adds a high C string. The tololoche in Mexico (a smaller variant of the double bass) also uses the A-D-G-C tuning. Some bassists with five-string basses use a high C3 string as the fifth string, instead of a low B0 string. Adding the high C string facilitates the performance of solo repertoire with a high tessitura (range). Another option is to utilize both a low C (or low B) extension and a high C string.\nFive strings.\nWhen choosing a bass with a fifth string, the player may decide between adding a higher-pitched string (a high C string) or a lower-pitched string (typically a low B). To accommodate the additional fifth string, the fingerboard is usually slightly widened, and the top slightly thicker, to handle the increased tension. Most five-string basses are therefore larger in size than a standard four-string bass. Some five-stringed instruments are converted four-string instruments. Because these do not have wider fingerboards, some players find them more difficult to finger and bow. Converted four-string basses usually require either a new, thicker top, or lighter strings to compensate for the increased tension.\nSix strings.\nThe six-string double bass has both a high C and a low B, making it very useful, and it is becoming more practical after several updates. It is ideal for solo and orchestral playing because it has a more playable range. This can be achieved on a six-string violone in D by restringing it with double bass strings, making the tuning B0\u2013E1\u2013A1\u2013D2\u2013G2\u2013C3.\nPlaying and performance considerations.\nBody and hand position.\nDouble bassists either stand or sit to play the instrument. The instrument height is set by adjusting the endpin such that the player can reach the desired playing zones of the strings with the bow or plucking hand. Bassists who stand and bow sometimes set the endpin by aligning the first finger in either first or half position with eye level, although there is little standardization in this regard. Players who sit generally use a stool about the height of the player's trousers inseam length.\nTraditionally, double bassists stood to play solo and sat to play in the orchestra or opera pit. Now, it is unusual for a player to be equally proficient in both positions, so some soloists sit (as with Joel Quarrington, Jeff Bradetich, Thierry Barb\u00e9, and others) and some orchestral bassists stand.\nWhen playing in the instrument's upper range (above G3, the G below middle C), the player shifts the hand from behind the neck and flattens it out, using the side of the thumb to press down the string. This technique\u2014also used on the cello\u2014is called \"thumb position\". While playing in thumb position, few players use the fourth (little) finger, as it is usually too weak to produce reliable tone (this is also true for cellists), although some extreme chords or extended techniques, especially in contemporary music, may require its use.\nPhysical considerations.\nRockabilly style can be very demanding on the plucking hand, due to rockabilly's use of \"slapping\" on the fingerboard.\nPerforming on bass can be physically demanding, because the strings are under relatively high tension. Also, the space between notes on the fingerboard is large, due to scale length and string spacing, so players must hold their fingers apart for the notes in the lower positions and shift positions frequently to play basslines. As with all non-fretted string instruments, performers must learn to place their fingers precisely to produce the correct pitch. For bassists with shorter arms or smaller hands, the large spaces between pitches may present a significant challenge, especially in the lowest range, where the spaces between notes are largest. However, the increased use of playing techniques such as thumb position and modifications to the bass, such as the use of lighter-gauge strings at lower tension, have eased the difficulty of playing the instrument.\nBass parts have relatively fewer fast passages, double stops, or large jumps in range. These parts are usually given to the cello section, since the cello is a smaller instrument on which these techniques are more easily performed.\nUntil the 1990s, child-sized double basses were not widely available, and the large size of the bass prevented children from playing the instrument until they grew to a height and hand size that allowed them to play a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444-size model (the most common size). Starting in the 1990s, smaller &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20448, and even &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204416-sized instruments became more widely available, so children could start younger.\nVolume.\nDespite the size of the instrument, it is not as loud as many other instruments, due to its low musical pitch. In a large orchestra, usually between four and eight bassists play the same bassline in unison to produce enough volume. In the largest orchestras, bass sections may have as many as ten or twelve players, but modern budget constraints make bass sections this large unusual.\nWhen writing solo passages for the bass in orchestral or chamber music, composers typically ensure the orchestration is light so it does not obscure the bass. While amplification is rarely used in classical music, in some cases where a bass soloist performs a concerto with a full orchestra, subtle amplification called acoustic enhancement may be used. The use of microphones and amplifiers in a classical setting has led to debate within the classical community, as \"...purists maintain that the natural acoustic sound of [Classical] voices [or] instruments in a given hall should not be altered\".\nIn many genres, such as jazz and blues, players use amplification via a specialized amplifier and loudspeakers. A piezoelectric pickup connects to the amplifier with a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444-inch cable. Bluegrass and jazz players typically use less amplification than blues, psychobilly, or jam band players. In the latter cases, high overall volume from other amplifiers and instruments may cause unwanted acoustic feedback, a problem exacerbated by the bass's large surface area and interior volume. The feedback problem has led to technological fixes like electronic feedback eliminator devices (essentially an automated notch filter that identifies and reduces frequencies where feedback occurs) and instruments like the electric upright bass, which has playing characteristics like the double bass but usually little or no soundbox, which makes feedback less likely. Some bassists reduce the problem of feedback by lowering their onstage volume or playing further away from their bass amp speakers.\nIn rockabilly and psychobilly, percussively slapping the strings against the fingerboard is an important part of the bass playing style. Since piezoelectric pickups are not good at reproducing the sounds of strings being slapped against the fingerboard, bassists in these genres often use both piezoelectric pickups (for the low bass tone) and a miniature condenser mic (to pick up the percussive slapping sounds). These two signals are blended together using a simple mixer before the signal is sent to the bass amp.\nTransportation.\nThe double bass's large size and relative fragility make it cumbersome to handle and transport. Most bassists use soft cases, referred to as gig bags, to protect the instrument during transport. These range from inexpensive, thin unpadded cases used by students (which only protect against scratches and rain) to thickly padded versions for professional players, which also protect against bumps and impacts. Some bassists carry their bow in a hard bow case; more expensive bass cases have a large pocket for a bow case. Players also may use a small cart and end pin-attached wheels to move the bass. Some higher-priced padded cases have wheels attached to the case. Another option found in higher-priced padded cases are backpack straps, to make it easier to carry the instrument.\nHard flight cases have cushioned interiors and tough exteriors of carbon fiber, graphite, fiberglass, or Kevlar. The cost of good hard cases\u2013several thousand US dollars\u2013and the high airline fees for shipping them tend to limit their use to touring professionals.\nAccessories.\nDouble bass players use various accessories to help them to perform and rehearse. Three types of mutes are used in orchestral music: a wooden mute that slides onto the bridge, a rubber mute that attaches to the bridge and a wire device with brass weights that fits onto the bridge. The player uses the mute when the Italian instruction \"con sordino\" (\"with mute\") appears in the bass part, and removes it in response to the instruction \"senza sordino\" (\"without mute\"). With the mute on, the tone of the bass is quieter, darker, and more somber. Bowed bass parts with a mute can have a nasal tone. Players use a third type of mute, a heavy rubber practice mute, to practice quietly without disturbing others (e.g., in a hotel room).\nA quiver is an accessory for holding the bow. It is often made of leather and it attaches to the bridge and tailpiece with ties or straps. It is used to hold the bow while a player plays pizzicato parts.\nA wolf tone eliminator is used to lessen unwanted sympathetic vibrations in the part of a string between the bridge and the tailpiece which can cause tone problems for certain notes. It is a rubber tube cut down the side that is used with a cylindrical metal sleeve which also has a slot on the side. The metal cylinder has a screw and a nut that fastens the device to the string. Different placements of the cylinder along the string influence or eliminate the frequency at which the wolf tone occurs. It is essentially an attenuator that slightly shifts the natural frequency of the string (and/or instrument body) cutting down on the reverberation. The wolf tone occurs because the strings below the bridge sometimes resonate at pitches close to notes on the playing part of the string. When the intended note makes the below-the-bridge string vibrate sympathetically, a dissonant \"wolf note\" or \"wolf tone\" can occur. In some cases, the wolf tone is strong enough to cause an audible \"beating\" sound. The wolf tone often occurs with the note G\u266f on the bass.\nIn orchestra, instruments tune to an A played by the oboist. Due to the three-octave gap between the oboist's tuning A and the open A string on the bass (for example, in an orchestra that tunes to 440\u00a0Hz, the oboist plays an A4 at 440\u00a0Hz and the open A1 of the bass is 55\u00a0Hz) it can be difficult to tune the bass by ear during the short period that the oboist plays the tuning note. Violinists, on the other hand, tune their A string to the same frequency as the oboist's tuning note. There is a method commonly used to tune a double bass in this context by playing the A harmonic on the D string (which is only an octave below the oboe A) and then matching the harmonics of the other strings. However, this method is not foolproof, since some basses' harmonics are not perfectly in tune with the open strings. To ensure the bass is in tune, some bassists use an electronic tuner that indicates pitch on a small display. Bassists who play in styles that use a bass amp, such as blues, rockabilly, or jazz, may use a stompbox-format electronic tuner, which mutes the bass pickup during tuning.\nA double bass stand is used to hold the instrument in place and raise it a few inches off the ground. A wide variety of stands are available, and there is no one common design.\nClassical repertoire.\nSolo works for double bass.\n1700s.\nThe double bass as a solo instrument enjoyed a period of popularity during the 18th century and many of the most popular composers from that era wrote pieces for the double bass. The double bass, then often referred to as the Violone, used different tunings from region to region. The \"Viennese tuning\" (A1\u2013D2\u2013F\u266f2\u2013A2) was popular, and in some cases a fifth string or even sixth string was added (F1\u2013A1\u2013D2\u2013F\u266f2\u2013A2). The popularity of the instrument is documented in Leopold Mozart's second edition of his Violinschule, where he writes \"One can bring forth difficult passages easier with the five-string violone, and I heard unusually beautiful performances of concertos, trios, solos, etc.\"\nThe earliest known concerto for double bass was written by Joseph Haydn c.1763, and is presumed lost in a fire at the Eisenstadt library. The earliest known existing concertos are by Carl Ditters von Dittersdorf, who composed two concertos for the double bass and a Sinfonia Concertante for viola and double bass. Other composers that have written concertos from this period include Johann Baptist Wanhal, Franz Anton Hoffmeister (3 concertos), Leopold Kozeluch, Anton Zimmermann, Antonio Capuzzi, Wenzel Pichl (2 concertos), and Johannes Matthias Sperger (18 concertos). While many of these names were leading figures to the music public of their time, they are generally unknown by contemporary audiences. Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart's concert aria, \"Per questa bella mano\", K.612 for bass, double bass obbligato, and orchestra contains impressive writing for solo double bass of that period. It remains popular among both singers and double bassists today.\nThe double bass eventually evolved to fit the needs of orchestras that required lower notes and a louder sound. The leading double bassists from the mid-to-late 18th century, such as Josef K\u00e4mpfer, Friedrich Pischelberger, and Johannes Mathias Sperger employed the \"Viennese\" tuning. Bassist Johann Hindle (1792\u20131862), who composed a concerto for the double bass, pioneered tuning the bass in fourths, which marked a turning point for the double bass and its role in solo works. Bassist Domenico Dragonetti was a prominent musical figure and an acquaintance of Haydn and Ludwig van Beethoven. His playing was known all the way from his homeland, Italy, to the Tsardom of Russia and he found a prominent place performing in concerts with the Philharmonic Society of London. Beethoven's friendship with Dragonetti may have inspired him to write difficult, separate parts for the double bass in his symphonies, such as the impressive passages in the third movement of the Fifth Symphony, the second movement of the Seventh Symphony, and last movement of the Ninth Symphony. These parts do not double the cello part.\nDragonetti wrote ten concertos for the double bass and many solo works for bass and piano. During Rossini's stay in London in the summer of 1824, he composed his popular Duetto for cello and double bass for Dragonetti and the cellist David Salomons. Dragonetti frequently played on a three string double bass tuned G\u2013D\u2013A from top to bottom. The use of only the top three strings was popular for bass soloists and principal bassists in orchestras in the 19th century, because it reduced the pressure on the wooden top of the bass, which creates a more resonant sound, most noticeably in the lower register. As well, the low E-strings used during the 19th century were thick cords made of gut, which were difficult to tune and play.\n1800s.\nIn the 19th century, the opera conductor, composer, and bassist Giovanni Bottesini was considered the \"Paganini of the double bass\" of his time, a reference to the violin virtuoso and composer. Bottesini's bass concertos were written in the popular Italian opera style of the 19th century, which exploit the double bass in a way that was not seen beforehand. They require virtuosic runs and great leaps to the highest registers of the instrument, even into the realm of natural and artificial harmonics. Many 19th century and early 20th century bassists considered these compositions unplayable, but in the 2000s, they are frequently performed. During the same time, a prominent school of bass players in the Czech region arose, which included Franz Simandl, Theodore Albin Findeisen, Josef Hrabe, Ludwig Manoly, and Adolf Mi\u0161ek. Simandl and Hrabe were also pedagogues whose method books and studies remain in use in the 2000s.\n1900s\u2013present.\nThe leading figure of the double bass in the early 20th century was Serge Koussevitzky, best known as conductor of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, who popularized the double bass in modern times as a solo instrument. Because of improvements to the double bass with steel strings and better set-ups, the bass is now played at a more advanced level than ever before and more and more composers have written works for the double bass. In the mid-century and in the following decades, many new concerti were written for the double bass, including Nikos Skalkottas's Concerto (1942), Eduard Tubin's Concerto (1948), Lars-Erik Larsson's Concertino (1957), Gunther Schuller's Concerto (1962), Hans Werner Henze's Concerto (1966) and Frank Proto's Concerto No. 1 (1968).\nThe \"Solo For Contrabass\" is one of the parts of John Cage's \"Concert For Piano And Orchestra\" and can be played as a solo, or with any of the other parts both orchestral and/or piano. Similarly, his solo contrabass parts for the orchestral work \"Atlas Eclipticalis\" can also be performed as solos. Cage's indeterminate works such as \"Variations I\", \"Variations II\", \"Fontana Mix\", \"Cartridge Music\" et al. can be arranged for a solo contrabassist. His work \"26.1.1499 for a String Player\" is often realized by a solo contrabass player, although it can also be played by a violinist, violist, or cellist.\nFrom the 1960s through the end of the century Gary Karr was the leading proponent of the double bass as a solo instrument and was active in commissioning or having hundreds of new works and concerti written especially for him. Karr was given Koussevitzky's famous solo double bass by Olga Koussevitsky and played it in concerts around the world for 40 years before, in turn, giving the instrument to the International Society of Bassists for talented soloists to use in concert. Another important performer in this period, Bertram Turetzky, commissioned and premiered more than 300 double bass works.\nIn the 1970s, 1980 and 1990s, new concerti included Nino Rota's \"Divertimento for Double Bass and Orchestra\" (1973), Alan Ridout's concerto for double bass and strings (1974), Jean Fran\u00e7aix's Concerto (1975), Frank Proto's Concerto No.\u00a02, Einojuhani Rautavaara's \"Angel of Dusk\" (1980), Gian Carlo Menotti's Concerto (1983), Christopher Rouse's Concerto (1985), Henry Brant's Ghost Nets (1988) and Frank Proto's \"Carmen Fantasy for Double Bass and Orchestra\" (1991) and \"Four Scenes after Picasso\" Concerto No.\u00a03 (1997). Peter Maxwell Davies' lyrical Strathclyde Concerto No.\u00a07, for double bass and orchestra, dates from 1992.\nIn the first decade of the 21st century, new concerti include Frank Proto's \"Nine Variants on Paganini\" (2002), Kalevi Aho's Concerto (2005), John Harbison's \"Concerto for Bass Viol\" (2006), Andr\u00e9 Previn's Double Concerto for violin, double bass, and orchestra (2007) and John Woolrich's \"To the Silver Bow\", for double bass, viola and strings (2014).\nReinhold Gli\u00e8re wrote an Intermezzo and Tarantella for double bass and piano, Op.\u00a09, No.\u00a01 and No.\u00a02 and a Praeludium and Scherzo for double bass and piano, Op.\u00a032 No.\u00a01 and No.\u00a02. Paul Hindemith wrote a rhythmically challenging Double Bass Sonata in 1949. Frank Proto wrote his Sonata \"1963\" for Double Bass and Piano. In the Soviet Union, Mieczys\u0142aw Weinberg wrote his Sonata No.\u00a01 for double bass solo in 1971. Giacinto Scelsi wrote two double bass pieces called \"Nuits\" in 1972, and then in 1976, he wrote \"Maknongan\", a piece for any low-voiced instrument, such as double bass, contrabassoon, or tuba. Vincent Persichetti wrote solo works\u2014which he called \"Parables\"\u2014for many instruments. He wrote Parable XVII for Double Bass, Op.\u00a0131 in 1974. Sofia Gubaidulina penned a Sonata for double bass and piano in 1975. In 1976 American minimalist composer Tom Johnson wrote \"Failing \u2013 a very difficult piece for solo string bass\" in which the player has to perform an extremely virtuosic solo on the bass whilst simultaneously reciting a text which says how very difficult the piece is and how unlikely he or she is to successfully complete the performance without making a mistake.\nIn 1977 Dutch-Hungarian composer G\u00e9za Frid wrote a set of variations on The Elephant from Saint-Sa\u00ebns' \"Le Carnaval des Animaux\" for scordatura double bass and string orchestra. In 1987 Lowell Liebermann wrote his Sonata for Contrabass and Piano Op.\u00a024. Fernando Grillo wrote the \"Suite No.\u00a01\" for double bass (1983/2005). Jacob Druckman wrote a piece for solo double bass entitled \"Valentine\". US double bass soloist and composer Bertram Turetzky (born 1933) has performed and recorded more than 300 pieces written by and for him. He writes chamber music, baroque music, classical, jazz, renaissance music, improvisational music and world music\nUS minimalist composer Philip Glass wrote a prelude focused on the lower register that he scored for timpani and double bass. Italian composer Sylvano Bussotti, whose composing career spans from the 1930s to the first decade of the 21st century, wrote a solo work for bass in 1983 entitled \"Naked Angel Face per contrabbasso\". Fellow Italian composer Franco Donatoni wrote a piece called \"Lem for contrabbasso\" in the same year. In 1989, French composer Pascal Dusapin (born 1955) wrote a solo piece called \"In et Out\" for double bass. In 1996, the Sorbonne-trained Lebanese composer Karim Haddad composed \"Ce qui dort dans l'ombre sacr\u00e9e\" (\"He who sleeps in the sacred shadows\") for Radio France's Presence Festival. Renaud Garcia-Fons (born 1962) is a French double bass player and composer, notable for drawing on jazz, folk, and Asian music for recordings of his pieces like \"Oriental Bass\" (1997).\nTwo significant recent works written for solo bass include, Mario Davidovsky's Synchronisms No.11 for double bass and electronic sounds and Elliott Carter's Figment III, for solo double bass. The German composer Gerhard St\u00e4bler wrote \"Co-wie Kobalt\" (1989\u201390), \"...a music for double bass solo and grand orchestra\". Charles Wuorinen added several important works to the repertoire, \"Spinoff\" trio for double bass, violin and conga drums, and \"Trio for Bass Instruments\" double bass, tuba and bass trombone, and in 2007 \"Synaxis\" for double bass, horn, oboe and clarinet with timpani and strings. The suite \"Seven Screen Shots\" for double bass and piano (2005) by Ukrainian composer Alexander Shchetynsky has a solo bass part that includes many unconventional methods of playing. The German composer Claus K\u00fchnl wrote \"Offene Weite / Open Expanse\" (1998) and \"Nachtschwarzes Meer, ringsum\u2026\" (2005) for double bass and piano.In 1997 Joel Quarrington commissioned the American / Canadian composer Raymond Luedeke to write his \"Concerto for Double Bass and Orchestra\", a piece he performed with the Toronto Symphony Orchestra, with the Saskatoon Symphony Orchestra, and, in a version for small orchestra, with the Nova Scotia Symphony Orchestra. Composer Raymond Luedeke also composed a work for double bass, flute, and viola with narration, \"The Book of Questions\", with text by Pablo Neruda.\nIn 2004 Italian double bassist and composer Stefano Scodanibbio made a double bass arrangement of Luciano Berio's 2002 solo cello work \"Sequenza XIV\" with the new title \"Sequenza XIVb\".\nChamber music with double bass.\nSince there is no established instrumental ensemble that includes the double bass, its use in chamber music has not been as exhaustive as the literature for ensembles such as the string quartet or piano trio. Despite this, there is a substantial number of https:// that incorporate the double bass in both small and large ensembles.\nThere is a small body of works written for piano quintet with the instrumentation of piano, violin, viola, cello, and double bass. The most famous is Franz Schubert's Piano Quintet in A major, known as \"The Trout Quintet\" for its set of variations in the fourth movement of Schubert's \"Die Forelle\". Other works for this instrumentation written from roughly the same period include those by Johann Nepomuk Hummel, George Onslow, Jan Ladislav Dussek, Louise Farrenc, Ferdinand Ries, Franz Limmer, Johann Baptist Cramer, and Hermann Goetz. Later composers who wrote chamber works for this quintet include Ralph Vaughan Williams, Colin Matthews, Jon Deak, Frank Proto, and John Woolrich. Slightly larger sextets written for piano, string quartet, and double bass have been written by Felix Mendelssohn, Mikhail Glinka, Richard Wernick, and Charles Ives.\nIn the genre of string quintets, there are a few works for string quartet with double bass. Anton\u00edn Dvo\u0159\u00e1k's String Quintet in G major, Op.77 and Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart's Serenade in G major, K.525 (\"Eine kleine Nachtmusik\") are the most popular pieces in this repertoire, along with works by Miguel del \u00c1guila (\"Nostalgica\" for string quartet and bass), Darius Milhaud, Luigi Boccherini (3 quintets), Harold Shapero, and Paul Hindemith. Another example is Alistair Hinton's String Quintet (1969\u201377), which also includes a major part for solo soprano; at almost 170 minutes in duration, it is almost certainly the largest such work in the repertoire.\nSlightly smaller string works with the double bass include six string sonatas by Gioachino Rossini, for two violins, cello, and double bass written at the age of twelve over the course of three days in 1804. These remain his most famous instrumental works and have also been adapted for wind quartet. Rossini and Dragonetti composed duos for cello and double bass, as did Johannes Matthias Sperger, a major soloist on the \"Viennese\" tuning instrument of the 18th century. Franz Anton Hoffmeister wrote four String Quartets for Solo Double Bass, Violin, Viola, and Cello in D Major. Frank Proto has written a Trio for Violin, Viola and Double Bass (1974), 2 Duos for Violin and Double Bass (1967 and 2005), and \"The Games of October\" for Oboe/English Horn and Double Bass (1991).\nLarger works that incorporate the double bass include Beethoven's Septet in E\u266d major, Op.\u00a020, one of his most famous pieces during his lifetime, which consists of clarinet, horn, bassoon, violin, viola, cello, and bass. When the clarinetist Ferdinand Troyer commissioned a work from Franz Schubert for similar forces, he added one more violin for his Octet in F major, D.803. Paul Hindemith used the same instrumentation as Schubert for his own Octet. In the realm of even larger works, Mozart included the double bass in addition to 12 wind instruments for his \"Gran Partita\" Serenade, K.361 and Martin\u016f used the double bass in his nonet for wind quintet, violin, viola, cello and double bass.\nOther examples of chamber works that use the double bass in mixed ensembles include Sergei Prokofiev's Quintet in G minor, Op.\u00a039 for oboe, clarinet, violin, viola, and double bass; Miguel del \u00c1guila's \"Malambo\" for bass flute and piano and for string quartet, bass and bassoon; Erwin Schulhoff's Concertino for flute/piccolo, viola, and double bass; Frank Proto's \"Afro-American Fragments\" for bass clarinet, cello, double bass and narrator and Sextet for clarinet and strings; Fred Lerdahl's Waltzes for violin, viola, cello, and double bass; Mohammed Fairouz's Litany for double bass and wind quartet; Mario Davidovsky's Festino for guitar, viola, cello, and double bass; and Iannis Xenakis's Morsima-Amorsima for piano, violin, cello, and double bass. There are also new music ensembles that utilize the double bass such as Time for Three and PROJECT Trio.\nOrchestral passages and solos.\n&lt;score sound=\"1\"&gt;\n\\new Score {\n #(set-default-paper-size \"b6\")\n \\new Staff {\n \\relative c, {\n \\set Staff.midiInstrument = #\"cello\"\n \\time 3/4\n \\key c \\minor\n \\clef \"bass_8\"\n \\omit Staff.ClefModifier\n \\tempo 4 = 240\n \\omit Score.MetronomeMark\n \\partial 4 g^\\markup { \\halign #-0.5 \\bold \"Allegro\" }(\\pp The opening of the third movement of Beethoven's Symphony No. 5 is often used as an orchestral excerpt during bass auditions.\nIn the baroque and classical periods, composers typically had the double bass double the cello part in orchestral passages. A notable exception is Haydn, who composed solo passages for the double bass in his Symphonies No.\u00a06 \"Le Matin\", No.\u00a07 \"Le midi\", No.\u00a08 \"Le Soir\", No.\u00a031 \"Horn Signal\", and No.\u00a045 \"Farewell\"\u2014but who otherwise grouped bass and cello parts together. Beethoven paved the way for separate double bass parts, which became more common in the romantic era. The scherzo and trio from Beethoven's Fifth Symphony are famous orchestral excerpts, as is the recitative at the beginning of the fourth movement of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony. In many nineteenth century symphonies and concertos, the typical impact of separate bass and cello parts was that bass parts became simpler and cello parts got the melodic lines and rapid passage work.\nA double bass section of a modern orchestra typically uses eight double bassists, usually in unison. Smaller orchestras may have four double basses, and in exceptional cases, bass sections may have as many as ten members. If some double bassists have low C extensions, and some have regular (low E) basses, those with the low C extensions may play some passages an octave below the regular double basses. Also, some composers write divided (divisi) parts for the basses, where upper and lower parts in the music are often assigned to \"outside\" (nearer the audience) and \"inside\" players. Composers writing divisi parts for bass often write perfect intervals, such as octaves and fifths, but in some cases use thirds and sixths.\n&lt;score sound=\"1\"&gt;\n\\layout {\n indent = 0\n ragged-right = ##t\n\\new Score {\n #(set-default-paper-size \"b6\")\n \\new Staff {\n \\relative c, {\n \\set Staff.midiInstrument = #\"cello\"\n \\set Score.currentBarNumber = #92\n \\time 4/4\n \\key d \\major\n \\clef \"bass_8\"\n \\omit Staff.ClefModifier\n \\tempo 2 = 60\n \\omit Score.MetronomeMark\n \\bar \"\"\n fis2\\p^\\markup { \\halign #-0.5 \\bold \"Allegro assai\" }( g4 a) Basses play the theme from the fourth movementof Beethoven's Ninth Symphony.\nWhere a composition calls for a solo bass part, the principal bass invariably plays that part. The section leader (or principal) also determines the bowings, often based on bowings set out by the concertmaster. In some cases, the principal bass may use a slightly different bowing than the concertmaster, to accommodate the requirements of playing bass. The principal bass also leads entrances for the bass section, typically by lifting the bow or plucking hand before the entrance or indicating the entrance with the head, to ensure the section starts together. Major professional orchestras typically have an assistant principal bass player, who plays solos and leads the bass section if the principal is absent.\nWhile orchestral bass solos are somewhat rare, there are some notable examples. Johannes Brahms, whose father was a double bass player, wrote many difficult and prominent parts for the double bass in his symphonies. Richard Strauss assigned the double bass daring parts, and his symphonic poems and operas stretch the instrument to its limits. \"The Elephant\" from Camille Saint-Sa\u00ebns' \"The Carnival of the Animals\" is a satirical portrait of the double bass, and American virtuoso Gary Karr made his televised debut playing \"The Swan\" (originally written for the cello) with the New York Philharmonic conducted by Leonard Bernstein. The third movement of Gustav Mahler's first symphony features a solo for the double bass that quotes the children's song \"Frere Jacques\", transposed into a minor key. Sergei Prokofiev's \"Lieutenant Kij\u00e9 Suite\" features a difficult and very high double bass solo in the \"Romance\" movement. Benjamin Britten's \"The Young Person's Guide to the Orchestra\" contains a prominent passage for the double bass section.\nDouble bass ensembles.\nEnsembles made up entirely of double basses, though relatively rare, also exist, and several composers have written or arranged for such ensembles. Compositions for four double basses exist by Gunther Schuller, Jacob Druckman, James Tenney, Claus K\u00fchnl, Robert Ceely, http://, Bernhard Alt, Norman Ludwin, Frank Proto, Joseph Lauber, Erich Hartmann, Colin Brumby, Miloslav Gajdos and Theodore Albin Findeisen. David A. Jaffe's \"Who's on First?\", commissioned by the Russian National Orchestra is scored for five double basses. Bertold Hummel wrote a \"Sinfonia piccola\" for eight double basses. Larger ensemble works include Galina Ustvolskaya's Composition No.\u00a02, \"Dies Irae\" (1973), for eight double basses, piano, and wooden cube, Jos\u00e9 Serebrier's \"George and Muriel\" (1986), for solo bass, double bass ensemble, and chorus, and Gerhard Samuel's \"What of my music!\" (1979), for soprano, percussion, and 30 double basses.\nDouble bass ensembles include L'Orchestre de Contrebasses (6 members), Bass Instinct (6 members), Bassiona Amorosa (6 members), the Chicago Bass Ensemble (4+ members), http:// founded by Daniele Roccato and Stefano Scodanibbio, The Bass Gang (4 members), the London Double Bass Ensemble (6 members) founded by members of the Philharmonia Orchestra of London who produced the LP http:// on Bruton Music records, Brno Double Bass Orchestra (14 members) founded by the double bass professor at Jan\u00e1\u010dek Academy of Music and Performing Arts and principal double bass player at Brno Philharmonic Orchestra \u2013 Miloslav Jelinek, and the ensembles of Ball State University (12 members), Shenandoah University, and the Hartt School of Music. The Amarillo Bass Base of Amarillo, Texas once featured 52 double bassists, and The London Double Bass Sound, who have released a CD on Cala Records, have 10 players.\nIn addition, the double bass sections of some orchestras perform as an ensemble, such as the Chicago Symphony Orchestra's Lower Wacker Consort. There is an increasing number of published compositions and arrangements for double bass ensembles, and the International Society of Bassists regularly features double bass ensembles (both smaller ensembles as well as very large \"mass bass\" ensembles) at its conferences, and sponsors the biennial David Walter Composition Competition, which includes a division for double bass ensemble works.\nUse in jazz.\nBeginning around 1890, the early New Orleans jazz ensemble (which played a mixture of marches, ragtime, and Dixieland) was initially a marching band with a tuba or sousaphone (or occasionally bass saxophone) supplying the bass line. As the music moved into bars and brothels, the upright bass gradually replaced these wind instruments around the 1920s. Many early bassists doubled on both the \"brass bass (tuba)\" and \"string bass\", as the instruments were then often referred to. Bassists played improvised \"walking\" bass lines\u2014scale- and arpeggio-based lines that outlined the chord progression.\nBecause an unamplified upright bass is generally the quietest instrument in a jazz band, many players of the 1920s and 1930s used the \"slap style\", slapping and pulling the strings to produce a rhythmic \"slap\" sound against the fingerboard. The slap style cuts through the sound of a band better than simply plucking the strings, and made the bass more easily heard on early sound recordings, as the recording equipment of that time did not favor low frequencies. For more about the slap style, see \"Modern playing styles\", below.\nJazz bass players are expected to improvise an accompaniment line or solo for a given chord progression. They are also expected to know the rhythmic patterns that are appropriate for different styles (e.g., Afro-Cuban). Bassists playing in a big band must also be able to read written-out bass lines, as some arrangements have written bass parts.\nMany upright bass players have contributed to the evolution of jazz. Examples include swing era players such as Jimmy Blanton, who played with Duke Ellington, and Oscar Pettiford, who pioneered the instrument's use in bebop. Paul Chambers (who worked with Miles Davis on the famous \"Kind of Blue\" album) achieved renown for being one of the first jazz bassists to play bebop solos with the bow. Terry Plumeri furthered the development of arco (bowed) solos, achieving horn-like technical freedom and a clear, vocal bowed tone, while Charlie Haden, best known for his work with Ornette Coleman, defined the role of the bass in Free Jazz.\nA number of other bassists, such as Ray Brown, Slam Stewart and Niels-Henning \u00d8rsted Pedersen, were central to the history of jazz. Stewart, who was popular with the beboppers, played his solos with a bow combined with octave humming. Notably, Charles Mingus was a highly regarded composer as well as a bassist noted for his technical virtuosity and powerful sound. Scott LaFaro influenced a generation of musicians by liberating the bass from contrapuntal \"walking\" behind soloists instead favoring interactive, conversational melodies. Since the commercial availability of bass amplifiers in the 1950s, jazz bassists have used amplification to augment the natural volume of the instrument.\nWhile the electric bass guitar was used intermittently in jazz as early as 1951, beginning in the 1970s bassist Bob Cranshaw, playing with saxophonist Sonny Rollins, and fusion pioneers Jaco Pastorius and Stanley Clarke began to commonly substitute the bass guitar for the upright bass. Apart from the jazz styles of jazz fusion and Latin-influenced jazz however, the upright bass is still the dominant bass instrument in jazz. The sound and tone of the plucked upright bass is distinct from that of the fretted bass guitar. The upright bass produces a different sound than the bass guitar, because its strings are not stopped by metal frets, instead having a continuous tonal range on the uninterrupted fingerboard. As well, bass guitars usually have a solid wood body, which means that their sound is produced by electronic amplification of the vibration of the strings, instead of the upright bass's acoustic reverberation.\nDemonstrative examples of the sound of a solo double bass and its technical use in jazz can be heard on the solo recordings \"Emerald Tears\" (1978) by Dave Holland or \"Emergence\" (1986) by Miroslav Vitou\u0161. Holland also recorded an album with the representative title \"Music from Two Basses\" (1971) on which he plays with Barre Phillips while he sometimes switches to cello.\nUse in bluegrass and country.\nThe string bass is the most commonly used bass instrument in bluegrass music and is almost always plucked, though some modern bluegrass bassists have also used a bow. The bluegrass bassist is part of the rhythm section, and is responsible for keeping a steady beat, whether fast, slow, in , or time. The bass also maintains the chord progression and harmony. The Engelhardt-Link (formerly Kay) brands of plywood laminate basses have long been popular choices for bluegrass bassists. Most bluegrass bassists use the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444 size bass, but the full-size and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5\u20448 size basses are also used.\nEarly pre-bluegrass traditional music was often accompanied by the cello. The cellist Natalie Haas points out that in the US, you can find \"...old photographs, and even old recordings, of American string bands with cello\". However, \"The cello dropped out of sight in folk music, and became associated with the orchestra.\" The cello did not reappear in bluegrass until the 1990s and first decade of the 21st century. Some contemporary bluegrass bands favor the electric bass, because it is easier to transport than the large and somewhat fragile upright bass. However, the bass guitar has a different musical sound. Many musicians feel the slower attack and percussive, woody tone of the upright bass gives it a more \"earthy\" or \"natural\" sound than an electric bass, particularly when gut strings are used.\nCommon rhythms in bluegrass bass playing involve (with some exceptions) plucking on beats 1 and 3 in time; beats 1 and 2 in time, and on the downbeat in time (waltz time). Bluegrass bass lines are usually simple, typically staying on the root and fifth of each chord throughout most of a song. There are two main exceptions to this rule. Bluegrass bassists often do a diatonic \"walkup\" or \"walkdown,\" in which they play every beat of a bar for one or two bars, typically when there is a chord change. In addition, if a bass player is given a solo, they may play a walking bass line with a note on every beat or play a pentatonic scale-influenced bassline.\nAn early bluegrass bassist to rise to prominence was Howard Watts (also known as Cedric Rainwater), who played with Bill Monroe's Blue Grass Boys beginning in 1944. The classical bassist Edgar Meyer has frequently branched out into newgrass, old-time, jazz, and other genres.\n\"My all-time favorite is Todd Phillips\", proclaimed Union Station bassist Barry Bales in April 2005. \"He brought a completely different way of thinking about and playing bluegrass.\nAn upright bass was the standard bass instrument in traditional country western music. While the upright bass is still occasionally used in country music, the electric bass has largely replaced its bigger cousin in country music, especially in the more pop-infused country styles of the 1990s and 2000s, such as new country.\nSlap-style bass.\nSlap-style bass is sometimes used in bluegrass bass playing. When bluegrass bass players slap the string by pulling it until it hits the fingerboard or hit the strings against the fingerboard, it adds the high-pitched percussive \"clack\" or \"slap\" sound to the low-pitched bass notes, sounding much like the clacks of a tap dancer. Slapping is a subject of minor controversy in the bluegrass scene. Even slapping experts such as Mike Bub say, \"Don't slap on every gig\", or in songs where it is not appropriate. As well, bluegrass bassists who play slap-style on live shows often slap less on records. Bub and his mentor Jerry McCoury rarely do slap bass on recordings. While bassists such as Jack Cook slap bass on the occasional faster \"Clinch Mountain Boys song\", bassists such as Gene Libbea, Missy Raines, Jenny Keel, and Barry Bales [rarely] slap bass.\nBluegrass bassist Mark Schatz, who teaches slap bass in his \"Intermediate Bluegrass Bass\" DVD acknowledges that slap bass \"...has not been stylistically very predominant in the music I have recorded\". He notes that \"Even in traditional bluegrass slap bass only appears sporadically and most of what I've done has been on the more contemporary side of that (Tony Rice, Tim O'Brien).\" Schatz states that he would be \"...\u00a0more likely to use it [slap] in a live situation than on a recording\u2014for a solo or to punctuate a particular place in a song or tune where I wouldn't be obliterating someone's solo\". Another bluegrass method, \"Learn to Play Bluegrass Bass\", by Earl Gately, also teaches bluegrass slap bass technique. German bassist Didi Beck plays rapid triplet slaps, as demonstrated in this video. \nUse in popular music.\nIn the early 1950s, the upright bass was the standard bass instrument in the emerging style of rock and roll music, Marshall Lytle of Bill Haley &amp; His Comets being but one example. In the 1940s, a new style of dance music called rhythm and blues developed, incorporating elements of the earlier styles of blues and swing. Louis Jordan, the first innovator of this style, featured an upright bass in his group, the Tympany Five.\nThe upright bass remained an integral part of pop lineups throughout the 1950s, as the new genre of rock and roll was built largely upon the model of rhythm and blues, with strong elements also derived from jazz, country, and bluegrass. However, upright bass players using their instruments in these contexts faced inherent problems. They were forced to compete with louder horn instruments (and later amplified electric guitars), making bass parts difficult to hear. The upright bass is difficult to amplify in loud concert venue settings, because it can be prone to feedback \"howls\". As well, the upright bass is large and awkward to transport, which also created transportation problems for touring bands. In some groups, the slap bass was utilized as band percussion in lieu of a drummer; such was the case with Bill Haley &amp; His Saddlemen (the forerunner group to the Comets), which did not use drummers on recordings and live performances until late 1952; prior to this the slap bass was relied on for percussion, including on recordings such as Haley's versions of \"Rock the Joint\" and \"Rocket 88\".\nIn 1951, Leo Fender released his Precision Bass, the first commercially successful electric bass guitar. The electric bass was easily amplified with its built-in magnetic pickups, easily portable (less than a foot longer than an electric guitar), and easier to play in tune than an upright bass, thanks to the metal frets. In the 1960s and 1970s bands were playing at louder volumes and performing in larger venues. The electric bass was able to provide the huge, highly amplified stadium-filling bass tone that the pop and rock music of this era demanded, and the upright bass receded from the limelight of the popular music scene.\nPhotos of bassist Miroslav Vitou\u0161:\nThe upright bass began making a comeback in popular music in the mid-1980s, in part due to a renewed interest in earlier forms of folk and country music, as part of the roots rock and Americana trends. In the 1990s, improvements in pickups and amplifier designs for electro-acoustic horizontal and upright basses made it easier for bassists to get a good, clear amplified tone from an acoustic instrument. Some popular bands decided to anchor their sound with an upright bass instead of an electric bass, such as the Barenaked Ladies. A trend for \"unplugged\" performances on MTV, in which rock bands performed with solely acoustic instruments, further helped to enhance the public's interest in the upright bass and acoustic bass guitars.\nJim Creeggan of Barenaked Ladies primarily plays upright bass, although he has increasingly played bass guitar throughout the band's career. Chris Wyse of alternative rock group Owl uses a combination of electric and double bass. Athol Guy of the Australian folk/pop group The Seekers plays an upright bass. Shannon Birchall, of the Australian folk-rock group the John Butler Trio, makes extensive use of upright basses, performing extended live solos in songs such as Betterman. On the 2008 album \"In Ear Park\" by the indie/pop band Department of Eagles, a bowed upright bass is featured quite prominently on the songs \"Teenagers\" and \"In Ear Park\". Norwegian ompa-rock band Kaizers Orchestra use the upright bass exclusively both live and on their recordings.\nFrench contemporary pop duet \"What a day\" uses double bass extended pizzicato technique with vocals and type writer.\nHank Williams III's bass players (Jason Brown, Joe Buck and Zach Shedd, most notably) have used upright basses for recording as well as during the country and Hellbilly sets of Hank III's live performances before switching to electric bass for the Assjack set.\nThe late 1970s rockabilly-punk genre of psychobilly continued and expanded upon the rockabilly tradition of slap bass. Bassists such as Kim Nekroman and Geoff Kresge have developed the ability to play rapid slap bass that in effect turns the bass into a percussion instrument.\nModern playing styles.\nIn popular music genres, the instrument is usually played with amplification and almost exclusively played with the fingers, \"pizzicato\" style. The pizzicato style varies between different players and genres. Some players perform with the sides of one, two, or three fingers, especially for walking basslines and slow tempo ballads, because this is purported to create a stronger and more solid tone. Some players use the more nimble tips of the fingers to play fast-moving solo passages or to pluck lightly for quiet tunes. The use of amplification allows the player to have more control over the tone of the instrument, because amplifiers have equalization controls that allow the bassist to accentuate certain frequencies (often the bass frequencies) while de-accentuating some frequencies (often the high frequencies, so that there is less finger noise).\nAn unamplified acoustic bass's tone is limited by the frequency responsiveness of the instrument's hollow body, which means that the very low pitches may not be as loud as the higher pitches. With an amplifier and equalization devices, a bass player can boost the low frequencies, which changes the frequency response. In addition, the use of an amplifier can increase the sustain of the instrument, which is particularly useful for accompaniment during ballads and for melodic solos with held notes.\nIn traditional jazz, swing, polka, rockabilly, and psychobilly music, it is sometimes played in the \"slap style\". This is a vigorous version of pizzicato where the strings are \"slapped\" against the fingerboard between the main notes of the bass line, producing a snare drum-like percussive sound. The main notes are either played normally or by pulling the string away from the fingerboard and releasing it so that it bounces off the fingerboard, producing a distinctive percussive attack in addition to the expected pitch. Notable slap style bass players, whose use of the technique was often highly syncopated and virtuosic, sometimes interpolated two, three, four, or more slaps in between notes of the bass line.\n\"Slap style\" may have influenced electric bass guitar players who, from the mid-sixties (particularly Larry Graham of Sly and the Family Stone), developed a technique called \"slap and pop\" that used the thumb of the plucking hand to hit the string, making a slapping sound but still letting the note ring, and the index or middle finger of the plucking hand to pull the string back so it hits the fretboard, achieving the pop sound described above. Motown bass player James Jamerson routinely used a double bass for enhancement of the electric bass in post-production (\"sweetening\") of recorded tracks and vice versa in many instances.\nDouble bassists.\nContemporary (1900s).\nClassical.\nSome of the most influential contemporary classical double bass players are known as much for their contributions to pedagogy as for their performing skills, such as US bassist Oscar G. Zimmerman (1910\u20131987), known for his teaching at the Eastman School of Music and, for 44 summers at the Interlochen National Music Camp in Michigan and French bassist Fran\u00e7ois Rabbath (b. 1931) who developed a new bass method that divided the entire fingerboard into six positions. Bassists noted for their virtuoso solo skills include American pedagogue and performer Gary Karr (1941-2025), Finnish composer Teppo Hauta-aho (b. 1941), Italian composer Fernando Grillo, and US player-composer Edgar Meyer. For a longer list, see the \"List of contemporary classical double bass players\".\nJazz.\nNotable jazz bassists from the 1940s to the 1950s included bassist Jimmy Blanton (1918\u20131942) whose short tenure in the Duke Ellington Swing band (cut short by his death from tuberculosis) introduced new melodic and harmonic solo ideas for the instrument; bassist Ray Brown (1926\u20132002), known for backing Beboppers Dizzy Gillespie, Oscar Peterson, Art Tatum and Charlie Parker, and forming the Modern Jazz Quartet; hard bop bassist Ron Carter (born 1937), who has appeared on 3,500 albums make him one of the most-recorded bassists in jazz history, including LPs by Thelonious Monk and Wes Montgomery and many Blue Note Records artists; and Paul Chambers (1935\u20131969), a member of the Miles Davis Quintet (including the landmark modal jazz recording \"Kind of Blue\") and many other 1950s and 1960s rhythm sections, was known for his virtuosic improvisations.\nThe experimental post 1960s era, and free jazz and jazz-rock fusion, produced several influential bassists. Charles Mingus (1922\u20131979), who was also a composer and bandleader, produced music that fused hard bop with black gospel music, free jazz, and classical music. Free jazz and post-bop bassist Charlie Haden (1937\u20132014) is best known for his long association with saxophonist Ornette Coleman, and for his role in the 1970s-era Liberation Music Orchestra, an experimental group. Eddie G\u00f3mez and George Mraz, who played with Bill Evans and Oscar Peterson, respectively, and are both acknowledged to have furthered expectations of pizzicato fluency and melodic phrasing. Fusion virtuoso Stanley Clarke (born 1951) is notable for his dexterity on both the upright bass and the electric bass. Terry Plumeri is noted for his horn-like arco fluency and vocal-sounding tone.\nIn the 1990s and first decade of the 21st century, one of the new \"young lions\" was Christian McBride (born 1972), who has performed with a range of veterans ranging from McCoy Tyner to fusion gurus Herbie Hancock and Chick Corea, and who has released albums such as 2003's \"Vertical Vision\". Another young bassist of note is Esperanza Spalding (born 1984) who, at 27 years of age, had already won a Grammy for Best New Artist.\nOther popular genres.\nIn addition to being a noted classical player, Edgar Meyer is well known in bluegrass and newgrass circles. Todd Phillips is another prominent bluegrass player. Well-known rockabilly bassists include Bill Black, Marshall Lytle (with Bill Haley &amp; His Comets) and Lee Rocker (with 1980s-era rockabilly revivalists the Stray Cats).\nNotable rockabilly revivalists and psychobilly performers from the 1990s and first decade of the 21st century include Scott Owen (from the Australian band The Living End), Jimbo Wallace (from the US band Reverend Horton Heat), Kim Nekroman (Nekromantix), Patricia Day (HorrorPops), Geoff Kresge (Tiger Army, ex-AFI). Willie Dixon (1915\u20131992) was one of the most notable figures in the history of rhythm and blues. In addition to being an upright bassist, he wrote dozens of R&amp;B hits and worked as a producer. He also plays bass on numerous Chuck Berry's rock and roll hits. Many other rockabilly bands like El Rio Trio (from the Netherlands) also use this instrument in their work. See also the List of double bassists in popular music.\nPedagogy and training.\nThe pedagogy and training for the double bass varies widely by genre and country. Classical double bass has a history of pedagogy dating back several centuries, including teaching manuals, studies, and progressive exercises that help students to develop the endurance and accuracy of the left hand, and control for the bowing hand. Classical training methods vary by country: many of the major European countries are associated with specific methods (e.g., the \u00c9douard Nanny method in France or the Franz Simandl method in Germany). In classical training, the majority of the instruction for the right hand focuses on the production of bowing tone; little time is spent studying the varieties of pizzicato tone.\nIn contrast, in genres that mainly or exclusively use pizzicato (plucking), such as jazz and blues, a great deal of time and effort is focused on learning the varieties of different pizzicato styles used for music of different styles of tempi. For example, in jazz, aspiring bassists have to learn how to perform a wide range of pizzicato tones, including using the sides of the fingers to create a full, deep sound for ballads, using the tips of the fingers for fast walking basslines or solos, and performing a variety of percussive \"ghost notes\" by raking muted or partially muted strings.\nFormal training.\nOf all of the genres, classical and jazz have the most established and comprehensive systems of instruction and training. In the classical milieu, children can begin taking private lessons on the instrument and performing in children's or youth orchestras. Teens who aspire to becoming professional classical bassists can continue their studies in a variety of formal training settings, including colleges, conservatories, and universities. Colleges offer certificates and diplomas in bass performance.\nConservatories, which are the standard musical training system in France and in Quebec (Canada) provide lessons and amateur orchestral experience for double bass players. Universities offer a range of double bass programs, including bachelor's degrees, Master of Music degrees, and Doctor of Musical Arts degrees. As well, there are a variety of other training programs such as classical summer camps and orchestral, opera, or chamber music training festivals, which give students the opportunity to play a wide range of music.\nBachelor's degrees in bass performance (referred to as B.Mus. or B.M.) are four-year programs that include individual bass lessons, amateur orchestra experience, and a sequence of courses in music history, music theory, and liberal arts courses (e.g., English literature), which give the student a more well-rounded education. Usually, bass performance students perform several recitals of solo double bass music, such as concertos, sonatas, and Baroque suites.\nMaster of music degrees (M.mus.) in double bass performance consist of private lessons, ensemble experience, coaching in playing orchestral double bass parts, and graduate courses in music history and music theory, along with one or two solo recitals. A Master's degree in music (referred to as an M.Mus. or M.M.) is often a required credential for people who wish to become a professor of double bass at a university or conservatory.\nDoctor of Musical Arts (referred to as D.M.A., DMA, D.Mus.A. or A.Mus.D.) degrees in double bass performance provide an opportunity for advanced study at the highest artistic and pedagogical level, requiring usually an additional 54+ credit hours beyond a master's degree (which is about 30+ credits beyond a bachelor's degree). For this reason, admission is highly selective. Examinations in music history, music theory, ear training/dictation, and an entrance examination-recital, are required. Students perform a number of recitals (around six), including a lecture-recital with an accompanying doctoral dissertation, advanced coursework, and a minimum B average are other typical requirements of a D.M.A. program.\nThroughout the early history of jazz, double bass players either learned the instrument informally, or from getting classical training early on, as in the case of Ron Carter and Charles Mingus. In the 1980s and 1990s, colleges and universities began to introduce diplomas and degrees in jazz performance. Students in jazz diploma or Bachelor of Music programs take individual bass lessons, get experience in small jazz combos with coaching from an experienced player, and play in jazz big bands. As with classical training programs, jazz programs also include classroom courses in music history and music theory. In a jazz program, these courses focus on the different eras of jazz history. such as Swing, Bebop, and fusion. The theory courses focus on the musical skills used in jazz improvisation and in jazz comping (accompanying) and the composition of jazz tunes. There are also jazz summer camps and training festivals/seminars, which offer students the chance to learn new skills and styles.\nInformal training.\nIn other genres, such as blues, rockabilly, and psychobilly, the pedagogical systems and training sequences are not as formalized and institutionalized. There are not degrees in blues bass performance, or conservatories offering multiple-year diplomas in rockabilly bass. However, there are a range of books, playing methods, and, since the 1990s, instructional DVDs (e.g., on how to play rockabilly-style slap bass). As such, performers in these other genres tend to come from a variety of routes, including informal learning by using bass method books or DVDs, taking private lessons and coaching, and learning from records and CDs. In some cases, blues or rockabilly bassists may have obtained some initial training through the classical or jazz pedagogy systems (e.g., youth orchestra or high school big band). In genres such as tango, which use a lot of bowed passages and jazz-style pizzicato lines, the bassists tend to come from classical or jazz training routes.\nCareers.\nCareers in double bass vary widely by genre and by region or country. Most bassists earn their living from a mixture of performance and teaching jobs. The first step to getting most performance jobs is by playing at an audition. In some styles of music, such as jazz-oriented stage bands, bassists may be asked to sight read printed music or perform standard pieces (e.g., a jazz standard such as \"Now's the Time\") with an ensemble. Similarly, in a rock or blues band, auditionees may be asked to play various rock or blues standards. An upright bassist auditioning for a blues band might be asked to play in a Swing-style walking bassline, a rockabilly-style \"slapping\" bassline (in which the strings are percussively struck against the fingerboard) and a 1950s ballad with long held notes. A person auditioning for a role as a bassist in some styles of pop or rock music may be expected to demonstrate the ability to perform harmony vocals as a backup singer. In some pop and rock groups, the bassist may be asked to play other instruments from time to time, such as electric bass, keyboards or acoustic guitar. The ability to play electric bass is widely expected in country groups, in case the band is performing a classic rock or new country song. \nClassical music.\nIn classical music, bassists audition for playing jobs in orchestras and for admission into university or Conservatory programs or degrees. At a classical bass audition, the performer typically plays a movement from a J.S. Bach suite for solo cello or a movement from a bass concerto and a variety of excerpts from the orchestral literature. The excerpts are typically the most technically challenging parts of bass parts and bass solos from the orchestral literature. Some of the most commonly requested orchestral excerpts at bass auditions are from Beethoven's Symphonies Nos.\u00a05, 7 and 9; Strauss's \"Ein Heldenleben\" and \"Don Juan\"; Mozart's Symphonies Nos.\u00a035, 39 and 40; Brahms' Symphonies Nos.\u00a01 and 2; Stravinsky's Pulcinella; Shostakovich's Symphony No.\u00a05; Ginastera's \"Variaciones Concertante\"; Tchaikovsky's Symphony No.\u00a04; Mahler's Symphony No.\u00a02; J.\u00a0S. Bach's Suite No.\u00a02 in B; Berlioz's \"Symphonie Fantastique\", Mendelssohn's Symphony No.\u00a04; and the bass solos from Verdi's opera \"Otello\", Mahler's Symphony No.\u00a01, Britten's \"The Young Person's Guide to the Orchestra\" and Prokofiev's \"Lieutenant Kije Suite\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8817", "revid": "50259402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8817", "title": "Deicide (band)", "text": "American death metal band\nDeicide is an American death metal band from Tampa, Florida. Formed in 1987 by drummer/composer Steve Asheim and guitarist brothers Eric and Brian Hoffman as \"Carnage\", then hiring bassist/vocalist/lyricist Glen Benton and becoming \"Amon\". They changed the band name to Deicide in 1989. The band rose to mainstream success in 1992 with their second album \"Legion\", and is credited as the second-best-selling death metal band of the Soundscan Era, after Cannibal Corpse.\nSince their debut album in 1990, Deicide has released thirteen studio albums, one live album, two compilation albums and two live DVDs. In November 2003, their first two albums, \"Deicide\" and \"Legion\", were ranked second and third place respectively in best-selling death metal albums of the SoundScan era. \nDeicide has been called \"Florida's most notorious and despised death metal export.\" The band's first three studio albums -- \"Deicide\", \"Legion\" and \"Once Upon the Cross\" -- are considered classics in the death metal genre. Deicide is notorious for its lyrical themes, which cover topics such as Satanism, anti-Christianity and blasphemy. The band's lyrics as well as the band members' personal lives have resulted in bans, lawsuits, criticism, and controversy from religious groups, political groups, animal rights activists, and the general public. Additionally, many of the band members have been arrested for various reasons.\nHistory.\nFormation and early years (1987\u20131989).\n Original guitarists Brian and Eric Hoffman met drummer Steve Asheim while in high school. During this time, Asheim moved his drum kit into Eric's bedroom. The boys would habitually skip school, and as soon as the Hoffmans' parents left the house to go to work, they would sneak back into the house and practice Slayer, Sodom and Destruction covers.\nDeicide was officially formed in Tampa, Florida on July 21, 1987, after Brian Hoffman called Glen Benton, replying to an advertisement the latter had placed in a local music magazine. The original bassist, named Ron, had been dismissed for not showing up for practice. Hoffman and his brother, along with drummer Steve Asheim, had previously played together as the band \"Carnage\", which was in need of a bassist and vocalist. Carnage played cover songs by Slayer, Exodus, Celtic Frost and Dark Angel. Within a month, they had recorded the \"Feasting the Beast\" 8-track demo in Benton's garage and had started playing the occasional gig in the Tampa area. In 1989, Amon recorded their second demo, \"Sacrificial\", at Morrisound with producer Scott Burns.\nMalevolent Creation guitarist Phil Fasciana recalls an early Carnage show: \"It was like Slayer intensified a thousand times. [...] I guess Carnage had hollowed out a mannequin and filled it with fuckin' blood and guts from a butcher shop... and then they threw the fuckin' thing on the floor. Morbid Angel had these pit bulls with them back then and they were just tearing the meat up. It was a really weird scene, man. There was blood and meat everywhere.\" The Hoffman brothers said that they would let the animal viscera sit in the sun all day prior to its use in their stage theatrics.\nRoadrunner Records releases (1989\u20132004).\nWhile still under the name Carnage, Benton reportedly stormed into Roadrunner Records' A&amp;R man Monte Conner's office and slammed the demo down on his desk, belting out \"sign us, you fucking asshole!\" The next day contracts were issued to the band. This version of events was partially later denied by Benton, who claimed he indeed visited the office but never used profanities. In 1989 the band's name was changed to Deicide at the request of Roadrunner Records due to multiple other bands already using \"Carnage\" as a band name.\nDeicide then released their self-titled debut album, also produced by Scott Burns at Morrisound, in 1990. Their debut featured re-recorded versions of all six of the \"Sacrificial\" tunes that had secured them their record deal. The band did not tour on the album because Glen Benton felt the band was worth more than the monetary offers they were receiving from promoters.\nDeicide's second full-length album \"Legion\" was released on June 9, 1992.\nIn 1992, Deicide was on tour in Europe with Atrocity from Germany and Gorefest, a Dutch death metal band. In Stockholm, during the Gorefest set, a bomb was discovered on-stage. It exploded in the club in which they were playing. The bomb was located to the rear of the stage, behind a heavy, fireproof door. The explosion was big enough to deform the door and blow it off its hinges. Deicide managed to play three songs before the police decided to stop the concert and evacuate the club. At first, Benton blamed that attack on the Norwegian black metal scene, where Deicide's brand of death metal was despised by some. Many people blamed animal rights activists who were angered at Deicide's lyrical themes of animal sacrifice.\nDeicide's third studio album \"Once upon the Cross\" was released in 1995. Benton was quoted in an interview saying: \"I think people are taking [the band] more serious[ly], and they're getting scared in that. You know, [the heaviness is] not going away. You know, it's one of the kind of things where [they'll] think 'well, maybe the next record they're gonna fuckin start softening.' I tell everybody man, the only things that get soft are butter and shit, man. We're \"not\" getting soft.\"\nThe band's fourth studio album \"Serpents of the Light\" was released on October 21, 1997.\nThe band's first live album, \"When Satan Lives\", was released on October 20, 1998.\nThe band's fifth studio album, \"Insineratehymn\", was released on June 27, 2000.\nDeicide left Roadrunner Records after its sixth studio album, \"In Torment in Hell,\" which was released on July 31, 2001. Glen Benton recalled: \"Roadrunner, on a personal level, treated me great. They hated particular two members of the band, but they treated me and Steve great. If I ever needed money, all I\u2019d do was make a phone call and it\u2019s be in my account before six o\u2019clock at night. They helped me through my first divorce, financially. They paid to have my tonsillectomy done around the time of the first album when I couldn\u2019t tour because my tonsils were rotting in my throat.\"\nIn 2003, Asheim and the Hoffmans were detained at the Canadian border by authorities due to a misunderstanding, which caused the planned concert in Detroit to be cancelled. Media reports indicated that they had been incarcerated on drug and weapons charges, however Earache Records quickly dispelled these rumors. The label made a statement that said: \"Deicide were forced to miss their October 21 show in Detroit, Michigan, due to a misunderstanding with officials at the Canadian border. According to frontman Glen Benton who was travelling separately from his three bandmates, Benton arrived at the Detroit venue in time for soundcheck, only to find drummer Steve Asheim and the Hoffman brothers nowhere in sight. It was soon revealed that the tardy parties were being detained by officials at the Canadian border and they would not make it to Detroit in time for the show. The men were held at the border over night and were finally released early the following morning, with no charges against them. Deicide would like to sincerely apologize to all the Detroit fans, and promise to make it up to them soon.\"\nDepartures of Eric and Brian Hoffman (2004).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThose two are a couple of idiots, man. I hate Eric and Brian Hoffman more than anything in this world, and I will not rest until I put shit straight with the fans. Up 'til now, everybody thinks I kicked them out of the band, but nobody kicked anybody out. They quit on their own, and I wanna set the record straight in regard to those two fuckin' pricks. [...] It's real simple: Eric Hoffman has a fucking steroid problem, and he's bi-polar. Brian married some young broad who's running his life for him. What initially happened is that when our publishing deal ended with Roadrunner, and our new deal started with Earache, we put them on notice that our publishing was no longer gonan be split four ways \u2014 it's gonna be based on who writes what. That's the industry standard. Brian writes one song for the album, Eric writes two songs and they wanna get paid for all the songs Steve wrote. That's not fuckin' fair. And I wrote all the lyrics, so I'm entitled to 50% of the publishing. Why should I give those two money? They've been losing thousands of dollars for me and Steve for ten years now. If it was one of those things where they showed up and did their jobs, we wouldn't have a fucking problem. That's why the deal we signed [with Roadrunner] in '90 was set up like that. Back then, everybody wrote and contributed and it was a fuckin' group effort. But now me and Steve are the Lennon and McCartney of the band, doing all the writing, and those two wanna get paid for our hard work. Fuck that.\n Deicide frontman Glen Benton on former guitarists Eric and Brian Hoffman, as quoted by \"Blabbermouth\" (March 2, 2006) \nEric and Brian Hoffman made their final studio appearance with Deicide on 2004's \"Scars of the Crucifix\", which was the band's first release on Earache Records. On November 25, 2004, the brothers departed from the band due to animosity relating to royalties and publishing. Steve Asheim stated that by this point, he had lost \"business trust\" in them, and stated that leading up to their departure, they could not even be relied upon to show up for live performances. \nThe Hoffmans (at least initially) denied quitting the band on their own accord, and insisted that they were fired. According to Eric Hoffman, \"No one quit Deicide. We split all royalties and publishing, or no deal. Glen wrote one song musically: \u2018Trifixion\u2019, then I arranged it, in his whole career and one part in \u2018Dead By Dawn\u2019. Yes, very brutal.\" Glen Benton contested this claim, telling \"Blabbermouth\" in 2006 that the brothers promptly quit the band upon receiving publishing checks for \"Scars\" and realizing that they had only received payment for a handful of the album's tracks. Benton also claimed that Eric Hoffman had made threats of physical violence towards himself and Steve Asheim, and vowed to defend himself should he catch the guitarist trespassing on his property. He said: \"We gotta deal with Eric threatening Steve, driving to his house and screaming outside his window at 10:30 at night, making threatening phone calls, talking shit on \"Blabbermouth\" about Steve's dad dying, and all this other bullshit. Eric knows better than to come over here, though \u2014 he knows I shoot first and ask questions later.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI will collect what has been rightfully owned and that scum fuck Glen and the Turtles, they only care about themselves. I will never stop death metal and yes we will kick your ass Glen any time any place. I will collect my money clearly fraud scum fuck. You say gloves are off your better put some on, the anger in me, your head will spin around like the fucking exorcist, you know where I live, welcome anytime collecting all my merch for royalties for 20 years and royalties for 13 on scars believe me I will not let you get away with this, we will meet again, anger is building and has it\u2019s vengeance. Yes again he was hired I drew the logo found the name. that\u2019s why I use his name AMON. fucking prick.\n Former Deicide guitarist Eric Hoffman on frontman Glen Benton in a 2019 deleted Facebook post regarding the dispute over royalties with Glen Benton, as quoted by Vince Neilstein of \"MetalSucks\" (July 19th, 2019) https://\nThey later attempted to sue Glen Benton for the rights to the Deicide name. Eric Hoffman recalled, \"We were actually going to use the Deicide name [for the new band], but [Glen and Steve] got on the bandwagon faster than us. [...] They basically took the name, and Glen writes all the lyrics, so the kids are familiar with that.\" In response, Benton countersued the Hoffmans in order to remove their names from the band's trademark. Benton told Decibel, \"They can't do a goddamned thing to me, dude. I own the fucking name. They went behind my back and filed on my trademark, so I'm in the process of suing them to get their names off it. And I will win. They abandoned their jobs, and now they wanna come back. Well, there's no coming back, man. Sorry.\" According to Eric Hoffman, Benton \"says if he sees me, he's gonna shoot me and ask questions later. He hates me more than Jesus.\" Benton later compared his relationship with the Hoffmans to a \"bad marriage,\" and was quoted saying: \"When you're in a bad marriage, it just ain't working out. So people have to go on their way.\" He also stated his belief that Deicide was stronger without the brothers, saying, \"They're just a couple of losers, and they rode on me and Steve's coattails for all these years.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI respect my fans, I love my fans, most people can\u2019t say that without them I\u2019m nothing without them. After what happened when Glen Benton fucking took scars royalties for 20 years and all Deicide merchandise I will find you and hunt you down like the animal you are. I have no label and did my last album for the fans out of my own savings and will do it again with without label. I now pronounce curse on his hair piece Glen Michael Benton you will be history soon and Steve will hire new singer. Also remember this I am Deicide you are a disgusting individual that doesn\u2019t care about anyone but himself Glen your Amon, not now, you\u2019re not good enough. I drew the logo came up with the name. Unbelievable I am Amon suck it Glen we will meet again.\n Former Deicide guitarist Brian Hoffman on frontman Glen Benton in a deleted 2022 Facebook post, as quoted by Emperor Rhombus of \"MetalSucks\" (February 1, 2022) https://\nThe Hoffman brothers later went on to reform Amon. Eric Hoffman described the sound as \"a little bit more technical\" than some of the music they created in Deicide. He explained: \"It's not too intricate, so it's still catchy at the same time. You'll still have a couple of classic Deicide beginnings, and then it'll go into some killer technical, in-your-face shit.\"\nIn 2019, Eric Hoffman made a threatening Facebook post directed at Benton, calling him a fraud, and vowing to collect the royalties from \"Scars of the Crucifix\". He said: \"Yes[,] we will kick your ass Glen any time[,] any place. I will collect my money[,] [you] clearly fraud scum fuck. You say gloves are off your better put some on, the anger in me, your head will spin around like the fucking exorcist, you know where I live, welcome anytime collecting all my merch for royalties for 20 years and royalties for 13 on scars believe me I will not let you get away with this, we will meet again, anger is building and has it\u2019s vengeance.\" Benton responded on \"Into the Combine\" podcast: \"Every time we do a record, I guess [Eric] loses his mind over there and he can\u2019t handle hearing us proceeding without them. It\u2019s been what \u2014 14, 15 years since those two departed, and they did one shitty album and tried ripping off the fans, charged them for videos and bullshit like that. And then from there, they\u2019ve done two shitty shows here in the state of Florida, and from what I was told, they almost canceled those. So their track record speaks for itself. Our track record speaks for itself. When you don\u2019t have the original singer, then you are the official cover band. You wanna make yourself look even more stupid than you already do, by all means, go ahead.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStill, to this day, he's still making fucking idiotic posts and shit. And uh, it's embarrassing. You know, it really is. You've been out of the band for 20 years man. You know what? Go do something with yourself, you know what I mean? Leave me the fuck alone. [...] I don't waste my thoughts on people and things like that. They're not worth my thoughts, I don't think about em. I really just don't waste my energy on people and things like that. It's a downer for life, you know what I mean? I don't live in the past man, and I don't swim up 'shit river' twice, and I don't walk up stairs backwards. That's how it is. [...] I wish them all the best, and I wish that they would move on and all that. They do still reach out trying to get back into the band but that's never going to happen, so the sooner they realize that, the sooner they can probably enjoy the rest of their lives maybe. [...] Dude, all you had to do was sit in the back seat and fucking look out the window, man. Just enjoy the fucking ride. That's all you had to do. Nothing more. [...] And you know what? Here's the fucked up thing, man. There [are] two words. Two words [that] can fix alot of fucking things, and they've never used those two words to me and Steve ever. And I don't think they ever will, and I'm never going to ask them for it. [...] That's how you teach your children not to be sociopaths. These individuals, I feel that there's alot of that [going on] there. It's like because, some people just don't know how to apologize for their behavior and their actions.\n Deicide frontman Glen Benton on Eric and Brian Hoffman, as quoted from an interview with Chris Garza of Suicide Silence (August 22, 2022) https://\nIn 2022, Brian Hoffman made a lengthy post on Facebook pertaining to the incident, going as far as to suggest that Benton wears a toupee in secrecy. He was quoted saying: \"After what happened when Glen Benton fucking took scars royalties for 20 years and all Deicide merchandise I will find you and hunt you down like the animal you are. I have no label and did my last album for the fans out of my own savings and will do it again with without label. I now pronounce [a] curse on his hair piece[.] Glen Michael Benton[,] you will be history soon and Steve will hire new singer. Also remember this[,] I am Deicide [and] you are a disgusting individual that doesn\u2019t care about anyone but himself.\"\nBenton again reflected on the split in a 2022 interview with Chris Garza of Suicide Silence: \"The way [the Hoffmans] conducted themselves was unprofessional and brought a black eye to me and Steve, which we didn't deserve it because we were doing all the work. [...] I was ready to quit [...] I was doing Vital and I had just had enough of their bullshit. I was ready to go, so when they quit the band they did me a favor. [...] And then they wanted to burn it down when they left, too. They wanted to burn the fucking thing to the ground. It's like, all me and Steve's hard work they wanted to burn it down to the ground.\" \nBenton also suggested that although his relationship with the Hoffmans was damaged beyond repair, the situation could be significantly improved by a simple apology. However, he stated that he did not expect to receive an apology from the brothers at any point in the indefinite future. He surmised: \"They don't care, or maybe they feel that there's been so much damage done that something as simple as an apology might fix things. But I mean, if they're that fucking stupid, ya know?\" He then stated: \"There's things that you just can't come back from. [...] You know when you're saying it \u2013 you know when you're doing it \u2013 that there's no coming back from it \u2013 that you've permanently stepped over that line forever. [...] You can't go through life, man, just hurting people and stepping on toes and burning bridges and that, I mean, coz it's all gonna come back to you eventually. You know? And, you reap what you sow, man.\"\nIn a 2024 interview, Asheim stated that he had heard rumors that relations between Eric and Brian Hoffman had deteriorated, and that they had not been in contact with one another. He commented, \"it's fucking comical fodder more than anything at this point.\"\nPost-Hoffman brothers period (2004\u2013present).\nShortly after the Hoffmans' departure, the guitar roles were then filled by former Cannibal Corpse guitarist Jack Owen, and Vital Remains guitarist Dave Suzuki. Following the tour, Suzuki was replaced by guitarist Ralph Santolla. Santolla stated he was a Catholic, which had received a small amount of shock and ridicule from some metal fans. In spite of this, Deicide's eighth studio album \"The Stench of Redemption\", which was released on August 22, 2006, received positive reviews from critics, who praised the album's guitar work and emphasis on melody.\nSpeaking of how Owen's presence affected the band's dynamic, Benton said: \"When those two morons left, Jack brought stability, a calm, a stress-free environment for me. 'Cause I was ready to quit the band; I was done. I had enough of them two morons; I was done. That's why I started doing Vital Remains. I was at that point. I had enough. And Ralph being in the band, that was just\u2026 I knew when we brought Ralph in he was never gonna be permanent, because he's just a fucking mess of a human being... Jack, though\u2026 We're like family. The band is a family. I treat this band like I would my family. I don't pay myself more than anybody; we split everything equally, four ways. [...] I like to sleep at night. I couldn't treat people like a hired gun and shit. You know what I mean?! To me, that's just\u2026 When bands do that, it's, like, 'Who are you as far as\u2026? On a human level, how are you better than anybody else? Why should you be paid more?' And people can respect me for that, or they can hate me for it. I run it like a business, you know what I mean?! And everybody's happy. This lineup is not gonna go away.\"In January 2007, Benton left the European tour and returned home to the United States as a result of legal issues at home. Asheim announced that Seth van Loo, from opening act Severe Torture, and Garbaty \"Yaha\", from the Polish death metal band Dissenter, would be replacing Benton starting on January 9 in the Netherlands, until Benton could rejoin the tour. Benton rejoined the band in Paris on January 13. On May 24, 2007, it was announced Ralph Santolla had left Deicide. Subsequently, he joined Florida's Obituary and appeared on their album \"Xecutioner's Return\" as well as the tour. On July 20, 2007, guitarist Jack Owen announced that Deicide would be \"on hiatus\" and he had temporarily joined Ohio-based deathrash band Estuary for touring purposes. The band embarked on a Balkan tour, dubbed \"Balkans AssassiNation Tour\", in October 2007 alongside Krisiun, Incantation and Inactive Messiah. Owen called the tour a \"death metal vacation.\"\nBy November 2007, Deicide began work on their ninth studio album at Florida's Morrisound Studios. Entitled \"Till Death Do Us Part\", the follow-up to \"The Stench of Redemption\", promised to be the band's \"most savage and aggressive [offering] to date\", according to a press release. Drummer Steve Asheim recorded drum tracks and Benton started recording vocals in December 2007. In April 2008, two songs off the album were posted online. It was finally released on April 28, 2008. As the record was coming out, Benton considered retiring from music, in the midst of personal matters including a custody battle.\nOn January 6, 2009, Deicide posted a blog on their official Myspace page saying they had signed a worldwide record deal with Century Media, with Ralph Santolla returning to the band for a European tour. They were said to be working on material for a summer 2010 release. In early 2009, they toured with Vital Remains and Order of Ennead. Guitarist Kevin Quirion of Order of Ennead joined the band in the summer of 2009. In June 2010, Glen Benton revealed that the next Deicide album was to be titled \"To Hell with God\". It was produced by Mark Lewis at Audiohammer Studios in Sanford, Florida, and was released on February 15, 2011. \nGuitarist Ralph Santolla left Deicide in 2011. Glen Benton explained on Facebook: \"Ralph didn't make us better, he never wrote one part and he threw up all over the studio drunk when he did his leads, fuck that drunk, Kevin is back full time, we would rather have a tight sound than that drunk fucking his way through the set. [...] Oh the whole 'I am a Christian' thing with him is total bullshit... the guy just uses that shit to upset myself and the fans... don't buy it, the guy couldn't tell ya the last time he went to church... The fucked up thing is, that he thinks it's fine to go on stage a drunken mess, me and Steve have more respect for the fans then to let him make us look bad, fuck the guy, total drunk. Just to get the story straight cause the bum will deny it, I kicked his drunk ass off the bus in Italy... and finished the tour as a three piece... that's how bad it was with the drunkard... I would rather sound tight than to have him slopping through the songs another night...\"\nThe eleventh studio album \"In the Minds of Evil\" was released on November 26, 2013. On October 9, 2014, The Village Voice reported that Deicide had started working on new material for their twelfth studio album.\nDeicide toured with Entombed A.D. and Hate Eternal in the spring of 2015.\nBy November 2016, it became apparent that guitarist Jack Owen was no longer in the band, and had been replaced by Monstrosity guitarist Mark English without an official announcement. Owen said, \"it was a problem with new stuff I was writing. I walked into practice and Steve had re-recorded it and changed notes here and there for three or four songs that I had. It was stupid at the time. But he's, like, 'Hey, I changed the notes so I get writing credit.' And I'm, like, 'That's not how the songs go, though.' And Glen's like, 'It is now.' [Laughs] So I literally walked out and ghosted them. [Laughs] Later on, it was like, 'Hey, dude, you're out.'\" Benton said Ashiem took two of Owen\u2019s tracks and turned them into \"one good song.\" Ashiem recounted, \"We were just kind of writing the record, and we were going over the songs. Me and Glen, we were, like, 'We wanna redo the songs.' It's like we had completed them \u2014 about nine or twelve, whatever how many songs. They were all right, but we weren't really psyched about them. So we decided to rewrite them. And Jack didn't really like it. And he kind of left one day and just never came back. So that was that. [...] I haven't talked to the guy in almost a year.\" Benton later expressed regret for \u201cbeing a smartass\u201d during the incident. Owen went on to join Six Feet Under in February 2017. Benton has stated that the band has \u201cno hard feelings\u201d towards Owen and that they were happy for him in joining Six Feet Under.\nOn March 10, 2017, Deicide announced a short U.S. tour which would begin in May and also issued an update on the album: \"the new record is almost completed, right now its down to scheduling, this run of shows were setting up is to introduce and work in our new guitarist Mark English, that and I need a break from this thing called Florida\u2026\". Deicide's twelfth studio album, \"Overtures of Blasphemy,\" was released on September 14, 2018.\nOn June 6, 2018, former guitarist Ralph Santolla died due to complications following a heart attack and was taken off life support since being in a coma for a week. Benton stated that the two had \"made peace\" prior to Santolla's death, going as far to say \"I hope he's in a better place and I hope he's happy.\"\nIn February 2019, Deicide parted ways with Mark English and replaced him with Autumn's End vocalist/guitarist Chris Cannella.\nOn April 17, 2021, the band performed in front of an audience of full capacity at The Verona in New Port Richey amid the COVID-19 pandemic, as all restrictions for businesses were lifted and mask mandate enforcements for local cities in Florida were removed as the state was moved into Stage 3 in late September 2020. A U.S. tour followed soon after, with Kataklysm, Internal Bleeding and Begat the Nephilim.\nOn January 19, 2022, Chris Cannella left the band and was replaced by new guitarist Taylor Nordberg. The thirteenth album \"Banished by Sin\" was released through Reigning Phoenix Music on April 26, 2024. It was the \"album of the month\" on metallian.com. The band toured Europe in 2024.\nOn May 18, 2025, guitarist Kevin Quirion announced his departure from Deicide for personal reasons, and would be replaced with Jadran \"Conan\" Gonzalez.\nArtistry.\nMusical style and influences.\nDom Lawson of Metal Hammer wrote, \"in terms of defining the sound of Floridian death metal in the early 90s, few bands are either as iconic or as notorious.\" Despite this, frontman Glen Benton prefers not to use the \"death metal\" terminology. Greg Prato of AllMusic loosely referred to Deicide as blackened death metal. Additionally, Deicide's albums following their debut album have been called brutal death metal.\nAccording to Benton, Deicide was initially influenced by extreme metal acts such as Venom, Possessed and Death. Original guitarist Eric Hoffman was introduced to extreme metal by his brother Brian while the two were in high school. Eric recalled: \"My brother came into my room and showed me some Bathory and Sodom and some Slayer, and I was like, 'what the fuck is this shit?!' I got into it.\" Eric, who was slightly older than his brother, was also influenced by Led Zeppelin, Black Sabbath and Yngwie Malmsteen. Brian stated that he was influenced by \"anything satanic, basically. Anything fucking evil. [...] Anything crazy.\" \nMusic journalist T Coles assessed, \"though few would accuse Deicide of having pop sensibilities, there was something fun and catchy about them. This is in part thanks to Glen Benton's vocals; individual words are barked out, retaining the evil vibe, and the staccato delivery builds tension before breaking it back down with chaotic guitar solos.\" Benton's high shrieks have drawn comparisons to black metal. Both the Hoffman brothers tended to play technical solos at fast speeds and with overlapping riffs, which allowed Deicide to achieve the definitive heavy sound and complex song structures the band would become known for. Their guitar tone preferences heard on early Deicide releases have been noted for their extreme high frequency. According to Zeke Ferrington of Gear Gods, \"It sounds like they plugged their pedals into a BBE Sonic Maximizer, then straight into the [mixing] desk with a HPF at 800hz and an upper mid boost.\"\nLyrical themes.\nDeicide's songs have been described as \"misanthropic odes to Satan.\" The band's lyrics explore vehement anti-Christian themes, as well as themes of blasphemy, Satanism, suicide, human sacrifice, deicide, and hell. Some of the band's song titles include \"Death to Jesus\", \"Fuck Your God\", \"Kill the Christian\", \"Behead the Prophet\", \"Scars of the Crucifix\", and \"Christ Don't Care\". Despite this, drummer Steve Asheim has denied belief in Satan or any other fire deity, explaining: \"The whole point of Satanic music is to blaspheme against the Church [...] Life is short enough without having to waste it doing this whole organized praying, hoping, wishing-type thing on some superior being.\"\nControversy and censorship.\nDeicide has received considerable controversy throughout their career. Most of the controversy surrounded frontman Benton for a rash of shocking interviews and wild statements. Benton has repeatedly branded an inverted cross into his forehead on at least 12 different occasions. During an interview with \"NME\" magazine, he shot and killed a squirrel with a pellet gun to prevent any further damage to his electrical system in the attic at the location the interview was held. This act garnered negative attention from critics and some animal rights activists. Benton had professed beliefs in theistic Satanism during Deicide's early years, claimed to slaughter rodents for fun, and that he held beliefs in demonic possession and that he was possessed. Such statements had eventually been concluded as tongue-in-cheek and little more than sensationalism by band members questioned alternatively. Additionally, Benton claimed in the early 1990s that he would commit suicide at the age of 33 to \"mirror\" a lifespan opposite that of Jesus Christ. However, he passed that age in 2000 and did not commit suicide, rebutting in 2006 that these statements had been \"asinine remarks\" and that \"only cowards and losers\" choose to kill themselves.\nDeicide has been banned from playing in several venues (such as Valparaiso, Chile over a promotional poster featuring Jesus Christ with a bullet hole in his forehead) and with various festivals such as Hellfest, after several graves had been spray-painted with \"When Satan Rules His World\", a reference to a song from Deicide's 1995 album \"Once upon the Cross\". In addition, their music video for \"Homage for Satan\", which features blood-splattered zombies on a rampaging mission to capture a priest, was banned from UK music TV channel Scuzz.\nDeicide also caused controversy when Benton tossed rotting animal meat into the crowd. Benton recalled, \u201cI didn\u2019t think playing shows with rotting meat as part of our set-up was gonna cause that much of a shitstorm. Within three shows of that stuff I had the authorities bearing down on me, so it was a very short-lived moment in Deicide history.\u201d Steve Asheim said that the authorities confiscated the animal entrails and had them sent to a lab to tested because they thought they were human. He said: \u201cScaring the shit out of people was what we were trying to do, so we achieved that!\" Benton later reflected: 'We all do stupid shit when we\u2019re kids and people at record companies made more out of it than was there. Yeah, it was sensationalized, stupid stuff. And I just played into it like I was being asked. As far as the animal guts I threw into the crowd and everything, yeah, we did that shit in the early days. When you\u2019re young and you\u2019re a kid all you think is just, 'Let\u2019s be as sick as fuckin\u2019 possible!' But you\u2019re not thinking about all the people you might harm in the fuckin\u2019 process. And then when you get a little older you go, \u201cWow, man. That was really fuckin\u2019 stupid of me to throw all that shit on fuckin\u2019 people. It could have made some of them really sick.' So you grow up. We all grow up.\"\nBand members.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "8819", "revid": "1274812874", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8819", "title": "Digital video disc", "text": ""}
{"id": "8820", "revid": "1274815090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8820", "title": "Digital Versatile Disc", "text": ""}
{"id": "8822", "revid": "38004052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8822", "title": "Daniel Williamson", "text": "Daniel Williamson may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "8824", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8824", "title": "Division of labour", "text": "Separation of tasks in any system so that participants may specialise\nThe division of labour is the separation of the tasks in any economic system or organisation so that participants may specialise (specialisation). Individuals, organisations, and nations are endowed with or acquire specialised capabilities, and either form combinations or trade to take advantage of the capabilities of others in addition to their own. Specialised capabilities may include equipment or natural resources as well as skills. Training and combinations of equipment and other assets acting together are often important. For example, an individual may specialise by acquiring tools and the skills to use them effectively just as an organisation may specialise by acquiring specialised equipment and hiring or training skilled operators. The division of labour is the motive for trade and the source of economic interdependence.\nAn increasing division of labour is associated with the growth of total output and trade, the rise of capitalism, and the increasing complexity of industrialised processes. The concept and implementation of division of labour has been observed in ancient Sumerian (Mesopotamian) culture, where assignment of jobs in some cities coincided with an increase in trade and economic interdependence. Division of labour generally also increases both producer and individual worker productivity.\nAfter the Neolithic Revolution, pastoralism and agriculture led to more reliable and abundant food supplies, which increased the population and led to specialisation of labour, including new classes of artisans, warriors, and the development of elites. This specialisation was furthered by the process of industrialisation, and Industrial Revolution-era factories. Accordingly, many classical economists as well as some mechanical engineers, such as Charles Babbage, were proponents of division of labour. Also, having workers perform single or limited tasks eliminated the long training period required to train craftsmen, who were replaced with less-paid but more productive unskilled workers.\nPre-modern theories.\nPlato.\nIn Plato's \"Republic\", the origin of the state lies in the natural inequality of humanity, which is embodied in the division of labour:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Well then, how will our state supply these needs? It will need a farmer, a builder, and a weaver, and also, I think, a shoemaker and one or two others to provide for our bodily needs. So that the minimum state would consist of four or five men...\u2014\u200a\nSilvermintz (2010) noted that \"Historians of economic thought credit Plato, primarily on account of arguments advanced in his Republic, as an early proponent of the division of labour.\" Notwithstanding this, Silvermintz argues that \"While Plato recognises both the economic and political benefits of the division of labour, he ultimately critiques this form of economic arrangement insofar as it hinders the individual from ordering his own soul by cultivating acquisitive motives over prudence and reason.\"\nXenophon.\nXenophon, in the 4th century BC, makes a passing reference to division of labour in his \"Cyropaedia\" (a.k.a. \"Education of Cyrus\").\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAugustine of Hippo.\nA simile used by Augustine of Hippo shows that the division of labour was practised and understood in late Imperial Rome. In a brief passage of his \"The City of God\", Augustine seems to be aware of the role of different social layers in the production of goods, like household (\"familiae\"), corporations (\"collegia\") and the state.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2026like workmen in the street of the silversmiths, where one vessel, in order that it may go out perfect, passes through the hands of many, when it might have been finished by one perfect workman. But the only reason why the combined skill of many workmen was thought necessary, was, that it is better that each part of an art should be learned by a special workman, which can be done speedily and easily, than that they should all be compelled to be perfect in one art throughout all its parts, which they could only attain slowly and with difficulty.\u2014\u200a\nMedieval Muslim scholars.\nThe division of labour was discussed by multiple medieval Persian scholars. They considered the division of labour between members of a household, between members of society and between nations. For Nasir al-Din al-Tusi and al-Ghazali the division of labour was necessary and useful. The similarity of the examples provided by these scholars with those provided by Adam Smith (such as al-Ghazali's needle factory and Tusi's claim that exchange, and by extension the division of labour, are the consequences of the human reasoning capability and that no animals have been observed to exchange one bone for another) led some scholars to conjecture that Smith was influenced by the medieval Persian scholarship.\nModern theories.\nWilliam Petty.\nSir William Petty was the first modern writer to take note of the division of labour, showing its has worth in existence and usefulness in Dutch shipyards. Classically, the workers in a shipyard would build ships as units, finishing one before starting another. But the Dutch had it organised with several teams each doing the same tasks for successive ships. People with a particular task to do must have discovered new methods that were only later observed and justified by writers on political economy.\nPetty also applied the principle to his survey of Ireland. His breakthrough was to divide up the work so that large parts of it could be done by people with no extensive training.\nBernard de Mandeville.\nBernard de Mandeville discussed the matter in the second volume of \"The Fable of the Bees\" (1714). This elaborates many matters raised by the original poem about a 'Grumbling Hive'. He says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But if one will wholly apply himself to the making of Bows and Arrows, whilst another provides Food, a third builds Huts, a fourth makes Garments, and a fifth Utensils, they not only become useful to one another, but the Callings and Employments themselves will in the same Number of Years receive much greater Improvements, than if all had been promiscuously followed by every one of the Five.\nDavid Hume.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When every individual person labors apart, and only for himself, his force is too small to execute any considerable work; his labor being employed in supplying all his different necessities, he never attains a perfection in any particular art; and as his force and success are not at all times equal, the least failure in either of these particulars must be attended with inevitable ruin and misery. Society provides a remedy for these three inconveniences. By the conjunction of forces, our power is augmented: By the partition of employments, our ability increases: And by mutual succor we are less exposed to fortune and accidents. 'Tis by this additional force, ability, and security, that society becomes advantageous. - David Hume, A Treatise on Human Nature\nHenri-Louis Duhamel du Monceau.\nIn his introduction to \"The Art of the Pin-Maker\" (\"Art de l'\u00c9pinglier\", 1761), Henri-Louis Duhamel du Monceau writes about the \"division of this work\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is nobody who isn't surprised of the small price of pins; but we shall be even more surprised, when we know how many different operations, most of them very delicate, are mandatory to make a good pin. We are going to go through these operations in a few words to stimulate the curiosity to know their detail; this enumeration will supply as many articles which will make the division of this work.\u2026 The first operation is to have brass go through the drawing plate to calibrate it.\u2026\nBy \"division of this work,\" du Monceau is referring to the subdivisions of \nthe text describing the various trades involved in the pin making activity; this can also be described as a division of labour.\nAdam Smith.\nIn the first sentence of \"An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations\" (1776), Adam Smith foresaw the essence of industrialism by determining that division of labour represents a substantial increase in productivity. Like du Monceau, his example was the making of pins.\nUnlike Plato, Smith famously argued that the difference between a street porter and a philosopher was as much a consequence of the division of labour as its cause. Therefore, while for Plato the level of specialisation determined by the division of labour was externally determined, for Smith it was the dynamic engine of economic progress. However, in a further chapter of the same book, Smith criticised the division of labour, saying that it makes man \"as stupid and ignorant as it is possible for a human creature to become\" and that it can lead to \"the almost entire corruption and degeneracy of the great body of the people.\u2026unless government takes some pains to prevent it.\" The contradiction has led to some debate over Smith's opinion of the division of labour. Alexis de Tocqueville agreed with Smith: \"Nothing tends to materialize man, and to deprive his work of the faintest trace of mind, more than extreme division of labor.\" Adam Ferguson shared similar views to Smith, though was generally more negative.\nThe specialisation and concentration of the workers on their single subtasks often leads to greater skill and greater productivity on their particular subtasks than would be achieved by the same number of workers each carrying out the original broad task, in part due to increased quality of production, but more importantly because of increased efficiency of production, leading to a higher nominal output of units produced per time unit. Smith uses the example of a production capability of an individual pin maker compared to a manufacturing business that employed 10 men:One man draws out the wire; another straights it; a third cuts it; a fourth points it; a fifth grinds it at the top for receiving the head; to make the head requires two or three distinct operations; to put it on is a peculiar business; to whiten the pins is another; it is even a trade by itself to put them into the paper; and the important business of making a pin is, in this manner, divided into about eighteen distinct operations, which, in some manufactories, are all performed by distinct hands, though in others the same man will sometimes perform two or three of them. I have seen a small manufactory of this kind, where ten men only were employed, and where some of them consequently performed two or three distinct operations. But though they were very poor, and therefore but indifferently accommodated with the necessary machinery, they could, when they exerted themselves, make among them about twelve pounds of pins in a day. There are in a pound upwards of four thousand pins of a middling size. Those ten persons, therefore, could make among them upwards of forty-eight thousand pins in a day. Each person, therefore, making a tenth part of forty-eight thousand pins, might be considered as making four thousand eight hundred pins in a day. But if they had all wrought separately and independently, and without any of them having been educated to this peculiar business, they certainly could not each of them have made twenty, perhaps not one pin in a day.Smith saw the importance of matching skills with equipment\u2014usually in the context of an organisation. For example, pin makers were organised with one making the head, another the body, each using different equipment. Similarly, he emphasised a large number of skills, used in cooperation and with suitable equipment, were required to build a ship.\nIn modern economic discussion, the term \"human capital\" would be used. Smith's insight suggests that the huge increases in productivity obtainable from technology or technological progress are possible because human and physical capital are matched, usually in an organisation. See also a short discussion of Adam Smith's theory in the context of business processes. Babbage wrote a seminal work \"On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures\" analysing perhaps for the first time the division of labour in factories.\nImmanuel Kant.\nIn the \"Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals\" (1785), Immanuel Kant notes the value of the division of labour:All crafts, trades and arts have profited from the division of labour; for when each worker sticks to one particular kind of work that needs to be handled differently from all the others, he can do it better and more easily than when one person does everything. Where work is not thus differentiated and divided, where everyone is a jack-of-all-trades, the crafts remain at an utterly primitive level.\nKarl Marx.\nMarx argued that increasing the specialisation may also lead to workers with poorer overall skills and a lack of enthusiasm for their work. He described the process as alienation: workers become more and more specialised and work becomes repetitive, eventually leading to complete alienation from the process of production. The worker then becomes \"depressed spiritually and physically to the condition of a machine.\"\nAdditionally, Marx argued that the division of labour creates less-skilled workers. As the work becomes more specialised, less training is needed for each specific job, and the workforce, overall, is less skilled than if one worker did one job entirely.\nAmong Marx's theoretical contributions is his sharp distinction between the economic and the social division of labour. That is, some forms of labour co-operation are purely due to \"technical necessity\", but others are a result of a \"social control\" function related to a class and status hierarchy. If these two divisions are conflated, it might appear as though the existing division of labour is technically inevitable and immutable, rather than (in good part) socially constructed and influenced by power relationships. He also argues that in a communist society, the division of labour is transcended, meaning that balanced human development occurs where people fully express their nature in the variety of creative work that they do.\nHenry David Thoreau and Ralph Waldo Emerson.\nHenry David Thoreau criticised the division of labour in \"Walden\" (1854), on the basis that it removes people from a sense of connectedness with society and with the world at large, including nature. He claimed that the average man in a civilised society is less wealthy, in practice, than one in a \"savage\" society. The answer he gave was that self-sufficiency was enough to cover one's basic needs.\nThoreau's friend and mentor, Ralph Waldo Emerson, criticised the division of labour in his \"The American Scholar\" speech: a widely informed, holistic citizenry is vital for the spiritual and physical health of the country.\n\u00c9mile Durkheim.\nIn his seminal work, \"The Division of Labor in Society\", \u00c9mile Durkheim observes that the division of labour appears in all societies and positively correlates with societal advancement because it increases as a society progresses.\nDurkheim arrived at the same conclusion regarding the positive effects of the division of labour as his theoretical predecessor, Adam Smith. In \"The Wealth of Nations\", Smith observes the division of labour results in \"a proportionable increase of the productive powers of labor.\" While they shared this belief, Durkheim believed the division of labour applied to all \"biological organisms generally,\" while Smith believed this law applied \"only to human societies.\" This difference may result from the influence of Charles Darwin's \"On the Origin of Species\" on Durkheim's writings. For example, Durkheim observed an apparent relationship between \"the functional specialisation of the parts of an organism\" and \"the extent of that organism's evolutionary development,\" which he believed \"extended the scope of the division of labour so as to make its origins contemporaneous with the origins of life itself\u2026implying that its conditions must be found in the essential properties of all organised matter.\"\nSince Durkheim's division of labour applied to all organisms, he considered it a \"natural law\" and worked to determine whether it should be embraced or resisted by first analysing its functions. Durkheim hypothesised that the division of labour fosters social solidarity, yielding \"a wholly moral phenomenon\" that ensures \"mutual relationships\" among individuals.\nAs social solidarity cannot be directly quantified, Durkheim indirectly studies solidarity by \"classify[ing] the different types of law to find...the different types of social solidarity which correspond to it.\" Durkheim categorises:\nDurkheim believes that organic solidarity prevails in more advanced societies, while mechanical solidarity typifies less developed societies. He explains that in societies with more mechanical solidarity, the diversity and division of labour is much less, so individuals have a similar worldview. Similarly, Durkheim opines that in societies with more organic solidarity, the diversity of occupations is greater, and individuals depend on each other more, resulting in greater benefits to society as a whole. Durkheim's work enabled social science to progress more efficiently \"in\u2026the understanding of human social behavior.\"\nLudwig von Mises.\nMarx's theories, including his negative claims regarding the division of labour, have been criticised by the Austrian economists, notably Ludwig von Mises. The primary argument is that the economic gains accruing from the division of labour far outweigh the costs, thus developing on the thesis that division of labour leads to cost efficiencies. It is argued that it is fully possible to achieve balanced human development within capitalism and alienation is downplayed as mere romantic fiction.\nAccording to Mises, the idea has led to the concept of mechanisation in which a specific task is performed by a mechanical device, instead of an individual labourer. This method of production is significantly more effective in both yield and cost-effectiveness, and utilises the division of labour to the fullest extent possible. Mises saw the very idea of a task being performed by a specialised mechanical device as being the greatest achievement of division of labour.\nFriedrich A. Hayek.\nIn \"The Use of Knowledge in Society\", Friedrich A. Hayek states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The price system is just one of those formations which man has learned to use (though he is still very far from having learned to make the best use of it) after he had stumbled upon it without understanding it. Through it not only a division of labour but also a coordinated utilisation of resources based on an equally divided knowledge has become possible. The people who like to deride any suggestion that this may so usually distort the argument by insinuating that it asserts that by some miracle just that sort of system has spontaneously grown up which is best suited to modern civilisation. It is the other way round: man has been able to develop that division of labour on which our civilisation is based because he happened to stumble upon a method which made it possible. Had he not done so, he might still have developed some other, altogether different, type of civilisation, something like the \"state\" of the termite ants, or some other altogether unimaginable type.\nGlobalisation and global division of labour.\nThe issue reaches its broadest scope in the controversies about globalisation, which is often interpreted as a euphemism for the expansion of international trade based on comparative advantage. This would mean that countries specialise in the work they can do at the lowest relative cost measured in terms of the opportunity cost of not using resources for other work, compared to the opportunity costs experienced by countries. Critics, however, allege that international specialisation cannot be explained sufficiently in terms of \"the work nations do best\", rather that this specialisation is guided more by commercial criteria, which favour some countries over others.\nThe OECD advised in June 2005 that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Efficient policies to encourage employment and combat unemployment are essential if countries are to reap the full benefits of globalisation and avoid a backlash against open trade... Job losses in some sectors, along with new job opportunities in other sectors, are an inevitable accompaniment of the process of globalisation... The challenge is to ensure that the adjustment process involved in matching available workers with new job openings works as smoothly as possible.\nFew studies have taken place regarding the global division of labour. Information can be drawn from ILO and national statistical offices. In one study, Deon Filmer estimated that 2.474 billion people participated in the global non-domestic labour force in the mid-1990s. Of these:\nThe majority of workers in industry and services were wage and salary earners\u201458 per cent of the industrial workforce and 65 per cent of the services workforce. But a large portion was self-employed or involved in family labour. Filmer suggests the total of employees worldwide in the 1990s was about 880 million, compared with around a billion working on their own account on the land (mainly peasants), and some 480 million working on their own account in industry and services. The 2007 ILO Global Employment Trends Report indicated that services have surpassed agriculture for the first time in human history:In 2006 the service sector's share of global employment overtook agriculture for the first time, increasing from 39.5 to 40 per cent. Agriculture decreased from 39.7 per cent to 38.7 per cent. The industry sector accounted for 21.3 per cent of total employment.\nContemporary theories.\nIn the modern world, those specialists most preoccupied in their work with theorising about the division of labour are those involved in management and organisation.\nIn general, in capitalist economies, such things are not decided consciously. Different people try different things, and that which is most effective cost-wise (produces the most and best output with the least input) will generally be adopted. Often, techniques that work in one place or time do not work as well in another.\nStyles of division of labour.\nTwo styles of management that are seen in modern organisations are control and commitment:\nJob specialisation is advantageous in developing employee expertise in a field and boosting organisational production. However, disadvantages of job specialisation included limited employee skill, dependence on entire department fluency, and employee discontent with repetitive tasks.\nLabour hierarchy.\nIt is widely accepted among economists and social theorists that the division of labour is, to a great extent, inevitable within capitalist societies, simply because no one can do all tasks at once. Labour hierarchy is a very common feature of the modern capitalist workplace structure, and the way these hierarchies are structured can be influenced by a variety of different factors, including:\nIt is often argued that the most equitable principle in allocating people within hierarchies is that of true (or proven) competency or ability. This concept of meritocracy could be read as an explanation or as a justification of why a division of labour is the way it is.\nThis claim, however, is often disputed by various sources, particularly: \nLimitations.\nAdam Smith famously said in \"The Wealth of Nations\" that the division of labour is limited by the extent of the market. This is because it is by the exchange that each person can be specialised in their work and yet still have access to a wide range of goods and services. Hence, reductions in barriers to exchange lead to increases in the division of labour and so help to drive economic growth. Limitations to the division of labour have also been related to coordination and transportation costs.\nThere can be motivational advantages to a reduced division of labour (which has been termed \u2018job enlargement\u2019 and 'job enrichment'). Jobs that are too specialised in a narrow range of tasks are said to result in demotivation due to boredom and alienation. Hence, a Taylorist approach to work design contributed to worsened industrial relations.\nThere are also limitations to the division of labour (and the division of work) that result from workflow variations and uncertainties. These help to explain issues in modern work organisation, such as task consolidations in business process re-engineering and the use of multi-skilled work teams. For instance, one stage of a production process may temporarily work at a slower pace, forcing other stages to slow down. One answer to this is to make some portion of resources mobile between stages so that those resources must be capable of undertaking a wider range of tasks. Another is to consolidate tasks so that they are undertaken one after another by the same workers and other resources. Stocks between stages can also help to reduce the problem to some extent but are costly and can hamper quality control. Modern flexible manufacturing systems require both flexible machines and flexible workers.\nIn project-based work, the coordination of resources is a difficult issue for the project manager as project schedules and resulting resource bookings are based on estimates of task durations and so are subject to subsequent revisions. Again, consolidating tasks so that they are undertaken consecutively by the same resources and having resources available that can be called on at short-notice from other tasks can help to reduce such problems, though at the cost of reduced specialisation.\nThere are also advantages in a reduced division of labour where knowledge would otherwise have to be transferred between stages. For example, having a single person deal with a customer query means that only that one person has to be familiar with the customer's details. It is also likely to result in the query being handled faster due to the elimination of delays in passing the query between different people.\nGendered division of labour.\nThe clearest exposition of the principles of sexual division of labour across the full range of human societies can be summarised by a large number of logically complementary implicational constraints of the following form: if women of childbearing ages in a given community tend to do X (e.g., preparing soil for planting) they will also do Y (e.g., the planting); while for men the logical reversal in this example would be that if men plant, they will prepare the soil.\nWhite, Brudner, and Burton's (1977) \"Entailment Theory and Method: A Cross-Cultural Analysis of the Sexual Division of Labor\", using statistical entailment analysis, shows that tasks more frequently chosen by women in these order relations are those more convenient in relation to child rearing. This type of finding has been replicated in a variety of studies, including those on modern industrial economies. These entailments do not restrict how much work for any given task could be done by men (e.g., in cooking) or by women (e.g., in clearing forests), but are only least-effort or role-consistent tendencies. To the extent that women clear forests for agriculture, for example, they tend to do the entire agricultural sequence of tasks on those clearings. In theory, these types of constraints could be removed by provisions of child care, but ethnographic examples are lacking.\nIndustrial organisational psychology.\nJob satisfaction has been shown to improve as an employee is given the task of a specific job. Students who have received PhDs in a chosen field later report increased satisfaction compared to their previous jobs. This can be attributed to their high levels of specialisation. The higher the training needed for the specialised job position, the higher is the level of job satisfaction as well, although many highly specialised jobs can be monotonous and produce high rates of burnout periodically.\nDivision of work.\nIn contrast to division of labour, division of work refers to the division of a large task, contract, or project into smaller tasks\u2014each with a separate schedule within the overall project schedule.\nDivision of labour, instead, refers to the allocation of tasks to individuals or organisations according to the skills and/or equipment those people or organisations possess. Often division of labour and division of work are both part of the economic activity within an industrial nation or organisation.\nDisaggregated work.\nA job divided into elemental parts is sometimes called \"disaggregated work\". Workers specialising in particular parts of the job are called professionals. The workers doing a portion of a non-recurring work may be called contractors, freelancers, or temporary workers. Modern communication technologies, particularly the Internet, gave rise to the sharing economy, which is orchestrated by online marketplaces for various kinds of disaggregated work.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8826", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8826", "title": "Davy lamp", "text": "Safety lamp used in flammable atmospheres\nThe Davy lamp is a safety lamp used in flammable atmospheres, invented in 1815 by Sir Humphry Davy. It consists of a wick lamp with the flame enclosed inside a mesh screen. It was created for use in coal mines, to reduce the danger of explosions due to the presence of methane and other flammable gases, called \"firedamp\" or \"minedamp.\"\nHistory.\nGerman polymath Alexander von Humboldt, working for the German Bureau of Mines, had concerns for the health and welfare of the miners and invented a kind of respirator and \"four lamps of different construction suitable for employment in various circumstances. The respirator was to prevent the inhaling of injurious gases, and to supply the miner with good air; the lamps were constructed to burn in the most inflammable kind of fire-damp without igniting the gas. They were the forerunners of Davy's later invention, and were frequently made use of by the miners.\"\nDavy's invention was preceded by that of William Reid Clanny, an Irish doctor at Bishopwearmouth, who had read a paper to the Royal Society in May 1813. The more cumbersome Clanny safety lamp was successfully tested at Herrington Mill, and he won medals, from the Royal Society of Arts.\nDespite his lack of scientific knowledge, engine-wright George Stephenson devised a lamp in which the air entered via tiny holes, through which the flames of the lamp could not pass. A month before Davy presented his design to the Royal Society, Stephenson demonstrated his own lamp to two witnesses by taking it down Killingworth Colliery and holding it in front of a fissure from which firedamp was issuing.\nThe first trial of a Davy lamp with a wire sieve was at Hebburn Colliery on 9 January 1816. A letter from Davy (which he intended to be kept private) describing his findings and various suggestions for a safety lamp was made public at a meeting in Newcastle on 3 November 1815, and a paper describing the lamp was formally presented at a Royal Society meeting in London on 9 November. For it, Davy was awarded the society's Rumford Medal. Davy's lamp differed from Stephenson's in that the flame was surrounded by a screen of gauze, whereas Stephenson's prototype lamp had a perforated plate contained in a glass cylinder (a design mentioned in Davy's Royal Society paper as an alternative to his preferred solution). For his invention Davy was given \u00a32,000 worth of silver (the money being raised by public subscription), whilst Stephenson was accused of stealing the idea from Davy, because the fully developed 'Geordie lamp' had not been demonstrated by Stephenson until after Davy had presented his paper at the Royal Society, and (it was held) previous versions had not actually been safe.\nA local committee of enquiry gathered in support of Stephenson exonerated him, showing that he had been working separately to create the Geordie lamp, and raised a subscription for him of \u00a31,000. Davy and his supporters refused to accept their findings, and would not see how an uneducated man such as Stephenson could come up with the solution he had: Stephenson himself freely admitted that he had arrived at a practical solution on the basis of an erroneous theory. In 1833, a House of Commons committee found that Stephenson had equal claim to having invented the safety lamp. Davy went to his grave claiming that Stephenson had stolen his idea. The Stephenson lamp was used almost exclusively in North East England, whereas the Davy lamp was used everywhere else. The experience gave Stephenson a lifelong distrust of London-based, theoretical, scientific experts.\nDesign and theory.\nThe lamp consists of a wick lamp with the flame enclosed inside a mesh screen. The screen acts as a flame arrestor; air (and any firedamp present) can pass through the mesh freely enough to support combustion, but the holes are too fine to allow a flame to propagate through them and ignite any firedamp outside the mesh. The Davy lamp was fueled by oil or naphtha (lighter fluid). \nThe lamp also provided a test for the presence of gases. If flammable gas mixtures were present, the flame of the Davy lamp burned higher with a blue tinge. Lamps were equipped with a metal gauge to measure the height of the flame. Miners could place the safety lamp close to the ground to detect gases, such as carbon dioxide, that are denser than air and so could collect in depressions in the mine; if the mine air was oxygen-poor (asphyxiant gas), the lamp flame would be extinguished (\"black damp\" or \"chokedamp\"). A methane-air flame is extinguished at about 17% oxygen content (which will still support life), so the lamp gave an early indication of an unhealthy atmosphere, allowing the miners to get out before they died of asphyxiation.\nImpact.\nIn 1816, the Cumberland Pacquet reported a demonstration of the Davy lamp at William Pit, Whitehaven. Placed in a blower \"... the effect was grand beyond description. At first a blue flame was seen to cap the flame of the lamp, \u2013 then succeeded a lambent flame, playing in the cylinder; and shortly after, the flame of the firedamp expanded, so as to completely fill the wire gauze. For some time, the flame of the lamp was seen through that of the firedamp, which became ultimately extinguished without explosion. Results more satisfactory were not to be wished...\" Another correspondent to the paper commented \"The Lamp offers absolute security to the miner... With the excellent ventilation of the \"Whitehaven Collieries\" and the application of Sir HUMPHRY's valuable instrument, the accidents from the explosion of' (carbureted) 'hydrogene which have occurred (although comparatively few for such extensive works) will by this happy invention be avoided\".\nHowever, this prediction was not fulfilled: in the next thirty years, firedamp explosions in Whitehaven pits killed 137 people. More generally, the Select Committee on Accidents in Mines reported in 1835 that the introduction of the Davy lamp had led to an increase in mine accidents; the lamp encouraged the working of mines and parts of mines that had previously been closed for safety reasons. For example, in 1835, 102 men and boys were killed by a firedamp explosion in a Wallsend colliery working the Bensham seam, described at the subsequent inquest by John Buddle as \"a dangerous seam, which required the utmost care in keeping in a working state\", which could only be worked with the Davy lamp. The coroner noted that a previous firedamp explosion in 1821 had killed 52, but directed his jury that any finding on the wisdom of continuing to work the seam was outside their province.\nThe lamps had to be provided by the miners themselves, not the owners, as traditionally the miners had bought their own candles from the company store. Miners still preferred the better illumination from a naked light, and mine regulations insisting that only safety lamps be used were draconian in principle, but in practice neither observed nor enforced. After two accidents in two years (1838\u201339) in Cumberland pits, both caused by safety checks being carried out by the light of a naked flame, the Royal Commission on Children's Employment commented both on the failure to learn from the first accident, and on the \"further absurdity\" of \"carrying a Davy lamp in one hand for the sake of safety, and a naked lighted candle in the other, as if for the sake of danger. Beyond this there can be no conceivable thoughtlessness and folly; and when such management is allowed in the mine of two of the most opulent coal-proprietors in the kingdom, we cease to wonder at anything that may take place in mines worked by men equally without capital and science\"\nAnother reason for the increase in accidents was the unreliability of the lamps themselves. The bare gauze was easily damaged, and once just a single wire broke or rusted away, the lamp became unsafe.\nWork carried out by a scientific witness and reported by the committee showed that the Davy lamp became unsafe in airflows so low that a Davy lamp carried at normal walking pace against normal airflows in walkways was only safe if provided with a draught shield (not normally fitted), and the committee noted that accidents had happened when the lamp was \"in general and careful use; no one survived to tell the tale of how these occurrences took place; conjecture supplied the want of positive knowledge most unsatisfactorily; but incidents are recorded which prove what must follow unreasonable testing of the lamp; and your Committee are constrained to believe that ignorance and a false reliance upon its merits, in cases attended with unwarrantable risks, have led to disastrous consequences\" The \"South Shields Committee\", a body set up by a public meeting there (in response to an explosion at the St Hilda pit in 1839) to consider the prevention of accidents in mines had shown that mine ventilation in the North-East was generally deficient, with an insufficient supply of fresh air giving every opportunity for explosive mixtures of gas to accumulate. A subsequent select committee in 1852 concurred with this view; firedamp explosions could best be prevented by improving mine ventilation (by the use of steam ejectors: the committee specifically advised against fan ventilation), which had been neglected because of over-reliance on the safety of the Davy lamp.\nThe practice of using a Davy lamp and a candle together was not entirely absurd, however, if the Davy lamp is understood to be not only a safe light in an explosive atmosphere, but also a gauge of firedamp levels. In practice, however, the warning from the lamp was not always noticed in time, especially in the working conditions of the era.\nThe Mines Regulation Act 1860 therefore required coal mines to have an adequate amount of ventilation, constantly produced, to dilute and render harmless noxious gases so that work areas were \u2013 under ordinary circumstances \u2013 in a fit state to be worked (areas where a normally safe atmosphere could not be ensured were to be fenced off \"as far as possible\"): it also required safety lamps to be examined and securely locked by a duly authorized person before use.\nEven when new and clean, illumination from the safety lamps was very poor, and the problem was not fully resolved until electric lamps became widely available in the late 19th century.\nSuccessors.\nA modern-day equivalent of the Davy lamp has been used in the Olympic flame torch relays. It was used in the relays for the Sydney, Athens, Turin, Beijing, Vancouver and Singapore Youth Olympic Games. It was also used for the Special Olympics Shanghai, Pan American and Central African games and for the London 2012 Summer Olympics relay.\nLamps are still made in Eccles, Greater Manchester; in Aberdare, South Wales; and in Kolkata, India.\nA replica of a Davy lamp is located in front of the ticket office at the Stadium of Light (Sunderland AFC) which is built on a former coal mine.\nIn 2015, the bicentenary of Davy's invention, the former Bersham Colliery, in Wrexham, Wales, now a mining museum, hosted an event for members of the public to bring in their Davy lamps for identification. The National Mining Museum Scotland at Newtongrange, Scotland, also celebrated the 200th anniversary of the invention. In 2016, the Royal Institution of Great Britain, where the Davy lamp prototype is displayed, decided to have the invention 3D scanned, reverse engineered and presented to the museum visitors in a more accessible digital format via a virtual reality cabinet. At first sight it appears to be a traditional display cabinet but has a touch screen with various options for visitors to view and reference the virtual exhibits inside.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8827", "revid": "31524402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8827", "title": "Docklands Light Railway", "text": "Automated light metro system in London\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Docklands Light Railway (DLR) is an automated light metro system primarily serving the redeveloped Docklands area of London and providing a direct connection between London's two major financial districts, Canary Wharf and the City of London. First opened on 31 August 1987, the DLR has been extended multiple times, giving a total route length of . Lines now reach north to Stratford, south to Lewisham, west to and in the City of London financial district, and east to Beckton, London City Airport and Woolwich Arsenal. An extension to Thamesmead is currently being proposed.\nNormal operations are automated, so there is minimal staffing on the 149 trains (which have no driving cabs) and at major interchange stations; the four below-ground stations are staffed, to comply with health and safety regulations for underground stations. The DLR was one of the first major railway infrastructure projects in Britain where access for disabled people was considered, with level access into the train from platforms and lifts at all stations.\nThe DLR is operated and maintained by franchisee KeolisAmey Docklands (a joint venture of transport company Keolis and infrastructure support provider Amey) for Transport for London (TfL). Passenger numbers have increased as the network has expanded since its launch. In the financial year 2024/25, there were 97.8million passenger journeys.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nIn the 18th and 19th century, new docks were built east of the City of London to cater for the rapidly growing city. The last of these docks opened in 1921 in the Royal Docks. From the early 1960s, the docks began to decline as cargo was containerised and mechanised. The older docks did not have space to expand, and could not handle larger vessels. The docks had been connected to the national railway network via the London and Blackwall Railway (L&amp;BR), which was closed in 1966 for lack of traffic. From the mid-1960s, the docks gradually closed down, leading to major job losses and economic deprivation. In the 1970s, the opening of new deep water Tilbury container docks located further east in Essex exacerbated the issue, with the Royal Docks closing in 1981. \nOrigins and development.\nThroughout the 1970s, the government and the Greater London Council (GLC) put forward various plans to redevelop the Docklands area. The area was thought to have great potential for redevelopment, located close to the City of London with historic warehouses and large areas of water.\nIn 1972, the London Docklands Study team commissioned Travis Morgan &amp; Partners to propose redevelopment of the area. In 1973, they proposed, among other recommendations, that a \"minitram\" people-mover system capable of carrying up to 20 people in each unit should be constructed to connect the Docklands with the planned Fleet line tube railway terminus at Fenchurch Street railway station. The Greater London Council formed a Docklands Joint Committee with the Boroughs of Greenwich, Lewisham, Newham, Southwark and Tower Hamlets in 1974 to undertake the redevelopment of the area. A light railway system was envisaged, terminating either at Tower Hill tube station or at nearby Fenchurch Street, but both options were seen as too expensive.\nNonetheless, in 1976 another report proposed a conventional tube railway for the area and London Transport obtained Parliamentary powers to build a line from Charing Cross station to Fenchurch Street, Surrey Docks (now Surrey Quays railway station), the Isle of Dogs, North Greenwich and Custom House to Woolwich Arsenal. This was intended to be the second stage of the Fleet line\u00a0\u2013 which had been renamed the Jubilee line, the first stage of which opened in 1979 from to . This would have cost around \u00a3325million. However, when the Thatcher Government came to power, the plans to extend the Jubilee line were halted and the new government insisted that a lower-cost option should be pursued.\nIn July 1981, the government established the London Docklands Development Corporation (LDDC) to coordinate the redevelopment of the Docklands. The need to provide a cheap public transport solution led to it commissioning London Transport to evaluate a number of exclusively light rail options, using trams or tram like vehicles. The cost of extending the Jubilee line to the area was now estimated to be around \u00a3450million.\nThe core of the route ran alongside the Great Eastern line out of London and south along the former London &amp; Blackwall Railway line through the Isle of Dogs. Three terminus options were proposed at the west end, at Tower Hill, Minories and Aldgate East. The Tower Hill option would have required a low-level interchange to be constructed alongside the existing Underground station, but this would have been a very costly venture. The Minories option, a high-level station virtually on the site of the old Minories railway station, was selected and became the current Tower Gateway DLR terminus. Aldgate East would have been perhaps the most ambitious of all of the options, as it originally envisaged a low-level connection with the District line that would have allowed DLR trains to run on London Underground tracks to a variety of central London destinations. However, it quickly became apparent that there was no capacity on the existing network for integrating the DLR into the Underground.\nTwo southern terminus options were put forward, at Cubitt Town (today's Island Gardens station) and Tiller Road, on the west side of Millwall Dock, with two possible routes to reach them. A \"western\" route would have run from the Westferry station alongside West Ferry Road via Cuba Street, then either terminating at Tiller Road or continuing over Millwall Docks Cut to a terminus at Cubitt Town. The \"central\" option required the West India Docks to be infilled or bridged and would run down the middle of the peninsula, through what was at the time an area of derelict warehouses. Ultimately this latter option was chosen, though the 1981 London Transport report warned that without extensive development around Canary Wharf the area would be \"very isolated with poor traffic prospects\"\u00a0\u2013 as indeed it was, for a number of years.\nThe northern terminus was proposed at Mile End, with options including street running down Burdett Road towards Limehouse or along the Mile End Road to turn south before using an old railway alignment to reach Poplar.\nA final report \u2013 prepared by the GLC, LDDC, government departments and London Transport \u2013 was published in June 1982, proposing a north\u2013south route from Mile End to the Isle of Dogs, and an east\u2013west route linking the Isle of Dogs to the City of London. Even during the development of the line, proposals for future extensions were being envisaged and investigated.\nParliamentary process and construction.\nFollowing the publishing of the report, the Departments of the Environment and Transport agreed to provide \u00a377million towards construction of the extension, with a deadline of 1987. The funding agreement also included conditions to maximise the use of modern technology, and that no ongoing subsidy would be available from government.\nInitially, the system was planned to be manually operated and having some stretches of street running. During the Parliamentary process, the northern terminus of the line was changed to Stratford, as part of efforts to segregate the line from road and other railway traffic, as the LDDC were pushing for the line to use a \"high tech automated system\". In 1984, the contract for the initial system was awarded to a GEC / John Mowlem joint venture, which proposed fully automated operation using light rail vehicles.\nThe two Acts of Parliament that authorised the line to be built were passed in 1984 and 1985. Construction of the system began shortly after in 1985, with the joint venture careful to minimise costs in light of the \u00a377million budget. Two thirds of the route was built on underused or disused railway infrastructure, and station architecture used a kit-of-parts approach to save money.\nInitial system (1987\u20131990).\nThe railway was formally opened by Queen Elizabeth II on 30 July 1987, and passenger services began on 31 August. The initial system comprised two routes, from and Stratford to , with a total length of . It was mainly elevated on disused railway viaducts or new concrete viaducts, and adopted disused surface railway formations between Poplar and Stratford. The trains were fully automated, controlled by computer, and had no driver; a Passenger Service Agent (PSA) on each train, originally referred to as a \"Train Captain\", was responsible for patrolling the train, checking tickets, making announcements and controlling the doors. PSAs could take control of the train in circumstances including equipment failure and emergencies. A total of eleven units supplied by Linke-Hofmann-Busch comprised the first generation of the Docklands Light Railway rolling stock.\nThe system was lightweight, with stations designed for trains of only a single articulated vehicle. The three branches totalled , had 15 stations, and were connected by a flat triangular junction near . Services ran from Tower Gateway to Island Gardens and from Stratford to Island Gardens; the north side of the junction was used only for access to the Poplar depot. The stations were mostly of a common design and constructed from standard components. A common feature was a short half-cylindrical glazed blue canopy. All stations were above ground and were generally unstaffed. All stations featured lifts and level access into the train from platforms.\nExtensions to the City and the Royal Docks (1991\u20131994).\nThe initial system had a relatively low capacity, but the Docklands area very quickly developed into a major financial centre and employment zone, increasing traffic. In particular Tower Gateway, at the edge of the City of London, attracted criticism for its poor connections, as it did not connect directly with the nearby Tower Hill tube station or Fenchurch Street railway station. The criticism arose partly because the system usage was higher than expected. Plans were developed, before the system opened, to extend it to in the west and Beckton in the east. Stations and trains were extended to two-unit length, and the system was expanded into the heart of the City of London to through a tunnel, which opened in 1991 at a cost of \u00a3295million. This extension left on a stub.\nThe original trains were not suitable for underground usage due to not meeting the fire safety laws for underground trains. They were operated for a time on the above-ground sections only, and were later sold.\nAs the Canary Wharf office complex grew, Canary Wharf DLR station was redeveloped from a small wayside station to a large one with six platforms serving three tracks and a large overall roof, fully integrated into the malls below the office towers.\nThe east of Docklands needed better transport connections to encourage development, and a fourth branch, towards Beckton, was planned, with several route options available. A route from via and the north side of the Royal Docks complex was chosen, and opened in March 1994 at a cost of \u00a3280million. Initially it was thought the line was likely to be underutilised, due to the sparse development in the area and for this reason two additional stations at Thames Wharf (not to be confused with the later Thames Wharf proposal on the Woolwich branch) and Connaught were omitted. As part of this extension, one side of the original flat triangular junction was replaced by a grade-separated junction west of Poplar. Poplar was rebuilt to give cross-platform interchange between the Stratford and Beckton lines, with a new grade-separated junction built east of the station at the divergence of the Stratford and Beckton lines. As part of the extension, a new, larger, depot was built at Beckton.\nExtension to Greenwich &amp; Lewisham (1996\u20131999).\nEarly on, Lewisham London Borough Council commissioned a feasibility study into extending the system under the River Thames. This led the council to advocate an extension via Greenwich and Deptford, terminating at Lewisham railway station. The ambitions of the operators were supported by politicians in Parliament, including the future Labour Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott, and Lord Whitty. The extension would be designed, built, financed and maintained by a private consortium as a Private finance initiative, with Government contributing around \u00a350 million of the \u00a3200 million construction cost.\nConstruction began in 1996, with the extension opening ahead of schedule on 20 November 1999. It left the Island Gardens route south of the Crossharbour turn-back sidings, and dropped gently to , where a street-level station replaced the high-level one on the former London &amp; Blackwall Railway viaduct. The line then entered a tunnel, following the route of the viaduct to a shallow subsurface station at , accessible by stairs or a lift. It crossed under the Thames to in the centre of Greenwich, and surfaced at Greenwich railway station, with cross-platform interchange between the northbound track and the London-bound main line. The line snaked on a concrete viaduct to , before descending to at street level, close to Lewisham town centre, terminating in two platforms between and below the main-line platforms at Lewisham railway station, with buses stopping outside the station. The extension quickly proved profitable.\nExtensions to London City Airport &amp; Woolwich (2004\u20132009).\nAn extension to London City Airport from the existing Beckton branch was explored in the mid-90s, at first via travelator from Royal Albert, and then in 1998 via a proposed lift-bridge over the dock with an intermediate station at West Silvertown. The government initially supported this proposal, and in 1999 was developed to the route known today with a further extension to King George V. At this time, the further route to Woolwich Arsenal was developed with an intermediate station at Woolwich Reach, but was viewed as a longer-term aspiration. The Woolwich Reach station (on the south bank of the Thames, at the site of the Marlborough Road ventilation and escape shaft), was descoped in 2000.\nThe extension was aided by a five-year programme of investment for public transport across London that was unveiled by Mayor of London Ken Livingstone on 12 October 2004. On 2 December 2005, an eastward branch along the approximate route of the former Eastern Counties and Thames Junction Railway on the southern side of the Royal Docks complex opened from Canning Town to via .\nA further extension from to Woolwich Arsenal opened on 10 January 2009, providing interchange with National Rail services. The extension again used Private Finance Initiative funding, with construction beginning in June 2005, the same month that the contracts were finalised. The tunnels under the Thames were completed on 23 July 2007, and formally opened by Boris Johnson, Mayor of London on 12 January 2009. Following completion, the project was shortlisted for the 2009 Prime Minister's Better Public Building Award.\nThe original station was closed in mid-2008 for complete reconstruction. The two terminal tracks either side of a narrow island platform were replaced by a single track between two platforms, one for arriving passengers and the other for departing (Spanish solution). It reopened on 2 March 2009.\nAs part of an upgrade to allow three-car trains, strengthening work was necessary at the Delta Junction north of . It was decided to include this in a plan for further grade separation to eliminate the conflict between services to Stratford and from Bank. A new timetable was introduced, with improved frequencies at peak hours. The new grade-separated route from Bank to Canary Wharf is used throughout the day, bypassing West India Quay station until mid-evening. Work on this project proceeded concurrently with the three-car upgrade work and the 'diveunder' (sometimes referred to as a flyunder but DLR have coined the term in this instance 'diveunder'), and the improved timetable came into use on 24 August 2009.\nUpgrade to three-car trains (2007\u20132011).\nWith the development of the eastern Docklands as part of the Thames Gateway initiative and London's staging of the 2012 Summer Olympics, several extensions and enhancements were undertaken.\nCapacity was increased by upgrading for trains with three cars, each with four doors per side. The alternative of more frequent trains was rejected as the signalling changes needed would have cost no less than upgrading to longer trains and with fewer benefits. The railway had been built for single-car operation, and the upgrade required both strengthening viaducts to take heavier trains and lengthening many platforms. The extra capacity was useful for the 2012 Summer Olympics, which increased the use of London's transport network. The main contractor for the expansion and alteration works was Taylor Woodrow.\nElverson Road, Royal Albert, Gallions Reach and Cutty Sark have not been extended for three-car trains; such extension may be impossible in some cases. Selective door operation is used, with emergency walkways in case a door fails to remain shut. station is underground, and both costs and the risk to nearby historic buildings prevent platform extension. The tunnel has an emergency walkway. Additional work beyond that needed to take the three-car trains was also carried out at some stations. This included replacing canopies with more substantial ones along the full platform length. A new station has been built east of the former location as nearby curves precluded lengthening. now has a third platform.\nFor this upgrade DLR purchased an additional 31 cars compatible with existing rolling stock. The works were originally planned as three phases: Bank-Lewisham, Poplar-Stratford, and the Beckton branch. The original \u00a3200million contract was awarded on 3 May 2007. Work started in 2007 and Bank-Lewisham was originally due to be completed in 2009. However, the work programme for the first two phases was merged and the infrastructure work was completed by the end of January 2010. The Lewisham-Bank route now runs three-car trains exclusively. They started running on the Beckton branch on 9 May 2011. Stratford to Lewisham and Bank to Woolwich Arsenal services sometimes operate as three-car trains; other routes run the longer trains when required.\nExtension to Stratford International (2011).\nIn addition to the three-car station extensions, partly funded from the 2012 Olympics budget, a line was opened from Canning Town to Stratford and Stratford International railway station along the former North London Line of the national railway system, with additional stations. It parallels the London Underground Jubilee line for much of its length.\nThe extension to Stratford International, taking over the North London Line from Canning Town to Stratford, links the Docklands area with domestic high-speed services on High Speed 1. It was an important part of transport improvements for the 2012 Olympic Games, much of which were held on a site adjoining Stratford International.\nThe first contract for construction work was awarded on 10 January 2007 and construction started in mid-2007. Originally scheduled to open in mid-2010, the line opened on 31 August 2011. On 11 November 2015 the Mayor of London announced that all stations on this line would be rezoned from zone 3 to zone 2/3.\nNew stations were , , , , and Stratford International. Of these, Canning Town, West Ham and Stratford are former North London Line stations, and Stratford High Street was built on the site of Stratford Market railway station.\nFrom Canning Town to Stratford the extension runs parallel to the Jubilee line of the London Underground. As well as providing interchange with the adjacent Jubilee line stations, there are additional DLR stations at Star Lane, Abbey Road and Stratford High Street.\nAt Stratford new platforms were built for the North London Line at the northern end of the station. The old platforms (formerly 1 and 2) adjacent to the Jubilee line were rebuilt for the DLR, renumbered 16 (towards Stratford International) and 17 (towards Beckton/Woolwich Arsenal). Interchange between the Stratford International branch and DLR trains via Poplar is possible although the platforms are widely separated and at different levels. There is no physical connection between the two branches.\nRelocation of Pudding Mill Lane station (2014).\nOne of the tunnel portals for Elizabeth line is on the original site of Pudding Mill Lane station. As a consequence, work was carried out to divert the DLR between City Mill River and the River Lea onto a new viaduct further south. This included a replacement station, which opened on 28 April 2014. The former station stood on the only significant section of single track on the system, between Bow Church and Stratford. The opportunity was taken to double the track in three stages, to improve capacity. There was originally no provision for works beyond the realigned section in the Crossrail Act.\nCurrent system.\nNetwork.\nThe DLR has of tracks, with 45 stations. The three lines shown on the TfL DLR map have six branches: to Lewisham in the south, and Stratford International in the north, and Woolwich Arsenal in the east, and Central London in the west, splitting to and .\nThe northern, southern and south-eastern branches terminate at the National Rail stations at Stratford, Stratford International, Lewisham and Woolwich Arsenal. Other interchanges with National Rail are at Limehouse, Greenwich and West Ham, while out-of-station interchanges for Oyster card holders are available between Shadwell DLR station and the Windrush line station of the same name, and between Fenchurch Street and the DLR's western termini of Tower Gateway and Bank.\nBetween Limehouse and Tower Gateway, the DLR runs parallel to the London, Tilbury and Southend line.\nServices.\nThe following services are operated in normal off-peak service from 26 September 2022:\nAt peak times, these same services run, but with the frequency increased by 25 per cent. Additionally, in the morning peak, alternate Stratford\u00a0\u2013 Canary Wharf services extend to Lewisham.\nAt terminal stations, trains reverse direction in the platforms, except at Bank where there is a reversing headshunt in the tunnel beyond the station. Trains can also turn back at and - a facility used during service disruption or planned engineering work. There is also capability for an additional shuttle from Canning Town to Prince Regent when exhibitions are in progress at the ExCeL exhibition centre, although this is not supported by any additional turnback infrastructure. Trains serve every station on the route, but trains from Bank to Lewisham do not call at because they are routed along the diveunder track to avoid junction conflicts. When required, such as during engineering works or for special events, other routes may be operated, such as Beckton to Lewisham if the Bank and Tower Gateway branch is closed.\nStations.\nMost stations are elevated, with others at street level, in cutting or underground. Access to the platforms is mostly by staircase and lift, with escalators at some stations. From the outset the system has been fully accessible to wheelchairs; much attention was paid to quick and effective accessibility for all passengers. The station platforms match the floor height of the cars, giving level access for passengers with wheelchairs or pushchairs.\nMost stations are of a modular design dating back to the initial system, extended and improved with two side platforms, each with separate access from the street, and platform canopies, although few examples remain of the original, distinctive rounded roof design. Stations are unstaffed, except the underground stations at , Stratford International and Woolwich Arsenal for safety reasons, a few of the busier interchange stations, Canning Town, West Ham, and City Airport, which has a ticket office for passengers unfamiliar with the system. Canning Town, Custom House and Prince Regent are normally staffed on the platform whenever there is a significant exhibition at the ExCeL exhibition centre.\nOn 3 July 2007, DLR officially launched an art programme called DLR Art, similar to that on the London Underground, Art on the Underground. Alan Williams was appointed to produce the first temporary commission, called \"Sidetrack\", which portrays the ordinary and extraordinary sights, often unfamiliar to passengers, on the system and was displayed throughout the network.\nFares and ticketing.\nThe system is part of the London fare zone system, and Travelcards that cover the appropriate zones are valid. Tickets can be purchased from ticket machines at the entrances to platforms, and are required before accessing the platform. Passengers using Oyster pay-as-you-go and contactless bank-cards need to touch both in and out of the system using card readers on automatic gates and platforms. There are no ticket barriers at DLR-only stations: correct ticketing is enforced by random on-train inspections by Passenger Service Agents (PSAs). There are barriers at Bank, , West Ham and , where the DLR platforms are within a London Underground or National Rail barrier line. There are also ticket barriers at Woolwich Arsenal, which are the only barriers staffed by DLR staff; at this station passengers can pass between the DLR and Southeastern platforms within the paid area. Users of payment cards who have failed to touch in at the start of the journey, and other passengers without a correct ticket, may be liable to a \u00a3100 penalty fare or prosecution for fare evasion.\nRolling stock.\nThe DLR is equipped with 149 high-floor bi-directional single-articulated electric multiple units (EMUs). Each car has four double doors on each side, and two or three cars make up a train. There are no cabs because normal operations are automated; an \"Emergency Driving Position\" console is concealed behind a locked panel at each end, from which the PSA can manually operate the car. Consoles at each door opening allow a PSA to control door closure and make announcements whilst patrolling the train. With the absence of a driver's position, the fully glazed car ends provide a forward and rear view for passengers. The operational top speed is .\nDespite having high floors and being automated, the cars are derived from a German light-rail design intended for street running. All cars look similar but there have been several different types, some still in service, others sold to other operators. Units were purchased from Bombardier in 2005 and delivered between 2007 and 2010.\nNew rolling stock.\nIn 2017, TfL opened bidding for new full-length, walk-through trains, subsequently awarded to CAF in 2019 and expected in service in April 2024, following delivery and testing on the network of the initial units from January 2023. An order was placed for 54 five-car trains: 33 to replace the oldest existing trains and the rest to increase service capacity. The design of the trains increases internal capacity by 10% which, combined with service improvements, will bring about a 65% increase in capacity from Stratford to Lewisham, and a doubling of capacity between Canning Town and Beckton or Woolwich Arsenal. The trains have charging points and air-conditioning.\nThese new trains entered service in the early mornings of 30 September 2025. On 12 November 2025 all three units of the B23 stock were temporarily withdrawn after a unit overshot a station.\nDepots.\nThe network has two depots, at Poplar and Beckton. Poplar was opened with the initial line in 1987. Owing to the constrained site, a new, larger, depot at Beckton was opened in 1994 \u2013 and is now the main maintenance depot and primary control centre for the network. Track maintenance, off-peak train stabling, as well as the Operating and Maintenance Centre (OMC for TfL Staff) and the Hilton, Ritz and Dorchester Buildings houses the KeolisAmey Docklands franchise staff and the secondary back-up control centre are based at Poplar.\nBuckingham Group was awarded a \u00a335m contract in 2021 to upgrade the Beckton DLR depot to accommodate the new B23 rolling stock. Works include construction of a new carriage wash, extension and modification to existing track, and new sidings for the new trains. This was scheduled for completion in September 2023, but Buckingham went into administration the previous month (August 2023). TfL appointed Morgan Sindall to complete the work, alongside a \u00a390m deal to build a new train shed and deliver further sidings.\nElectrification.\nTraction power is provided at via a bottom-contact third rail system.\nSignalling technology.\nOriginally, the DLR used signalling based on a fixed-block technology developed by GEC-General Signal and General Railway Signal. This was replaced in 1994 with a moving-block TBTC (Transmission Based Train Control) system developed by Alcatel, called SelTrac. The SelTrac system was bought by Thales in 2007 and updates are provided by Thales Rail Signalling Solutions. The same technology is used by rapid transit systems including Vancouver's SkyTrain, Toronto's SRT, the San Francisco Municipal Railway and Hong Kong's MTR. The SelTrac S40 system has also been adopted by the London Underground Jubilee line and Northern line. Transmissions occur via an inductive loop cable between each train's Vehicle On-Board Controller (VOBC) and the control centre (VCC, SMC) at Beckton. If this link is broken and communication is lost between the VOBC and VCC, SMC, the train stops until it is authorised to move again. If the whole system fails the train can run in restricted manual at for safety until the system is restored and communication is re-established. Emergency brakes can be applied if the train breaks the speed limit during manual control or overshoots a fixed stopping point, or if it leaves the station when the route has not been set. A secondary control centre is based at Poplar, the location of the original control centre, which can operate immediately should there be any issues with the primary at Beckton.\nCorporate affairs.\nInfrastructure and ownership.\nInitially, DLR was a wholly owned subsidiary of London Regional Transport. In 1992, ownership was transferred to the London Docklands Development Corporation (LDDC). With the winding up of the LDDC in 1998, ownership passed to Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions \u2013 before passing to Transport for London (TfL) in 2000.\nThe infrastructure is owned by Docklands Light Railway Ltd, part of the London Rail division of TfL, which also manages London Overground, London Trams, the IFS Cloud Cable Car and the Elizabeth line. The infrastructure is maintained by the private company awarded the DLR franchise by TfL \u2013 currently KeolisAmey Docklands. The Lewisham, City Airport and Woolwich Arsenal extensions were designed, financed, built and maintained by private companies (concessionnaires): City Greenwich Lewisham (CGL) Rail, City Airport Rail Enterprises (CARE), and Woolwich Arsenal Rail Enterprises (WARE). In 2011, Transport Trading Limited (a subsidiary of TfL) bought out the companies responsible for the City Airport and Woolwich Arsenal extensions, leaving only the Lewisham extension under private ownership until 31 March 2021, when the concession reverted to TfL.\nOperations.\nInitially operated by London Regional Transport, the DLR was transferred to the LDDC in 1992. The LDDC appointed Brown and Root to run the system in 1993. In 1994, it was announced that the DLR would be privatised, with operations and maintenance operated under franchise by the private sector.\nIn 1997, the first franchise was awarded to Serco Docklands Limited for seven years; operations began in April 1997. A management buyout backed by Serco management later sold its shares to Serco. A two-year extension was granted in 2002. In February 2005 TfL announced that Balfour Beatty/Keolis, First Carillion, RATP/Transdev and Serco had been shortlisted to operate the franchise, and in November 2005 TfL announced that Serco had retained the franchise for seven years from May 2006.\nIn July 2012, TfL called for expressions of interest in bidding for the next DLR franchise, and in January 2013 Serco's contract was extended until September 2014. In April 2013, TfL announced that Go-Ahead/Colas Rail, Keolis/Amey, Serco and Stagecoach had been shortlisted to bid for the next franchise. However, on 30 August, just before the bid submission date of 9 September 2013, Go-Ahead/Colas Rail pulled out. The franchise was awarded to KeolisAmey Docklands Limited, with a handover date of 7 December 2014, expiring in April 2021 with an option for extension without going to tender.\nIn August 2023, TfL went out for tender for the next DLR franchise, with KeolisAmey Docklands contract being extended to 2025 while bidding took place. In February 2024, TfL announced that KeolisAmey, ComfortDelGro and Connecting Docklands (a joint venture of AtkinsR\u00e9alis and Go-Ahead Group) had been shortlisted to bid for the next franchise. In October 2024, TfL announced that KeolisAmey retained the franchise, being awarded an eight-year contract to operate and maintain the DLR from 1 April 2025.\nPerformance.\nWithin a year of launch, annual passenger numbers reached 17\u00a0million, increasing to 64\u00a0million in 2009, and more than 80\u00a0million in 2011. The most recent figures show 116.8\u00a0million annual passengers in the financial year to 31 March 2020. The first five years had unreliability and operational problems, but the system has since become highly reliable. Research in 2008 showed 87% of the population of North Woolwich were in favour of the DLR.\nThe Parliamentary Transport Select Committee favourably reviewed light rail in 2005, and due to the success of the DLR, proposals for similar systems elsewhere emerged. The North and West London Light Railway was a plan for an orbital railway serving the other side of London. The DLR has been successful, as have other recent light rail systems, although it was earlier criticised for having been designed with insufficient capacity to meet the demand that quickly arose.\nUntil 1 July 2013, the only bicycles that were allowed were folding ones. DLR stated that this is because if evacuation is required, they would slow down the process. DLR cars, especially older rolling stock, were not designed with bicycles in mind\u00a0\u2013 if they were allowed, they might obstruct doors and emergency exits. Since January 2014, full-size bicycles have been allowed on DLR trains at off-peak hours and weekends (except Bank Station, where bicycles are not permitted for safety reasons).\nBusiness trends.\nThe key available trends in recent years for the Docklands Light Railway are (years ending 31 March):\nActivities in financial years 2020/21 and 2021/22 were severely reduced by the impact of the coronavirus pandemic.\nFuture developments.\nThamesmead extension.\nMooted throughout the 2010s, an extension across the River Thames to Thamesmead was first proposed in November 2019 as part of the Thamesmead and Abbey Wood OAPF (Opportunity Area Planning Framework). Technical and feasibility work began in late 2020. Stations would be located at Beckton Riverside and Thamesmead. Public consultation into the extension began in 2024. Media reports in November 2025 anticipate that the extension will be backed by the UK Treasury in the November budget. Estimated to cost around \u00a3700m and \u00a31.3bn, Construction could start in 2027 and the extension could open in the \"early 2030s\".\nThames Wharf station.\nAs part of the construction of the London City Airport extension, a gap in the viaduct due west of the western end of Royal Victoria Dock, between and stations, was passively safeguarded for a future station when development came forward on the brownfield and industrial sites. A station was also initially proposed at Oriental Road; however this was discounted at an early stage and the site is now flanked by several developments. The potential of development on the land at Thames Wharf was on hold for until the late 2010s, as the area was being safeguarded for the route of the Silvertown Tunnel, a new Thames river crossing which opened on 7 April 2025.\nAs part of the 2018 budget, the Chancellor announced funding for the DLR to support development in the Royal Docks. Following completion of the Silvertown Tunnel, around 5,000 homes will be built on the site, and a new DLR station constructed.\nTower Gateway station to Tower Hill interchange.\nIn July 2014, a Transport Supporting Paper from the London Infrastructure Plan 2050 by the Mayor of London considered the closure of Tower Gateway DLR station and the branch serving it, with a replacement interchange being provided via new platforms at Tower Hill Underground station. This would increase train frequencies to Bank by approximately 30 per cent, thereby unlocking more capacity on the Bank branch.\nExtensions cancelled or not progressed.\nGallions Reach to Dagenham Dock.\nThe extension to Dagenham Dock in East London, via the Barking Riverside development was first proposed in 2003, and was anticipated that the project could be completed and open for use by 2017, at a cost of around \u00a3750million. In November 2008, the Mayor of London Boris Johnson announced that due to financial constraints the extension, along with a number of other transport projects, had been cancelled. The Barking Riverside development is instead served by an extension of the London Overground to the new Barking Riverside station, which opened in July 2022.\nBank to Charing Cross.\nIn February 2006, a proposal to extend the DLR to station from DLR branch was revealed. The idea originates from a DLR \"Horizon Study\".\nWhile not confirmed, it is probable that the Charing Cross scheme would use the overrun tunnels between Charing Cross Jubilee platforms and slightly west of . These tunnels were intended to be incorporated into the abandoned Phase 2 of the \"Fleet Line\" (Phase 1 became the original Jubilee line, prior to the Jubilee line Extension). However they would need enlargement because the DLR loading gauge is larger than tube gauge and current safety regulations require an emergency walkway in the tunnel.\nTwo reasons driving the proposal are capacity problems at Bank, having just one interchange between the DLR and the central portion of Underground, and the lack of connection between Southeastern's routes and the DLR outside of Lewisham. Intermediate stations would be at City Thameslink/Ludgate Circus and Aldwych, which was intended for future connection with the proposed but now abandoned Cross River Tram.\nCity Thameslink to Euston and St Pancras.\nIn 2011, strategy documents proposed a DLR extension to Euston and St Pancras. Transport for London have considered driving a line from City Thameslink via north to the rail termini. The main benefit of such an extension would be to broaden the available direct transport links to the Canary Wharf site. It would create a new artery in central London and help relieve the Northern and Circle lines and provide another metro line to serve the High Speed line into Euston.\nLewisham to Catford and Beckenham Junction.\nThis possible extension was considered during the latest Horizon Study. The route would follow the Southeastern line and terminate between Catford and Catford Bridge stations. It has been seen as attractive to the district, as has the current terminus at Lewisham, built in an earlier extension. A map published in 2010 by Transport for London suggests that a further extension from Catford to Forest Hill has also been considered.\nHowever, early plans showed problems due to station being only marginally lower than the busy A20 road, which impedes any extension. The plan is however being revised. When the Lewisham extension was first completed there were proposals to continue further to Beckenham to link it up with the Tramlink system. However, the way in which Lewisham station was built impedes this possible extension and it would prove costly to redevelop.\nLewisham to Bromley North.\nAnother proposal is to Bromley North by taking over the Bromley North Line, a short National Rail branch line which has no direct services into Central London. The scheme being considered by Transport for London and the London Borough of Bromley would convert the branch line to DLR operation. Although Lewisham Council planned to re-route the A20 road and redevelop the area south of Lewisham DLR station, the plans published in 2012 have no safeguarded route for an extension, making one unlikely.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8828", "revid": "43249068", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8828", "title": "Dundee", "text": "City and council area in Scotland\nDundee (; or , ) is the fourth-largest city in Scotland. The 2020 mid-year population estimate for the locality was \n. It lies within the eastern central Lowlands on the north bank of the Firth of Tay, which feeds into the North Sea. \nUnder the name of Dundee City, it forms one of the 32 council areas used for local government in Scotland. Within the boundaries of the historic county of Angus, the city developed into a burgh in the late 12th century and established itself as an important east coast trading port. Rapid expansion was brought on by the Industrial Revolution, particularly in the 19th century when Dundee was the centre of the global jute industry. This, along with its other major industries, gave Dundee its epithet as the city of \"jute, jam and journalism\".\nWith the decline of traditional industry, the city has adopted a plan to regenerate and reinvent itself as a cultural centre. In pursuit of this, a \u00a31\u00a0billion master plan to regenerate and to reconnect the Waterfront to the city centre started in 2001 and is expected to be completed within a 30-year period. The V&amp;A Dundee \u2013 the first branch of the V&amp;A to operate outside of London \u2013 is the main centrepiece of the waterfront project. Today, Dundee is promoted as \"One City, Many Discoveries\" in honour of Dundee's history of scientific activities and of the RRS \"Discovery\", Robert Falcon Scott's Antarctic exploration vessel, which was built in Dundee and is now berthed at Discovery Point. \nDundee is an international research and development hub in technology, medicine and life sciences, with technological industries having arrived since the 1980s. Dundee was named as a \"City of the Future\" by Cognizant in 2021, the only UK city to be featured. Dundee has also been a leading city in electric vehicles, having one of the largest fleets of electric vehicles in the country. The city was named as the electric vehicle capital of Europe in 2018, and it has continuously been branded as the electric vehicle capital of Scotland and the United Kingdom. \nIn 2014, Dundee was recognised by the United Nations as the UK's first UNESCO City of Design for its diverse contributions to fields including medical research, comics and video games. Since 2015, Dundee's international profile has risen. \"GQ\" magazine named Dundee the \"Coolest Little City in Britain\" in 2015 and \"The Wall Street Journal\" ranked Dundee at number 5 on its \"Worldwide Hot Destinations\" list for 2018.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Dundee\" is made up of two parts: the common Celtic place-name element , meaning 'fort'; and a second part that may be the genitive of a personal name \"Daig\", which in turn derives from an old Celtic element meaning 'fire'. The Latin soubriquet \"Dei donum\" ('Gift of God') is a learned pun with no relevance for the etymology. The usual medieval Latin form was Taodunum.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nWhile earlier evidence for human occupation is abundant, Dundee's success and growth as a seaport town arguably came as a result of William the Lion's charter, granting Dundee to his younger brother, David (later Earl of Huntingdon), in the late 12th century. The situation of the town and its promotion by Earl David as a trading centre led to a period of prosperity and growth. The earldom was passed down to David's descendants, amongst whom was John Balliol. The town became a Royal Burgh on John's coronation as king in 1292. The town and its castle were occupied by English forces for several years during the First War of Independence and recaptured by Robert the Bruce in early 1312. The original burghal charters were lost during the occupation and subsequently renewed by Bruce in 1327.\nThe burgh suffered considerably during the conflict known as the Rough Wooing of 1543 to 1550, and was occupied by the English forces of Andrew Dudley from 1547. In 1548, unable to defend the town against an advancing Scottish force, Dudley ordered that the town be burnt to the ground. In 1645, during the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, Dundee was again besieged, this time by the Royalist Marquess of Montrose. The town was finally destroyed by Parliamentarian forces led by George Monck in 1651. The town played a pivotal role in the establishment of the Jacobite cause when John Graham of Claverhouse, 1st Viscount Dundee raised the Stuart standard on the Dundee Law in 1689. The town was held by the Jacobites in the 1715\u201316 rising, and on 6 January 1716 the Jacobite claimant to the throne, James VIII and III (the Old Pretender), made a public entry into the town. Many in Scotland, including many in Dundee, regarded him as the rightful king.\nA notable resident of Dundee was Adam Duncan, 1st Viscount Duncan of Camperdown, Baron of Lundie (1 July 1731 to 4 August 1804). He was born in Dundee on 1 July 1731, the son of Alexander Duncan of Lundie, Provost of Dundee. Adam was educated in Dundee and later joined the Royal Navy on board the sloop Trial. He rose to be admiral and in October 1797 defeated the Dutch fleet off Camperdown (north of Haarlem). This was seen as one of the most significant actions in naval history.\n18th and 19th centuries.\nThe economy of medieval Dundee centred on the export of raw wool, with the production of finished textiles being a reaction to recession in the 15th century. Two government Acts in the mid 18th century had a profound effect on Dundee's industrial success: the textile industry was revolutionised by the introduction of large four-storey mills, stimulated in part by the 1742 Bounty Act which provided a government-funded subsidy on Osnaburg linen produced for export. Expansion of the whaling industry was triggered by the second Bounty Act, introduced in 1750 to increase Britain's maritime and naval skill base. Dundee, and Scotland more generally, saw rapid population increase at end of the 18th and beginning of the 19th century, with the city's population increasing from 12,400 in 1751 to 30,500 in 1821.\nThe phasing out of the linen export bounty between 1825 and 1832 stimulated demand for cheaper textiles, particularly for cheaper, tough fabrics. The discovery that the dry fibres of jute could be lubricated with whale oil (of which Dundee had a surfeit, following the opening of its gasworks) to allow it to be processed in mechanised mills resulted in the Dundee mills rapidly converting from linen to jute, which sold at a quarter of the price of flax. Interruption of Prussian flax imports during the Crimean War and of cotton during the American Civil War resulted in a period of inflated prosperity for Dundee and the jute industry dominated Dundee throughout the latter half of the 19th century. Unprecedented immigration, notably of Irish workers, led to accelerated urban expansion, and at the height of the industry's success, Dundee supported 62 jute mills, employing some 50,000 workers. Cox Brothers, who owned the massive Camperdown Works in Lochee, were one of the largest jute manufacturers in Europe and employed more than 5,000 workers.\nThe rise of the textile industries brought with it an expansion of supporting industries, notably of the whaling, maritime and shipbuilding industries, and extensive development of the waterfront area started in 1815 to cope with increased demand for port capacity. At its height, 200 ships per year were built there, including Robert Falcon Scott's Antarctic research vessel, the . This ship is now on display at Discovery Point in the city. A significant whaling industry was also based in Dundee, largely existing to supply the jute mills with whale oil. Whaling ceased in 1912 and shipbuilding ceased in 1981.\nWhile the city's economy was dominated by the jute industry, it also became known for smaller industries. Most notable among these were James Keiller's and Sons, established in 1795, which pioneered commercial marmalade production, and the publishing firm DC Thomson, which was founded in the city in 1905. Dundee was said to be built on the 'three Js': Jute, Jam and Journalism.\nThe population at the time of the 1841 census was 60,551 inhabitants.\nThe town was also the location of one of the worst rail disasters in British history, the Tay Bridge disaster. The first Tay Rail Bridge was opened in 1878. It collapsed some 18 months later during a storm, as a passenger train passed over it, resulting in the loss of 75 lives. The most destructive fire in the city's history came in 1906, reportedly sending \"rivers of burning whisky\" through the street.\n20th and 21st centuries.\nThe jute industry fell into decline in the early 20th century, partly due to reduced demand for jute products and partly due to an inability to compete with the emerging industry in Calcutta. This gave rise to unemployment levels far in excess of the national average, peaking in the inter-war period, but major recovery was seen in the post-war period, thanks to the arrival first of American light engineering companies like Timex and NCR, and subsequent expansion into microelectronics.\nDundee was the first city in Scotland to gain official city status, after Queen Victoria signed a patent announcing the transition of Dundee from a royal burgh into a city. Dundee would officially gain city status on 26 January 1889. The patent still exists and is kept in storage in the city archives.\nA \u00a31\u00a0billion master plan to regenerate Dundee Waterfront is expected to last for a 30-year period between 2001 and 2031. The aims of the project are to reconnect the city centre to the waterfront; to improve facilities for walking, cyclists and buses; to replace the existing inner ring road with a pair of east/west tree-lined boulevards; and to provide a new civic square and a regenerated railway station and arrival space at the western edge. A new Victoria and Albert Museum opened on 15 September 2018. A new Eden Project attraction is also set to open in Dundee by the 2030s.\nCommemoration of the battle of Loos.\nIn 2015, the National Commemoration marking the centenary of the battle of Loos was held in Dundee. The city had been selected due to the large number of men from the city who became casualties during the battle. In attendance on 25th September were the then Prince of Wales and his wife Camilla who was at the time the Duchess of Cornwall. Other distinguished attendees were Nicola Sturgeon, First Minister of Scotland, Tricia Marwick, Presiding Officer of the Scottish Parliament, and Bob Duncan, Lord Provost of Dundee. \nApproximately 1,000 people, including serving soldiers and veterans, also attended.\nGovernance.\nRepresentation.\nDundee City is one of 32 council areas of Scotland, administered by Dundee City Council. The council meets at Dundee City Chambers in City Square and has its mains offices at Dundee House on North Lindsay Street. The civic head and chair of the council is the Lord Provost. The council area is also divided into eighteen community council areas, three of which (Broughty Ferry, City Centre and Harbour, and West End) had community councils operating as at August 2024.\nFor elections to the House of Commons at Westminster, the city area and portions of the Angus council area are divided into two constituencies. The constituencies of Arbroath and Broughty Ferry and Dundee West are represented by Stephen Gethins (Scottish National Party) and Chris Law (Scottish National Party), respectively, both of whom were elected and re-elected respectively at the 2024 general election. For elections to the Scottish Parliament at Holyrood, the city area is divided across three constituencies. The Dundee City East constituency and the Dundee City West constituency are entirely within the city area. The Angus South (Holyrood) constituency includes north-eastern and north-western portions of the city area. All three constituencies are within the North East Scotland electoral region: Shona Robison (SNP) is the Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) for the Dundee East constituency; Joe Fitzpatrick (SNP) is the current MSP for the Dundee West constituency and Graeme Dey (SNP) is the current MSP for the Angus South constituency.\nWinston Churchill served as one of two MPs for Dundee from 1908 to 1922.\nAdministrative history.\nDundee appears to have been made a burgh sometime between 1181 and 1195. It was then raised to royal burgh status on the coronation of John Balliol as King of Scotland in 1292. The city has two mottos: ('Gift of God') and ('With Thought and Purity') although usually only the latter is used for civic purposes.\nDundee was declared a city in 1889, being the first Scottish place to have the title of city explicitly conferred on it rather than assuming it by customary usage. In 1894, Dundee was made a county of itself, removing it from Angus. The city's boundaries were enlarged on numerous occasions, notably in 1913 when it absorbed the neighbouring burgh of Broughty Ferry.\nFrom 1975 to 1996, Dundee was governed by the City of Dundee District Council, one of three district-level authorities within the Tayside region. The district was created under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973 and covered a larger area than the pre-1975 city, taking in the burgh of Monifieth and most of the landward district of Monifieth (covering a number of villages north of Dundee) from Angus, and the parish of Longforgan (which included Invergowrie) from Perthshire. In 1996, the Dundee City council area was created under the Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994. Monifieth and the villages north of Dundee itself were transferred back to Angus, and the Longforgan area (including Invergowrie) was transferred to Perth and Kinross, largely reinstating the pre-1975 boundaries. Some controversy has ensued as a result of these boundary changes, with Dundee city councillors arguing for the return of Monifieth and Invergowrie.\nIndependence referendum.\nOn 18 September 2014, Dundee was one of four council areas to vote \"Yes\" in the Scottish independence referendum, with 57.3% voting \"Yes\" on a 78.8% turnout. With the highest Yes vote for any local authority in Scotland, some in the Yes Scotland campaign nicknamed Dundee the \"Yes City\", including former First Minister Alex Salmond.\nGeography.\nDundee sits on the north bank of the Firth of Tay on the eastern, North Sea Coast of Scotland. The city lies NNE of Edinburgh and NNW of London. The built-up area occupies a roughly rectangular shape long by wide, aligned in an east to west direction and occupies an area of . The town is bisected by a line of hills stretching from Balgay Hill (elevation of 143 m) in the west end of the city, through the Dundee Law (174 m) which occupies the centre of the built up area, to Gallow Hill (83 m), between Baxter Park and the Eastern Cemetery. North of this ridge lies a valley through which cuts the Dighty Water burn, the elevation falling to around 45 m. North of the Dighty valley lie the Sidlaw Hills, the most prominent hill being Craigowl Hill (455 m).\nThe western and eastern boundaries of the city are marked by two burns that are tributaries of the River Tay. On the westernmost boundary of the city, the Lochee burn meets the Fowlis burn, forming the Invergowrie burn, which meets the Tay at Invergowrie basin. The Dighty Water enters Dundee from the village of Strathmartine and marks the boundaries of a number of northern districts of the city, joining the Tay between Barnhill and Monifieth. The Scouring burn in the west end of the city and Dens Burn in the east, both of which played important roles in the industrial development of the city, have now been culverted over.\nGeology.\nThe city lies within the Sidlaw-Ochil anticline, and the predominant bedrock type is Old Red Sandstone of the Arbuthnott-Garvock group. Differential weathering of a series of igneous intrusions has yielded a number of prominent hills in the landscape, most notably the Dundee Law (a late Silurian/early Devonian Mafic rock intrusion) and Balgay hill (a Felsic rock intrusion of similar age). In the east of the city, in Craigie and Broughty Ferry, the bedrock geology is of extrusive rocks, including mafic lava and tuff.\nThe land surrounding Dundee, particularly that in the lower lying areas to the west and east of the city, bears high quality soil that is particularly suitable for arable farming. It is predominantly of a brown forest soil type with some gleying, the lower parts being formed from raised beach sands and gravels derived from Old Red Sandstone and lavas.\nUrban environment.\nVery little of pre-Reformation Dundee remains, the destruction suffered in the War of the Rough Wooing being almost total, with only scattered, roofless shells remaining. The area occupied by the medieval burgh of Dundee extends between East Port and West Port, which formerly held the gates to the walled city. The shoreline has been altered considerably since the early 19th century through development of the harbour area and land reclamation. Several areas on the periphery of the burgh saw industrial development with the building of textile mills from the end of the 18th century. Their placement was dictated by the need for a water supply for the modern steam powered machinery, and areas around the Lochee Burn (Lochee), Scouring Burn (Blackness) and Dens Burn (Dens Road area) saw particular concentrations of mills. The post war period saw expansion of industry to estates along the Kingsway.\nWorking-class housing spread rapidly and without control throughout the Victorian era, particularly in the Hawkhill, Blackness Road, Dens Road and Hilltown areas. Despite the comparative wealth of Victorian Dundee as a whole, living standards for the working classes were very poor. A general lack of town planning coupled with the influx of labour during the expansion of the jute industry resulted in insanitary, squalid and cramped housing for much of the population. While gradual improvements and slum clearance began in the late 19th century, the building of the groundbreaking Logie housing estate marked the beginning of Dundee's expansion through the building of planned housing estates, under the vision of city architect James Thomson, whose legacy also includes the housing estate of Craigiebank and the beginnings of an improved transport infrastructure by planning the Kingsway bypass.\nModernisation of the city centre continued in the post-war period. The medieval Overgate was demolished in the early 1960s to make way for a shopping centre, followed by construction of the inner ring road and the Wellgate Shopping Centre. The Tay Road Bridge, completed in 1966, had as its northern landfall the docklands of central Dundee, and the new associated road system resulted in the city centre being cut off from the river. An acute shortage of housing in the late 1940s was addressed by a series of large housing estates built in the northern environs, including the Fintry, Craigie, Charleston and Douglas areas in the 1950s and early 1960s. These were followed by increasingly cost-effective and sometimes poorly planned housing throughout the 1960s. Much of this, in particular the high-rise blocks of flats at Lochee, Kirkton, Trottick, Whitfield, Ardler and Menzieshill, and the prefabricated Skarne housing blocks at Whitfield, has been demolished since the 1990s or is scheduled for future demolition.\nAreas of Dundee:\nClimate.\nThe climate, like the rest of lowland Scotland, is Oceanic (K\u00f6ppen-Geiger classification Cfb). Mean temperature and rainfall are typical of the east coast of Scotland and with the city's sheltered estuarine position mean daily maxima are slightly higher than coastal areas to the North, particularly in spring and summer. The summers are still chilly when compared with similar latitudes in continental Europe, something compensated for by the mild winters, similar to the rest of the British Isles. The nearest official Met Office weather station is Mylnefield, Invergowrie which is about west of the city centre.\nA record high of was recorded in July 2022. The warmest month was July 2006, with an average temperature of (average high , average low ). In an 'average' year the warmest day should reach , and in total just 1.86 days should equal or exceed a temperature of per year, illustrating the rarity of such warmth.\nOn average 4.73 days should record a minimum temperature at or below -5\u00a0\u00b0C and there are 48.45 days of air frost on average. From 1991 to 2020 Mylnefield averaged 0.9 ice days, 50 days with precipitation of more than 5mm and 19.56 days with more than 10mm. The weather station is in plant-hardiness zone 10a.\nDemography.\nPopulation.\nDundee's recorded population reached a peak of 182,204 at the 1971 census. According to the 2011 census, the City of Dundee had a population of 147,268. A more recent population estimate of the City of Dundee has been recorded at 149,680 in 2020. The demographic make-up of the population is much in line with the rest of Scotland. The age group from 30 to 44 forms the largest portion of the population (20%). The median age of males and females living in Dundee was 37 and 40 years respectively, compared with 37 and 39 years for those in the whole of Scotland.\nResidents.\nThe place of birth of the town's residents was 94.16% United Kingdom (including 87.85% from Scotland), 0.42% Ireland, 1.33% from other European Union (EU) countries, and 3.09% from elsewhere in the world. The economic activity of residents aged 16\u201374 was 35.92% in full-time employment, 10.42% in part-time employment, 4.25% self-employed, 5.18% unemployed, 7.82% students with jobs, 4.73% students without jobs, 15.15% retired, 4.54% looking after home or family, 7.92% permanently sick or disabled, and 4.00% economically inactive for other reasons. Compared with the average demography of Scotland, Dundee has both low proportions of people born outside the United Kingdom and for people over 75\u00a0years old.\nNatives of Dundee are called Dundonians and are often recognisable by their distinctive dialect of Scots as well as their accent, which most noticeably substitutes the monophthong /\u025b/ (pronounced \"eh\") in place of the diphthong /aj/ (pronounced \"ai\"). Dundee, and Scotland more generally, saw rapid population increase at end of the 18th and beginning of the 19th century, with the city's population increasing from 12,400 in 1751 to 30,500 in 1821. Of particular significance was an influx of Irish workers in the early to mid-19th century, attracted by the prospect of employment in the textiles industries. In 1851, 18.9% of people living in Dundee were of Irish birth.\nThe city has also attracted immigrants from Italy, fleeing poverty and famine, in the 19th century Jews, fleeing from the Russia controlled portions of partitioned Poland and from German occupation in the 20th. Today, Dundee has a sizeable ethnic minority population, and has around 4,000 Asian residents which is the fourth-largest Asian community in Scotland. The city also has 1.0% of residents from a Black/African/Caribbean background.\nStudents.\nDundee has a higher proportion of university students \u2013 one in seven of the population \u2013 than any other town in Europe, except Heidelberg and T\u00fcbingen. The 14.2% come from all around the world to attend the local universities and colleges. Dundee is a major attraction for Northern Irish students who make up 5% of the total student population. The city's universities are believed to hold the highest percentage of Northern Irish students outside of Northern Ireland and have a big impact on the local economy and culture. However, this has declined in recent years due to the increase of tuition fees for students elsewhere in the UK. Dundee also has a lot of students from abroad, mostly from the Republic of Ireland and other EU countries but with an increasing number from countries from the Far East and Nigeria.\nLanguages.\nThe 2022 Scottish Census reported that out of 144,803 residents aged three and over, 49,484 (34.2%) considered themselves able to speak or read the Scots language. \nThe 2022 Scottish Census reported that out of 144,793 residents aged three and over, 1,443 (1%) considered themselves able to speak or read Gaelic. \nEthnicity.\nThe proportion of people residing in Dundee born outside the UK was 12.9% in 2022, compared with 9.0% in 2011 and 4.9% in 2001. Below are the fifteen largest overseas-born groups in Dundee according to the 2022 census, alongside the two previous censuses.\nReligion.\nThe Church of Scotland Presbytery of Dundee is responsible for overseeing the worship of 37 congregations in and around the Dundee area, although changing population patterns have led to some of the churches becoming linked charges. Due to their city centre location, the City Churches, Dundee Parish Church (St Mary's) and the Steeple Church, are the most prominent Church of Scotland buildings in Dundee. They are on the site of the medieval parish kirk of St Mary, of which only the 15th-century west tower survives. The attached church was once the largest parish church in medieval Scotland.\nDundee was unusual among Scottish medieval burghs in having two parish kirks; the second, dedicated to St Clement, has disappeared, but its site was approximately that of the present City Square. Other presbyterian groups include the Free Church which meet at St. Peters (the historic church of Robert Murray M'Cheyne).\nIn the Middle Ages Dundee was also the site of houses of the Dominicans (Blackfriars), and Franciscans (Greyfriars), and had a number of hospitals and chapels. These establishments were sacked during the Scottish Reformation, in the mid-16th century, and were reduced to burial grounds, now Barrack Street (also referred to as the Dek-tarn street) and The Howff burial ground, respectively.\nSt. Paul's Cathedral is the seat of the Scottish Episcopal Diocese of Brechin. It is charged with overseeing the worship of 9 congregations in the city, as well as a further 17 in Angus, the Carse of Gowrie and parts of Aberdeenshire. Since 2018 the diocese has been led by Bishop Andrew Swift. St. Andrew's Cathedral is the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Dunkeld, led by Bishop Stephen Robson. The diocese is responsible for overseeing 15 congregations in Dundee and 37 in the surrounding area, including St Mary, Our Lady of Victories Church in the city.\nThere are Methodist, Baptist, Congregationalist, Pentecostal and Salvation Army churches in the city, and non-mainstream Christian groups are also well represented, including the Unitarians, the Society of Friends, the Jehovah's Witnesses, Seventh-day Adventists, Christadelphians, and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nMuslims are served by the Dundee Central Mosque, built in 2000 to replace their former premises on the Hilltown. There are three other mosques in the city including Jamia Masjid Tajdare Madina on Victoria Road, Jame Masjid Bilal on Dura Street and Al Maktoum Mosque on Wilkie's Lane. Alongside these there is an Islamic Society on the University of Dundee campus.\nThe Sikh community is served by the Guru Nanak Gurdwara on Victoria Road, which serves its community in Dundee.\nA recorded Jewish community has existed in the city since the early 19th century. There is a small Orthodox synagogue at Dudhope Park which was built in the 1960s, with the Hebrew Burial Grounds located to the east. Dundee Buddhist Group is a Buddhist Temple based in Reform Street. There is also a Hindu mandir in Taylor's Lane, situated in the West End of the city.\nEconomy.\nIn 1911 40% of the city's population was employed in the jute industry. By 1951 this had dropped to 20%, and now is effectively zero. The period following World War II was notable for the transformation of the city's economy. While jute still employed one-fifth of the working population, new industries were attracted and encouraged. NCR Corporation selected Dundee as the base of operations for the UK in late 1945, primarily because of the lack of damage the city had sustained in the war, good transport links and high productivity from long hours of sunshine. Production started in the year before the official opening of the plant on 11 June 1947. A fortnight after the tenth anniversary of the plant the 250,000th cash register was produced. By the 1960s, NCR had become the principal employer of the city producing cash registers, and later ATMs, at several of its Dundee plants. The firm developed magnetic-strip readers for cash registers and produced early computers. Astral, a Dundee-based firm that manufactured and sold refrigerators and spin dryers was merged into Morphy Richards and rapidly expanded to employ over 1,000 people. The development in Dundee of a Michelin tyre-production facility helped to absorb the unemployment caused by the decline of the jute industry, particularly with the abolition of the jute control by the Board of Trade on 30 April 1969.\nEmployment in Dundee changed dramatically during the 1980s with the loss of nearly 10,000 manufacturing jobs due to closure of the shipyards, cessation of carpet manufacturing and the disappearance of the jute trade. To combat growing unemployment and declining economic conditions, Dundee was declared an Enterprise Zone in January 1984. In 1983, the first ZX Spectrum home computers were produced in Dundee by Timex. In the same year the company broke production records, despite a sit-in by workers protesting against job cuts and plans to demolish one of the factory buildings to make way for a supermarket. Timex closed its Dundee plant in 1993 following an acrimonious six-month industrial dispute. The Michelin Tyre factory closed in June 2020, with the loss of 850 jobs.\nDundee is a regional employment and education centre, with around 325,000 people within 30 minutes' drive of the city centre and 860,000 people within one hour. Many people from North East Fife, Angus and Perth and Kinross commute to the city. As of 2015, there were 395 employers who employed 250 or more staff; over a five-year period (2011\u20132015) the number of registered enterprises in Dundee increased by 20.9% from 2,655 to 3,210. The largest employers in the city are NHS Tayside, Dundee City Council, University of Dundee, Tayside Contracts, Tesco, D. C. Thomson &amp; Co and BT. Several government agencies and public sector organisations are based in Dundee, such as the Care Inspectorate (Scotland), the Scottish Social Services Council and Social Security Scotland.\nOther employers include limited and private companies such as NCR, Michelin, Alliance Trust, Aviva, Royal Bank of Scotland, Asda, Stagecoach Strathtay, Tokheim, Scottish Citylink, Rochen Limited, C J Lang &amp; Son (SPAR Scotland), Joinery and Timber Creations, Xplore Dundee, and W. L. Gore and Associates. Between 2009 and 2014 the hardest-hit sectors, in terms of jobs, were Information and Communication, Construction and Manufacturing which each lost around 500 full-time jobs. By contrast, the Professional, Scientific and Technical sector saw an upsurge in jobs in addition to the Business Administration and Support Service sector which increased by approximately 1,000 full-time and 300 part-time jobs in the same six-year period. Gross median weekly earnings of full-time employees in Dundee in 2015 was \u00a3523.50; men received \u00a3563.40 and women \u00a3451.80. Gross weekly pay for all employees in Dundee has increased from \u00a3325.00 in 2000 to \u00a3380.00 in 2015.\nThe biomedical and biotechnology sectors, including start-up biomedical companies arising from university research, employ just under 1,000 people directly and nearly 2,000 indirectly. Information technology and video game development have been important industries in the city for more than 20 years. Rockstar North, developer of \"Lemmings\" and the \"Grand Theft Auto\" series was founded in Dundee as DMA Design by David Jones; an undergraduate of the Abertay University. Rockstar Games returned to Dundee in 2020 when they acquired Ruffian Games to form Rockstar Dundee. Other game development studios in Dundee include Denki, Dynamo Games, 4J Studios and Outplay Entertainment, among others.\nDundee is also a key retail destination for North East Scotland and has been ranked fourth in Retail Rankings in Scotland. The city centre offers a wide variety of retailers, department stores and independent/specialist stores. The Murraygate and High Street forms the main pedestrian area and is home to a number of main anchors such as Marks and Spencer, Accessorise. The main pedestrian area also connects the two large shopping centres; the Overgate Centre which is anchored by Primark, H&amp;M, Next, Argos, and The Perfume Shop and the Wellgate Centre by Home Bargains, T. J. Hughes, B&amp;M, Superdrug, Iceland, Holland &amp; Barrett, Poundland, Savers, The Works, Hydro Electric, Other retail areas in the city include Gallagher Retail Park, Kingsway East Retail Park and Kingsway West Retail Park. The new Myrekirk Retail Park opened in 2022.\nTransport.\nRoad.\nDundee is served by the A90 road, which connects the city to the M90 and Perth in the west with Forfar and Aberdeen in the north. The part of the road that is in the city is a dual carriageway and forms the city's main bypass on its north side, known as the Kingsway. East of the A90's Forfar Road junction, the Kingsway East continues as the A972 and meets the A92 at the Scott Fyffe roundabout. Travelling east, the A92 connects the city to Arbroath and Montrose and to the south with Fife, via the Tay Road Bridge.\nThe A930 links the city with coastal settlements to the east, including Monifieth and Carnoustie. Progressing westward from where the A92 meets the Tay Road Bridge at the Riverside Roundabout, the A85 follows the southern boundary of the city along Riverside Drive and towards the A90 at the Swallow Roundabout. The A85 multiplexes with the A90 and diverges again at Perth.\nAlso meeting the A92 and A85 at the Riverside Roundabout is the A991 Inner Ring Road, which surrounds the perimeter of the city centre, returning to the A92 on the east side of the Tay Road Bridge. The A923 Dundee to Dunkeld road meets the A991 at the Dudhope Roundabout, and the A929 links the A991 to the A90 via Forfar Road.\nBus.\nDundee has an extensive network of bus routes. The Seagate bus station is the city's main terminus for journeys out of town. Xplore Dundee operates most of the intra-city services, with other more rural services operated by Stagecoach Strathtay and Moffat &amp; Williamson. In the Dundee built\u2011up area, there are five railway stations: Invergowrie, Dundee, Broughty Ferry, Balmossie, and Monifieth. Although Invergowrie is part of Perth and Kinross, and Balmossie and Monifieth lie within Angus, all three form part of a contiguous urban area with Dundee. The main station, named Dundee, is situated near the waterfront and was rebuilt in 2018 as part of the waterfront redevelopment programme. The station now also includes a hotel and a Tesco Express.\nThere are also many inter-city bus services offered by Megabus, Citylink, National Express and more recently Ember\nRail, air and sea.\nPassenger services at Dundee are provided by ScotRail, CrossCountry, Caledonian Sleeper and London North Eastern Railway. There are other nearby stations at Invergowrie, Balmossie and Monifieth. No freight trains have served the city since the Freightliner terminal in Dundee was closed in the 1980s.\nDundee Airport offers commercial flights to Heathrow Airport, Kirkwall Airport, and Sumburgh (Shetland) by Loganair. The airport is capable of serving small aircraft and is located west of the city centre, adjacent to the River Tay. The nearest major international airport is Edinburgh Airport, to the south.\nThe cargo port of Dundee is one of the largest economic generators in the city and is operated by Forth Ports. Seafarers arriving at the port are offered welfare and pastoral assistance by seafarers charity Apostleship of the Sea. In recent years the seaport has seen a significant increase in cruises arriving at port. In 2023 Ambassador Cruise Line made Dundee a port call following the launch of their second ship, \"Ambition\". Cruises from Dundee depart to Norway, Denmark, France, Spain, Sweden, Belgium and the Netherlands.\nEducation.\nDundee is home to two universities and a student population of approximately 20,000. The University of Dundee became an independent entity in 1967, after 70 years of being incorporated into the University of St Andrews. It was founded in 1881 by Mary Ann Baxter and her distant cousin John Boyd Baxter as University College, Dundee, and teaching began in 1883. It fully merged with the University of St Andrews in 1897 and was reorganised as Queen's College, Dundee in 1954. Significant research in biomedical fields is carried out in the School of Life Sciences. The university is also home to Dundee Law School, situated in the Scrymgeour Building on the main campus and the School of Medicine, based at the city's Ninewells Hospital. The university also incorporates the Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and Design and the teacher training college.\nAbertay University was founded as Dundee Institute of Technology in 1888. Previously, the buildings formed Bell Street Technical College, a further education college. It was granted university status in 1994 under the Further and Higher Education Act, 1992. The university is noted for its computing and creative technology courses, particularly in the fields of computer games technology and cyber-security. Notable alumni include David Jones, founder of DMA Design (now known as Rockstar North), Sir Brian Souter, founder of Stagecoach, and Lord Iain McNicol, former General Secretary of the Labour Party.\nDundee College is the city's umbrella further education college, which was established in 1985 as an institution of higher education and vocational training. As of 2013, it merged with Angus College in Arbroath, to become Dundee and Angus College (D&amp;A college). The Al-Maktoum College of Higher Education was established in Dundee in Blackness Road in 2002. It is a research-led institution of higher education which are currently offering programmes accredited by SQA in the study of Islam and Muslims, Arabic language and Islamic Economics and Finance. It is an independent institution. It is named after its patron, Hamdan bin Rashid Al Maktoum.\nSchools in Dundee have a pupil enrolment of over 20,300. There are 37 primary state schools and 8 secondary state schools in the city. There are 11 primary and 2 secondary Roman Catholic denominational schools which, as in the rest of Scotland, are open to children of all denominations. The remainder are non-denominational. There is also one specialist school that caters for pupils with learning difficulties aged between five and 18 from Dundee and the surrounding area.\nDundee has one independent school, the High School of Dundee, which was founded in the 13th century by the Abbot and monks of Lindores Abbey. The current building was designed by George Angus in a Greek Revival style and built in 1832\u201334. Notable students in the early modern period included Thomas Thomson, Hector Boece, and the brothers James, John and Robert Wedderburn who were the authors of \"The Gude and Godlie Ballatis\", used early in the Scottish Reformation as a vehicle to spread Protestant theology. According to Blind Harry's largely apocryphal work \"The Actes and Deidis of the Illustre and Vallyeant Campioun Schir William Wallace\", William Wallace was also educated in Dundee.\nCulture.\nDundee made a bid to be named the 2017 UK City of Culture and on 19 June 2013 was named as one of the four shortlisted cities alongside Hull, Leicester and Swansea Bay. Ultimately, Dundee's bid was unsuccessful, with Hull winning the contest. Dundee came in fifth place in a newspaper survey regarding numbers of cultural venues in the United Kingdom, ahead of other Scottish cities.\nIn August 2021 Dundee made a joint bid with Perth and Kinross, Angus and Fife for the UK City of Culture again in 2025 under the title of 'Tay Cities'.\nDundee also intended to bid to become the European Capital of Culture in 2023 but owing to the United Kingdom voting to leave the European Union in June 2016 Dundee's bid, along with those of other British cities submitting bids, was discontinued by the European Commission.\nMuseums and galleries.\nThe city's main museum and art gallery, McManus Galleries, is in Albert Square. The exhibits include work by James McIntosh Patrick, Alberto Morrocco and David McClure amongst the collection of fine and decorative art, items from Dundee's history and natural history artefacts. Dundee Contemporary Arts (abbreviated DCA) opened in 1999 is an international art centre in the Nethergate close to Dundee Rep, which houses two modern-art galleries, a two-screen arthouse cinema, a print studio, a visual research centre and a caf\u00e9-bar. Britain's only full-time public observatory, Mills Observatory at the summit of the city's Balgay Hill, was given to the city by linen manufacturer and keen amateur scientist John Mills in 1935. Dundee Science Centre in the Greenmarket is a science centre based on the five senses with a series of interactive shows and exhibits. Verdant Works is a museum dedicated to the once dominant jute industry in Dundee and is based in a former jute mill.\nThe University of Dundee also runs several public museums and galleries, including the D'Arcy Thompson Zoology Museum and the Tayside Medical History Museum. The university, through Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and Design, also offers the Cooper Gallery for modern art and its archives include: the abcD (artists' books collection Dundee); the REWIND Archive (video art collection); and the Richard Demarco Digital Archive.\nThe V&amp;A Dundee Museum of Design opened in September 2018 and is built south of Craig Harbour onto the River Tay in a building designed by Kengo Kuma. It was officially opened by the Earl and Countess of Strathearn, in 2019. It is the centrepiece of the city's waterfront redevelopment. The new museum may bring another 500,000 extra visitors to the city and create up to 900 jobs.\nThe city's archival records are mostly kept by two archives: Dundee City Archives, operated by Dundee City Council and the University of Dundee's Archive Services.\nDundee City Archives holds the official records of the city and of the former Tayside Regional Council. The archive also holds the records of various people, groups and organisations connected to the city. The university's Archive Services hold a wide range of material relating to the university and its predecessor institutions and to individuals associated with the university, such as D'Arcy Wentworth Thompson. Archive Services also holds the archives of several individuals, businesses and organisations based in Dundee and the surrounding area. The records held include a substantial number of business archives relating to the jute and linen industry in Dundee; records of other businesses including the archives of the Alliance Trust and the department store G. L. Wilson; the records of the Brechin Diocese of the Scottish Episcopal Church; and the NHS Tayside Archive. The same archive also holds the Michael Peto collection which includes thousands of the photojournalist's photographs, negatives, slides, publications and papers.\nLiterature.\nDundee has a strong literary heritage, with several authors having been born, lived or studied in the city. These include A. L. Kennedy, Rosamunde Pilcher, Kate Atkinson, Thomas Dick, Mary Shelley, Mick McCluskey, John Burnside and Neil Forsyth. The Dundee International Book Prize is a biennial competition open to new authors, offering a prize of \u00a310,000 and publication by Polygon Books. Past winners have included: Andrew Murray Scott, Claire-Marie Watson and Malcolm Archibald. William McGonagall, regularly cited as the \"world's worst poet\", worked and wrote in the city, often giving performances of his work in pubs and bars. Many of his poems are about the city and events therein, such as his work \"The Tay Bridge Disaster\".\nDundee's poetic heritage is represented by the 2013 poetry anthology \"Whaleback City\" edited by W. N. Herbert and Andy Jackson (Dundee University Press) containing poems by McGonagall, Don Paterson, Douglas Dunn, John Burnside and many others. City of Recovery Press was founded in Dundee, and has become a controversial figure in documenting the darker side of the city.\nCinema.\nThe Dundee Mountain Film Festival (DMFF), held in the last weekend of November, presents the best presenters and films of the year in mountaineering, mountain culture and adventure sport, along with an art and trade exhibition. DMFF is also one of the members of International Alliance for Mountain Film (IAMF) among other important international mountain film festivals.\nDundee Contemporary Arts hosts an annual horror film festival called \"Dundead\", which started in 2011. It also hosts the Discovery Film Festival, an international film festival targeted for young audiences.\nThe city also has two Multiplex cinemas, Odeon and Cineworld.\nTheatre, drama, dance.\nDundee is home to a full-time repertory ensemble, which originated in 1939. One of its alumni, Hollywood actor Brian Cox, is a native of the city. The Dundee Repertory Theatre, built in 1982, is also the base for the Scottish Dance Theatre company.\nThe Whitehall Theatre opened in 1969.\nThe Little Theatre at the foot of the Hilltown is home to and maintained by Dundee Dramatic Society.\nMusic.\nDundee's principal concert auditorium, the Caird Hall (named after its benefactor, the jute baron James Key Caird) in the City Square regularly hosts the Royal Scottish National Orchestra. Various smaller venues host local and international musicians during Dundee's annual Jazz, Guitar and Blues Festivals.\nDundee has hosted the National Mod a number of times \u2013 1902, 1913, 1937, 1959 and 1974.\nDundee also hosted BBC Radio 1's Big Weekend back in 2006 and was due to host for a second time in 2020 but it was cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Dundee hosted the event again on 26th-28 May 2023 at Camperdown Park in the north-west of the city.\nPopular music groups such as the 1970s soul-funk outfit Average White Band, the Associates, the band Spare Snare, Danny Wilson, the Hazey Janes, and the Indie rock bands the View and the Law are from Dundee. Musician, songwriter and performer Michael Marra was born and raised in Dundee. Ricky Ross of Deacon Blue and singer-songwriter KT Tunstall are former pupils of the High School of Dundee, although Tunstall is not a native of the city. The Northern Irish indie rock band Snow Patrol was formed by students at the University of Dundee. Brian Molko, lead singer of Placebo, grew up in the city as did Ian Cussick, singer of Lake. At the end of June, Dundee hosts an annual blues festival known as the \"Dundee Blues Bonanza\".\nMedia.\nDundee is home to DC Thomson &amp; Co. Ltd, established in 1905, which produces over 200\u00a0million magazines, newspapers and comics every year; these include \"The Beano\", \"The Dandy\" and \"The Press and Journal\".\nDundee is home to one of eleven BBC Scotland broadcasting centres, located within the Nethergate Centre. STV North's Tayside news and advertising operations are based in the Seabraes area of the city, from where an \"STV News Tayside\" opt-out bulletin is broadcast, (though not on Digital Satellite), within the nightly regional news programme, \"STV News at Six\". The city also had a community internet TV station called The Dundee Channel which was launched on 1 September 2009.\nDundee formerly had three local radio stations that were based in the city. Radio Tay was launched on 17 October 1980. The station split frequencies in January 1995, launching Tay FM for a younger audience and Tay AM playing classic hits (now called Greatest Hits Radio Tayside &amp; Fife). Neither Tay FM or Greatest Hits Radio are based within the city of Dundee, with their only locally targeted show (Tay FM breakfast) being broadcast from a Bauer studio in Edinburgh. In 1999, Discovery 102 was launched, later to be renamed Wave 102 following a claim by The Discovery Channel that the station could mistakenly be linked to its brand. The station was further rebranded to Wave FM and Pure Radio. The 102FM frequency now carries a relay of Aberdeen-based radio station Original 106 which features news, content and commercials tailored for Tayside.\nLandmarks.\nThe city and its landscape are dominated by The Law and the Firth of Tay. The Law, a large hill to the north of the City Centre was the site of an Iron Age Hill Fort, upon which the Law War Memorial, designed by Thomas Braddock, was erected in 1921 to commemorate the fallen of World War I. The waterfront, much altered by reclamation in the 19th century, retains several of the docks that once were the hub of the jute and whaling industries, including the Camperdown and Victoria Docks. The Victoria Dock is the home of the frigate HMS \"Unicorn\" and the North Carr Lightship, while Captain Scott's RRS \"Discovery\" occupies Craig Pier, from where the ferries to Fife once sailed.\nThe oldest building in the city is St Mary's Tower, which dates from the late 15th century. This forms part of the City Churches, which consist of St Clement's Church, dating to 1787\u20138 and built by Samuel Bell, Old St Paul's and St David's Church, built in 1841\u201342 by William Burn, and St Mary's Church, rebuilt in 1843\u201344, also by Burn, following a fire. Other significant churches in the city include the Gothic Revival St Paul's Episcopal Cathedral, built by Sir George Gilbert Scott in 1853 on the former site of Dundee Castle in the High Street, and the Catholic St. Andrew's Cathedral, built in 1835 by George Mathewson in Nethergate.\nAs a result of the destruction suffered during the Rough Wooing, little of the mediaeval city (aside from St Mary's Tower) remains and the earliest surviving domestic structures date from the Early Modern Era. A notable example is the Wishart Arch (or East Port) in Cowgate. It is the last surviving portion of the city walls. Dating from prior to 1548, it owes its continued existence to its association with the Protestant martyr George Wishart, who is said to have preached to plague victims from the East Port in 1544. Another is the building complex on the High Street known as Gardyne's Land, parts of which date from around 1560. The Howff burial ground in the northern part of the City Centre also dates from this time; it was given to the city by Mary Queen of Scots in 1564, having previously served as the grounds of a Franciscan abbey.\nSeveral castles can be found in Dundee, mostly from the Early Modern Era. The earliest parts of Mains Castle in Caird Park were built by David Graham in 1562 on the site of a hunting lodge of 1460. Dudhope Castle, originally the seat of the Scrymgeour family, dates to the late 16th century and was built on the site of a keep of 1460. Claypotts Castle, a striking Z plan castle in West Ferry, was built by John Strachan and dates from 1569 to 1588. In 1495 Broughty Castle was built and remained in use as a major defensive structure until 1932, playing a role in the Anglo-Scottish Wars and the Wars of the Three Kingdoms. The castle stands on a shallow tip projecting into the Firth, alongside two beaches, one of sand, the other of pebbles. The ruins of Powrie Castle, north of Fintry, date from the 16th-century.\nNorth of the City Churches, at the end of Reform Street, lies the High School of Dundee, built in 1829\u201334 by George Angus in a Greek Revival style. Another school building of note is Morgan Academy on Forfar Road, built in 1863, designed by John Dick Peddie in a Dutch Gothic style.\nDundee's industrial history as a centre for textile production is apparent throughout the city. Numerous former jute mills remain standing and while some lay derelict, many have been converted for other uses. Of particular note are the Tay Works, built by the Gilroy Brothers c.\u20091850\u20131865, Camperdown Works in Lochee, which built and owned by Cox Brothers, one of Europe's largest jute manufacturing companies, and begun in 1849, and Upper Dens Mill and Lower Dens Works, built by the Baxter Brothers in the mid-19th century.\nA more recent landmark is the Tower Building of the University of Dundee built between 1959 and 1961. At the time of its construction only the Old Steeple was taller in the city. The Tower was built to replace the original college buildings which stood on the site. The building houses the university's main administration and includes galleries and the university's Archive, Records Management and Museum Services.\nMany 1960s landmark multi-storey housing buildings were demolished in the late 2000s. The former Tayside House block, nicknamed 'Faulty Towers' by many local people, was demolished in 2013 as part of the waterfront redevelopment program. According to the architectural historian Charles McKean and his co-authors of Lost Dundee, the best views in the city were from Tayside House, because these were the only views from which the building itself could not be seen.\nSport and recreation.\nFootball.\nDundee has two professional football clubs: Dundee, founded in 1893, and Dundee United, founded in 1909 as Dundee Hibernian. Dundee FC and Dundee United currently play in the Scottish Premiership. Their grounds Dens Park Stadium and Tannadice Park are just 100 metres apart, closer together than any other football stadiums in the UK. The Dundee derby is one of the most highly anticipated fixtures in Scottish football.\nDundee is one of four British cities to have produced two European Cup semi-finalists. Dundee lost to A.C. Milan in 1963 and Dundee United lost to A.S. Roma in 1984. Dundee also reached the semi-finals of the forerunner to the UEFA Cup in 1968 and Dundee United were runners-up in the UEFA Cup in 1987. There are also seven junior football teams in the area: Dundee North End, East Craigie, Lochee Harp, Lochee United, Dundee Violet, Broughty Athletic and Downfield.\nIce hockey.\nDundee Stars, the main ice hockey team, play at the Dundee Ice Arena. The team joined the Elite League in the 2010/2011 season. They are one of three professional ice hockey teams in Scotland, and play against teams from England, Wales and Northern Ireland in the Elite League. In the 2013/2014 season, Dundee Stars won the Gardiner Conference trophy, their only one to date. The majority of the players are from Canada and the United States. Marc LeFebvre is the current head coach and general manager of the Dundee Stars.\nThere also is an amateur ice hockey team, Dundee Rockets, who play in the Scottish National League.\nRugby.\nThe city is also home to six rugby union teams. Dundee High School Former Pupils play in Scottish National League Division One, the second tier of Scottish club rugby. The remainder of the teams compete in the Caledonia Regional League \u2013 Harris Academy FP play in Caledonia Division One, Morgan Academy FP and Panmure in Caledonia Division Two Midlands, Dundee University Medics and Stobswell in Caledonia Division Three Midlands.\nAthletics.\nLiz McColgan and Eilish McColgan both hail from Dundee and have been members of the Dundee Hawkhill Harriers athletics club.\nOther sports.\nLocal sports clubs include Dundee Handball Club, Grove Menzieshill Hockey Club; Dundee Wanderers Hockey Club, Dundee Volleyball Club, Dundee Northern Lights Floorball Club, Dundee Hawkhill Harriers, Dundee City Aquatics, Dundee Hurricanes, Dundee Roller Derby and Dundee &amp; Angus Radio Controlled Car Klub (DARCCK).\nThe Olympia Leisure Centre, opened in 2013, has a swimming pool.\nThere is a velodrome, Caird Park Velodrome.\nPublic services.\nDundee and the surrounding area is supplied with water by Scottish Water. Dundee, along with parts of Perthshire and Angus is supplied from Lintrathen and Backwater reservoirs in Glen Isla. Electricity distribution is by Scottish Hydro Electric plc, part of the Scottish and Southern Energy group.\nWaste management is handled by Dundee City Council. There is a kerbside recycling scheme that currently only serves 15,500 households in Dundee. Cans, glass and plastic bottles are collected on a weekly basis. Compostable material and non-recyclable material are collected on alternate weeks. Paper is collected for recycling on a four-weekly basis.\nRecycling centres and points are at a number of locations in Dundee. Items accepted include steel and aluminium cans, cardboard, paper, electrical equipment, engine oil, fridges and freezers, garden waste, gas bottles, glass, liquid food and drinks cartons, plastic bottles, plastic carrier bags, rubble, scrap metal, shoes and handbags, spectacles, textiles, tin foil, wood and yellow pages. Recent figures taken in 2008, suggest the city council has a recycling rate of 36.1%.\nLaw enforcement is provided by Police Scotland. The headquarters of the Dundee Branch of Police Scotland is situated in West Bell Street. There are also four police stations which serve the city: Maryfield, Lochee, Downfield and Longhaugh.\nHealthcare is supplied in the area by NHS Tayside. Ninewells Hospital, is the only hospital with an accident and emergency department in the area. Dundee is also served by the East Central Region of the Scottish Ambulance Service which covers the city, Tayside and parts of Fife. There is one ambulance station for the city; on West School Road.\nThe Scottish Fire and Rescue Service operate three fire stations, covering the city and surrounding villages. The main station is at Blackness Road and there is a control room at Macalpine Road fire station.\nSister cities.\nChronologically:\nFreedom of the City.\nThe following people and military units have received the Freedom of the City of Dundee.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNews.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWebsites.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nListed building reports.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8829", "revid": "847224", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8829", "title": "Do Not Adjust Your Set", "text": "British television series\nDo Not Adjust Your Set is a British television series produced originally by Rediffusion, London, and then by the fledgling Thames Television for British commercial television channel ITV from 26 December 1967 to 14 May 1969. The show took its name from the message (frequently seen on the TV screen in those days) that was displayed when there was a problem with transmission or technical difficulties.\nIt helped launch the careers of Denise Coffey, David Jason, Eric Idle, Terry Jones and Michael Palin; the last three became members of the Monty Python comedy troupe soon afterwards. Although originally conceived as a children's programme, it quickly acquired a following amongst adults, including future Python members John Cleese and Graham Chapman.\nThe Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band, a satirical comedy/art/pop group, also performed songs in each programme and frequently appeared as extras in sketches. The programme itself comprised a series of satirical sketches, often presented in a surreal, absurd and discontinuous style \u2013 anticipating \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\", which began five months after the last episode of \"Do Not Adjust Your Set\". Several surreal animations between sketches were crafted for the second series by Terry Gilliam, who soon graduated to \"Python\" along with Palin, Jones and Idle.\nOne recurring feature of the show was \"Captain Fantastic\", a superhero parody featuring David Jason in farcical and morbid adventures against villainess Mrs. Black (Coffey). These segments were shot entirely on location in London. The feature was so popular with the young audience that after \"Do Not Adjust Your Set\" itself ended, \"Captain Fantastic\" briefly continued in its own capacity in the children's magazine show \"Magpie\".\nOnly 14 of the original 29 episodes currently exist.\nAwards.\nIn June 1968, an episode of \"Do Not Adjust Your Set\" was submitted to the 1968 Prix Jeunesse International Television Festival in Munich. It won first prize in the 12\u201315 years category.\nHome media.\nNine of the 14 episodes from the first (Rediffusion) series were released on DVD in the UK and the US on 25 August 2005. Both releases use the same NTSC Region 0 discs made from telerecordings of the original videotapes. In this DVD release, the episodes are numbered 1 to 9, although, in fact, they are episodes 2, 3, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14 from series 1 (a similar fault was made on the release of \"At Last the 1948 Show\"). The sole surviving episode from series 2 and \"Do Not Adjust Your Stocking\" were not included. Contrary to claims on the packaging, Terry Gilliam's animations also do not appear on this release, although Gilliam does appear as one of the additional writers in the credits for episodes 3 and 4. The Bonzo Dog Doo Dah Band was seen playing their song \"Death Cab for Cutie\" (also performed in the Beatles' film \"Magical Mystery Tour\") on the DVD in episode 7.\nOn 16 September 2019, the British Film Institute released a comprehensive DVD set of the surviving videos and animations from both series. It includes the previously missing fourth episode of the first series, which was rediscovered (but only after the earlier DVD release) when it was noticed that a copy had been sent to the jury of the Prix de Jeunesse award. This edition survives as a domestic recording on a Phillips 1500 cassette made by Thames Television in 1976, which was discovered by Kaleidoscope in 2015, when a copy was returned from Munich. It is thus the only series 1 episode with magnetic rather than optical sound quality. The BFI release features episodes with their original numbering. They include the Christmas special and some Terry Gilliam animations (restored from his own masters) that appeared in otherwise lost episodes.\nEpisodes.\nChristmas Special (1967).\nThe very first episode, an introductory special meant for Boxing Day 1967, was accidentally switched with the first regular episode in all regions except for London.\nSeries 1 (1968).\nThe first series was produced by Rediffusion, thirteen episodes were broadcast from 26 December 1967 to 28 March 1968, on Thursdays at 17:25. Three episodes from this series are currently missing from the archives, nine episodes survive as telerecordings and a further edition \"(Episode 4)\" survives on a domestic tape recording. Several cast changes occurred over the course of this series, Tim Brooke-Taylor filled in for Michael Palin for the studio recording for Episode 9, as the latter was having his appendix removed. The following edition, Neil Innes was absent from the taping since he had the flu, so Eric Idle filled in for him when performing the vocals/ piano parts for the Bonzo's musical number \"'Love is a Cylindrical Piano'\". \nSpecials (1968).\nA summer special was broadcast on 29 July 1968. It was the last episode to be produced by Rediffusion, since it was transmitted on their final day of broadcasting before Thames Television took over as the franchise holder for the London region (weekdays only) the following day. The Christmas special was the first episode to be produced by Thames. For a 1986 repeat, David Jason demanded to be removed from the show, thus creating an abridged version of 25 minutes. This edition was also notable for featuring the first animated sketch by Terry Gilliam, who would go on to contribute further material for the subsequent series. \nSeries 2 (1969).\nThe second and final series, thirteen episodes were broadcast from 19 February 1969 to 14 May 1969, on Wednesdays at 17:20. Most of the episodes from this series are currently missing from the archives, although audio recordings survive from several missing episodes Only Episode 2 survives intact, it's also the only episode from the entire series run to exist on its original 2\" master videotape. Animated sequences by Terry Gilliam including \"'Beware of the Elephants'\" and \"'Learning to Live with an Elephant'\" also exist on b&amp;w 35mm film. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8832", "revid": "24142958", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8832", "title": "West Memphis Three", "text": "Men convicted of 1993 murders in Arkansas, United States\nThe West Memphis Three are three freed men convicted as teenagers of the 1993 murders of three boys in West Memphis, Arkansas, United States. Damien Echols was sentenced to death, Jessie Misskelley Jr. to life imprisonment plus two 20-year sentences, and Jason Baldwin to life imprisonment. During the trial, the prosecution asserted that the juveniles killed the children as part of a Satanic ritual.\nDue to the dubious nature of the evidence, the lack of physical evidence connecting the men to the crime, and the suspected presence of emotional bias in court, the case generated widespread controversy and was the subject of several documentaries. Celebrities and musicians held fundraisers to support efforts to free the men.\nIn July 2007, new forensic evidence was presented. A report jointly issued by the state and the defense team stated, \"Although most of the genetic material recovered from the scene was attributable to the victims of the offenses, some of it cannot be attributed to either the victims or the defendants.\"\nFollowing a 2010 decision by the Arkansas Supreme Court regarding newly produced DNA evidence and potential juror misconduct, the West Memphis Three negotiated a plea bargain with prosecutors. On August 19, 2011, they entered Alford pleas, which allowed them to assert their innocence while acknowledging that prosecutors have enough evidence to convict them. Judge David Laser accepted the pleas and sentenced the three to time served. They were released with 10-year suspended sentences, having served 18 years.\nThe crime.\nOn May 5, 1993, three eight-year-old boys (Steve Branch, Michael Moore, and Christopher Byers) were reported missing in West Memphis, Arkansas. The first report to the police was made by Byers's adoptive father, John Mark Byers, around 7:00\u00a0pm. The boys were allegedly last seen together by three neighbors, who in affidavits told of seeing them playing together around 6:30\u00a0pm the evening they disappeared and seeing Terry Hobbs, Steve Branch's stepfather, calling them to come home. Initial police searches made that night were limited. Friends and neighbors also conducted a search that night, which included a cursory visit to the location where the bodies were later found.\nA more thorough police search for the children began around 8:00\u00a0am on May 6, led by the Crittenden County Search and Rescue personnel. Searchers canvassed all of West Memphis but focused primarily on Robin Hood Hills, where the boys were reported last seen. Despite a shoulder-to-shoulder search of Robin Hood Hills by a human chain, searchers found no sign of the missing boys.\nAround 1:45\u00a0pm, juvenile Parole Officer Steve Jones spotted a boy's black shoe floating in a muddy creek that led to a major drainage canal in Robin Hood Hills. A subsequent search of the ditch revealed the bodies of three boys. They had been stripped naked and were hogtied with their own shoelaces, their right ankles tied to their right wrists behind their backs, the same with their left arms and legs. Their clothing was found in the creek, some of it twisted around sticks that had been thrust into the muddy ditch bed. The clothing was mostly turned inside-out; two pairs of the boys' underwear were never recovered. Christopher Byers had lacerations to various parts of his body and mutilation of his scrotum and penis.\nThe autopsies by forensic pathologist Frank J. Peretti indicated that Byers died of \"multiple injuries\", while Moore and Branch died of \"multiple injuries with drowning\".\nPolice initially suspected the boys had been raped; however, later expert testimony disputed this finding. Trace amounts of sperm DNA were found on a pair of pants recovered from the scene. Prosecution experts claim Byers's wounds were the results of a knife attack and that he had been purposely castrated by the murderer; defense experts claim the injuries were most likely the result of post-mortem animal predation. Police believed the boys were assaulted and killed at the location where they were found; critics argued that the assault, at least, was unlikely to have occurred at the creek.\nByers was the only victim with drugs in his system; he was prescribed Ritalin (methylphenidate) in January 1993 as part of treatment of an attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. The initial autopsy report describes the drug as Carbamazepine and the dosage at a sub-therapeutic level. His father said Byers may not have taken his prescription on May 5, 1993.\nVictims.\nSteve Edward Branch, Christopher Byers and Michael Moore were all second graders at Weaver Elementary School. Each had achieved the rank of \"Wolf\" in the local Cub Scout pack and were best friends.\nSteve Edward Branch.\nSteve Branch was the son of Steven and Pamela Branch, who divorced when he was an infant. His mother was awarded custody and later married Terry Hobbs. Branch was eight years old, 4\u00a0ft. 2 tall, weighed 65\u00a0lbs, and had blond hair. He was last seen wearing blue jeans and a white T-shirt, and riding a black and red bicycle. He was an honor student. He lived with his mother, Pamela Hobbs, his stepfather, Terry Hobbs, and a four-year-old half-sister, Amanda. Steve Edward Branch is buried in Mount Zion Cemetery in Steele, Missouri.\nChristopher Mark Byers.\nChristopher Byers was born to Melissa DeFir and Ricky Murray. His parents divorced when he was four years old and shortly afterward his mother married John Mark Byers, who adopted the boy. Byers was eight years old, 4\u00a0ft. tall, weighed 52\u00a0lbs, and had light brown hair. He was last seen wearing blue jeans, dark shoes, and a white long-sleeved shirt. He lived with his mother, Sharon Melissa Byers, his adoptive father, John Mark Byers, and his stepbrother, Shawn Ryan Clark, aged 13. According to his mother, Christopher was a typical eight-year-old. \"He still believed in the Easter Bunny and Santa Claus\". Christopher Mark Byers is buried in Forest Hill Cemetery East in Memphis, Tennessee.\nJames Michael Moore.\nMichael Moore was the son of Todd and Dana Moore. He was eight years old, 4\u00a0ft. 2 tall, weighed 55\u00a0lbs, and had brown hair. He was last seen wearing blue pants, a blue Boy Scouts of America shirt, and an orange and blue Boy Scout hat, and riding a light green bicycle. Moore enjoyed wearing his scout uniform even when he was not at meetings. He was considered the leader of the three. He lived with his parents and his nine-year-old sister, Dawn. James Michael Moore is buried in Crittenden Memorial Park Cemetery in Marion, Arkansas.\nVictims memorial.\nIn 1994, a memorial was erected for the three murder victims. The memorial is located in the playground of Weaver Elementary School in West Memphis, where all three victims were second graders at the time of the crime. In May 2013, for the 20th anniversary of the slayings, Weaver Elementary School principal Sheila Grissom raised funds to refurbish the memorial.\nSuspects.\nBaldwin, Echols, and Misskelley.\nAt the time of their arrests, Jessie Misskelley Jr. was 17 years old, Jason Baldwin was 16 years old, and Damien Echols was 18 years old.\nBaldwin and Echols had been previously arrested for vandalism and shoplifting respectively, and Misskelley had a reputation for his temper and for engaging in fistfights with other teenagers at school. Misskelley and Echols had dropped out of high school; however, Baldwin earned high grades and demonstrated a talent for drawing and sketching, and was encouraged by one of his teachers to study graphic design in college. Echols and Baldwin were close friends, and bonded over their similar tastes in music and fiction, and over their shared distaste for the prevailing cultural climate of West Memphis, situated in the Bible Belt. Echols and Baldwin were acquainted with Misskelley from school, but were not close friends with him.\nEchols' family was poor, received frequent visits from social workers and he rarely attended school. He and a girlfriend had run off and later broken into a trailer during a rain storm; they were arrested, though only Echols was charged with burglary.\nEchols spent several months in a mental institution in Arkansas and afterward received \"full disability\" status from the Social Security Administration. During Echols' trial, Dr. George W. Woods testified (for the defense) that Echols suffered from:\nserious mental illness characterized by grandiose and persecutory delusions, auditory and visual hallucinations, disordered thought processes, substantial lack of insight, and chronic, incapacitating mood swings.\nAt his death penalty sentencing hearing, Echols' psychologist reported that months before the murders, Echols had claimed that he obtained super powers by drinking human blood. At the time of his arrest, Echols was working part-time with a roofing company and expecting a child with his girlfriend, Domini Teer.\nChris Morgan and Brian Holland.\nEarly in the investigation, the WMPD briefly regarded two West Memphis teenagers as suspects. Chris Morgan and Brian Holland, both with drug offense histories, had abruptly departed for Oceanside, California, four days after the bodies were discovered. Morgan was presumed to be at least casually familiar with all three murdered boys, having previously driven an ice cream truck route in their neighborhood.\nArrested in Oceanside on May 17, 1993, Morgan and Holland both took polygraph exams administered by California police. Examiners reported that both men's charts indicated deception when they denied involvement in the murders. During subsequent questioning, Morgan claimed a long history of drug and alcohol use, along with blackouts and memory lapses. He claimed that he \"might have\" killed the victims but quickly recanted this part of his statement.\nCalifornia police sent blood and urine samples from Morgan and Holland to the WMPD, but there is no indication WMPD investigated Morgan or Holland as suspects following their arrest in California. The relevance of Morgan's recanted statement would later be debated in trial, but it was eventually barred from admission as evidence.\n\"Mr. Bojangles\".\nThe sighting of a black male as a possible alternate suspect was implied during the beginning of the Misskelley trial. According to local West Memphis police officers, on the evening of May 5, 1993, at 8:42\u00a0pm, workers in the Bojangles' restaurant located about a mile from the crime scene in Robin Hood Hills reported seeing a black male who seemed \"mentally disoriented\" inside the restaurant's ladies' room. The man was bleeding and had brushed against the restroom walls. Officer Regina Meeks responded to the call, taking the restaurant manager's report through the eatery's drive-through window. By then, the man had left, and police did not enter the restroom on that date.\nThe day after the victims' bodies were found, Bojangles' manager Marty King, thinking there was a possible connection to the bleeding man found in the bathroom, reported the incident to police officers who then inspected the ladies' room. The man reportedly wore a \"blue cast type brace on his arm that had white Velcro on it\", which would have made it difficult to tie up and murder three young boys. King gave the officers a pair of sunglasses he thought the man had left behind, and the detectives took some blood samples from the walls and tiles of the restroom. Police detective Bryn Ridge testified that he later lost those blood scrapings. A hair identified as belonging to a black male was later recovered from a sheet wrapped around one of the victims.\nInvestigation.\nEvidence and interviews.\nPolice officers James Sudbury and Steve Jones felt that the crime had \"cult\" overtones, and that Damien Echols might be a suspect because he had an interest in occultism, and Jones felt Echols was capable of murdering children. The police interviewed Echols on May 7, two days after the bodies were discovered. During a polygraph examination, he denied any involvement. The polygraph examiner claimed that Echols' chart indicated deception. On May 9, during a formal interview by Detective Bryn Ridge, Echols mentioned that one of the victims had wounds to the genitals; law enforcement viewed this knowledge as incriminating.\nNo physical evidence connected Echols, Baldwin or Misskelley to the crime.\nAfter a month had passed with little progress in the case, police continued to focus their investigation upon Echols, interrogating him more frequently than any other person. Nonetheless, they claimed he was not regarded as a direct suspect but a source of information.\nOn June 3, the police interrogated Jessie Misskelley Jr. Despite his reported IQ of 72 (categorizing him as borderline intellectual functioning) and his status as a minor, Misskelley was questioned alone; his parents were not present during the interrogation. Misskelley's father gave permission for Misskelley to go with police but did not explicitly give permission for his son to be questioned or interrogated. Misskelley was questioned for roughly 12 hours. Only two segments, totaling 46 minutes, were recorded. Misskelley quickly recanted his confession, citing intimidation, coercion, fatigue, and veiled threats from police. Misskelley specifically said he was \"scared of the police\" during this confession.\nThough he was informed of his Miranda rights, Misskelley later claimed he did not fully understand them. In 1996, the Arkansas Supreme Court ruled that Misskelley's confession was voluntary and that he did, in fact, understand the Miranda warning and its consequences. Portions of Misskelley's statements to the police were leaked to the press and reported on the front page of the Memphis \"Commercial Appeal\" before any of the trials began.\nShortly after Misskelley's first confession, police arrested Echols and his close friend Baldwin. Eight months after his original confession, on February 17, 1994, Misskelley made another statement to police. His lawyer, Dan Stidham, remained in the room and continually advised Misskelley not to say anything. Misskelley ignored this advice and went on to detail how the boys were abused and murdered. Stidham, who was later elected to a municipal judgeship, has written a detailed critique of what he asserts are major police errors and misconceptions during their investigation. Stidham made similar comments during a radio show interview in May 2010.\nThe physical evidence presented at the trial of Echols and Baldwin consisted of two green threads found at the crime scene that a state witness claimed are microscopically similar to a green child's T-shirt found in Echols's sister's closet, and one red rayon fiber that state witnesses said is similar to a women's robe found in Baldwin's home. Under further questioning, the state witness conceded that many fibers are microscopically similar to each other and that the discovery proved nothing.\nVicki Hutcheson.\nVicki Hutcheson, a new resident of West Memphis, would play an important role in the investigation, though she would later recant her testimony, claiming her statements were fabricated due in part to coercion from police.\nOn May 6, 1993 (before the victims were found later the same day), Hutcheson took a polygraph exam by Detective Don Bray at the Marion Police Department, to determine whether or not she had stolen money from her West Memphis employer. Hutcheson's young son, Aaron, was also present, and proved such a distraction that Bray was unable to administer the polygraph. Aaron, a playmate of the murdered boys, mentioned to Bray that the boys had been killed at \"the playhouse.\" When the bodies proved to have been discovered near where Aaron indicated, Bray asked Aaron for further details, and Aaron claimed that he had witnessed the murders committed by Satanists who spoke Spanish. Aaron's further statements were wildly inconsistent, and he was unable to identify Baldwin, Echols, or Misskelley from photo line-ups, and there was no \"playhouse\" at the location Aaron indicated. A police officer leaked portions of Aaron's statements to the press contributing to the growing belief that the murders were part of a Satanic rite.\nOn or about June 1, 1993, Hutcheson agreed to police suggestions to place hidden microphones in her home during an encounter with Echols. Misskelley agreed to introduce Hutcheson to Echols. During their conversation, Hutcheson reported that Echols made no incriminating statements. Police said the recording was \"inaudible\", but Hutcheson claimed the recording was audible. On June 2, 1993, Hutcheson told police that about two weeks after the murders were committed, she, Echols, and Misskelley attended a Wiccan meeting in Turrell, Arkansas. Hutcheson claimed that at the Wiccan meeting, a drunken Echols openly bragged about killing the three boys. Misskelley was first questioned on June 3, 1993, a day after Hutcheson's purported confession. Hutcheson was unable to recall the Wiccan meeting location and did not name any other participants in the purported meeting. Hutcheson was never charged with theft. She claimed she had implicated Echols and Misskelley to avoid facing criminal charges, and to obtain a reward for the discovery of the murderers.\nTrials.\nMisskelley was tried separately, and Echols and Baldwin were tried together in 1994. Under the \"\"Bruton\" rule\", Misskelley's confession could not be admitted against his co-defendants; thus he was tried separately. All three defendants pleaded not guilty.\nMisskelley's trial.\nDuring Misskelley's trial, Richard Ofshe, an expert on false confessions and police coercion, and Professor of Sociology at UC Berkeley, testified that the brief recording of Misskelley's interrogation was a \"classic example\" of police coercion. Critics have also stated that Misskelley's various \"confessions\" were in many respects inconsistent with each other, as well as with the particulars of the crime scene and murder victims, including (for example) an \"admission\" that Misskelley watched Damien rape one of the boys. Police had initially suspected that the victims had been raped because their anuses were dilated. However, there was no forensic evidence indicating that the murdered boys had been raped. Dilation of the anus is a normal post-mortem condition.\nOn February 5, 1994, Misskelley was convicted by a jury of one count of first-degree murder and two counts of second-degree murder. The court sentenced him to life plus 40 years in prison. His conviction was appealed, but the Arkansas Supreme Court affirmed the conviction.\nEchols' and Baldwin's trial.\nThree weeks later, Echols and Baldwin went on trial. The prosecution accused the three young men of committing a Satanic murder. The prosecution called Dale W. Griffis, a graduate of the unaccredited Columbia Pacific University, as an expert in the occult to testify the murders were a Satanic ritual. On March 19, 1994, Echols and Baldwin were found guilty on three counts of murder. The court sentenced Echols to death and Baldwin to life in prison.\nAt trial, the defense team argued that news articles from the time could have been the source for Echols' knowledge about the genital mutilation, and Echols said his knowledge was limited to what was \"on TV\".\nThe prosecution claimed that Echols' knowledge was nonetheless too close to the facts, since there was no public reporting of drowning or that one victim had been mutilated more than the others. Echols testified that Detective Ridge's description of their earlier conversation (which was not recorded) regarding those particular details was inaccurate (and indeed that some other claims by Ridge were \"lies\"). Mara Leveritt, an investigative journalist and the author of \"Devil's Knot\", argues that Echols' information may have come from police leaks, such as Detective Gitchell's comments to Mark Byers, that circulated amongst the local public. The defense team objected when the prosecution attempted to question Echols about his past violent behaviors, but the defense objections were overruled.\nAftermath.\nCriticism of the investigation.\nThere has been widespread criticism of the handling of the crime scene by the police. Misskelley's former attorney Dan Stidham cites substantial police errors at the crime scene, characterizing it as \"literally trampled, especially the creek bed.\" The bodies, he said, had been removed from the water before the coroner arrived to examine the scene and determine the state of rigor mortis, allowing the bodies to decay on the creek bank and to be exposed to sunlight and insects. The police did not telephone the coroner until almost two hours after the discovery of the floating shoe, resulting in a late appearance by the coroner. Officials failed to drain the creek in a timely manner and secure possible evidence in the water (the creek was sandbagged after the bodies were pulled from the water).\nStidham has called the coroner's investigation \"extremely substandard.\" There was a small amount of blood found at the scene that was never tested. According to HBO's documentaries ' (1996) and ' (2000), no blood was found at the crime scene, indicating that the location where the bodies were found was not necessarily the location where the murders actually happened. After the initial investigation, the police failed to control disclosure of information and speculation about the crime scene.\nAccording to Leveritt, \"Police records were a mess. To call them disorderly would be putting it mildly.\" Leveritt speculated that the small local police force was overwhelmed by the crime, which was unlike any they had ever investigated. Police refused an unsolicited offer of aid and consultation from the violent crimes experts of the Arkansas State Police, and critics suggested this was due to the WMPD's being under investigation by the Arkansas State Police for suspected theft from the Crittenden County drug task force. Leveritt further noted that some of the physical evidence was stored in paper sacks obtained from a supermarket (with the supermarket's name printed on the bags) rather than in containers of known and controlled origin.\nWhen police speculated about the assailant, the juvenile probation officer assisting at the scene of the murders speculated that Echols was \"capable\" of committing the murders,\" stating: \"it looks like Damien Echols finally killed someone.\"\nBrent Turvey, a forensic scientist and criminal profiler, stated in the film \"Paradise Lost 2\" that human bite marks could have been left on at least one of the victims. However, these potential bite marks were first noticed in photographs years after the trials and were not inspected by a board-certified medical examiner until four years after the murders. The defense's expert testified that the mark in question was not an adult bite mark, while experts put on by the State concluded that there was no bite mark at all. The State's experts had examined the actual bodies for any marks, and others conducted expert photo analysis of injuries. Upon further examination, it was concluded that if these marks were bite marks, they did not match the teeth of any of the three convicted.\nAppeals and new evidence.\nIn May 1994, the three defendants appealed their convictions; the convictions were upheld on direct appeal. In June 1996, Misskelley's lawyer, Dan Stidham, was preparing an appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court.\nIn 2007, Echols petitioned for a retrial, based on a statute permitting post-conviction testing of DNA evidence due to technological advances made since 1994 which might provide exoneration for the wrongfully convicted. The petition failed when the original trial judge, Judge David Burnett, disallowed presentation of this information in his court. This ruling was in turn thrown out by the Arkansas Supreme Court as to all three defendants on November 4, 2010.\nJohn Mark Byers's knife (1993).\nJohn Mark Byers, the adoptive father of victim Christopher Byers, gave a knife to cameraman Doug Cooper, who was working with documentary makers Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky while filming the first \"\" feature. The knife was a folding hunting knife manufactured by Kershaw. According to the statements given by Berlinger and Sinofsky, Cooper informed them of his receipt of the knife on December 19, 1993. After the documentary crew returned to New York, Berlinger and Sinofsky were reported to have discovered what appeared to be blood on the knife. HBO executives ordered them to return the knife to the West Memphis Police Department. The knife was not received at the West Memphis Police Department until January 8, 1994.\nByers initially claimed the knife had never been used. However, after blood was found on the knife, Byers stated that he had used it only once, to cut deer meat. When told the blood matched both his and Chris's blood type, Byers said he had no idea how that blood might have gotten on the knife. During interrogation, West Memphis police suggested to Byers that he might have left the knife out accidentally, and Byers agreed with this. Byers later stated that he may have cut his thumb. Further testing of the knife produced inconclusive results about the source of the blood. Uncertainty remained due to the small amount of blood and because both John Mark Byers and Chris Byers had the same HLA-DQ\u03b1 genotype.\nByers agreed to and passed a polygraph test about the murders during the filming of \"Paradise Lost 2: Revelations\", but the documentary indicated that Byers was under the influence of several psychoactive prescription medications that could have affected the test results.\nPossible teeth imprints (1996\u20131997).\nFollowing their convictions, Echols, Misskelley, and Baldwin submitted imprints of their teeth. These were compared to the alleged bite marks on Stevie Branch's forehead that had not been mentioned in the original autopsy or trial. No matches were found. John Mark Byers had his teeth removed in 1997, after the first trial but before an imprint could be made. His stated reasons for the removal are apparently contradictory. He has claimed both that the seizure medication he was taking caused periodontal disease, and that he planned the removal because of other kinds of dental problems which had troubled him for years.\nAfter an expert examined autopsy photos and noted what he thought might be the imprint of a belt buckle on Byers's corpse, the elder Byers revealed to the police that he had spanked his stepson shortly before the boy disappeared.\nVicki Hutcheson's recantation (2003).\nIn October 2003, Vicki Hutcheson, who had played a part in the arrests of Misskelley, Echols, and Baldwin, gave an interview to the \"Arkansas Times\" in which she stated that every word she had given to the police was a fabrication. She further asserted that the police had implied that if she did not cooperate with them they would take away her child. She said that when she visited the police station, employees had photographs of Echols, Baldwin, and Misskelley on the wall and were using them as dart targets. She also claims that an audiotape the police said was \"unintelligible\" (and that they eventually lost) was perfectly clear and contained no incriminating statements.\nDNA testing and new physical evidence (2007).\nIn 2007, DNA collected from the crime scene was tested. None was found to match DNA from Echols, Baldwin, or Misskelley. A hair \"not inconsistent with\" Stevie Branch's stepfather, Terry Hobbs, was found tied into the knots used to bind one of the victims. The prosecutors, while conceding that no DNA evidence tied the accused to the crime scene, said: \"The State stands behind its convictions of Echols and his codefendants.\" Pamela Hobbs' May 5, 2009, declaration in the United States District Court, Eastern District of Arkansas, Western Division, indicates that \"one hair was consistent with the hair of [Terry's] friend, David Jacoby\" (Point 16), and:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;17. Additionally, after the Murders my sister Jo Lynn McCauhey and I found in Terry's nightstand a knife that Stevie carried with him constantly and which I had believed was with him when he died. It was a pocket knife that my father had given to Stevie, and Stevie loved that knife. I had been shocked that the police did not find it with Stevie when they found his body. I had always assumed that my son's murderer had taken the knife during the crime. I could not believe it was in Terry's things. He had never told me that he had it.\n18. Also, my sister Jo Lynn told me that she saw Terry wash clothes, bed linens and curtains from Stevie's room at an odd time around the time of the Murders.\n19. There was additional new evidence discovered in 2007 that I cannot now recall.\nIn 2013, written statements from two men, Billy Wayne Stewart and Bennie Guy, were introduced in the court. They both claimed to have had information on the case linking Terry Hobbs to the murders, but were ignored by police initially.\nForeman and jury misconduct (2008).\nIn July 2008, it was revealed that Kent Arnold, the jury foreman on the Echols\u2013Baldwin trial, had discussed the case with an attorney prior to the beginning of deliberations. Arnold was accused of advocating for the guilt of the West Memphis Three and sharing knowledge of inadmissible evidence, like the Jessie Misskelley statements, with other jurors. At the time, legal experts agreed that this issue could result in the reversal of the convictions of Jason Baldwin and Damien Echols.\nIn September 2008, attorney (now judge) Daniel Stidham, who represented Misskelley in 1994, testified at a postconviction relief hearing. Stidham testified under oath that during the trial, Judge David Burnett erred by making an improper communication with the jury during its deliberations. Stidham overheard Judge Burnett discuss taking a lunch break with the jury foreman and heard the foreman reply that the jury was almost finished. He testified that Judge Burnett responded, \"You'll need food for when you come back for sentencing,\" and that the foreman asked in return what would happen if the defendant was acquitted. Stidham said the judge closed the door without answering. He testified that his own failure to put this incident on the court record and his failure to meet the minimum requirements in state law to represent a defendant in a capital murder case was evidence of ineffective assistance of counsel and that Misskelley's conviction should therefore be vacated.\nRequest for retrial (2007\u20132010).\nOn October 29, 2007, papers were filed in federal court by Echols's defense lawyers seeking a retrial or his immediate release from prison. The filing cited DNA evidence linking Terry Hobbs (stepfather of one of the victims) to the crime scene, and new statements from Hobbs's now ex-wife. Also presented in the filing was new expert testimony that the supposed knife marks on the victims, including the injuries to Byers's genitals, were in fact the result of animal predation after the bodies had been dumped.\nOn September 10, 2008, Circuit Court Judge David Burnett denied the request for a retrial, citing the DNA tests as inconclusive. That ruling was appealed to the Arkansas Supreme Court, which heard oral arguments in the case on September 30, 2010.\nArkansas Supreme Court ruling (2010).\nOn November 4, 2010, the Arkansas Supreme Court ordered a lower judge to consider whether newly analyzed DNA evidence might exonerate the three. The justices also instructed the lower court to examine claims of misconduct by the jurors who sentenced Damien Echols to death and Jessie Misskelley and Jason Baldwin to life in prison.\nIn early December 2010, David Burnett was elected to the Arkansas State Senate. Circuit Court Judge David Laser was selected to replace David Burnett and preside in the evidentiary hearings mandated by the successful appeal.\nPlea deal and release (2011).\nAfter weeks of negotiations, on August 19, 2011, Echols, Baldwin and Misskelley were released from prison as part of a plea deal, making the hearings ordered by the Arkansas Supreme Court unnecessary. The three entered into Alford plea deals. Stephen Braga, an attorney with Ropes &amp; Gray who took up Echols's defense on a \"pro bono\" basis beginning in 2009, negotiated the plea agreement with prosecutors.\nUnder the deal, Judge David Laser vacated the previous convictions, including the capital murder convictions for Echols and Baldwin, and ordered a new trial. Each man then entered an Alford plea to lesser charges of first- and second-degree murder while verbally stating their innocence. Judge Laser then sentenced them to time served, a total of 18 years and 78 days, and they were each given a suspended imposition of sentence for 10 years. If they re-offend they can be sent back to prison for 21 years.\nFactors cited by prosecutor Scott Ellington for agreeing to the plea deal included that two of the victims' families had joined the cause of the defense, that the mother of a witness who testified about Echols's confession had questioned her daughter's truthfulness, and that the State Crime Lab employee who collected fiber evidence at the Echols and Baldwin homes after their arrests had died. As part of the plea deal, the three men cannot pursue civil action against the state for wrongful imprisonment.\nMany of the men's supporters, and opponents who still believe them guilty, were unhappy with the unusual plea deal. In 2011, supporters pushed Arkansas Governor Mike Beebe to pardon Echols, Baldwin, and Misskelley based on their innocence. Beebe said he would deny the request unless there was evidence showing someone else committed the murders. Prosecutor Scott Ellington said the Arkansas state crime laboratory would help seek other suspects by running searches on any DNA evidence produced in private laboratory tests during the defense team's investigation. This would include running the results through the FBI's Combined DNA Index System database. Ellington said that, although he still considered the men guilty, the three would likely be acquitted if a new trial were held because of the powerful legal counsel representing them now, the loss of evidence over time, and the change of heart among some of the witnesses.\nFamily and law enforcement opinions.\nThe families of the three victims are divided in their opinions as to the guilt or innocence of the West Memphis Three. In 2000, the biological father of Christopher Byers, Rick Murray, expressed his doubts about the guilty verdicts on the West Memphis Three website. In 2007, Pamela Hobbs, the mother of victim Stevie Branch, joined those who have publicly questioned the verdicts, calling for a reopening of the verdicts and further investigation of the evidence. In late 2007, John Mark Byers\u2014who was previously vehement in his belief that Echols, Misskelley, and Baldwin were guilty\u2014also announced that he now believes that they are innocent. \"I had made the comment if it were ever proven the three were innocent, I'd be the first to lead the charge for their freedom,\" said Byers, and take \"every opportunity that I have to voice that the West Memphis Three are innocent and the evidence and proof prove they're innocent.\" Byers has spoken to the media on behalf of the convicted, and has expressed his desire for justice for the families of both the victims and the three accused.\nIn 2010, district Judge Brian S. Miller ordered Terry Hobbs, the stepfather of victim Stevie Branch, to pay $17,590 to The Chicks (then known as the Dixie Chicks) singer Natalie Maines for legal costs stemming from a defamation lawsuit he filed against the band. Miller dismissed a suit Hobbs filed over Maines's remarks and writings implying that he was involved in killing his stepson. The judge said Hobbs had chosen to involve himself in public discussion over whether the convictions were just.\nJohn E. Douglas, a former longtime FBI agent and current criminal profiler, said that the murders were more indicative of a single murderer intent on degrading and punishing the victims, than of a trio of \"unsophisticated\" teenagers. Douglas believed that the perpetrator had a violent history and was familiar with the victims and with local geography. Douglas served as FBI Unit Chief of the Investigative Support Unit of the National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime for 25 years. He stated in his report for Echols's legal team that there was no evidence the murders were linked to satanic rituals and that post-mortem animal predation could explain the alleged knife injuries. He said that the victims had died from a combination of blunt force trauma and drowning, in a crime which he believed was driven by personal cause.\nDocumentaries, publications, and studies.\nThree films, ', ', and \", directed by Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky, have documented this case and are strongly critical of the verdict. The films marked the first time Metallica allowed their music to be used in a movie, which drew attention to the case.\nThere have been a number of books about the case, also arguing that the suspects were wrongly convicted: \" by Mara Leveritt, \"Blood of Innocents\" by Guy Reel, and \"The Last Pentacle of the Sun: Writings in Support of the West Memphis Three\", edited by Brett Alexander Savory &amp; M. W. Anderson, and featuring dark fiction and non-fiction by well-known writers of speculative fiction. In 2005, Damien Echols completed his memoir, \"Almost Home, Vol 1\", offering his perspective of the case. A biography of John Mark Byers by Greg Day named \"Untying the Knot: John Mark Byers and the West Memphis Three\" was published in May 2012.\nMany songs were written about the case, and two albums were released in support of the defendants. In 2000, The album \"Free the West Memphis 3\" was released by KOCH Records. Organized by Eddie Spaghetti of the band Supersuckers, the album featured a number of original songs about the case and other recordings by artists such as Steve Earle, Tom Waits, L7, and Joe Strummer. In 2002, Henry Rollins worked with other vocalists from various rock, hip hop, punk, and metal groups and members of Black Flag and the Rollins Band on the compilation album \"\". All money raised from sales of the album was donated to the legal funds of the West Memphis Three. Metalcore band Zao's 2002 album \"Parade of Chaos\" included a track inspired by the case named \"Free The Three\". On April 28, 2011, the band Disturbed released a song entitled \"3\" as a download on their website. The song is about the West Memphis Three, with 100% of the proceeds going to their benefit foundation for their release.\nA website by Martin David Hill, containing approximately 160,000 words and intending to be a \"thorough investigation\", collates and discusses many details surrounding the murders and investigation, including some anecdotal information.\nInvestigative journalist Aphrodite Jones undertook an exploration of the case on her Discovery Network show \"True Crime with Aphrodite Jones\" following the DNA discoveries. The episode premiered May 5, 2011, with extensive background information included on the show's page at the Investigation Discovery site. In August 2011, White Light Productions announced that the West Memphis Three would be featured on their new program \"Wrongfully Convicted\".\nIn January 2010, the CBS television news journal \"48 Hours\" aired \"The Memphis 3\", an in-depth coverage of the history of the case, including interviews with Echols and supporters. On September 17, 2011, \"48 Hours\" re-aired the episode with the update of their release and interviews from Echols and his wife, and Baldwin. \"Piers Morgan Tonight\" aired an episode on September 29, 2011, about the three's plans for the future and continued investigations on the case.\n\"West of Memphis\", directed and written by Amy J. Berg, and produced by Peter Jackson, as well as by Echols himself, premiered at the 2012 Sundance Film Festival. Actor Johnny Depp, a longtime supporter of the West Memphis Three and personal friend of Damien Echols, was on hand to support the film in its premiere at the Toronto International Film Festival in 2012.\nAtom Egoyan directed a feature film of the case based on Mara Leveritt's book, titled \"Devil's Knot\", starring Colin Firth and Reese Witherspoon, which was produced by Worldview Entertainment. The film premiered at the 2013 Toronto International Film Festival and was released in U.S. theaters on May 9, 2014.\nDefendants.\nJessie Misskelley.\nJessie Misskelley Jr. (born July 10, 1975) was arrested in connection to the murders of May 5, 1993. After a reported 12 hours of interrogation by police, Misskelley, who has an IQ of 72, confessed to the murders, and implicated Baldwin and Echols. However, the confession was at odds with facts known by police, such as the time of the murders. Under the \"Bruton\" rule, his confession could not be admitted against his co-defendants and thus he was tried separately. Misskelley was convicted by a jury of one count of first-degree murder and two counts of second-degree murder. The court sentenced him to life plus 40 years in prison. His conviction was appealed and affirmed by the Arkansas Supreme Court.\nOn August 19, 2011, Misskelley, along with Baldwin and Echols, entered an Alford plea. Judge David Laser then sentenced them to 18 years and 78 days, the amount of time they had served, and also levied a suspended sentence of 10 years. All three were released from prison that same day. Since his release, Misskelley has become engaged to his high school girlfriend and enrolled in a community college to train as an auto mechanic.\nCharles Jason Baldwin.\nCharles Jason Baldwin (born April 11, 1977) along with Misskelley and Echols, entered an Alford plea on August 19, 2011. Baldwin pleaded guilty to three counts of first degree murder while still asserting his actual innocence. The judge then sentenced the three men to 18 years and 78 days, the amount of time they had served, and also levied a suspended sentence of 10 years.\nBaldwin was initially resistant to agree to this deal, insisting as a matter of principle that he would not plead guilty to something he did not do. He then realized, he has said, that his refusal would have meant that Echols stayed on death row. \"This was not justice,\" he said of the deal. \"However, they're trying to kill Damien.\" Since his release, Baldwin has moved to Seattle to live with friends. He is in a relationship with a woman who befriended him while he was in prison. He has stated that he plans on enrolling in college to become a lawyer in order to help wrongfully convicted persons prove their innocence. Baldwin said in a 2011 interview with Piers Morgan that he worked for a construction company and he was learning how to drive.\nDamien Wayne Echols.\nDamien Wayne Echols (born Michael Wayne Hutchison, December 11, 1974) was on death row, locked-down 23 hours per day at the Varner Unit Supermax. Echols, ADC# 000931, entered the system on March 19, 1994. From prison in 1999, he married landscape architect Lorri Davis.\nOn August 19, 2011, Echols, along with Baldwin and Misskelley, was released from prison after their attorneys and the judge handling the upcoming retrial agreed to a deal. Under the terms of the Alford guilty plea, Echols and his co-defendants accepted the sufficiency of evidence supporting the three counts of first degree murder while maintaining their innocence. DNA evidence at the scene was not found to include any from Echols or his co-defendants. He moved to New York City after his release.\nAppeal.\nEchols' mental stability during the years immediately prior to the murders and during his trial was the focus of his appellate legal team in their appeal attempts. In his efforts to win a new trial, Echols, 27 at the time of the appeal, claimed he was incompetent to stand trial because of a history of mental illness. The record on appeal spells out a long history of Echols' mental health problems, including a May 5, 1992, Arkansas Department of Youth Services referral for possible mental illness, a year to the day before the murders. Hospital records for his treatment in Little Rock 11 months before the killings show a history of self-mutilation and assertions to hospital staff that he gained power by drinking blood, that he had inside him the spirit of a woman who had killed her husband, and that he was having hallucinations. He also told mental health workers that he was \"going to influence the world.\"\nThe appellate legal team argued that Echols did not waive his assertion that he was not mentally competent before his 1994 trial because he was not competent to waive it. To assist in the appeals process, Echols' appellate legal team retained a Berkeley, California-based forensic psychiatrist, Dr. George Woods, to make their case.\nEchols' lawyers claimed that his condition worsened during the trial, when he developed a \"psychotic euphoria that caused him to believe he would evolve into a superior entity\" and eventually be transported to a different world. His psychosis dominated his perceptions of everything going on in court, Woods wrote. Echols's mental state while in prison awaiting trial was also called into question by his appellate team.\nRetrial request.\nWhile in prison, Echols wrote letters to Gloria Shettles, an investigator for his defense team. Echols sought to overturn his conviction based on trial error, including juror misconduct, as well as the results of a DNA Status Report filed on July 17, 2007, which concluded \"none of the genetic material recovered at the scene of the crimes was attributable to Mr. Echols, Echols' co-defendant, Jason Baldwin, or defendant Jessie Misskelley ... Although most of the genetic material recovered from the scene was attributable to the victims of the offenses, some of it cannot be attributed to either the victims or the defendants.\" Advanced DNA and other scientific evidence\u00a0\u2013 combined with additional evidence from several different witnesses and experts\u00a0\u2013 released in October 2007 had cast strong doubts on the original convictions. A hearing on Echols' petition for a writ of habeas corpus was held in the Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Arkansas.\nRelease.\nOn August 19, 2011, Echols, along with Baldwin and Misskelley, entered an Alford plea, while asserting their innocence. The judge sentenced them to 18 years and 78 days, the amount of time they had served, and levied a suspended sentence of 10 years. Echols's sentence was reduced to three counts of first degree murder. Lawyers representing the West Memphis Three reached a plea deal that allowed the men to be released from prison. They were transferred to the hearing with their possessions. The plea deal did not technically result in a full exoneration; some of the convictions would stand, but the men would not admit guilt. The counsel representing the men said they would continue to pursue full exoneration.\nAftermath.\nEchols relocated to Salem, Massachusetts with his wife and has no intentions of returning to Arkansas. In a 2013 interview with Piers Morgan, he said that he would like to have a career in writing and visual arts.\nEchols self-published the memoir, \"Almost Home: My Life Story Vol. 1\" (2005), while still in prison. After his release, he has worked on a number of additional media projects.\n*Echols co-wrote the lyrics to the song \"Army Reserve\", on Pearl Jam's self-titled album (2006).\n*Echols and punk musician Michale Graves, the latter a former vocalist for Misfits, released an album titled \"Illusions\" in October 2007.\n*Echols began creating art while on death row as a \"side effect of my spiritual, magical practice.\" The Copro Gallery in Los Angeles exhibited Echols' artwork (March 19 \u2013 April 16, 2016). The focus of the exhibit, titled 'SALEM,' draws attention to the comparison between the historical U.S. Salem witch trials and Echols' own experience during a modern-day U.S. witch-hunt known for false accusations of Satanic ritual abuse.\n*On March 23, 2016, Echols gave a presentation about his art processes at the Rubin Museum of Art.\n*The transcript of Echols's spoken word performance in \"The Moth\" is included in a written compilation of 50 stories from the show's archives, published in 2013.\n*Echols's poetry has appeared in the \"Porcupine Literary Arts\" magazine (volume 8, issue 2).\n* He has written non-fiction for the \"Arkansas Literary Forum\".\n*Since his release, he has published a non-fiction book about both his childhood and incarceration, \"Life After Death\" (2012), which includes material from his 2005 memoir.\n* He and Lorri Davis, a NYC landscape architect who initiated a correspondence with Echols in 1999 and ultimately became his wife, co-authored \"Yours for Eternity: A Love Story on Death Row\" (2014)\n*Echols provided the voice of Darryl, a fish man (i.e., a fish situated on a robot body), in episode 3 of the animated Netflix series \"The Midnight Gospel\" (2020).\nIn August 2021, ten years after release from prison, Echols reiterated that he would not give up seeking any evidence that remained, so it could be retested to exonerate the three and lead to those actually responsible. In response to Echols's requests since early 2020 that the remaining evidence undergo specialized DNA testing, officials told his legal team that such evidence had been lost or destroyed years ago in a fire, of which there is no public record. A FOIA request was submitted, and the receiving attorney said any evidence testing would have to be ordered by a judge. Echols's attorneys filed a Motion for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief in the Circuit Court of Crittenden County, First Division, and requested an expedited hearing. In December 2021, Echols's team was able to review remaining evidence and planned to move forward with new testing. In June 2022, a judge rejected a January request for DNA testing of the evidence. Echols's lawyers appealed the case to the Arkansas Supreme Court in January 2023. The state said in February that the appeal should be dismissed because the case was initially filed in the wrong county \u2013 Crittenden rather than Craighead County, where Echols's conviction was entered. In March, Echols's team responded that such a dismissal reason is irrelevant because both counties are within Arkansas's 2nd Judicial Circuit. In April 2023, the state supreme court ruled in favor of Echols's appeal for DNA testing. In April 2024, the Arkansas Supreme Court again reversed a lower court's order denying Echols's postconviction motion for DNA testing for lack of jurisdiction.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8833", "revid": "26110720", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8833", "title": "Donald Dewar", "text": "First Minister of Scotland from 1999 to 2000\nDonald Campbell Dewar (21 August 1937 \u2013 11 October 2000) was a Scottish statesman and politician who served as the inaugural first minister of Scotland from 1999 until his death in 2000 and leader of the Labour Party in Scotland from 1998 until his death in 2000. He was widely regarded as the \"Father of the Nation\" during his tenure as first minister, and the \"Architect of Devolution\" whilst serving as Secretary of State for Scotland from 1997 to 1999. He was Member of Parliament (MP) for Glasgow Anniesland (formerly Glasgow Garscadden) from 1978 to 2000. Dewar was also Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) for the equivalent seat from 1999 to 2000.\nBorn in Glasgow, Dewar studied history, and later law, at the University of Glasgow. Before entering politics, he worked as a solicitor in Glasgow. At the age of 28, he was elected to the House of Commons, representing Aberdeen South from 1966 to 1970. After losing his seat, he returned to law and hosted his own Friday evening talk show on Radio Clyde. Dewar was re-elected in the 1978 Glasgow Garscadden by-election and served as the MP until his death in 2000. Following Labour's landslide victory in 1997, he was appointed Secretary of State for Scotland by Prime Minister Tony Blair. As the Scottish secretary, he was an advocate of Scottish devolution, and campaigned for a Scottish Parliament in the 1997 Scottish devolution referendum. Following a successful campaign, Dewar worked on creating the Scotland Act 1998.\nDewar led the Labour campaign through the first Scottish Parliament election and was elected a Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) for Glasgow Anniesland. On 7 May 1999, he was appointed Leader of the Labour Party in Scotland and he led coalition talks with the Scottish Liberal Democrats. Following successful talks, the Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition was announced. Dewar was elected as first minister on 13 May 1999, by a vote of the parliament, and formed the first Scottish Executive cabinet. As first minister, he set out the legislative programme for the Executive which included: an Education bill to improve standards in Scottish schools; land reform to give right of access to the countryside, a bill to abolish the feudal system of land tenure; and a bill to establish national parks in Scotland.\nOn 10 October 2000, Dewar sustained a fall, and the following day he died of a brain hemorrhage at the age of 63 while still in office. Deputy First Minister Jim Wallace served as the acting first minister, until Henry McLeish was announced to succeed Dewar.\nEarly life and education.\nDonald Campbell Dewar was born on Saturday, 21 August 1937 in Glasgow. He grew up in a middle-class household in Kelvingrove as the only child of Dr. Alasdair Dewar, a consultant dermatologist, and Mary Howat Dewar (\"n\u00e9e\" Bennett). Both of Dewar's parents had ill health during his childhood; his father contracted tuberculosis and his mother suffered from a benign brain tumour when he was young.\nDewar attended a small school in the Scottish Borders during the Second World War. From the age of nine, he was educated at Mosspark Primary School and then The Glasgow Academy. He made few friends at school and blamed his \"shyness and gauche manner\" on his experience as being an only child. A year before his death, Dewar admitted that he had been an \"isolated misfit\" in his youth, which is a reasoning for his public image of being awkward. \nIn 1957, Dewar attended the University of Glasgow where his father, mother, two uncles and aunt also attended. He met several future politicians at the university Dialectic Society, including John Smith, who would later become leader of the Labour Party, Sir Menzies Campbell, who would later become leader of the Liberal Democrats, and Lord Irvine of Lairg, who would serve as Lord Chancellor. He met Alison McNair at Glasgow University, who he would later marry in 1964.\nDewar was an editor of the \"Glasgow University Guardian\" and sales manager for \"Glasgow University Magazine\" in 1960. He served as chairman of the University Labour Club from 1961 from 1962 and president of the Glasgow University Union. Dewar was an Honorary Secretary of the Students' Representative Council. In 1962, he campaigned for Albert Luthuli, the banned African National Congress leader, as University Rector.\nIn 1961, Dewar gained a Master of Arts degree in History and in 1964 a second-class Bachelor of Law degree. After graduating, he worked as a solicitor in Glasgow.\nMember of Parliament (1966\u20131970).\nDewar was a member of the Labour Party, and soon turned his sights towards being elected to parliament. In 1962, he was selected as the Labour candidate for the Aberdeen South constituency. In the 1964 general election, he failed to win the seat, but won it at the 1966 general election at the age of 28 defeating Priscilla Tweedsmuir by 1,799 votes.\nIn his maiden speech to the House of Commons on 4 May 1966, Dewar spoke against a proposed increase on potato tax. His speech became his first political success: as the tax was repealed the following year. Dewar was made a member of the public accounts committee and in October 1967, he was appointed a Parliamentary Private Secretary to the President of the Board of Trade, Anthony Crosland.\nDewar remained in that position at the Department of Education until 1969, in which year he opposed a visit to Aberdeen by the Springbok rugby team and staged a silent vigil near the team's ground. In April 1968, he was proposed for a Minister of State position by Roy Jenkins, but was not appointed. Dewar lost his constituency seat to the Conservative candidate Iain Sproat at the 1970 general election by over 1,000 votes.\nOut of parliament.\nDewar spent much of the 1970s looking for another parliamentary seat. He hosted a Friday evening talk show on Radio Clyde, and in June 1971 was beaten by Dennis Canavan when he applied for the seat of West Stirlingshire. He worked as a solicitor for much of that decade and became a reporter on children's panels and was involved with the Lanarkshire local authority. Dewar became a partner in Ross Harper Murphy, in 1975.\nReturn to parliament (1978\u20131999).\n1978 Glasgow Garscadden by-election.\nDonald Dewar was selected for the seat of Glasgow Garscadden by a majority of three, after Dewar's friend in the Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers, MP Willie Small, died unexpectedly. He was returned to parliament at a by-election on 13 April 1978, a crucial victory which was seen as halting the rise of the Scottish National Party. \n1979 devolution referendum.\nIn Scotland's first referendum on devolution, held in March 1979, he campaigned for a \"Yes\" vote alongside the Conservative Alick Buchanan-Smith and the Liberal Russell Johnston. Though they won a narrow majority, it fell short of the 40% required, contributing to the downfall of the Callaghan Government, in May 1979.\nFront bench opposition.\nDewar gained a parliamentary platform as chairman of the Scottish Affairs Select Committee. After a year honing his inquisitorial skills, he joined the front bench in November 1980 as a Scottish affairs spokesman when Michael Foot became party leader. In 1981, as the Labour Party divided itself further due to internal disagreement, Dewar was almost deselected in his constituency by hard left activists, but he successfully defended himself against this threat.\nHe rose quickly through the ranks, becoming Shadow Scottish Secretary in November 1983. On 21 December 1988, Dewar was in Lockerbie after the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, as the member of the Shadow Cabinet in charge of Scottish affairs. In 1992, John Smith made him Shadow Social security Secretary and three years later, Dewar was made a Chief Whip for the Labour Party by Tony Blair.\nSecretary of State for Scotland (1997\u20131999).\nAt the 1997 general election, he became MP for Glasgow Anniesland, which was mostly the same constituency with minor boundary changes. Labour won this election by a landslide, and Dewar was given the post of Secretary of State for Scotland. He was able to start the devolution process he dreamt of years earlier, and worked on creating the Scotland Act, popularly referred to as \"Smith's unfinished business\". When ratified, this was to give Scotland its first Parliament for nearly 300 years.\nIn January 1998, he confirmed that he would stand for a seat in the Scottish Parliament. The first elections to the Scottish Parliament were held on 6 May 1999, with Dewar leading the Scottish Labour Party against their main opponents, the Scottish National Party led by Alex Salmond. He was elected as the Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) for Glasgow Anniesland, having the unusual distinction of being both an MP and MSP for the same constituency.\nFirst Minister of Scotland (1999\u20132000).\nElection.\nOn 13 May 1999, Dewar was elected by the Scottish Parliament for the nominee for First Minister of Scotland, after receiving 71 votes by MSPs. On 17 May, he received the Royal Warrant of Appointment by Her Majesty the Queen at Holyroodhouse and was officially sworn in at the Court of Session. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There shall be a Scottish parliament.' Through long years, those words were first a hope, then a belief, then a promise. Now they are a reality.\u2014\u200a\nEntering government.\nAlthough Scottish Labour won more seats than any other party, they did not have a majority in Parliament to allow them to form an Executive without the help of a smaller party. A deal was agreed with the Scottish Liberal Democrats to form a coalition, with Dewar agreeing to their demand for the abolition of up front tuition fees for university students.\nOn 13 May 1999, Dewar was nominated as first minister, and was officially appointed by the Queen on 17 May at a ceremony in the Palace of Holyroodhouse. He later travelled to the Court of Session to be sworn in by the lord president and receive the Great Seal of Scotland. \nDewar made his initial appointments to the first Scottish cabinet in over 300 years in May 1999. Before the formal announcement of his cabinet appointments, Dewar said that he was \"confident\" that he had \"chosen a strong team who will serve Scotland well\". \nDewar decided to re\u2013organise most of the former portfolios of the preceding Scottish Office, the department of the UK Government responsible for Scotland prior to the establishment of the Scottish Executive and Scottish Parliament. The only exception to this was the creation of a new ministerial post for justice and the introduction of new ministerial posts for children and education, social inclusion, local government and housing, a minister to be responsible for rural affairs and the first Scottish finance minister who would be directly responsible for the budget of the Scottish Parliament.\nAhead of announcing his cabinet, Dewar advocated that he had created his team in order to ensure the Scottish Labour and Scottish Liberal Democrat coalition would be an effective administration for Scotland. Some of the key appointments to Dewar's cabinet included Jim Wallace as the deputy first minister and Minister for Justice, Henry McLeish was appointed as the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning and Sam Galbraith who was appointed as the Minister for Health. \nAs first minister, Dewar was also responsible for the appointment of the two highest law officers of Scotland. Both Lord Hardie and Colin Boyd continued in their respective roles as Lord Advocate and Solicitor General for Scotland following their initial appointments in 1997. Less than 24 hours after announcing his cabinet, Dewar announced the eleven junior ministers of his cabinet.\nLegislation proposals.\nAhead of forming the coalition with the Scottish Liberal Democrats, Dewar was urged not to succumb to pressure to scrap tuition fees in Scotland, mostly by the then Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown and education secretary David Blunkett of the UK Government. The Scottish Liberal Democrats claimed that any agreement to form a coalition administration with the Scottish Labour Party would require a commitment for tuition fees to be scrapped, and that the party would \"not compromise\" on the issue. \nOn 16 June, Dewar set out the legislative programme for the Executive which included: an Education bill to improve standards in Scottish schools; land reform to give right of access to the countryside, a bill to abolish the feudal system of land tenure; and a bill to establish national parks in Scotland.\nOn 23 March 2000, Dewar presided over the launch of a consultation paper by his Minister for Justice, Jim Wallace, on stalking and harassment in Scotland. The Scottish Executive intended for the consultation paper to be used as an exercise to consult with the public to determine whether existing Scots law was sufficient to protect victims of stalking and harassment or whether to determine that new laws should be introduced. Wallace claimed that the \"Scottish Executive was well aware of the devastating consequences stalking can have\".\nAdult literacy rates.\nIn May 2000, a report indicated that 400,000 Scots were unable to source employment as a result of poor adult literacy rates, with the estimated total being roughly one million adults deemed as \"functionally illiterate\". In response, Henry McLeish, the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning in the Dewar government confirmed that \"efforts would be made to gather exact statistics to tackle the issue\". Dewar and the government were criticised due to there being a considerable lack of opportunities and programmes available to provide basic adult education similar to programmes that had already been established in England and in Wales.\nSocial justice and poverty.\nDuring his tenure as first minister, Dewar claiming that tackling poverty was the main agenda for the Scottish Executive. To reduce the level of poverty in Scotland, Dewar vowed that Scottish Executive policy would largely follow the policy agenda as set by the UK Government, claiming that the \"exchange of ideas with Westminster is vital\" but claimed that \"we must never be afraid to take a different path when that is in Scotland's interest\". Dewar supported an increase in spending available from the UK Government to be used by the Scottish Executive and had indicated that additional funds could be used to progress the executive's work on tackling poverty.\nUnder Dewar, the Scottish Executive also spearheaded policy relating to social justice, including deprivation and disadvantage. Dewar stated that the executive was committed to tackling the core root of the issues to be \"sure that all our children have the best start in life\" whilst also advocating the role education and employment plays in social justice.\nEducation and employment.\nDuring his time in office, Dewar presided over record levels of employment in Scotland and advocated that this was in part the responsibility of his executives agenda and policies. Dewar claimed that the introduction of quality child-care, the national minimum income guarantee for pensioners and the establishment of the \"New Deal\" had \"laid the foundations\" for an increase in employment in the country. Additionally, Dewar was hopeful that strong numbers of 18 year olds in full time education would continue to increase under his premiership, stating that he wanted to \"skill the workforce, not only to make the Scottish economy truly competitive but to provide opportunities for the individual\".\nAbsence for surgery.\nAround April 2000, Dewar temporarily stepped back from his duties as first minister to allow him to undergo heart surgery. For a period of four months, he was succeeded by his deputy first minister Jim Wallace as \"Acting\" first minister. Following his surgery, Dewar publicly thanked NHS Scotland for their \"care and commitment\" in which he claimed \"did so much for me over this period\". \nUpon resuming his post of first minister in August 2000, Dewar praised Wallace's tenure as acting first minister, acknowledging his \"distinction, style and energy\" and praised his \"success at question time is only the most visible aspect of a job well done\". Additionally, Dewar issued a public message of thanks to both the Scottish Parliament and cabinet colleagues for messages following his surgery. Upon resuming his government duties, Dewar was said to be \"in fine form\" with Dewar claiming he was \"looking forward to working with colleagues to drive forward the Executive's agenda\".\nLobbygate scandal.\nOne of the first scandals to hit the new Scottish Parliament occurred when allegations that the lobbying arm of public relations company Beattie Media had privileged access to ministers were published, prompting Dewar to ask the standards committee to investigate the reports. The minister for finance, Jack McConnell, was called to appear before the standards committee during the investigation although he was later cleared of any wrongdoing and the committee declared there was no evidence he had been influenced from lobbying by Beattie Media.\nDewar also threatened to sack any minister or aide who briefed the media against another member of the Scottish Executive, following public rows between Jack McConnell and Health Minister Susan Deacon over the budget allocated to health .\n2000 SQA examinations controversy.\nThe introduction in Scotland of the reformed examinations system in 2000 was criticised in the press and by the Government after a series of administrative and computer errors led to several thousand incorrect Higher and Intermediate certificates being sent out by post. In a statement to the Scottish Parliament, Dewar stated he \"greatly regrets\" the errors made by the SQA but assured the parliament that he was aware that \"many people are working hard to put matters right\". Dewar announced that independent consultants had been drafted in by the Scottish Executive to investigate the issue.\nThe crisis took several months to resolve, and several management figures including the Chief Executive, Ron Tuck, resigned or lost their jobs as a result.\nOn 15 August 2000, it was announced that several senior officials with the Scottish Qualification Authority (SQA) would be facing disciplinary action as a result of the error. \"BBC News\" suggested that Chief Executive Ron Tuck and the Minister for Education Sam Galbraith were \"kept in the dark\" about the problems. It had been announced that concerns were raised months prior to the error being made that exam results would not be ready when expected but assurances continued to be provided that results would be issued on time and when expected. Bill Morton became the new Chief Executive of the SQA, the organisations third in only five days, and upon his appointment said that the reassessing of exam results was his priority and that of the SQA.\nPersonal life.\nDewar was an atheist who while \"sceptical of religion\" treated religious beliefs with \"bemused tolerance\" and \"gracious respect\". His political style in relation to religion was characterised as one of \"quiet, non-interfering, practical secularism\"; his political rival Alex Salmond credits this with enabling the \"Time for Reflection\" system at Holyrood, implemented as an alternative to the Westminster parliamentary prayers model.\nOn 20 July 1964, Dewar married Alison Mary McNair, with whom he had two children: a daughter, Marion, and a son, Ian. In 1972, McNair separated from Dewar and entered a relationship with the then Derry Irvine, a prominent Scottish barrister in London. Dewar and his wife divorced in 1973, and he never remarried. Dewar and Lord Irvine of Lairg never reconciled, even though they later served in the same Cabinet from May 1997 until 1999.\nIn September 2009, Dennis Canavan said Dewar reacted callously when Canavan's son was diagnosed with skin cancer in 1989. The disease eventually killed him. Canavan said Dewar remarked, \"Oh no! That's all we need. He was mad enough before but I shudder to think what he'll be like now.\"\nDewar amassed a personal fortune in excess of \u00a32,000,000 including public utility shares, antiques and artwork with a value of over \u00a3400,000.\nDeath and funeral.\nIn early 2000, Dewar was admitted to the Glasgow Royal Infirmary after tests at Stobhill Hospital highlighted \"minor irregularity\" in his heart. In May 2000, tests revealed he had a faulty aortic valve and he underwent a four-hour heart operation to repair a leaking heart valve. His personal spokesperson, David Whitton, stated \"he is as concerned about his health as anyone else would be\". Although Dewar was not going under surgery, considerations over whether to cancel foreign trips to Japan were under close watch.\nDewar was forced to take a three-month break and Deputy First Minister Jim Wallace took over as acting first minister. After returning to office, Dewar was described as being \"visibly tired\" and fears for his health at this stage were officially dismissed following a First Minister's Question Time.\nDewar dealt with the 2000 exam results controversy and the lorry drivers' strike, and attended the Labour Party conference in Brighton, but on 29 September 2000 he told the historian Tom Devine in Dublin that if he did not feel any better, he would have to reappraise the situation in a few months' time.\nOn 10 October 2000, Dewar sustained a seemingly harmless fall outside his official residence at Bute House following a meeting of the Scottish Cabinet. He seemed fine at first, but later that day suffered a massive brain haemorrhage which was possibly triggered by the anticoagulant medication he was taking following his heart surgery. At 7pm, five hours after his fall, Dewar was admitted to the Western General Hospital in Edinburgh after his condition rapidly deteriorated. By 9pm, he was put on a life-support machine in the hospital's intensive care unit. Dewar's condition worsened and he failed to regain consciousness. On 11 October at 12:18pm, after his children gave permission for his life support to be switched off, Dewar was officially pronounced dead, aged 63.\nFuneral.\nDewar's funeral service was held at Glasgow Cathedral, he was cremated on 18 October 2000 and his ashes were scattered at Lochgilphead in Argyll.\nReactions and aftermath.\nDewar's death came as a shock to Scotland. The UK Foreign Secretary described his death as \"a tragedy for Donald and a tragedy for Scotland.\" Henry McLeish said: \"this is a day of enormous sadness for Scotland and for me personally. Donald was devolution. The architect of the most successful constitutional change this century.\"\n\"Although he has become something of a political legend, Donald would have abhorred any attempt to turn him into some kind of secular saint. He would have been horrified at a Diana-style out-pouring of synthetic grief at his untimely death.\"\u00a0\u2014 Iain Macwhirter, \"Sunday Herald\", 15 October 2000.\nDewar was succeeded by Henry McLeish as First Minister.\nLegacy.\nDewar's commitment to re-establishing the Scottish Parliament and his tireless work on the Scotland Act 1998 has led to his epithet the \"Father of the Nation\" and the \"Father of Devolution\". His advocacy for Scottish devolution began in the 1960s, at a time when devolution was fairly unpopular among Labour politicians. However, he persevered to gain support from all parties. \nAlthough Dewar did not associate with Scottish nationalism or support attempts for independence, he was a \"great unionist\" and saw the new Parliament as a \"journey not a destination\", which left many Labour supporters questioning devolution. His leadership prioritised semi-proportional representation for Scottish parliamentary elections. At the time, many thought this, and devolution, would \"end the Scottish National Party's success\". However, in the late-2000s Labour's popularity plummeted in Scotland while the SNP's popularity grew rapidly. Dewar received nicknames such as \"Donald Dour\" for his stiff, matter-of-fact tone and \"The Gannet\" due to his large appetite.\nIn May 2002, then Prime Minister Tony Blair unveiled a statue of Dewar at the top of Glasgow's Buchanan Street. In keeping with his famously unkempt appearance, it showed Dewar wearing a slightly crumpled jacket.\nThe statue was taken down in October 2005 to be cleaned, and was re-erected on a high plinth in December to protect it from vandalism. On the base of the statue was inscribed the opening words of the Scotland Act: \"There Shall Be A Scottish Parliament\", a phrase to which Dewar himself famously said, \"I like that!\"\nDewar called the Old Royal High School on Calton Hill in Edinburgh a \"nationalist shibboleth\", mainly because it had been the proposed site of the Scottish Assembly in the 1979 referendum. Dewar's opposition to the Calton Hill site partly contributed to the selection of the Holyrood site, which proved expensive.\nThe First ScotRail Class 334 train \"334001\" was named \"Donald Dewar\" in his memory. The \"Dewar Arts Award\" was created by the Scottish Executive in 2002 dedicated to his memory. This award supports talented young Scottish artists.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8835", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8835", "title": "Digimon", "text": "Japanese media franchise\n, short for \"Digital Monsters\" ( \"Dejitaru Monsut\u0101\"), is a Japanese media franchise, which encompasses virtual pet toys, anime, manga, video games, films, and a trading card game. The franchise focuses on the eponymous creatures who inhabit a digital world, a parallel universe which originated from Earth's various communication networks.\nThe franchise was created in 1997 as Digital Monster, a series of digital pets, and it was intended as the masculine counterpart to Tamagotchi. The creatures were designed to look cute and iconic on the devices' small screens. Later developments had them created with a harder-edged style, which was influenced by American comics. The franchise gained momentum with an early video game, \"Digimon World\", originally released in Japan in January 1999. Several anime series and films have been released; the video game series has expanded into various genres, such as role-playing, racing, fighting, and MMORPGs. The franchise generated over $500 million in sales by 2000.\nConception and creation.\nThe \"Digimon\" franchise began as a series of virtual pets created by WiZ and Bandai, intended as a masculine counterpart to the more female-oriented Tamagotchi pets. It was released in June 1997 with the name Digital Monster, shortened for \"Digimon\". This device shows to players a virtual pet composed entirely of data and designed to play and fight. In February 1998, the \"DigiMon\" fighting game was announced. It was developed by Rapture Technologies. The one-shot manga \"C'mon Digimon\", designed by Tenya Yabuno, was published in the Japanese magazine V-Jump by Shueisha in 1997.\nA second generation of virtual pets was marketed six months after the launch of the first, followed by a third in 1998. Each player starts with a baby-level digital creature that has a limited number of attacks and transformations and to make the creature stronger by training and nourishing the creature; when the player is successful in a workout, the Digimon becomes strong, when the player fails, the Digimon becomes weak. Two devices can be connected, allowing two players to battle with their respective creatures, an innovation at the time, however, the battle is only possible from the moment the creature is in the child level or bigger. Playgrounds and subways were where the majority of users of the apparatus were concentrated; the virtual pet was banned in some Asian schools, being considered by parents and teachers as very noisy and violent. The first Digimon were created by Japanese designer Kenji Watanabe, influenced by American comics, which were beginning to gain popularity in Japan, and as such began to make his characters look stronger and \"cool.\" Other types of Digimon, which until the year 2000 totalled 279, came from extensive discussions and collaborations between the Bandai company members.\nThe original Digital Monster model that was released in 1997 sold 14 million units worldwide, including million units in Japan and million overseas, up until March 2004. By 2005, more than 24 million Digital Monster units had been sold worldwide.\nPremise.\nSeveral media in the franchise are contained within their own continuity; however, they all share a similar setting and premise. For instance, most \"Digimon\" stories begin with a human child, who comes into contact with a Digimon. This generally occurs either through an accidental entrance into the so-called Digital World or an encounter with a Digimon who has come into the human world. The child or children then often find themselves equipped with a \"digivice\", which is a device modelled after the series' virtual pets; this device enables them to empower their partner Digimon.\nWhile some Digimon act like wild beasts, there are many who form small societies and follow governing bodies. Digimon can change through evolution (or \"digivolution\" in most English-language dubs), where they absorb additional data that allows them to change forms. This process is normally linear, but there are other methods, depending upon the media within the franchise. For example, \"Jogress\" (a portmanteau of \"joint progress\"; \"DNA Digivolution\" in most English-language dubs) is when two or more Digimon combine into a single being. Though evolution can occur naturally, Digimon can progress into stronger forms more quickly, when they are partnered with a human.\nMedia.\nAnime.\nTelevision series.\nMultiple \"Digimon\" anime series have been produced by Toei Animation since 1999. The first of these was \"Digimon Adventure\"; it began as a short film, but after its storyboard was finished, a request for the film to become a television series was made. The film debuted in theaters a day before the series debuted on TV.\nThere are seven \"Digimon\" series adapted into English for release in Western markets, with the first four treated as a single show under the collective title \"Digimon: Digital Monsters\". The sixth series, \"Digimon Fusion\", was only partially dubbed; its third season was never dubbed into English.\nFilms.\nSeveral \"Digimon\" films were released in Japan, with some of them seasonal tie-ins for their respective television series. Footage from the first three films was used for the American-produced \"Digimon: The Movie\".\nDistribution and localization.\nIn the United States, the first three series that made up \"Digimon: Digital Monsters\" first aired on Fox Kids from August 14, 1999 to June 8, 2002. The localized series was produced by Saban Entertainment, which was acquired by The Walt Disney Company during the show's Fox Kids run. Some scenes from the original shows were modified or omitted in order to comply with Fox's standards and practices. The show also featured more jokes and added dialogue, along with a completely different musical score. As a cross-promotional stunt, 2001 and 2002 saw \"Digi-Bowl\" specials co-produced with Fox Sports; \"NFL on Fox\" commentator Terry Bradshaw provided interstitial segments in-between episodes as if the episodes were actually a football game.\nDisney's acquisition of Saban resulted in \"Digimon\" airing on Disney's TV networks and programming blocks. Reruns of the show began airing on the cable network ABC Family on March 4, 2002, while the fourth series, \"Digimon Frontier\", premiered on UPN's Disney's One Too block. UPN aired the series until late August 2003, when they severed their ties to Disney. \"Frontier\" also aired in reruns on ABC Family and on Toon Disney under the Jetix branding. An English version of \"Digimon Data Squad\", produced by Studiopolis, premiered October 1, 2007, on Toon Disney. Around this time, the remaining Digimon Adventure 02 movie, both Tamers movies and the Frontier movie were dubbed and aired on Toon Disney in the US, with most actors from the TV series reprising their roles. The Data Squad/Savers movie however have not had a North American localised English dub produced.\nIn September 2012, Saban Brands, a successor to Saban Entertainment, announced it had acquired the \"Digimon\" anime franchise. Saban announced an English dub for \"Digimon Xros Wars\", retitled \"Digimon Fusion\", for broadcast on Nickelodeon in the United States starting September 7, 2013. Saban Capital Group sold most of Saban Brands' entertainment properties to Hasbro in 2018 and shutter the division in July of that year.\nThe \"Digimon Adventure tri.\" series were distributed in North America by Eleven Arts. The English dub utilized localized names from Saban's original dub, reunite several voice actors from the original cast, and feature a remixed version of the English opening theme, while retaining the original Japanese score. Shout! Factory acquired the broadcast and home media distribution rights for the films.\nInternational.\nIn Canada, the English versions of \"Digimon\" were broadcast on YTV, with the exception of \"Data Squad\", which aired in Family Channel's Jetix block. YTV acquired \"Digimon Fusion\", but only the first 26 episodes were shown.\nIn the United Kingdom, \"Digimon\" first aired on Fox Kids. ITV's children's slot CITV broadcast \"Adventure\", \"Adventure 02\" and several episodes of \"Tamers\" during after school hours from 2001\u20132002. The rest of \"Tamers\" aired on Fox Kids from 2002\u201303. \"Digimon Frontier\" was originally announced to be broadcast on Jetix, but the series was later dropped. The series eventually saw a release on October 29, 2018. In 2011, \"Digimon Data Squad\" aired on Kix!. \nAccording to Fox Kids' (2000\u201303) and Kix's (2010\u2013) BARB Television ratings, \"Adventure\", \"Adventure 02\" and \"Tamers\" have been the most popular series'/seasons in the United Kingdom and was consistently in the weekly top 10 broadcasts for both channels for new episodes. Broadcast rights and merchandising sub-licensing rights for \"Digimon Fusion\" in the UK have been acquired by ITV Studios Global Entertainment. \"Digimon Fusion\" had aired since Spring 2014 on digital terrestrial channel, CITV.\nIn the Philippines, \"Digimon\" was first aired on ABS-CBN in Filipino English language from June 2, 2000 to October 21, 2001. And later, it was shift to Filipino on April 6, 2002.\nManga.\n\"Digimon\" first appeared in narrative form in the one-shot manga \"C'mon Digimon\", released in the summer of 1997. \"C'mon Digimon\" spawned the popular \"Digimon Adventure V-Tamer 01\" manga, written by Hiroshi Izawa, which began serialization on November 21, 1998.\n\"Digimon Next\".\nWritten by Tatsuya Hamazaki and illustrated by Takeshi Okano, was serialized in Shueisha's magazine \"V Jump\" from 2005 to 2008. Shueisha collected its chapters in four \"tank\u014dbon\" volumes, released from July 4, 2006, to February 4, 2008. The story follow Tsurugi Tatsuno and his digimon partner, Greymon (later Agumon). Tsurugi makes contact with the Digital World through his virtual pet device called Digimon Mini and a \"Battle Terminal\", a virtual reality interface. Digimon can use the technology to materialize in the human world as well.\n\"Digimon Dreamers\".\nIn 2021, a manga called \"Digimon Dreamers\" was announced.\nYuen Wong Yu manhua.\nA Chinese manhua was written and drawn by Yuen Wong Yu (\u4f59 \u9060\u9360 \"Yu Yuen-wong\"), who based its storyline on the television series. This adaptation covers \"Digimon Adventure\" in five volumes, \"Digimon Adventure 02\" in two, \"Digimon Tamers\" in four, and \"Digimon Frontier\" in three. The original stories are heavily abridged, though on rare occasions events play out differently from the anime. The Chinese-language version was published by Rightman Publishing Ltd. in Hong Kong. Yu also wrote \"D-Cyber\".\nTwo English versions were also released. The first one was published by Chuang Yi in Singapore. The second one, which was adapted by Lianne Sentar, was released by Tokyopop in North America.&lt;br&gt;The three volumes for \"Digimon Frontier\" have been released by Chuang Yi in English. These have not been released by TOKYOPOP in North America or Europe. However, the Chuang Yi releases of \"Digimon Frontier\" were distributed by Madman Entertainment in Australia.\nDark Horse.\nDark Horse Comics published American-style Digimon comic books, adapting the first thirteen episodes of the English dub of \"Digimon Adventure\" in 2001. The story was written by Daniel Horn and Ryan Hill, and illustrated by Daniel Horn and Cara L. Niece.\nPanini.\nThe Italian publishing company Panini published \"Digimon\" titles in several ways in different countries. Germany had their own adaptations of episodes, the UK reprinted the Dark Horse titles and translated some of the German adaptations of \"Adventure 02\" episodes. Eventually the UK comics had their own original stories, which appeared in both the UK's \"Digimon Magazine\" and the UK Fox Kids companion magazine \"Wickid\". These original stories roughly followed the continuity of \"Adventure 02\". When the comic switched to the \"Tamers\" series the storylines adhered to continuity more strictly; sometimes it expanded on subject matter not covered by the original Japanese anime (such as Mitsuo Yamaki's past) or the English adaptations of the television shows and movies (such as Ryo's story or the movies that remained undubbed until 2005). In a money saving venture, the original stories were later removed from \"Digimon Magazine\", which returned to printing translated German adaptations of \"Tamers\" episodes. Eventually, both magazines were cancelled.\nVideo games.\nThe \"Digimon\" series has inspired various video games, including the \"Digimon World\" and \"Digimon Story\" sub-series of role-playing video games. Other genres have included life simulation, adventure, video card game, strategy, and racing games.\nBy March 2001, Bandai had sold approximately 1 million video games worldwide, including 400,000 in Japan. In February 2010, a website for the MMORPG \"Digimon Battle Online\" was launched. On September 22, 2011, online game publisher Joymax announced the release of an MMORPG game called \"Digimon Masters\", which was developed by the Korean publisher DIGITALIC. In June 2021 it was announced that they were developing a new MMORPG titled \"Digimon Super Rumble\".\nIn 2011, a new entry in the \"Digimon World\" series was announced after a seven-year hiatus, titled \"\". The game was released in Japan on July 19, 2012, followed by an enhanced version for Nintendo 3DS released in 2013.\n' was first released in Japan in 2015. It is the first game in the \"Digimon Story\" series to be released in North America under its original title; \"Digimon World DS\" and \"Digimon World Dawn and Dusk\" were originally marketed as entries in the \"Digimon World\" series, with the latter game being the last to be released in the West for nine years until \"Cyber Sleuths release on February 2, 2016.\nThere have been several mobile games. \"Digimon Links\" was active from March 2016 to July 2019, and was similar to the \"Story\" games in that the player raised digimon in a farm and fought enemies using a team of three of their Digimon. It was succeeded by \"Digimon ReArise\", which launched June 2018 in Japan and October 2019 in America.\nWeb novel.\nIn February 2023, Bandai announced a web novel titled to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the franchise. The novel will serialize on the Digimon Web website for about a year, starting on April 3, simultaneously in English, Chinese, and Japanese.\nWebcomic.\nIn December 2023, Bandai announced a webcomic titled \"Digimon Liberator\" for Spring 2024.\nCard game.\nThe Digimon Collectible Card Game is a card game based on Digimon, first introduced in Japan in 1997 and published by Bandai. The third season (\"Digimon Tamers\") utilized this aspect of the franchise by making the card game an integral part of the season. Versions of the card game are also included in some of the Digimon video games including \"Digital Card Battle\" and \"Digimon World 3\".\nDuring the fourth anime (\"Digimon Frontier\"), Bandai created the \"D-Tector Card Game\" to tie in to their own D-Tector virtual pet toys. This was a West-only card game. From February 25, 2011 to September 28, 2012, \"Digimon Jintrix\" was an online card game supported by physical card releases. It was followed up by the mobile game \"Digimon Crusader\", which lasted from December 2012 to December 2017. In 2020 a new card game was launched to coincide with \"Digimon Adventure:\" using a new system, this was released in the West in January 2021.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8836", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8836", "title": "Dideoxy sequencing", "text": ""}
{"id": "8837", "revid": "4754841", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8837", "title": "David Beatty, 1st Earl Beatty", "text": "Royal Navy Admiral of the Fleet (1871\u20131936)\nAdmiral of the Fleet David Richard Beatty, 1st Earl Beatty, (17 January 1871 \u2013 12 March 1936) was a Royal Navy officer. After serving in the Mahdist War and then the response to the Boxer Rebellion, he commanded the Battle Cruiser Fleet at the Battle of Jutland in 1916, a tactically indecisive engagement after which his aggressive approach was contrasted with the caution of his commander Admiral Sir John Jellicoe. He is remembered for his comment at Jutland that \"There seems to be something wrong with our bloody ships today\", after two of them exploded. \nLater in the war he succeeded Jellicoe as Commander in Chief of the Grand Fleet, in which capacity he received the surrender of the German High Seas Fleet at the end of the war. He then followed Jellicoe's path a second time, serving as First Sea Lord\u2014a position that Beatty held longer (7 years 9 months) than any other First Sea Lord. While First Sea Lord, he was involved in negotiating the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 in which it was agreed that the United States, Britain and Japan should set their navies in a ratio of 5:5:3, with France and Italy maintaining smaller ratio fleets of 1.75 each.\nFamily and childhood.\nBeatty was born into an Anglo-Irish family at Howbeck Lodge in the parish of Stapeley, near Nantwich, Cheshire, on 17 January 1871. He was the second son of five children born to Captain David Longfield Beatty and Katherine (or Katrine) Edith Beatty (n\u00e9e Sadleir), both from Ireland: David Longfield had been an officer in the Fourth Hussars where he formed a relationship with Katrine, the wife of another officer.\nAfter the affair between David Longfield and Katrine became known, David Longfield's father (Beatty's grandfather), David Vandeleur Beatty (1815\u20131881), arranged for his son to be posted to India in the hope that the scandalous relationship might end. David Longfield resigned from the regiment on 21 November 1865, with the honorary rank of Captain. He took up residence with Katrine in Cheshire and in 1869 sold his commission. David Longfield was unable to marry Katrine until Katrine had obtained a divorce on 21 February 1871, after the birth of their first two sons. Beatty's birth certificate recorded his mother's surname as Beatty, and his parents' eventual marriage at St Michael's Church in Liverpool was kept secret.\nBeatty's early education concentrated on horsemanship, hunting and learning to be a gentleman. Beatty had a close relationship with his elder brother Charles, who became his ally against their oppressive and overbearing father. They remained close throughout life, so much so that the only time Beatty felt despair was at his brother's death. Beatty later wrote to his wife about Charles, \"we lived together, played together, rode together, fought together.\" His brothers would later join the British Army, but early on young David developed an interest in ships and the sea and expressed a desire to join the Royal Navy. In 1881 Beatty's grandfather died and David Longfield succeeded to the 18th century mansion, 'Borodale', outside Enniscorthy, in County Wexford. After retiring from the army David Longfield established a business training horses first in Cheshire and then at 'The Mount', near Rugby, Warwickshire. On inheriting and following the death of his wife at 'The Mount', David Longfield returned to Ireland abandoning the training business.\nBeatty was educated at Kilkenny College and in 1882 entered Burney's Naval Academy at Gosport, which was a 'crammer' for boys wishing to take the entrance examinations for the Royal Navy.\nEarly career.\nBeatty joined the Royal Navy as a cadet passing into the training ship HMS \"Britannia\" tenth out of ninety-nine candidates in January 1884. During his two years at \"Britannia\", moored at Dartmouth, he was beaten three times for various infractions. He passed out of \"Britannia\" eighteenth out of the thirty-three remaining cadets at the end of 1885. Beatty's letters home made no complaint about the poor living conditions in \"Britannia\", and generally he was extrovert, even aggressive, and resented discipline. However, he understood how far he could transgress without serious consequences, and this approach continued throughout his career.\nBeatty was given orders to join the China Station in January 1886, but the posting did not appeal to his mother, who wrote to Lord Charles Beresford, then a senior naval officer, member of parliament and personal friend, to use his influence to obtain something better. Beatty was, in February 1886, instead appointed to , flagship of Admiral the Duke of Edinburgh, Queen Victoria's second son, who was Commander-in-Chief of the Mediterranean Squadron. This proved an excellent social opening for Beatty, who established a longstanding relationship with the Duke's eldest daughter, Marie, and with other members of the court. \"Alexandra\" was a three-masted sailing ship with auxiliary steam power, nonetheless, remaining flagship in a navy which was steadily transitioning from sail to steam. Life in the Mediterranean fleet was considerably easier than cadet life, with visits to friendly ports all around the Mediterranean, but Beatty was concerned to work diligently towards naval examinations, which would determine seniority and future promotion prospects. Beatty was promoted to midshipman on 15 May 1886 and assigned to assist Lieutenant Stanley Colville on watchkeeping duties: Colville was to play an important part in Beatty's future career.\nBeatty left HMS \"Alexandra\" in March 1889 and joined the cruiser in July 1889 for manoeuvres before joining the sailing corvette in September 1889, in which he was promoted to sub-lieutenant on 14 May 1890. Next he attended courses at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich during which he was somewhat distracted from his naval career by the delights of London. Beatty scored a first-class examination pass in Torpedoes, but only seconds in Seamanship, Gunnery and Pilotage, and a third in Navigation. A biography states that \"his cabin at Greenwich was full of photographs of actresses, some of which were signed in the most endearing terms\". After attending the gunnery school, , he undertook a posting to a torpedo boat in July 1891 and then a tour in from 19 January 1892.\nBeatty joined the Royal Yacht \"Victoria and Albert\" in July 1892 while Queen Victoria was holidaying in the Mediterranean: Victoria was in mourning for her grandson, Albert Duke of Clarence, who had died January 1892. Promoted to lieutenant on 25 August 1892, he rejoined HMS \"Ruby\" in August 1892 and then transferred to the battleship in September 1893 (which had only recently been involved in the fleet accident where she had rammed and sunk the battleship ). He transferred to the battleship in September 1895.\nSudan Campaign.\nBeatty gained recognition during the Mahdist War for his actions in the campaign to recapture the Sudan. Stanley Colville was placed in command of the gunboats attached to the British expeditionary force in Egypt and as Beatty's former commander in HMS \"Trafalgar\" and superior in HMS \"Alexandra\" he requested that Beatty join him. Control of the river Nile was considered vitally important for any expedition into Egypt and the Sudan. Beatty was seconded to the Egyptian government on 3 June 1896 and appointed second in command of the river flotilla. Colville was wounded during the operation, leaving Beatty in command of the gunboats for the successful attack on Dongola. The campaign halted at Dongola to regroup and Beatty returned to Britain on leave. He was commended by Kitchener for his part in the campaign and as a result was awarded the Distinguished Service Order.\nBeatty was again seconded to the Egyptian government for the next phase of the campaign. This was now at Lord Kitchener's specific request, for the Khartoum expedition. Beatty first commanded the gunboat \"El Teb\" but this was capsized attempting to ascend the Fourth Cataract. Beatty then took command of gunboat \"Fateh\" between October 1897 and August 1898: the gunboats were frequently in action advancing along the Nile ahead of the army and saw action at the Battle of Omdurman, where Beatty made the acquaintance of Winston Churchill who had become a cavalry officer in Beatty's father's old regiment, the 4th Hussars, and had there learnt his family history. In a few hours 10,000 Dervishes were killed by rifle and machine gun fire without any of them getting within 600 yards of the British force. This battle marked the effective end of resistance to the expeditionary force, but the gunboats were called into service to transport troops to Fashoda, south along the White Nile, where a small force of French troops had made a difficult land crossing and staked a claim to the area. Despite the ensuing crisis, the French were persuaded to withdraw without incident. Kitchener commended Beatty for his efforts in the campaign and as a result Beatty was promoted to commander, ahead of 400 other lieutenants, on 15 November 1898.\nBoxer Rebellion.\nBeatty was appointed executive officer of the small battleship , flagship of the China Station, on 20 April 1899. The first year of his tour of duty was uneventful, but unrest against foreigners was growing in China. The Boxer movement was a secret Chinese peasant society committed to resisting oppression both from foreigners and from the Chinese government. The Empress Dowager Tzu-hsi partly encouraged the Boxer's opposition to foreigners in an attempt to turn their attention away from herself. The name was derived from ritual exercises supposed to make their users immune to bullets, which resembled boxing.\nIn the summer of 1900 the rebellion reached Peking, where the German legation was attacked and foreign nationals withdrew to the relative safety of the Legation Quarter. Government troops joined forces with the rebels and the railway to the Treaty Port of Tientsin was interrupted. Admiral Sir Edward Seymour, then the Commander-in-Chief of the China Station, sent reinforcements to Peking, but they were insufficient to defend the legation. An attempt was therefore made to send more troops from Tientsin, where British ships had been joined by French, German, Russian, American, Austrian, Italian and Japanese. The international naval brigade force of naval marines placed itself under the senior officer present, which was Seymour. After an urgent call for help from the legation, Seymour set out on 10 June 1900 with 2,000 troops to attempt to break through to Peking in the Seymour Expedition. The force got about halfway before abandoning the attempt because the railway line had been torn up. By now rebels had begun destroying the track behind the force, cutting it off from Tientsin.\nOn 11 June 1900, Beatty and 150 men from HMS \"Barfleur\" landed as part of a force of 2,400 defending Tientsin from 15,000 Chinese troops plus Boxers. On 16 June 1900 the Taku forts were bombarded and captured to ensure ships could still reach the port. Fierce fighting broke out throughout the foreign areas and railway station, and Beatty was injured. He later took part in the successful relief of the naval brigade and was promoted to captain on 8 November 1900. Beatty returned to Britain, where he required an operation to restore proper use of his left arm.\nMarriage.\nBeatty had returned from leave after the Sudan campaign, but finding life at the family home in Ireland not to his taste, stayed instead with his brother at Newmarket, Suffolk. The location allowed him good hunting, and access to aristocratic houses where his recent heroic reputation from the campaign made him an honoured guest. Out hunting one day he chanced to meet Ethel Tree, daughter of Chicago department store founder Marshall Field. Beatty was immediately taken with her, for her good looks and her ability to hunt. The immediate difficulty with the match was that Ethel was married already to Arthur Tree, with a son, Ronald Tree.\nAfter the Boxer Campaign, the couple had at first exchanged letters, which Beatty signed 'Jack', as Ethel was still a married woman and discretion was advised. Ethel became involved with another man and the exchange of letters ceased but on Beatty's return she sent him a telegram and letter inviting him to resume their friendship. Beatty did not respond until after surgery on his arm in September 1900 when he wrote, \"I landed from China with my heart full of rage, and swore I did not care if I ever saw you again, or if I were killed or not. And now I have arrived with the firm determination not to see you at all in my own mind... Unfortunately I shall go on loving you to the bitter end... To me always a Queen, if not always mine, Good-bye.\"\nDespite this estrangement, the couple again met foxhunting and resumed a discreet relationship. Marshall Field was at first unimpressed by the impecunious Beatty as a future son-in-law, but was persuaded by his heroic reputation, impressive record of promotion and future prospects. There was the possibility that Field might revoke the settlement he had made on his daughter at the time of her first marriage and the new couple would have no means of support. Beatty's father was also unhappy about the match, fearing a repeat of the difficulties he had faced with his own relationship with a married woman, but with the added risk of publicity because both Beatty and Ethel were famous and the risk that Beatty's illegitimacy might be exposed. Beatty went so far as to consult a fortune teller, Mrs. Roberts, who predicted a fine outcome to the match. Ethel wrote to Arthur, telling him that it was her firm intention never to live with him again as his wife, though not naming any particular person or reason. Arthur agreed to co-operate, and filed for divorce in America on the grounds of desertion, which was granted 9 May 1901. Beatty and Ethel married on 22 May 1901 at the registry office, St. George's, Hanover Square, London, with no family attending. Although Arthur Tree was himself from a wealthy American family, he now had to adjust to reduced circumstances without Ethel's support. He elected to remain in Britain and their son Ronald remained with him. Ronald and his mother were never reconciled from his perception that she had deserted his father, but he visited in later life and became friendly with Beatty. Ronald later became a member of parliament and, during the Second World War became a link between the British and United States governments, lending his country house, Ditchley Park near Oxford, to Winston Churchill for weekend visits when the official residences were considered unsafe. Beatty and Ethel set up home at Hanover Lodge in Regent's Park, London.\nThe couple had two sons, David Field Beatty, 2nd Earl Beatty (1905\u20131972) born at the Capua Palace in Malta, and the Hon. Peter Randolph Louis Beatty (1910\u20131949). His marriage to a very wealthy heiress allowed Beatty an independence that most other officers lacked. She is reputed to have commented after he was threatened with disciplinary action following the straining of his ship's engines, \"What? Court-martial my David? I'll buy them a new ship.\"\nAdvancement.\nIn May 1902 Beatty was passed fit for sea duty and was appointed captain of the cruiser on 2 June, spending two months in exercises with the Channel Fleet under Admiral Sir Arthur Wilson before joining the Mediterranean Fleet. Beatty worked hard to raise efficiency so that she was highly rated in gunnery and other competitions by the time he left the ship 19 December 1902. Ethel decided not to be left behind so rented the Capua Palace on Malta, home port of the Mediterranean Fleet, where she became part of the island's high society.\nBeatty took command of the cruiser in the Mediterranean Fleet in November 1903 and then commanded the cruiser in the Mediterranean Fleet from October 1904. He then became the naval advisor to the Army Council in 1906 and, after having been appointed a naval Aide-de-Camp to the King on 5 November 1908, he became captain of the battleship in the Atlantic Fleet in December 1908. At the request of Alfred Winsloe, the Fourth Sea Lord, he was promoted to rear-admiral on 1 January 1910 by a special order in council since he had not completed the requisite time as a captain. He was offered the post of second-in-command of the Atlantic Fleet, but declined it and asked for one in the Home Fleet. As the Atlantic Fleet post was a major command, the Admiralty were very unimpressed and his attitude nearly ruined his career. Beatty, as a rapidly promoted war hero, with no financial worries and with a degree of support in Royal circles, felt more confident than most naval officers in standing firm on requesting a posting nearer home. He was approaching two years on half pay (which would trigger automatic retirement from the navy) when on 8 January 1912 his career was saved by the new First Lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill. Churchill had met Beatty when Beatty was commander of a gunboat on the Nile supporting the army at the Battle of Omdurman, in which Churchill took part as a cavalry officer. A \"probably apocryphal\" story relates that as Beatty walked into Churchill's office at the Admiralty, Churchill looked him over and said, \"You seem very young to be an Admiral.\" Unfazed, Beatty replied, \"And you seem very young to be First Lord.\" Churchill \u2013 who was himself only thirty-eight years old in 1912 \u2013 took to him immediately and he was appointed Naval Secretary.\nBeatty became Rear-Admiral Commanding the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron on 1 March 1913. Beatty was late taking up his new post, choosing not to cut short a holiday in Monte Carlo. On his eventual arrival, he set about drafting standing orders regarding how the squadron was to operate. He noted, \"Captains...to be successful must possess, in a marked degree, initiative, resource, determination, and no fear of accepting responsibility\". He went on \"...as a rule instructions will be of a very general character so as to avoid interfering with the judgement and initiative of captains...The admiral will rely on captains to use all the information at their disposal to grasp the situation quickly and anticipate his wishes, using their own discretion as to how to act in unforeseen circumstances...\" The approach outlined by Beatty contradicted the views of many within the navy, who felt that ships should always be closely controlled by their commanding admiral, and harked back to reforms attempted by Admiral George Tryon. It is argued that Tryon had attempted to introduce greater independence and initiative amongst his captains, which he believed would be essential in the confusion of a real war situation, but had ironically been killed in an accident caused by captains rigorously obeying incorrect but precise orders issued by Tryon himself.\nBeatty chose Lieutenant Ralph Seymour as his flag lieutenant, despite Seymour being unknown to him. Seymour had aristocratic connections, which may have appealed to Beatty since he sought connections in society, but it was also the case that Seymour's sister was a longstanding close friend of Churchill's wife. Appointments by influence were common in the navy at this time, but the significance of Beatty's choice lay in Seymour's relative inexperience as a signals officer, which later resulted in difficulties in battle.\nFirst World War.\nOn the eve of the First World War in 1914, Beatty was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath and promoted to acting vice-admiral in February 1915 and given command of the Battle Cruiser Fleet a month later. He was confirmed in the rank of vice-admiral on 9 August 1915. He led the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron at the actions at Heligoland Bight (1914), Dogger Bank (1915) and Jutland (1916).\nJutland proved to be decisive in Beatty's career, despite the loss of two of his battlecruisers. Beatty is reported to have remarked (to his Flag Captain, Ernle Chatfield, later First Sea Lord in the early 1930s), \"there seems to be something wrong with our bloody ships today,\" after two of them had exploded within half an hour during the battle. In any case Beatty's actions succeeded in drawing the German High Seas Fleet into action against the British Grand Fleet.\nBeatty succeeded Admiral John Jellicoe as commander-in-chief of the Grand Fleet and received promotion to the acting rank of admiral in December 1916. With his dashing style, he was the antithesis of his predecessor. Beatty's marriage was failing disastrously at the time, and the result was to be a decade-long love affair between Beatty and Eug\u00e9nie Godfrey-Faussett, wife of Captain Bryan Godfrey-Faussett. Under Beatty's command the Grand Fleet maintained its dominance of the North Sea until the end of the War.\nBeatty escorted the German High Seas Fleet to internment at Scapa Flow in November 1918 giving the order from his flagship that \"the German Flag will be hauled down at sunset and will not be raised again without permission\". This was not a lawful order, as the fleet remained the property of the German Government having been interned rather than having surrendered, but nevertheless Beatty enforced it.\nFirst Sea Lord.\nBeatty was promoted to substantive full admiral on 1 January 1919 and to Admiral of the Fleet on 1 May 1919. He was created 1st Earl Beatty, Viscount Borodale and Baron Beatty of the North Sea and Brooksby on 18 October 1919. He became First Sea Lord on 1 November 1919. In this capacity he was involved in negotiating the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 in which it was agreed that the United States, Britain and Japan should set their navies in a ratio of 5:5:3, with France and Italy maintaining smaller fleets.\nDuring the First Labour Government of 1924, with Japan increasingly hostile to the UK, Beatty lobbied the Clynes Committee for construction of the Singapore Naval Base to continue. Beatty wrote out, but did not send, a threat of resignation. The government were trying to cut back on the numbers of cruisers constructed; the other Sea Lords attributed the building of the \"Kent\" class to Beatty's lobbying, but government desire to alleviate shipyard unemployment was probably a more important factor.\nDespite further rumours that he would resign, Beatty remained in office when the Conservatives took power in the autumn of 1924. Supported by the First Lord of the Admiralty William Bridgeman, he clashed with the new Chancellor of the Exchequer, Winston Churchill, once again over the number of cruisers required by the Royal Navy. At this stage of his career Churchill was opposed to what he saw as excessive defence spending. This may seem odd in light of his previous and subsequent reputation, but in the 1920s no major war seemed to be on the horizon. Beatty also at this time pressed hard for the return of responsibility for naval aviation from the newly formed Royal Air Force to the Royal Navy.\nIn 1926 Beatty was considered for the post of Governor General of Canada but was rejected by the Colonial Secretary Leo Amery as he had \"no manners and an impossible American wife\".\nBy the time of his retirement from the Royal Navy in July 1927 a great deal of time was being spent preparing for the Coolidge Conference in Geneva, although Beatty did not himself attend as he had to remain in London to supervise the deployment of naval and marine forces against nationalist unrest in China and Egypt. On his last day in office (30 July) he attended a Cabinet at which Bridgeman reported the breakdown of the Geneva Conference as the Americans refused to accept any gun smaller than 8-inch for their cruisers, and after leaving office he congratulated Bridgeman that the Americans had not been able to achieve \"command of the sea at any cost\". Beatty was appointed a member of the Privy Council on 25 July 1927. Stephen Roskill wrote that whilst Beatty and his disciple Chatfield deserve some praise for the Royal Navy's comparative readiness in 1939, his main achievement was to maintain the morale of the Navy at a time of serious defence cuts, and that without his strong leadership the Royal Navy might have suffered more events like the Invergordon Mutiny of 1931.\nRetirement and death.\nBeatty spent much of his life (when not at sea) in Leicestershire, and lived at Brooksby Hall and Dingley Hall. In July 1930 he denounced the London Naval Treaty in the House of Lords as \"a great and deplorable blunder to which we are about to be committed by signing away the sea power by which the British Empire came into being\". Beatty also stated: \"If any sane man erects an edifice, or has great possessions, he protects them by insurance. The Navy is the insurance company of the economic unity of the Empire. Under the Naval Treaty of London the Navy will be totally and entirely inadequate to provide that insurance\".\nBeatty's old commander Admiral John Jellicoe died on 19 November 1935. Already suffering from heart failure, and sick with influenza, Beatty defied doctors' orders and left his bed to act as a pallbearer, saying, \"What will the Navy say if I fail to attend Jellicoe's funeral?\" He was so obviously ill that, as the funeral procession passed up Fleet Street, a bystander sent a glass of brandy out to him. He also insisted on attending the funeral of King George V in January 1936. These acts hastened his own death.\nBeatty died at around 1\u00a0am on 12 March 1936.\nAt Beatty's funeral his coffin was draped in the Union Flag flown by his flagship in 1919. The Archbishop of Canterbury, Cosmo Lang, said \"In him something of the spirit of Nelson seemed to have come back\". The Prime Minister, Stanley Baldwin, called in the House of Commons for a public memorial to Beatty to be erected, but no action was taken until after the Second World War, when busts of Beatty and Jellicoe were unveiled in Trafalgar Square on 21 October (Trafalgar Day) 1948.\nBeatty had requested in his will that he would like to be buried next to his wife Ethel at Dingley: however he was actually buried at St Paul's Cathedral and therefore the double grave at Dingley Church contains only his wife's body.\nAssessment.\nThe outcome of the Battle of Jutland was inconclusive, leading to controversy and a search for someone to blame, especially since the British lost more ships. Beatty was particularly unhappy with the official account of the battle and other historians took sides in support of him or Jellicoe. Beatty did not publish his analysis of the battle, while Jellicoe wrote two memoirs.\nA number of serious errors have been identified in Beatty's handling of the Battle Cruiser Fleet at the Battle of Jutland:\nAfter the war a report of the battle was prepared by the Admiralty under First Sea Lord Rosslyn Wemyss. Before the report was published, Beatty was himself appointed First Sea Lord, and immediately requested amendments to the report. When the authors refused to comply, he ordered it to be destroyed and instead had prepared an alternative report, which proved highly critical of Jellicoe. Considerable argument broke out as a result, with significant numbers of servicemen disputing the published version, including Admiral Reginald Bacon, who wrote his own book about the battle, criticising the version sponsored by Beatty and highly critical of Beatty's own part in the battle.\nBesides encouraging the publication of books and articles designed to praise his role at the Battle of Jutland and denigrate Jellicoe's, after his retirement Beatty assisted with the preparation of a 5,200 line poem \"The Epic of Jutland\" by Shane Leslie.\nIn 2022 U.S. Air Force Academy military historian Chuck Steele found Beatty's failures to improve communications between vessels before Jutland more glaring in light of his own personal awareness of how that had kept earlier victories at Heligoland Bight and Dogger Bank from being as overwhelming as they could have been. Gordon Moore, Steele writes, was transferred to the Canary Islands after the latter engagement not for his failures in it but for complaining about Beatty's poor communications to Churchill, then First Lord of the Admiralty and a strong supporter of Beatty's. Steele also argues that Beatty should also have known how to effectively use his battle cruisers due to the role they had played in smashing the German East Asia Squadron at the Falkland Islands. He faults Beatty for having learned too much from his earlier experience leading troops on land, and Churchill and others for being too impressed with Beatty as the supposed second coming of Horatio Nelson to see that unlike Nelson Beatty did not appreciate the value of newer naval technology.\nHonours and awards.\nBritish.\nBeatty was granted the Freedom of the City of London on 16 June 1919 at the same ceremony as Lord Haig. In June 1920, the Great Central Railway gave the name \"Earl Beatty\" to one of their newly built 4-6-0 express passenger locomotives, no. 1164 of class 9P (LNER class B3). It carried the name until withdrawal in September 1947. In 1925, he became the President of the Society for Nautical Research.\nQuotations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the afternoon [of 1 June 1916] Beatty came into the \"Lion's\" chart-house. Tired and depressed, he sat down on the settee, and settling himself in a corner he closed his eyes. Unable to hide his disappointment at the result of the battle, he repeated in a weary voice, 'There is something wrong with our ships', then opening his eyes and looking at the writer, he added, 'And something wrong with our system'. Having thus unburdened himself he fell asleep.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At 4.25, soon after we had resumed our position ahead of the \"Princess Royal\", the third ship in the line, the \"Queen Mary\" (Captain Prowse) blew up exactly as had the \"Indefatigable\". I was standing beside Sir David Beatty and we both turned round in time to see the unpleasant spectacle. The thought of my friends in her flashed through my mind; I thought also how lucky we had evidently been in the \"Lion\". Beatty turned to me and said, \"There seems to be something wrong with our bloody ships to-day,\" a remark which needed neither comment nor answer.\u2014\u200a\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8838", "revid": "35383775", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8838", "title": "Dictum of Kenilworth", "text": "1266 treaty\nThe Dictum of Kenilworth (), issued on 31 October 1266, was a pronouncement designed to reconcile the rebels of the Second Barons' War with the royal government of England. After the baronial victory at the Battle of Lewes in 1264, Simon de Montfort took control of royal government, but at the Battle of Evesham the next year Montfort was killed, and King Henry III restored to power. A group of rebels held out in the stronghold of Kenilworth Castle, however, and their resistance proved difficult to crush.\nA siege of the castle was started, but through papal intervention King Henry later entered on a more conciliatory path. A commission was appointed to draw up an arrangement that would be acceptable to both sides. The resulting Dictum of Kenilworth offered the rebels the right to buy back forfeited estates, at prices depending on their level of involvement in the rebellion. After initial resistance, the terms were eventually accepted. By the summer of 1267, the country was pacified, and this spirit of reconciliation would last until the 1290s. The Dictum of Kenilworth was later incorporated into the Statute of Marlborough.\nBackground.\nAt the Battle of Lewes in 1264, the rebellious barons, led by Simon de Montfort, had defeated the royal army and taken King Henry III captive. For the next year, the reins of government were in Montfort's hands, but his support soon began to crumble. On 4 August 1265, Montfort faced an army led by Prince Edward (later King Edward I) and the powerful Earl of Gloucester, who had recently defected to the royalist side, at the Battle of Evesham. The battle resulted in a complete royal victory; Montfort was killed, and King Henry III was restored to full power.\nPart of the rebellious forces held out, however, and their stronghold was the virtually impregnable Kenilworth Castle. In the summer of 1266, a siege of the castle was initiated, but the effort proved futile. There were rumours that Montfort's son Simon the Younger was planning an invasion of England from Normandy, and this was the hope that the rebels hung on to. It was in this situation that the papal legate Ottobuono Fieschi exerted his influence, to make the king pursue a more conciliatory policy. In August, the king summoned a parliament at Kenilworth, where the siege was ongoing. He commissioned a number of earls, barons and bishops to draft a treaty of reconciliation.\nThe Dictum of Kenilworth.\nThe commission was created by parliament appointing three bishops and three barons, who then selected one more bishop, two earls, and three more barons.\nThe final committee consisted of the bishops of Exeter, Bath and Wells, Worcester and St. David's, the earls of Gloucester and Hereford, and six barons (Philip Basset, John Balliol, Robert Walerand, Alan la Zouche, Roger de Somery and Warin Basingbourne). This committee was given until All Saints Day (1 November) to come up with provisions for a settlement. The result, known as the Dictum of Kenilworth, was made public on 31 October 1266.\nThe primary point of the Dictum was the re-establishment of royal authority. The Provisions of Oxford, that had been forced on the king were repudiated, and it was made clear that the appointment of ministers was entirely a royal prerogative. King Henry in turn reconfirmed Magna Carta and the Charter of the Forest. At the same time, Henry was faced with the increasing veneration of the fallen Simon de Montfort, whom some were already starting to consider a martyr and a possible saint.\nThe rebels had previously been completely disinherited, and their land taken into the king's hands. The Dictum instead extended a pardon, and restored land to their previous owners, contingent on payment of certain penalties that were proportional to the level of involvement in the rebellion. It was traditional to value land at ten times its annual yield, and most of the rebels were subsequently fined at half of this amount: five times the annual yield of their lands.\nRobert Ferrers, Earl of Derby, was singled out in particular for his central involvement in the rebellion, and for him the multiple was seven rather than five. The same was the case for Henry de Hastings, who was the commander of Kenilworth Castle. Those who had not taken part in the fighting themselves, but had incited others to rise up against the king, were fined at two years' value, while those who had been compelled to fight, or played only a minor part, had to pay one year's value of their land. The proceedings from the fines were awarded to royal supporters, some of whom had already been awarded parts of the rebels' land, and now had to give it back.\nAftermath.\nHostilities did not end with the publication of the Dictum. The garrison at Kenilworth refused to accept the terms given, and held out until 14 December, when deprivation forced them to surrender. In April 1267, the earl of Gloucester\u00a0\u2013 who had been central both to the royal victory at Evesham and to the drafting of the Dictum\u00a0\u2013 turned against the king. He occupied the city of London, and set himself up as the champion of the disinherited. After negotiations involving both Edward and Ottobuono, Gloucester relented, and by June a settlement was reached. Gloucester had forced a change to the conditions of the Dictum, whereby the disinherited were allowed to recover their lands before they had paid their fines rather than after; an arrangement that made repayment much easier. In the summer of that year, Prince Edward moved at the Isle of Ely, where the last of the rebels still held out, and forced them into submission under terms favourable to the rebels.\nIn November 1267, parliament met at Marlborough in Wiltshire. Here an important provision was issued that would become known to history as the Statute of Marlborough. This statute incorporated the clauses of the Dictum of Kenilworth that dealt with the restoration of royal power, and reconciliation between the loyalists and the rebels. The Statute of Marlborough became a basis for royal government, and the relationship between the king and his subjects, and as such the Dictum lived on in English constitutional history.\nThe spirit of peace and reconciliation established by the Dictum of Kenilworth lasted for the remainder of Henry III's reign and into the 1290s. In 1270, Prince Edward left the country to go on crusade in the Holy Land. When his father died in 1272, Edward felt in a safe enough position to wait until 1274 before returning home to claim the throne.\nSubsequent developments.\nThe act was extended to Ireland by Poynings' Law 1495 (10 Hen. 7. c. 22 (I)).\nThe whole act was repealed for England and Wales by section 1 of, and the schedule to, the Statute Law Revision Act 1863 (26 &amp; 27 Vict. c. 125) and for Ireland by section 1 of, and the schedule to, the Statute Law (Ireland) Revision Act 1872 (35 &amp; 36 Vict. c. 98).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8839", "revid": "32990417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8839", "title": "London Docklands", "text": "Area by the Thames in London, England\nLondon Docklands is an area of London encompassing the city\u2019s former docks. It is located in inner east and southeast London, in the boroughs of Southwark, Tower Hamlets, Lewisham, Newham and Greenwich. The docks were formerly part of the Port of London, at one time the world's largest port. After the docks closed, the area had become derelict and poverty-ridden by the 1980s. The Docklands' regeneration began later that decade; it has been redeveloped principally for commercial and residential use. The name \"London Docklands\" was used for the first time in a government report on redevelopment plans in 1971 and has since been almost universally adopted. The redevelopment created wealth, but also led to some conflict between the new and old communities in the area.\nEstablishment.\nIn Roman and medieval times, ships arriving in the River Thames tended to dock at small quays in the present-day City of London or Southwark, an area known as the Pool of London. However, these gave no protection against the elements, were vulnerable to thieves and suffered from a lack of space at the quayside. The Howland Great Dock in Rotherhithe (built in 1696, and later to form the core of the Surrey Commercial Docks) was designed to address these problems, providing a large, secure and sheltered anchorage with room for 120 large vessels. It was a major commercial success, and provided for two phases of expansion during the Georgian and Victorian eras.\nThe first of the Georgian docks was the West India (opened in 1802), followed by the London (1805), the East India (also 1805), the Surrey (1807), the Regent's Canal Dock (1820), St Katharine (1828) and the West India South (1829). The Victorian docks were mostly further east, comprising the Royal Victoria (1855), Millwall (1868) and Royal Albert (1880). The King George V Dock (1921) was a late addition.\nDevelopment.\nThree principal kinds of docks existed. Wet docks were where ships were laid up at anchor and loaded or unloaded. Dry docks, which were far smaller, took individual ships for repairing. Ships were built at dockyards along the riverside. In addition, the river was lined with innumerable warehouses, piers, jetties and dolphins (mooring points). The various docks tended to specialise in different forms of produce. The Surrey Docks concentrated on timber, for instance; Millwall took grain; St Katharine took wool, sugar and rubber; and so on.\nThe docks required an army of workers, chiefly lightermen (who carried loads between ships and quays aboard small barges called lighters) and quayside workers, who dealt with the goods once they were ashore. Some of the workers were highly skilled: the lightermen had their own livery company or guild, while the deal porters (workers who carried timber) were famous for their acrobatic skills. Most were unskilled and worked as casual labourers. They assembled at certain points, such as pubs, each morning, where they were selected more or less at random by foremen. For these workers, it was effectively a lottery whether they would get work on any particular day. This arrangement continued until as late as 1965, although it was somewhat regularised after the creation of the National Dock Labour Scheme in 1947.\nThe main dockland areas were originally low-lying marshes, mostly unsuitable for agriculture and lightly populated. With the establishment of the docks, the dock workers formed a number of tight-knit local communities with their own distinctive cultures and slang. Due to poor communications with other parts of London, they tended to develop in some isolation. Road access to the Isle of Dogs, for example, was only via two swing bridges. Local sentiment there was so strong that Ted Johns, a local community campaigner, and his supporters, in protest at the lack of social provision from the state, unilaterally declared independence for the area, set up a so-called \"Island Council\" with Johns himself as its elected leader, and blocked off the two access roads.\n20th century.\nThe docks were originally built and managed by a number of competing private companies. From 1909, they were managed by the Port of London Authority (PLA) which amalgamated the companies in a bid to make the docks more efficient and improve labour relations. The PLA constructed the last of the docks, the King George V, in 1921, as well as greatly expanding the Tilbury docks.\nGerman bombing during the Second World War caused massive damage to the docks, with 380,000 tons of timber destroyed in the Surrey Docks in a single night. Nonetheless, following post-war rebuilding they experienced a resurgence of prosperity in the 1950s.\nBefore the later Docklands' redevelopment and gentrification, the dock workers often made ends meet with petty and not so petty criminality, such as theft from the not yet containerized cargo, smuggling and fencing. As a result, the docks became \"centres of excellence for criminal practice\". Many of Britain's most proficient criminals learnt their trade here, including those behind the Hatton Garden heist, the Great Train Robbery, the Brink's-Mat robbery, the Security Express robbery and the Tonbridge cash depot robbery.\nThe end came suddenly, between approximately 1960 and 1970, when the shipping industry adopted the newly invented container system of cargo transportation. London's docks were unable to accommodate the much larger vessels needed by containerization, and the shipping industry moved to deep-water ports such as Tilbury and Felixstowe. Between 1960 and 1980, all of London's docks were closed, leaving around eight square miles (21\u00a0km2) of derelict land in East London.\nRedevelopment.\nEfforts to redevelop the docks began almost as soon as they were closed, although it took a decade for most plans to move beyond the drawing board and another decade for redevelopment to take full effect. The situation was greatly complicated by the large number of landowners involved: the Port of London Authority (PLA), the Greater London Council (GLC), the British Gas Corporation, five borough councils, British Rail and the Central Electricity Generating Board.\nTo address this problem, in 1981 the Secretary of State for the Environment, Michael Heseltine, formed the London Docklands Development Corporation (LDDC) to redevelop the area. This was a statutory body appointed and funded by central government (a quango), with wide powers to acquire and dispose of land in the Docklands. It also served as the development planning authority for the area.\nAnother important government intervention was the designation in 1982 of an enterprise zone, an area in which businesses were exempt from property taxes and had other incentives, including simplified planning and capital allowances. This made investing in the Docklands a significantly more attractive proposition and was instrumental in starting a property boom in the area.\nThe LDDC was controversial; it was accused of favouring elitist luxury developments rather than affordable housing, and it was unpopular with the local communities, who felt that their needs were not being addressed. Nonetheless, the LDDC was central to a remarkable transformation in the area, although how far it was in control of events is debatable. It was wound up in 1998 when control of the Docklands area was handed back to the respective local authorities.\nThe massive development programme managed by the LDDC during the 1980s and 1990s saw a huge area of the Docklands converted into a mixture of residential, commercial and light industrial space. The clearest symbol of the whole effort was the ambitious Canary Wharf project that constructed Britain's tallest building at the time and established a second business district (CBD) in London. However, there is no evidence that the LDDC foresaw this scale of development; nearby Heron Quays had already been developed as low-density offices when Canary Wharf was proposed, and similar development was already underway on Canary Wharf itself, Limehouse Studios being the most famous occupant.\nCanary Wharf was far from trouble-free; the property slump of the early 1990s halted further development for several years. Developers found themselves, for a time, saddled with property that they were unable to sell or let.\nTransport.\nThe Docklands historically had poor transport connections. This was addressed by the LDDC with the construction of the Docklands Light Railway (DLR), which connected the Docklands with the city. According to Transport for London, the owner of the project, it was a remarkably inexpensive development, costing only \u00a377 million in its first phase, as it relied on reusing disused railway infrastructure and derelict land for much of its length. The LDDC originally requested a full London Underground line, but the Government refused to fund it.\nThe LDDC also built the Limehouse Link tunnel, a cut and cover road tunnel linking the Isle of Dogs to The Highway (the A1203 road) at a cost of over \u00a3150 million per kilometre, one of the most expensive stretches of road ever built.\nThe LDDC also contributed to the development of London City Airport (IATA airport code LCY), opened in October 1987 on the spine of the Royal Docks.\nThe London Underground's Jubilee line was extended eastwards in 1999; it now serves Rotherhithe/Surrey Quays at Canada Water station, the Isle of Dogs at Canary Wharf tube station, Greenwich at North Greenwich tube station and the nearby Royal Docks at Canning Town station. The DLR was extended in 1994 to serve much of the Royal Docks area when the Beckton branch was opened. The Isle of Dogs branch was extended further south, and in 1999 it began serving Greenwich town centre\u2014including the Cutty Sark museum\u2014Deptford and finally Lewisham. In 2005, a new branch of the DLR opened from Canning Town to serve what used to be the eastern terminus of the North London Line, including a station at London City Airport. It was then further extended to Woolwich Arsenal in 2009.\nFuture developments.\nFurther development projects are being proposed and put into practice within the London Dockland area, such as:\nIn the early 21st century, redevelopment is spreading into the more suburban parts of east and southeast London, and into the parts of the counties of Kent and Essex that abut the Thames Estuary. See Thames Gateway and Lower Lea Valley for further information on this trend.\nDocklands series buses.\nHistory.\nThe numbers of several London Buses routes are prefixed \"D\" for Docklands; all run on the north bank of the River Thames as part of the London bus network, and act as feeder buses to the DLR. The \"D\" network was developed in the early stages of Docklands redevelopment; it was originally much larger, but as transport rapidly improved across east London, the need for the \"D\" routes reduced. Today only four remain, running primarily in Tower Hamlets and briefly into Newham and Hackney. Stagecoach London operate routes D6, D7 and D8, and Blue Triangle operate route D3.\n21st century.\nThe population of the Docklands has more than doubled during the last 30 years, and the area has become a major business centre. Canary Wharf has emerged as one of Europe's biggest clusters of skyscrapers and a major extension to the financial services district of the City of London.\nAlthough most of the old wharfs and warehouses have been demolished, some have been restored and converted into flats. Many of the docks themselves have survived and are now used as marinas or watersports centres; a major exception is the Surrey Commercial Docks, which are now largely filled in. Although large ships can\u2014and occasionally still do\u2014visit the old docks, all of the commercial traffic has moved downriver further east.\nThe revival of the Docklands has had major effects in other run-down surrounding areas. Greenwich and Deptford are undergoing large-scale redevelopment, chiefly as a result of the improved transport links making them more attractive to commuters.\nThe Docklands' redevelopment has, however, had some less beneficial aspects. The massive property boom and consequent rise in house prices has led to friction between the new arrivals and the old Docklands communities, who have complained of being squeezed out. It has also made for some of the most striking disparities to be seen anywhere in Britain: luxury executive flats constructed alongside run-down public housing estates.\nThe Docklands' status as a symbol of Margaret Thatcher's Britain has also made it a target for terrorists. After a failed attempt to bomb Canary Wharf in 1992, a large IRA bomb exploded at South Quay on 9 February 1996. Two people died in the explosion, forty people were injured and an estimated \u00a3150 million of damage was caused. This bombing ended an IRA ceasefire. James McArdle was sentenced to 25 years of jail time but released in 2000 under the terms of the Good Friday Agreement and royal prerogative of mercy officially signed by Queen Elizabeth II.\nIn a further sign of regeneration in the area, the Docklands now has its own symphony orchestra, Docklands Sinfonia; which was formed in January 2009 and is based at St Anne's Limehouse.\nEconomy.\nThe offices of \"The Independent\" group of publications were at one time situated in the Docklands. In 2008, Independent News &amp; Media announced that \"The Independent\" would be moving its offices to Northcliffe House in Kensington.\nLondon's Docklands has become one of the world's leading global internet hubs since the opening in 1990 of the carrier-neutral Telehouse campus, which hosts the vast majority of LINX's internet peering traffic, occupying over 73,000 square metres. In August 2016, Telehouse Europe opened the $177 million North Two data centre of 24,000 square metres that became the only UK data centre to own a 132 kV on-campus grid substation that is directly connected to the National Grid, reducing transmission losses and improving power density and service continuity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8840", "revid": "50915785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8840", "title": "Diesel multiple unit", "text": "Diesel-powered railcar designed to be used in formations of 2 or more cars\nA diesel multiple unit or DMU is a multiple-unit train powered by on-board diesel engines. A DMU requires no separate locomotive, as the engines are incorporated into one or more of the carriages. When additional carriages are coupled on, their controls are connected through and a single driver can control every engine in the train. This also allows the driver to drive from a cab at either end, simplifying reversing. Diesel-powered single-unit railcars are generally regarded as DMUs for most operations, at least with smaller trains. \nAdvantages.\nThe first diesel railcars appeared in the 1930s and DMUs became popular immediately post-war. They offered several cost-saving advantages at a time when railway operations were short of funds.\nDesign.\nThe diesel engine may be located above the frame in an engine bay or under the floor. Driving controls can be at both ends, on one end, or in a separate car.\nTypes by transmission.\nDMUs may also be classified by the method of transmitting motive power to their wheels: diesel\u2013mechanical DMMU, diesel\u2013hydraulic DHMU, or diesel\u2013electric DEMU.\nDiesel\u2013mechanical.\nIn a diesel\u2013mechanical multiple unit (DMMU), the rotating energy of the engine is transmitted via a gearbox and driveshaft directly to the wheels of the train, like a car. The transmissions can be shifted manually by the driver, as in the great majority of first-generation British Rail DMUs, but in most applications, gears are changed automatically.\nDiesel\u2013hydraulic.\nIn a diesel\u2013hydraulic multiple unit (DHMU), a hydraulic torque converter, a type of fluid coupling, acts as the transmission medium for the motive power of the diesel engine to turn the wheels. Some units feature a hybrid mix of hydraulic and mechanical transmissions, usually reverting to the latter at higher operating speeds as this decreases engine RPM and noise.\nDiesel-hydraulic locomotive transmissions can be hard to distinguish from diesel-mechanical, where both have multiple mechanical ratios and a single torque converter. This is especially true for lower powers (&lt;500 hp) such as DMUs. Some railways, such as British Rail in the 1960s, retreated from using hydraulic transmissions from main line locomotives, yet had no difficulty with large DMU fleets based on torque converters.\nDiesel\u2013electric.\nIn a diesel\u2013electric multiple unit (DEMU), a diesel engine drives an electrical generator or an alternator which produces electrical energy. The generated current is then fed to electric traction motors on the wheels or bogies in the same way as a conventional diesel\u2013electric locomotive.\nOn some DEMUs, such as the Bombardier Voyager, each car is entirely self-contained and has its own engine, generator and electric motors. In other designs, such as the British Rail Class 207 or the Stadler GTW and Stadler FLIRT DMU, some cars within the consist may be entirely unpowered or only feature electric motors, obtaining electric current from other cars in the consist which have a generator and engine.\nWith diesel\u2013electric transmission, some DMU can be no other than an EMU without pantograph or contact shoes (for use on the former British Rail Southern Region), which \"is substituted\" by one or more on-board diesel generators; this kind of DEMU can be potentially upgraded to electro-diesel multiple unit (EDMU), becoming a bi-mode multiple units train (BMU), just adding one or two pantographs or contact shoes (with opportune converters, if necessary) and related modifications on the electric system.\nAround the world.\nEurope.\nBelgium.\nNMBS/SNCB uses its NMBS/SNCB Class 41 DMUs on the few remaining unelectrified lines. As electrification progresses, the DMUs become less and less important.\nCroatia.\nDiesel multiple units cover large number of passenger lines in Croatia which are operated by the national passenger service operator H\u017d Putni\u010dki Prijevoz. On Croatian Railways, DMUs have important role since they cover local, regional and distant lines all across the country. The country's two largest towns, Zagreb and Split, are connected with an inter-city service that is provided by DMU tilting trains \"RegioSwinger\" (Croatian series 7123) since 2004. Those trains may also cover other lines in the country depending on need and availability.\nLuxury DMU series 7021, built in France, started to operate for Yugoslav Railways in 1972 and after 1991 still remained in service of Croatian Railways until 2005. Units 7121 and 7122 (which came as a replacement for 7221 units), together with the newest series 7022 and 7023 built in 2010s Croatia, cover many of the country's local and regional services on unelectrified or partly electrified lines.\nCzech Republic.\nDiesel multiple units also cover large number of passenger lines in the Czech Republic which are operated by the national operator \u010cesk\u00e9 dr\u00e1hy. They have important role since they cover local, regional and distant lines all across the country. Those trains may also cover other lines in the country depending on need and availability too.\nAlso, the DMUs were manufactured for foreign carriers. The tables of cars and units are divided into vehicles operated until 1987, when the \u010cSD used the series designations proposed by Vojt\u011bch Kry\u0161p\u00edn, and vehicles created after this date, which no longer have Kry\u0161p\u00edn's designations (with some exceptions). In addition, these new cars are the new vehicles are already different in both countries.\nEstonia.\nElron has since 2015 a Stadler FLIRT fleet, with 20 trains DEMU version.\nGermany.\nGermany has employed DMUs for both commuter and express services for many decades. The SVT 877 \"Fliegender Hamburger\" DMU introduced in 1933 made the run from Berlin to Hamburg in a record-setting 138 minutes, and its derivative SVT 137 broke the land speed record in 1936. After World War II, the VT 11.5 DMU was the flagship of the glamorous Trans Europ Express.\nSince 1968, DB has designated DMUs with class numbers beginning in 6. While DB and regional transport authorities generally prefer electric power for commuter rail, many local and rural lines remain unelectrified and DMUs are needed for those areas. DMUs in service as of 2021 include the Adtranz Class 612 tilting train (\"Regio Swinger\"), the Alstom Coradia LINT (Classes 620\u2013623, 640 and 648), the Siemens Desiro (Class 642) and the Bombardier Talent (Class 643/644). From 2001 to 2016 there was even a DMU version of DB's high-speed Intercity Express, the Class 605 ICE TD.\nIreland.\nIn the Republic of Ireland the C\u00f3ras Iompair \u00c9ireann (CI\u00c9), which controlled the republic's railways between 1945 and 1986, introduced DMUs in the mid-1950s and they were the first diesel trains on many main lines.\nItaly.\nDiesel Multiple Unit were introduced in Italy around the 1930s when Fiat produced the first unit of the ATR 100 series, a fixed-composition train that was innovative for the time, equipped with two diesel-powered extreme traction units with a trailered intermediate unit. They are still used today.\nRomania.\nDMUs are used mostly on shorter or less frequently travelled routes in remote areas. The national railway company CFR still uses, along with other DMU models, Class 77 and 78 DMUs, locally built by Malaxa between the 1930s and 50s and refurbished in the 70s. The main DMU in use is the Class 96 Siemens Desiro aka S\u0103geata Albastr\u0103 (The Blue Arrow). Private operators also largely use DMU units, mainly purchased from various French and German operators.\nSlovakia.\nIn the present, several types of DMUs operate in Slovakia. Was the most common type in Slovakia is a Class 812 ZSSK based on the \u010cD Class 810. These are used almost exclusively for hauling passenger trains on non-electrified regional lines and these trains often excel in low travel speeds. In the past, however, in Slovakia there were a number of express trains driven by motor coaches, which often overcame heavier trains driven by steam locomotives at cruising speed, and classic sets. A typical example can be, for example, the Slovensk\u00e1 strela motor express train led on the Bratislava-Prague route by a motor car of the same name, or the Tatran express from Bratislava to Ko\u0161ice. Representatives of high-speed motor wagons were, for example, motor wagons of the M262 or M286 series, which, however, lost their application in high-speed wagons due to the gradual electrification of main lines and were, like the current wagons currently used for passenger trains.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe first significant use of DMUs in the United Kingdom was by the Great Western Railway, which introduced its small but successful series of diesel\u2013mechanical GWR railcars in 1934. The London &amp; North Eastern Railway and London, Midland &amp; Scottish Railway also experimented with DMUs in the 1930s, the LMS both on its own system, and on that of its Northern Irish subsidiary, but development was curtailed by World War II.\nAfter nationalisation, British Railways (BR) revived the concept in the early 1950s. At that time there was an urgent need to move away from expensive steam traction which led to many experimental designs using diesel propulsion and multiple units. The early DMUs proved successful, and under BR's 1955 Modernisation Plan the building of a large fleet was authorised. These BR \"First Generation\" DMUs were built between 1956 and 1963.\nBR required that contracts for the design and manufacture of new locomotives and rolling stock be split between numerous private firms as well as BR's own workshops, while different BR Regions laid down different specifications. The result was a multitude of different types, one of which was:\nIn 1960, British Railways introduced its Blue Pullman high-speed DEMUs.\nThese were few in number and relatively short-lived, but they paved the way for the very successful InterCity 125 or High Speed Train (HST) units, which were built between 1975 and 1982 to take over most principal express services on non-electrified routes.\nThese trains run with a streamlined power car at each end and (typically) seven to nine intermediate trailer cars. Although originally classified as DEMUs, the trailer cars are very similar to loco-hauled stock, and the power cars were later reclassified as locomotives under Class 43. HSTs started being replaced in 2017, but as of October 2022 some are still in use.\nBy the early 1980s, many of the surviving First Generation units were reaching the end of their design life, leading to spiralling maintenance costs, poor reliability and a poor public image for the railway. A stopgap solution was to convert some services back to locomotive haulage, as spare locomotives and hauled coaching stock were available, but this also increased operating costs. Commencing in the mid '80s, British Rail embarked upon its so called \"Sprinterisation\" programme, to replace most of the first generation DMUs and many locomotive-hauled trains with three new families of DMU:\nFollowing the impact of the privatisation of British Rail in the late 1990s, several other DMU families have been introduced:\nIn 2018, the first bi and tri-mode electro-diesel multiple units were introduced:\nNorth America.\nCanada.\nCanada generally follows similar buffer strength requirements to the US, but new services are evaluated on a case-by-case basis. As a result, several types of lightweight DMUs have been used:\nCosta Rica.\nCosta Rica has purchased several Apolo 2400 series DMU railcars from the former narrow gauge operator in Spain, which are run in commuter service.\nMexico.\n42 X'Trapolis Ts\u00edimin K'\u00e1ak train sets have been ordered for Tren Maya, 10 of which are DMU and 32 are EDMU.\nUnited States.\nA type of diesel multiple units in the U.S. was the Budd Rail Diesel Car (RDC). The RDC was a single passenger car with two diesel engines and two sets of controls.\nIn the United States, DMU systems must be FRA-compliant to be permitted on freight rail corridors. The Federal Railway Administration has mandated higher coupling strength requirements than European regulators, effectively prohibiting the use of lighter weight European-style inter-city rail DMUs on U.S. main line railways without timesharing with freight operations or special waivers from the FRA. This has greatly restricted the development of DMUs within the U.S. as no other country requires the much heavier FRA compliant vehicles, and no export market for them exists.\nOperations using FRA-compliant vehicles:\nOperations using non FRA-compliant vehicles:\nProposed operations:\nAsia/Australasia.\nAustralia.\nDMUs were first introduced to Australia in the late mid-20th century for use on quiet branch lines that could not justify a locomotive hauled service. Today, DMUs are widely used throughout Australia's southern states:\nIn Queensland, heritage DMUs are used on the \"Savannahlander\" and \"Gulflander\" tourist trains.\nBangladesh.\nChinese manufactured (CNR Tangshan) DEMU was introduced in Bangladesh from 25 May 2013. DEMU is the country's first-ever commuter train service starting its journey on the Chittagong\u2013Faujdarhat line. These DEMUs also operate on the Chittagong Circular Railway and on the Bangladesh Railway's service between Dhaka and Narayanganj. However, these trains faced reliability issues soon after the final delivery in 2015, with all 20 trains becoming inoperable past 2018. In 2020, technicians from Bangladesh Railway were able to repair one of the inoperative trains to working condition. However, the proposed project to repair the rest of the trains were deemed to be too expensive in the long run. By January 2025, after 10 years of service, Bangladesh Railway announced its intention to sell the DEMU trains as scrap.\nCambodia.\nMexican manufacturer Ferrovias Del Bajio supplied in 2019, three DSUs (Diesel Single Unit) to Royal Railway in Cambodia for their airport shuttle service from Phnom Penh international airport to the city central station. The other two units were assigned to long-distance services from the central station to Sihanoukville and to Poipet. Royal Railways Cambodia have now acquired eleven carriages DMU from Japan. Model: \" Kiha 183 heavy snow \". (\u30ad\u30cf183\u7cfb\u30aa\u30db\u30fc\u30c4\u30af\u30fb\u5927\u96ea)\nSpeed: 110 km/h (max)\nType: \u7279\u6025\u3000(Limited Express)\nStarted: 1986 ... End of Service in Japan 17 March 2023\nChina.\nThe Dongfeng DMU was first Chinese diesel multiple unit produced by Qingdao Sifang in 1958. \nThe China Railway NZJ was China's first double-decker diesel multiple unit is an ideal medium- and short-distance rail transport vehicle. It was independently developed and manufactured by Tangshan Works in 1998 and put into operation between Nanchang and Jiujiang in June of that year. \nThe China Railway NYJ1 was China's first hydraulic transmission diesel multiple unit class was developed by Qingdao Sifang at the end of 1998 and put into operation between Nanchang and Jiujiang and Nanchang and Ganzhou in February 1999. \nThe China Railway NZJ1 \"New Dawn\" was higher-speed double-decker diesel multiple unit was jointly developed by Qishuyan Works and Nanjing Puzhen Works in August 1999, and put into commercial operation on the Shanghai-Nanjing Railway in October of that year.\nThe China Railway NDJ3 \"Great Wall\", previously labeled the \"Harmony Great Wall\" is the only higher-speed diesel multiple unit that is still operating in China. It was first designed to be used for passenger transport in the 2008 Olympics, and has become a mature technology platform with export orders to Nigeria despite initial flaws related to overheating of electrical cables in the power car.\nOn 14 January 2014, CRRC Changchun Railway Vehicles announced that hybrid electric multiple units were put into production. At the end of 2014, the first batch of hybrid EMUs, one train each with battery-catenary power supply (EEMU) and catenary power supply-internal combustion engine (DEMU), rolled off the assembly line in Changchun. From 2016 to 2020, the vehicles were tested in Hohhot and Beijing Academy of Railway Sciences.\nIn September 2022, the first CJ-5 train used by the Xi'an-Huxian Railway arrived in Xi'an. The No. 0506 train, which uses an internal combustion engine and a battery hybrid, was used as a vehicle during the initial operation of the Xi'an-Huxian Railway. During the operation period, it will be temporarily managed by Xi'an Metro.\nIndia.\nDMUs (particularly DEMUs) are widely used in India. DEMUs in India are used in both the eight-coach format and the four-coach format. These trains replaced many (up to 10 car) trains with a WDM-2 or WDM-3A locomotive in the middle. These old trains had the loco controls duplicated in the Driving Trailer coach and all the actuation information reaching the locomotive through thin communication lines. This was called 'push-pull train'. The longest running such push-pull service operated between Diva \u2013 Bhiwandi Road and Vasai Road and was recently converted into an MEMU train service in 2018.\nIndia's first and largest DMU shed at Jalandhar, Punjab, holds more than 90 units placed in service all over Punjab.\nThe DMU services in India have had various different classes. They can be classified as\nIndonesia.\nState-owned company PT.INKA builds several type of DMU, some of which operate in urban and suburban areas.\nJapan.\nIn Japan, where gasoline-driven railbuses (on small private lines) and railmotors (Kihani 5000 of the national railways) had been built since the 1920s, the first two streamlined DMUs came in service in 1937, class Kiha 43000 (\u30ad\u30cf43000\u7cfb).\nThe service of several hundreds (in sum even thousands) of diesel railcars and DMUs started in 1950s following the improvement of fuel supply that was critical during World War II.\nKenya.\nIn 2021, Kenya acquired DMUs from France to operate in the Nairobi Metropolitan Area. These trains connect the city with settlements outside Nairobi, Jomo Kenyatta International Airport and the Nairobi Terminus.\nMalaysia.\nThe Keretapi Tanah Melayu (KTM) has a total of 13 DMU KTM Class 61 ordered from CRRC for the West Coast Line and are assembled locally at CRRCs Batu Gajah factory from 2016 to 2020. The service began 1 September along the Gemas-Kuala Lipis-Tumpat route, replacing old non-automotive stock.\nThe Sabah State Railway (JKNS) utilized HD-100A DMU sets from CRRC Ziyang, along with older 2-car DMU sets for the West Sabah Line.\nPhilippines.\nThe Philippine National Railways (PNR) was one of the first adopters of diesel multiple unit trains in Asia. Initially built as gasoline-powered railmotors, the locally assembled Manila Railroad RMC class of 1929 was the first to be powered by diesel traction. Some units were also converted to streamliner units by 1932 for first-class services on the South Main Line between Manila and Legazpi, Albay. Since then, generations of DMUs were used chiefly for short-distance commuter services by the PNR in the island of Luzon.\nEven without active inter-city rail services in the present-day, DMUs are still used on the PNR Metro Commuter Line in Metro Manila and the Bicol Commuter service in the Bicol Region. Three generations of DMUs are in use: second-hand DMUs handed over by JR East such as the KiHa 35, 52 and 59 series originally built in the 1960s and acquired in the early 2010s, the Rotem DMUs of 2009 built by Korean manufacturer Hyundai Rotem, and the 8000 and 8100 classes built by Indonesian firm PT INKA.\nFrom 2022 onwards, the PNR will purchase standard gauge DMUs for its upcoming inter-city rail network in Luzon and Mindanao. This is compared to the 3 ft 6 in gauge of the rolling stock that is currently in active service. This move should allow access to better technology and increase line speeds.\nSouth Korea.\nKorail used to operates many DMUs. The DHC (Diesel Hydraulic Car), which made its debut for the 1988 Seoul Olympics, was able to reach speeds up to and served Saemaul-ho trains. These train have retired on 2008.\nSri Lanka.\nDMUs were first introduced to Sri Lanka in 1940. The aim of this was connecting minor railway stations and stops on the main line where most express trains don't have a halt.\nTaiwan.\nThe DMUs are now usually used on the Taiwan Railway Administration Hualien\u2013Taitung Line, North-Link Line, South-Link Line. DMUs in Taiwan are classified as Class DR.\nThailand.\nThe State Railway of Thailand ASR class is a diesel multiple unit operated by the State Railway of Thailand. Built by British Rail Engineering Limited at Derby Litchurch Lane Works in England, it is based on the British Rail Class 158. Twenty carriages were built in 1990/91. All were painted in the same Regional Railways livery as the Class 158s.\nManufacturers.\nDMU manufacturers include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8843", "revid": "1005449", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8843", "title": "Donald A. Wollheim", "text": "American sci-fi writer, editor, publisher\nDonald Allen Wollheim (October 1, 1914 \u2013 November 2, 1990) was an American science fiction editor, publisher, writer, and fan. As an author, he published under his own name as well as under pseudonyms, including David Grinnell, Martin Pearson, and Darrell G. Raynor. A founding member of the Futurians, he was a leading influence on science fiction development and fandom in the 20th-century United States. Ursula K. Le Guin called Wollheim \"the tough, reliable editor of Ace Books, in the Late Pulpalignean Era, 1966 and '67\", which is when he published her first two novels in Ace Double editions.\nProfile.\nInvolvement in science fiction fandom.\nThe 1979 first edition of \"The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction\" calls Wollheim \"one of the first and most vociferous SF fans.\" He published numerous fanzines and co-edited the early \"Fanciful Tales of Time and Space\". His importance to early fandom is chronicled in the 1974 book \"The Immortal Storm\" by Sam Moskowitz and in the 1977 book \"The Futurians\" by Damon Knight.\nWollheim organized an event later considered the first American science fiction convention, when a group from New York met with a group from Philadelphia on October 22, 1936, in Philadelphia. The modern Philcon convention claims descent from this event. Out of this meeting, plans were formed for regional and national meetings, including the first-ever Worldcon.\nWollheim was a member of the New York Science Fiction League, one of the clubs established by Hugo Gernsback to promote science fiction. When payment was not forthcoming for the first story he sold to Gernsback, Wollheim formed a group with several other authors, and successfully sued for payment. He was expelled from the Science Fiction League as \"a disruptive influence\" but was later reinstated. From the September 1935 issue of Gernsback's \"Wonder Stories\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;THREE MEMBERS EXPELLED\nIt grieves us to announce that we have found the first disloyalty in our organization... These members we expelled on June 12th. Their names are Donald A. Wollheim, John B. Michel, and William S. Sykora\u2014three active fans who just got themselves onto the wrong road.\nIn 1937 Wollheim founded the Fantasy Amateur Press Association, whose first mailing (July 1937) included this statement from him: \"There are many fans desiring to put out a voice who dare not, for fear of being obliged to keep it up, and for the worry and time taken by subscriptions and advertising. It is for them and for the fan who admits it is his hobby and not his business that we formed the FAPA.\" In 1938, with several friends, he formed the Futurians\u2014arguably the best-known of the science fiction clubs. At one time or another, the membership included Isaac Asimov, Frederik Pohl, Cyril Kornbluth, James Blish, John Michel, Judith Merril, Robert A. W. Lowndes, Richard Wilson, Damon Knight, Virginia Kidd, and Larry T. Shaw. In 1943 Wollheim married fellow Futurian Elsie Balter (1910\u20131996). It proved to be a lasting marriage and publishing partnership.\nThe Futurians became less fan-oriented and more professional after 1940. Its conferences and workshops focused on writing, editing, and publishing, with many of its members interested in all three.\nWork as author.\nWollheim's first story, \"The Man from Ariel\", was published in the January 1934 issue of \"Wonder Stories\" when he was nineteen. \nHe was not paid for the story, and when he learned that other authors had not been paid either, he said so in the \"Bulletin\" of the Terrestrial Fantascience Guild. Publisher Hugo Gernsback eventually settled with Wollheim and the other authors out of court for $75. However, when Wollheim submitted another story (\"The Space Lens\") under the pseudonym Millard Verne Gordon, he was once again cheated by Gernsback who published it in the September 1935 issue. His third known story was published in \"Fanciful Tales of Time and Space\", Fall 1936, a fanzine that he edited himself. That year he also published and edited another short-lived fanzine, \"Phantagraph\".\nWollheim's stories were published regularly from 1940; at the same time he was becoming an important editor. In the 1950s and 60s he wrote chiefly novels. He usually used pseudonyms for works aimed at grownups, and wrote children's novels under his own name. Notable and popular were the eight \"Mike Mars\" books for children, which explored different facets of the NASA space program. Also well-received were the \"Secret\" books for young readers: \"The Secret of Saturn's Rings\" (1954), \"Secret of the Martian Moons\" (1955), and \"The Secret of the Ninth Planet\" (1959). As Martin Pearson he published the \"Ajax Calkins\" series, which became the basis for his novel \"Destiny's Orbit\" (1962). A sequel, \"Destination: Saturn\" was published in 1967 in collaboration with Lin Carter. \"The Universe Makers\" (1971) is a discussion of themes and philosophy in science fiction.\nOne of Wollheim's short stories, \"Mimic\", was made into the film of the same name by director and co-writer Guillermo del Toro, released in 1997.\nHis daughter Betsy declared: \"In true editorial fashion, he was honest about the quality of his own writing. He felt it was fair to middling at best. He always knew that his great talent was as an editor.\"\nCareer as editor and publisher.\nRobert Silverberg said that Wollheim was \"one of the most significant figures in 20th century American science fiction publishing,\" adding, \"A plausible case could be made that he was \"the\" most significant figure\u2014responsible in large measure for the development of the science fiction paperback, the science fiction anthology, and the whole post-Tolkien boom in fantasy fiction.\"\nIn late 1940, Wollheim noticed a new magazine titled \"Stirring Detective and Western Stories\" on the newsstands. He wrote to the publishers, Albing Publications, to see if they were interested in adding a science fiction title to their list, and he was invited to meet them. They did not have capital, however, and only guaranteed him a salary if the magazines were successful. He approached some of his fellow Futurians for free stories (some published under pseudonyms to protect their reputations with paying editors). It resulted in Wollheim's editing two of the earliest periodicals devoted to science fiction, the \"Cosmic Stories\" and \"Stirring Science Stories\" magazines starting in February 1941. After the magazines were cancelled later in 1941, Wollheim was able to find another publisher, Manhattan Fiction Publications, and a fourth issue of \"Stirring\" appeared, dated March 1942. Wartime constraints prevented ongoing publication, and there were no more issues of either title.\nWollheim edited the first science fiction anthology to be mass-marketed, \"The Pocket Book of Science Fiction\" (1943). It was also the first book containing the words \"science fiction\" in the title. It included works by Robert A. Heinlein, Theodore Sturgeon, T. S. Stribling, Stephen Vincent Ben\u00e9t, Ambrose Bierce, and H. G. Wells. In 1945 Wollheim edited the first hardcover anthology from a major publisher and the first omnibus, \"The Viking Portable Novels of Science\". He also edited the first anthology of original science fiction, \"The Girl With the Hungry Eyes\" (1947), although there is evidence that this last was originally intended to be the first issue of a new magazine.\nBetween 1947 and 1951 he was editor at the pioneering paperback publisher Avon Books, where he made available highly affordable editions of the works of A. Merritt, H. P. Lovecraft, and C. S. Lewis' \"Silent Planet\" space trilogy, bringing these previously little known authors a wide readership. During this period he also edited eighteen issues of the influential \"Avon Fantasy Reader\" as well as three of the \"Avon Science Fiction Reader\". These periodicals contained mostly reprints and a few original stories.\nIn 1952 Wollheim left Avon to work for A. A. Wyn at the Ace Magazine Company and spearheaded a new paperback book list, Ace Books. In 1953 he introduced science fiction to the Ace lineup, and for 20 years as editor-in-chief was responsible for their multi-genre list and, most important to him, their renowned sf list. Wollheim invented the \"Ace Doubles\" series which consisted of pairs of books, usually by different authors, bound back-to-back with two \"front\" covers. Because these paired books had to fit a fixed total page length, one or both were usually abridged to fit, and Wollheim often made other editorial alterations\u2014as witness the differences between Poul Anderson's Ace novel \"War of the Wing-Men\" and its definitive revised edition, \"The Man Who Counts\". Among the authors who made their paperback debuts in Ace Doubles were Philip K. Dick, Samuel R. Delany, Leigh Brackett, Ursula K. Le Guin, and John Brunner. William S. Burroughs' first book, \"Junkie\", was published as an Ace Double. Wollheim also helped develop Marion Zimmer Bradley, Robert Silverberg, Avram Davidson, Fritz Leiber, Andre Norton, Thomas Burnett Swann, Jack Vance, and Roger Zelazny, among others. While at Ace, he and co-editor Terry Carr began an annual anthology series, \"The World's Best Science Fiction\", the first collection of what they considered the best of the prior year's short stories, from magazines, hardcovers, paperback collections and other anthologies.\nIn the early 1960s Ace reintroduced Edgar Rice Burroughs' work, which had long been out of print, and in 1965, Ace bought the paperback rights to \"Dune\" (Herbert's title worried Wollheim, who feared it would be mistaken for a western). Eventually, Ace introduced single paperback books and became one of the preeminent genre publishers. Ace and Ballantine dominated sf in the 1960s and built the genre by publishing original material as well as reprints.\nTolkien controversy.\nPrior to the 1960s, no large American paperback publisher would publish fantasy. It was believed that there was no public demand for it and that it would not sell. Wollheim published an unauthorized paperback edition of J. R. R. Tolkien's \"The Lord of the Rings\" in three volumes. It was the first mass-market paperback edition of Tolkien's epic. Wollheim did not consider himself a fantasy fan. In a 2006 interview his daughter, Betsy Wollheim, said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When he called up Professor Tolkien in 1964 and asked if he could publish \"Lord of the Rings\" as Ace paperbacks, Tolkien said he would \"never\" allow his great works to appear in so 'degenerate a form' as the paperback book. Don was one of the fathers of the entire paperback industry, since before he spearheaded the Ace line he was the originating editor-in-chief of the Avon paperback list in 1945, so he took this personally. He was very offended. He did a little research and discovered a loophole in the copyright. Houghton Mifflin, Tolkien's American hardcover publisher, had neglected to protect the work in the United States. So, incensed by Tolkien's response, he realized that he could legally publish them and did.\nThis brash action (which ultimately benefited his primary competitors) was really the Big Bang that founded the modern fantasy field, and only someone like my father could have done that. He \"did\" pay Tolkien, and he was responsible for making not only Tolkien but Ballantine Books extremely wealthy. He was bitter about that, and frankly that's probably why he never got the Hugo he wanted. But if he hadn't done it, who knows when\u2014or if \u2014those books would have been published in paperback?\nThis account was disputed by Tolkien, who claimed that he never received any communication from Ace prior to publication of their version. In any case, Tolkien had previously authorized paperback editions of \"The Hobbit\" and \"Tree and Leaf\". The authorized Ballantine paperback edition of \"The Lord of the Rings\" was then published in November 1965. Ace subsequently agreed to cease publishing the unauthorized edition and to pay Tolkien for their sales following a grassroots campaign by Tolkien's U.S. fans. A 1993 court determined that the copyright loophole suggested by Ace Books was invalid and its paperback edition was found to have been a violation of copyright under U.S. law (at this time, the U.S. had yet to join the International Copyright Convention, and most laws on the books existed to protect domestic creations from foreign infringement. Houghton Mifflin was technically in violation of the law when they exceeded their import limits and failed to renew their interim copyright). In the \"Locus\" obituary for Donald Wollheim, however, more details emerge:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Houghton-Mifflin had imported sheets instead of printing their own edition, but they didn't want to sell paperback rights. Ace printed the first paperback edition and caused such a furor that Tolkien rewrote the books enough to get a new copyright, then sold them to Ballantine. The rest is history. Although Ace and Wollheim have become the villains in the Tolkien publishing gospel, it's probable that the whole Tolkien boom would not have happened if Ace hadn't published them.\nFoundation of DAW Books.\nWollheim left Ace in 1971. Frederik Pohl describes the circumstances:\nUnfortunately, when Wyn died [in 1968] the company was sold to a consortium headed by a bank.\u00a0... Few of them had any publishing experience before they found themselves running Ace. It showed. Before long, bills weren't being paid, authors' advances and royalties were delayed, budgets were cut back, and most of Donald's time was spent trying to soothe authors and agents who were indignant, and had every right to be, at the way they were treated.\nUpon leaving Ace, he and his wife, Elsie Balter Wollheim, founded DAW Books, which he named for his initials. DAW can claim to be the first mass market specialist science fiction and fantasy fiction publishing house. DAW issued its first four titles in April 1972. Most of the writers whom he had developed at Ace went with him to DAW: Marion Zimmer Bradley, Andre Norton, Philip K. Dick, John Brunner, A. Bertram Chandler, Kenneth Bulmer, Gordon R. Dickson, A. E. van Vogt, and Jack Vance. In later years, when his distributor, New American Library, threatened to withhold Thomas Burnett Swann's Biblical historical fantasy \"How Are the Mighty Fallen\" (1974), owing to its homosexual content, Wollheim fought vigorously against their decision, and they relented.\nHis later author discoveries included Tanith Lee, Jennifer Roberson, Michael Shea, Tad Williams, Celia S. Friedman, and C. J. Cherryh, whose \"Downbelow Station\" (1982) was the first DAW book to win the Hugo Award for best novel. He was also able to give a number of British writers, including E. C. Tubb, Brian Stableford, Barrington Bayley, and Michael Coney, a new American audience. He published translations of international sf as well as anthologies of translated stories, \"Best From the Rest of the World.\" With the help of Arthur W. Saha, Wollheim also edited and published the popular \"Annual World's Best Science Fiction\" anthology from 1971 until his death.\nRecognition.\nAlgis Budrys in 1966 gave Wollheim a Galaxy Bookshelf award \"for doing his job\". Upon Wollheim's death in 1990, the prolific editor Robert Silverberg argued (above) that he may have been \"\"the\" most significant figure\" in American SF publishing.\nRobert Jordan credited Wollheim for helping to launch Jordan's career. Wollheim made an offer for Jordan's first novel, \"Warrior of the Ataii\", though he withdrew the offer when Jordan requested some minor changes to the contract. Jordan claimed that Wollheim's first, 'laudatory' letter convinced him that he could write, and so he chose to remember the first letter and forget about the second. The novel remained unpublished during Jordan's lifetime, he Jordan went on to write the immensely successful \"The Wheel of Time\" series for Tor Books.\nMarion Zimmer Bradley referred to him as \"a second father\", Frederick Pohl called him \"a founder\", and Robert Silverberg says he was \"seriously underrated\" and \"one of the great shapers of science-fiction publishing in the United States\". In 1977 scholar Robert Scholes named Wollheim \"one of the most important editors and publishers of science fiction.\"\nFrom 1975 on, Wollheim received several special awards for his contributions to science fiction and to fantasy, including one at the 1975 World SF Convention and runner-up to Ian &amp; Betty Ballantine at the 1975 World Fantasy Convention.\nThe Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted him in 2002, its seventh class of two deceased and two living persons. He is the third person inducted primarily for his work as editor or publisher, after the inaugural 1996 pair Hugo Gernsback and John W. Campbell.\nSelected works.\nAs writer.\nMike Mars series.\nSource:\nPersonal life.\nWollheim also actively practiced cross-dressing as a woman throughout his life, and he regularly attended events at Casa Susanna in the Catskills of upstate New York.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nImproper reference format"}
{"id": "8844", "revid": "8264159", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8844", "title": "Digital cinema", "text": "Use of digital projectors in cinemas\nDigital cinema is the digital technology used within the film industry to distribute or project motion pictures as opposed to the historical use of reels of motion picture film, such as 35 mm film. Whereas film reels have to be shipped to movie theaters, a digital movie can be distributed to cinemas in a number of ways: over the Internet or dedicated satellite links, or by sending hard drives or optical discs such as Blu-ray discs, then projected using a digital video projector instead of a film projector.\nTypically, digital movies are shot using digital movie cameras or in animation transferred from a file and are edited using a non-linear editing system (NLE). The NLE is often a video editing application installed in one or more computers that may be networked to access the original footage from a remote server, share or gain access to computing resources for rendering the final video, and allow several editors to work on the same timeline or project.\nAlternatively a digital movie could be a film reel that has been digitized using a motion picture film scanner and then restored, or, a digital movie could be recorded using a film recorder onto film stock for projection using a traditional film projector.\nDigital cinema is distinct from high-definition television and does not necessarily use traditional television or other traditional high-definition video standards, aspect ratios, or frame rates. In digital cinema, resolutions are represented by the horizontal pixel count, usually 2K (2048\u00d71080 or 2.2 megapixels) or 4K (4096\u00d72160 or 8.8 megapixels). The 2K and 4K resolutions used in digital cinema projection are often referred to as DCI 2K and DCI 4K. DCI stands for Digital Cinema Initiatives.\nAs digital cinema technology improved in the early 2010s, most theaters across the world converted to digital video projection. Digital cinema technology has continued to develop over the years with 3D, RPX, 4DX and ScreenX, allowing moviegoers more immersive experiences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nThe transition from film to digital video was preceded by cinema's transition from analog to digital audio, with the release of the Dolby Digital (AC-3) audio coding standard in 1991. Its main basis is the modified discrete cosine transform (MDCT), a lossy audio compression algorithm. It is a modification of the discrete cosine transform (DCT) algorithm, which was first proposed by Nasir Ahmed in 1972 and was originally intended for image compression. The DCT was adapted into the MDCT by J.P. Princen, A.W. Johnson and Alan B. Bradley at the University of Surrey in 1987, and then Dolby Laboratories adapted the MDCT algorithm along with perceptual coding principles to develop the AC-3 audio format for cinema needs. Cinema in the 1990s typically combined analog photochemical images with digital audio.\nDigital media playback of high-resolution 2K files has at least a 20-year history. Early video data storage units (RAIDs) fed custom frame buffer systems with large memories. In early digital video units, the content was usually restricted to several minutes of material. Transfer of content between remote locations was slow and had limited capacity. It was not until the late 1990s that feature-length films could be sent over the \"wire\" (Internet or dedicated fiber links). On October 23, 1998, Digital light processing (DLP) projector technology was publicly demonstrated with the release of \"The Last Broadcast\", the first feature-length movie, shot, edited and distributed digitally. In conjunction with Texas Instruments, the movie was publicly demonstrated in five theaters across the United States (Philadelphia, Portland (Oregon), Minneapolis, Providence, and Orlando).\nFoundations.\nIn the United States, on June 18, 1999, Texas Instruments' \"DLP Cinema\" projector technology was publicly demonstrated on two screens in Los Angeles and New York for the release of Lucasfilm's \"\". In Europe, on February 2, 2000, Texas Instruments' \"DLP Cinema\" projector technology was publicly demonstrated, by Philippe Binant, on one screen in Paris for the release of \"Toy Story 2\".\nFrom 1997 to 2000, the JPEG 2000 image compression standard was developed by a Joint Photographic Experts Group (JPEG) committee chaired by Touradj Ebrahimi (later the JPEG president). In contrast to the original 1992 JPEG standard, which is a DCT-based lossy compression format for static digital images, JPEG 2000 is a discrete wavelet transform (DWT) based compression standard that could be adapted for motion imaging video compression with the Motion JPEG 2000 extension. JPEG 2000 technology was later selected as the video coding standard for digital cinema in 2004.\nIn 1992, Hughes-JVC was founded by JVC and Hughes Electronics to develop ILA (Image Light Amplifer) digital video projectors for commercial movie theaters using liquid crystal on silicon (LCOS) technology. In 1997, JVC introduced D-ILA (Direct-Drive ILA) technology with a 2K resolution digital video projector. In 2000, JVC introduced a 4K resolution video projector using D-ILA technology.\nInitiatives.\nOn January 19, 2000, the Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers, in the United States, initiated the first standards group dedicated towards developing digital cinema. By December 2000, there were 15 digital cinema screens in the United States and Canada, 11 in Western Europe, 4 in Asia, and 1 in South America. Digital Cinema Initiatives (DCI) was formed in March 2002 as a joint project of many motion picture studios (Disney, Fox, MGM, Paramount, Sony Pictures, Universal and Warner Bros.) to develop a system specification for digital cinema. The same month it was reported that the number of cinemas equipped with digital projectors had increased to about 50 in the US and 30 more in the rest of the world.\nIn April 2004, in collaboration with the American Society of Cinematographers, DCI created standard evaluation material (the ASC/DCI StEM material) for testing of 2K and 4K playback and compression technologies. DCI selected JPEG 2000 as the basis for the compression in the system the same year. Initial tests with JPEG 2000 produced bit rates of around 75\u2013125\u00a0Mbit/s for 2K resolution and 100\u2013200\u00a0Mbit/s for 4K resolution.\nWorldwide deployment.\nIn China, in June 2005, an e-cinema system called \"dMs\" was established and was used in over 15,000 screens spread across China's 30 provinces. DMs estimated that the system would expand to 40,000 screens in 2009. In 2005, the UK Film Council Digital Screen Network launched in the UK by Arts Alliance Media creating a chain of 250 2K digital cinema systems. The roll-out was completed in 2006. This was the first mass roll-out in Europe. AccessIT/Christie Digital also started a roll-out in the United States and Canada. By mid-2006, about 400 theaters were equipped with 2K digital projectors with the number increasing every month. In August 2006, the Malayalam digital movie \"Moonnamathoral\", produced by Benzy Martin, was distributed via satellite to cinemas, thus becoming the first Indian digital cinema. This was done by Emil and Eric Digital Films, a company based at Thrissur using the end-to-end digital cinema system developed by Singapore-based DG2L Technologies.\nIn January 2007, \"Guru\" became the first Indian film mastered in the DCI-compliant JPEG 2000 Interop format and also the first Indian film to be previewed digitally, internationally, at the Elgin Winter Garden in Toronto. This film was digitally mastered at Real Image Media Technologies in India. In 2007, the UK became home to Europe's first DCI-compliant fully digital multiplex cinemas; Odeon Hatfield and Odeon Surrey Quays (in London), with a total of 18 digital screens, were launched on 9 February 2007. By March 2007, with the release of Disney's \"Meet the Robinsons\", about 600 screens had been equipped with digital projectors. In June 2007, Arts Alliance Media announced the first European commercial digital cinema Virtual Print Fee (VPF) agreements (with 20th Century Fox and Universal Pictures). In March 2009, AMC Theatres announced that it closed a $315 million deal with Sony to replace all of its movie projectors with 4K digital projectors starting in the second quarter of 2009; it was anticipated that this replacement would be finished by 2012.\nAs digital cinema technology improved in the early 2010s, most theaters across the world converted to digital video projection. In January 2011, the total number of digital screens worldwide was 36,242, up from 16,339 at end 2009 or a growth rate of 121.8 percent during the year. There were 10,083 d-screens in Europe as a whole (28.2 percent of global figure), 16,522 in the United States and Canada (46.2 percent of global figure) and 7,703 in Asia (21.6 percent of global figure). Worldwide progress was slower as in some territories, particularly Latin America and Africa. As of 31 March 2015, 38,719 screens (out of a total of 39,789 screens) in the United States have been converted to digital, 3,007 screens in Canada have been converted, and 93,147 screens internationally have been converted. By the end of 2017, virtually all of the world's cinema screens were digital (98%). Digital cinema technology has continued to develop over the years with 3D, RPX, 4DX and ScreenX, allowing moviegoers with more immersive experiences.\nDespite the fact that today, virtually all global movie theaters have converted their screens to digital cinemas, some major motion pictures even as of 2019 are shot on film. For example, Quentin Tarantino released his latest film \"Once Upon a Time in Hollywood\" in 70\u00a0mm and 35\u00a0mm in selected theaters across the United States and Canada.\nElements.\nIn addition to the equipment already found in a film-based movie theatre (e.g., a sound reinforcement system, screen, etc.), a DCI-compliant digital cinema requires a DCI-compliant digital projector and a powerful computer known as a server. \nMovies are supplied to the theater as a set of digital files called a Digital Cinema Package (DCP). For a typical feature film, these files will be anywhere between 90 GB and 300 GB of data (roughly two to six times the information of a Blu-ray disc) and may arrive as a physical delivery on a conventional computer hard drive or via satellite or fibre-optic broadband Internet. As of 2013, physical deliveries of hard drives were most common in the industry. Promotional trailers arrive on a separate hard drive and range between 200 GB and 400 GB in size. Ingest of DCP files may be done at each cabin\u2019s projector-server or may be stored in a central server called a \"Digital Cinema Library\" sharing its content over the cinema local area network (LAN) and managed by the Theater Management System (software).\nRegardless of how the DCP arrives, it first needs to be copied onto the internal hard drives of the server, either via an eSATA connection, or via a closed network, a process known as \"ingesting.\" DCPs can be, and in the case of feature films almost always are, encrypted, to prevent illegal copying and piracy. The necessary decryption keys are supplied separately, usually as email attachments or via download, and then \"ingested\" via USB. Keys are time-limited and will expire after the end of the period for which the title has been booked. They are also locked to the hardware (server and projector) that is to screen the film, so if the theatre wishes to move the title to another screen or extend the run, a new key must be obtained from the distributor. Several versions of the same feature can be sent together. The original version (OV) is used as the basis of all the other playback options. Version files (VF) may have a different sound format (e.g. 7.1 as opposed to 5.1 surround sound) or subtitles. 2D and 3D versions are often distributed on the same hard drive.\nThe playback of the content is controlled by the server using a \"playlist\". As the name implies, this is a list of all the content that is to be played as part of the performance. The playlist will be created by a member of the theatre's staff using proprietary software that runs on the server. In addition to listing the content to be played the playlist also includes automation cues that allow the playlist to control the projector, the sound system, auditorium lighting, tab curtains and screen masking (if present), etc. The playlist can be started manually, by clicking the \"play\" button on the server's monitor screen, or automatically at pre-set times.\nThe \"Theater Manager System\" (TMS) is a central system software for the whole cinema house, handling the central cinema content library and preparing the playback sessions (playlists) with the correct KDM keys and the selected cinema content moved to each projector.\nTechnology and standards.\nDigital Cinema Initiatives.\nDigital Cinema Initiatives (DCI), a joint venture of the six major studios, published the first version (V1.0) of a system specification for digital cinema in July 2005. The main declared objectives of the specification were to define a digital cinema system that would \"present a theatrical experience that is better than what one could achieve now with a traditional 35mm Answer Print\", to provide global standards for interoperability such that any DCI-compliant content could play on any DCI-compliant hardware anywhere in the world and to provide robust protection for the intellectual property of the content providers.\nThe DCI specification calls for picture encoding using the ISO/IEC 15444-1 \"JPEG2000\" (.j2c) standard and use of the CIE XYZ color space at 12 bits per component encoded with a 2.6 gamma applied at projection. Two levels of resolution for both content and projectors are supported: 2K (2048\u00d71080) or 2.2 MP at 24 or 48 frames per second, and 4K (4096\u00d72160) or 8.85 MP at 24 frames per second. The specification ensures that 2K content can play on 4K projectors and vice versa. Smaller resolutions in one direction are also supported (the image gets automatically centered). Later versions of the standard added additional playback rates (like 25 fps in SMPTE mode). For the sound component of the content the specification provides for up to 16 channels of uncompressed audio using the \"Broadcast Wave\" (.wav) format at 24 bits and 48\u00a0kHz or 96\u00a0kHz sampling.\nPlayback is controlled by an XML-format Composition Playlist, into an MXF-compliant file at a maximum data rate of 250\u00a0Mbit/s. Details about encryption, key management, and logging are all discussed in the specification as are the minimum specifications for the projectors employed including the color gamut, the contrast ratio and the brightness of the image. While much of the specification codifies work that had already been ongoing in the Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers (SMPTE), the specification is important in establishing a content owner framework for the distribution and security of first-release motion-picture content.\nCinema United.\nIn addition to DCI's work, the Cinema United released its Digital Cinema System Requirements. The document addresses the requirements of digital cinema systems from the operational needs of the exhibitor, focusing on areas not addressed by DCI, including access for the visually impaired and hearing impaired, workflow inside the cinema, and equipment interoperability. In particular, NATO's document details requirements for the Theatre Management System (TMS), the governing software for digital cinema systems within a theatre complex, and provides direction for the development of security key management systems. As with DCI's document, NATO's document is also important to the SMPTE standards effort.\nE-Cinema.\nThe Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers (SMPTE) began work on standards for digital cinema in 2000. It was clear by that point in time that HDTV did not provide a sufficient technological basis for the foundation of digital cinema playback. In Europe, India and Japan however, there is still a significant presence of HDTV for theatrical presentations. Agreements within the ISO standards body have led to these non-compliant systems being referred to as Electronic Cinema Systems (E-Cinema).\nProjectors.\nOnly four manufacturers make DCI-approved digital cinema projectors; these are Barco, Christie, Sharp/NEC and Sony. Except for Sony, who used to use their own SXRD technology, all use the Digital light processing (DLP) technology developed by Texas Instruments (TI). D-Cinema projectors are similar in principle to digital projectors used in industry, education, and domestic home cinemas, but differ in two important respects. First, projectors must conform to the strict performance requirements of the DCI specification. Second, projectors must incorporate anti-piracy devices intended to enforce copyright compliance such as licensing limits. For these reasons all projectors intended to be sold to theaters for screening current release movies \"must\" be approved by the DCI before being put on sale. They now pass through a process called CTP (compliance test plan). Because feature films in digital form are encrypted and the decryption keys (KDMs) are locked to the serial number of the server used (linking to both the projector serial number and server is planned in the future), a system will allow playback of a protected feature only with the required KDM.\nDLP Cinema.\nThree manufacturers have licensed the DLP Cinema technology developed by Texas Instruments (TI): Christie Digital Systems, Barco, and NEC. While NEC is a relative newcomer to Digital Cinema, Christie is the main player in the U.S. and Barco takes the lead in Europe and Asia. Initially DCI-compliant DLP projectors were available in 2K only, but from early 2012, when TI's 4K DLP chip went into full production, DLP projectors have been available in both 2K and 4K versions. Manufacturers of DLP-based cinema projectors can now also offer 4K upgrades to some of the more recent 2K models. Early DLP Cinema projectors, which were deployed primarily in the United States, used limited 1280\u00d71024 resolution or the equivalent of 1.3 MP (megapixels). Digital Projection Incorporated (DPI) designed and sold a few DLP Cinema units (is8-2K) when TI's 2K technology debuted, but then abandoned the D-Cinema market while continuing to offer DLP-based projectors for non-cinema purposes. Although based on the same 2K TI \"light engine\" as those of the major players they are so rare as to be virtually unknown in the industry. They are still widely used for pre-show advertising but not usually for feature presentations.\nTI's technology is based on the use of digital micromirror devices (DMDs). These are MEMS devices that are manufactured from silicon using similar technology to that of computer chips. The surface of these devices is covered by a very large number of microscopic mirrors, one for each pixel, so a 2K device has about 2.2 million mirrors and a 4K device about 8.8 million. Each mirror vibrates several thousand times a second between two positions: In one, light from the projector's lamp is reflected towards the screen, in the other away from it. The proportion of the time the mirror is in each position varies according to the required brightness of each pixel. Three DMD devices are used, one for each of the primary colors. Light from the lamp, usually a Xenon arc lamp similar to those used in film projectors with a power between 1\u00a0kW and 7\u00a0kW, is split by colored filters into red, green and blue beams which are directed at the appropriate DMD. The 'forward' reflected beam from the three DMDs is then re-combined and focused by the lens onto the cinema screen. Later projectors may use lasers instead of xenon lamps.\nSony SXRD.\nAlone amongst the manufacturers of DCI-compliant cinema projectors Sony decided to develop its own technology rather than use TI's DLP technology. SXRD (Silicon X-tal (Crystal) Reflective Display) projectors have only ever been manufactured in 4K form and, until the launch of the 4K DLP chip by TI, Sony SXRD projectors were the only 4K DCI-compatible projectors on the market. Unlike DLP projectors, however, SXRD projectors do not present the left and right eye images of stereoscopic movies sequentially, instead they use half the available area on the SXRD chip for each eye image. Thus during stereoscopic presentations the SXRD projector functions as a sub 2K projector, the same for HFR 3D Content.\nHowever, Sony decided in late April 2020 that they would no longer manufacture digital cinema projectors.\nStereo 3D images.\nIn late 2005, interest in digital 3D stereoscopic projection led to a new willingness on the part of theaters to collaborate in installing 2K stereoscopic installations to show Disney's \"Chicken Little\" in 3D film. Six more digital 3D movies were released in 2006 and 2007 (including \"Beowulf\", \"Monster House\" and \"Meet the Robinsons\"). The technology combines a single digital projector fitted with either a polarizing filter (for use with polarized glasses and silver screens), a filter wheel or an emitter for LCD glasses. \"RealD\" uses a \"ZScreen\" for polarisation and MasterImage uses a filter wheel that changes the polarity of projector's light output several times per second to quickly alternate the left-and-right-eye views. Another system that uses a filter wheel is Dolby 3D. The wheel changes the wavelengths of the colors being displayed, and tinted glasses filter these changes so the incorrect wavelength cannot enter the wrong eye. \"XpanD\" makes use of an external emitter that sends a signal to the 3D glasses to block out the wrong image from the wrong eye.\nLaser.\nRGB laser projection produces the purest BT.2020 colors and the brightest images.\nLED screens.\nIn Asia, on July 13, 2017, an LED screen for digital cinema developed by Samsung Electronics was publicly demonstrated on one screen at Lotte Cinema World Tower in Seoul. The first installation in Europe is in Arena Sihlcity Cinema in Z\u00fcrich. These displays do not use a projector; instead they use a LED video wall, and can offer higher contrast ratios, higher resolutions, and overall improvements in image quality. Sony already sells MicroLED displays as a replacement for conventional cinema screens.\nEffect on distribution.\nDigital distribution of movies has the potential to save money for film distributors. In the early 21st century, making release prints for 4,000 screens at a typical cost of about $1,500 per print meant that a wide release cost about $6 million. In contrast, at the maximum 250 megabit-per-second data rate (as defined by DCI for digital cinema), a feature-length movie can be stored on an off-the-shelf 300\u00a0GB hard drive for $50 and a broad release of 4000 'digital prints' might cost $200,000. In addition hard drives can be returned to distributors for reuse. With several hundred movies distributed every year, the industry saves billions of dollars. The digital-cinema roll-out was stalled by the slow pace at which exhibitors acquired digital projectors, since the savings would be seen not by themselves but by distribution companies. The Virtual Print Fee model was created to address this by passing some of the saving on to the cinemas. As a consequence of the rapid conversion to digital projection, the number of theatrical releases exhibited on film is dwindling. As of 4 May 2014, 37,711 screens (out of a total of 40,048 screens) in the United States have been converted to digital, 3,013 screens in Canada have been converted, and 79,043 screens internationally have been converted.\nTelecommunication.\nRealization and demonstration, on October 29, 2001, of the first digital cinema transmission by satellite in Europe of a feature film by Bernard Pauchon, Alain Lorentz, Raymond Melwig and Philippe Binant.\nThen, reliable file delivery of DCPs via Internet emerged, thanks to higher bandwidth connections in cinemas, first with bonded DSL lines, then with fiber connection to the Internet.\nLive broadcasting to cinemas or event cinema.\nDigital cinemas can deliver live broadcasts (mainly via satellite digital television) or broadband Internet (streaming media) from performances or events. This began initially with live broadcasts from the New York Metropolitan Opera delivering regular live broadcasts into cinemas and has been widely imitated ever since. Leading territories providing the content are the UK, the US, France and Germany. The Royal Opera House, Sydney Opera House, English National Opera and others have found new and returning audiences captivated by the detail offered by a live digital broadcast featuring handheld and cameras on cranes positioned throughout the venue to capture the emotion that might be missed in a live venue situation. In addition these providers all offer additional value during the intervals e.g. interviews with choreographers, cast members, a backstage tour which would not be on offer at the live event itself. Other live events in this field include live theatre from NT Live, Branagh Live, Royal Shakespeare Company, Shakespeare's Globe, the Royal Ballet, Mariinsky Ballet, the Bolshoi Ballet and the Berlin Philharmoniker.\nIn the last ten years, this initial offering of the arts has also expanded to include live and recorded music events such as Take That Live, One Direction Live, Andre Rieu, live musicals such as the recent Miss Saigon and a record-breaking Billy Elliot Live In Cinemas. Live sport, documentary with a live question and answer element such as the recent Oasis documentary, lectures, faith broadcasts, stand-up comedy, museum and gallery exhibitions, TV specials such as the record-breaking \"Doctor Who\" fiftieth anniversary special \"The Day Of The Doctor\", have all contributed to creating a valuable revenue stream for cinemas large and small all over the world. Subsequently, live broadcasting, formerly known as Alternative Content, has become known as Event Cinema and a trade association now exists to that end. Ten years on the sector has become a sizeable revenue stream in its own right, earning a loyal following amongst fans of the arts, and the content limited only by the imagination of the producers it would seem. Theatre, ballet, sport, exhibitions, TV specials and documentaries are now established forms of Event Cinema. Worldwide estimations put the likely value of the Event Cinema industry at $1bn by 2019.\nEvent Cinema currently accounts for on average between 1-3% of overall box office for cinemas worldwide but anecdotally it's been reported that some cinemas attribute as much as 25%, 48% and even 51% (the Rio Bio cinema in Stockholm) of their overall box office. It is envisaged ultimately that Event Cinema will account for around 5% of the overall box office globally. Event Cinema saw six worldwide records set and broken over from 2013 to 2015 with notable successes Dr Who ($10.2m in three days at the box office \u2013 event was also broadcast on terrestrial TV simultaneously), Pompeii Live by the British Museum, Billy Elliot, Andre Rieu, One Direction, Richard III by the Royal Shakespeare Company.\nEvent Cinema is defined more by the frequency of events rather than by the content itself. Event Cinema events typically appear in cinemas during traditionally quieter times in the cinema week such as the Monday-Thursday daytime/evening slot and are characterised by the One Night Only release, followed by one or possibly more 'Encore' releases a few days or weeks later if the event is successful and sold out. On occasion more successful events have returned to cinemas some months or even years later in the case of NT Live where the audience loyalty and company branding is so strong the content owner can be assured of a good showing at the box office.\nPros and cons.\nPros.\nThe digital formation of sets and locations, especially in the time of growing film series and sequels, is that virtual sets, once computer-generated and stored, can be easily revived for future films.\nConsidering digital film images are documented as data files on hard disk or flash memory, varying systems of edits can be executed with the alteration of a few settings on the editing console with the structure being composed virtually in the computer's memory. A broad choice of effects can be sampled simply and rapidly, without the physical constraints posed by traditional cut-and-stick editing. Digital cinema allows national cinemas to construct films specific to their cultures in ways that the more constricting configurations and economics of customary film-making prevented. Low-cost cameras and computer-based editing software have gradually enabled films to be produced for minimal cost. The ability of digital cameras to allow film-makers to shoot limitless footage without wasting costly film has transformed film production in some Third World countries. From consumers' perspective digital prints do not deteriorate with the number of showings. Unlike film, there is no projection mechanism or manual handling to add scratches or other physically generated artefacts. Provincial cinemas that would have received old prints can give consumers the same cinematographic experience (all other things being equal) as those attending the premiere.\nThe use of NLEs in movies allows for edits and cuts to be made non-destructively, without actually discarding any footage.\nCons.\nA number of high-profile film directors, including Christopher Nolan, Paul Thomas Anderson, David O. Russell and Quentin Tarantino have publicly criticized digital cinema and advocated the use of film and film prints. Most famously, Tarantino has suggested he may retire because, though he can still shoot on film, because of the rapid conversion to digital, he cannot project from 35\u00a0mm prints in the majority of American cinemas. Steven Spielberg has stated that though digital projection produces a much better image than film if originally shot in digital, it is \"inferior\" when it has been converted to digital. He attempted at one stage to release \"Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull\" solely on film. Paul Thomas Anderson recently was able to create 70-mm film prints for his film \"The Master\".\nFilm critic Roger Ebert criticized the use of DCPs after a cancelled film festival screening of Brian DePalma's film \"Passion\" at New York Film Festival as a result of a lockup due to the coding system.\nThe theoretical resolution of 35\u00a0mm film is greater than that of 2K digital cinema. 2K resolution (2048\u00d71080) is also only slightly greater than that of consumer based 1080p HD (1920x1080). However, since digital post-production techniques became the standard in the early 2000s, the majority of movies, whether photographed digitally or on 35\u00a0mm film, have been mastered and edited at the 2K resolution. Moreover, 4K post production was becoming more common as of 2013. As projectors are replaced with 4K models the difference in resolution between digital and 35\u00a0mm film is somewhat reduced. Digital cinema servers utilize far greater bandwidth over domestic \"HD\", allowing for a difference in quality (e.g., Blu-ray colour encoding 4:2:0 48\u00a0Mbit/s MAX datarate, DCI D-Cinema 4:4:4 250\u00a0Mbit/s 2D/3D, 500\u00a0Mbit/s HFR3D). Each frame has greater detail.\nOwing to the smaller dynamic range of digital cameras, correcting poor digital exposures is more difficult than correcting poor film exposures during post-production. A partial solution to this problem is to add complex video-assist technology during the shooting process. However, such technologies are typically available only to high-budget production companies. Digital cinemas' efficiency of storing images has a downside. The speed and ease of modern digital editing processes threatens to give editors and their directors, if not an embarrassment of choice then at least a confusion of options, potentially making the editing process, with this 'try it and see' philosophy, lengthier rather than shorter. Because the equipment needed to produce digital feature films can be obtained more easily than film projectors, producers could inundate the market with cheap productions and potentially dominate the efforts of serious directors. Because of the quick speed in which they are filmed, these stories sometimes lack essential narrative structure.\nCosts.\nPros.\nThe electronic transferring of digital film, from central servers to servers in cinema projection booths, is an inexpensive process of supplying copies of newest releases to the vast number of cinema screens demanded by prevailing saturation-release strategies. There is a significant saving on print expenses in such cases: at a minimum cost per print of $1200\u20132000, the cost of film print production is between $5\u20138 million per movie. With several thousand releases a year, the probable savings offered by digital distribution and projection are over $1 billion. The cost savings and ease, together with the ability to store film rather than having to send a print on to the next cinema, allows a larger scope of films to be screened and watched by the public; minority and small-budget films that would not otherwise get such a chance.\nCons.\nThe initial costs for converting theaters to digital are high: $100,000 per screen, on average. Theaters have been reluctant to switch without a cost-sharing arrangement with film distributors. A solution is a temporary \"Virtual Print Fee\" system, where the distributor (who saves the money of producing and transporting a film print) pays a fee per copy to help finance the digital systems of the theaters. A theater can purchase a film projector for as little as $10,000 (though projectors intended for commercial cinemas cost two to three times that; to which must be added the cost of a long-play system, which also costs around $10,000, making a total of around $30,000\u2013$40,000) from which they could expect an average life of 30\u201340 years. By contrast, a digital cinema playback system\u2014including server, media block, and projector\u2014can cost two to three times as much, and would have a greater risk of component failure and obsolescence. (In Britain the cost of an entry-level projector including server, installation, etc., would be \u00a331,000 [$50,000].)\nArchiving digital masters has also turned out to be both tricky and costly. In a 2007 study, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences found the cost of long-term storage of 4K digital masters to be \"enormously higher - 1100% higher - that of the cost of storing film masters.\" This is because of the limited or uncertain lifespan of digital storage: No current digital medium\u2014be it optical disc, magnetic hard drive or digital tape\u2014can reliably store a motion picture for as long as a hundred years or more (a timeframe for film properly stored). The short history of digital storage media has been one of innovation and, therefore, of obsolescence. Archived digital content must be periodically removed from obsolete physical media to up-to-date media. The expense of digital image capture is not necessarily less than the capture of images onto film; indeed, it is sometimes greater.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
